Story_ID: 520958
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna start by slating this.  I'm [HistoryMaker] Harriette Cole.  I'm your interviewer.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Today is September 19th, 2016.  We are at the home of Mr. Roy Ayers.  I would like for you to say and spell your name for me, sir.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Want me to-right now (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Roy, [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers.  R-O-Y, A-Y-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  And, tell me sir, what do you do?
Speaker 2: I play, I play music.  I play music and I perform, and I'm, I'm a performer.  It's wonderful.
Speaker 1: Excellent.
Story_ID: 520959
Speaker 1: So, I'd like to start with some what we call People magazine questions.  So, what is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is red.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: And, what about your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, is usually shrimp, something like with the shrimp or chicken, you know.
Speaker 1: Your favorite season of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I like summer, you know, summertime, summertime songs.
Speaker 1: So, where, where do you like to go on vacation?
Speaker 2: Maybe, Mexico.
Speaker 1: And, do you have a favorite saying or phrase, something that you like to remember?
Speaker 2: A phrase.  I guess, "What's up?"  (Laughter) "What's up, what up?  What up, what up, bro?"
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Very good, very good.
Story_ID: 520960
Speaker 1: So, I want to now take you back to your family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, let's start with your mother.  What's your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ruby Ayers.  My mother, my mother's name is Ruby Ayers.
Speaker 1: And, and tell me about her.  Where did she, where was she born?  When was she born?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in Oklahoma, in Tulsa, Oklahoma.  And, my fath- my, my, my mother and father [Roy Ayers, Sr.] they met, I guess, when they were very young, my god.  Had three, three, four, four children, four children, my god.  And, my father, by the way, moved, moved everybody to New York--to Los Angeles, California; everybody in his whole family.  You know, eight--sisters and brothers, everybody.
Speaker 1: When--and, was this during the Great Migration when he did that?
Speaker 2: I don't think it's migration but it was, it was early, you know.
Speaker 1: So, but your mom, your mother grew up in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What did, what did she do?  What was her work?
Speaker 2: She did everything.  I mean, she, she was a, she was a handy woman, you know.  And, she did everything.  I mean, she kept, kept my--the children, the children, kept the children together.  It was really, really wonderful.
Speaker 1: And, did she grow up on a farm in a rural area or was it in the city?
Speaker 2: It was in a rural area.  Yeah, it was a very rural area.  So, there's, there's a lot of property left from my mother and father.
Speaker 1: Did she every talk about growing up during--I'm assuming she, her time was before the end of segregation.  So, like was it during Jim Crow that she grew up?  What are, what were her years, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really haven't gotten into that.  But, I know that she was very active in the PTA, Parent Teacher Association.  And, she was very, very, very, very, very, very active with the parenting, oh, my god.  It was wonderful.
Story_ID: 520961
Speaker 1: And, what's your father's name?
Speaker 2: Roy.  Roy, Roy Ayers.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you're Roy Ayers, Jr. [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Roy Ayers, Jr.  That's right.
Speaker 1: You are?  So, Roy Ayers is your dad.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: What did (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Roy Ayers, Sr., right.
Speaker 1: Sr.  And, what did your dad do?
Speaker 2: He was a junkman.  And, he was very good.  He did junk very, very well.  And, he was a junkman.  He was the only person in our block, in our scene in Los Angeles, California, that my sister went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], my oldest sister [Thomasina Ayers].  And, he put her through, through college as a junkman.  My god, it was wonderful.  You know, I said, "Oh, that's wonderful."
Speaker 1: Now, before you, before they moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], do you, do you know anything about your grandparents or your great-grandparents on either side?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I know something.  But, my, my grandfather on my father's side, my god, he was a teacher.  He was an English teacher.  He was very brilliant.
Speaker 1: In Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: From Oklahoma.  That's right.  My god.
Speaker 1: And, what about your other grandparents?
Speaker 2: No.  They, they were not into anything.  They're not, they were not, they were not into anything.
Story_ID: 520962
Speaker 1: Did your father move your family--do you know what year they got married, your parents [Ruby Ayers and Roy Ayers, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  I can't remember.  I can't remember.  I never, I never found that out.
Speaker 1: Were you born in Oklahoma or in California (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was born in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, when did they, your father move the family to California, do you know?
Speaker 2: They moved to--Thomasina was my oldest sister.  She was eighty-eight years old when she passed away.  But, my oldest sister, she was a genius, quite a bit of a genius.  He put her through USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California], USC in very, very hard times, you know, for blacks, very, very hard.  It was very difficult.  But, he did it through, through USC.  It was really wonderful.
Speaker 1: How many children did your parents have?  How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: (Holds up four fingers).
Speaker 1: There're four of you?
Speaker 2: Four of us.
Speaker 1: And, where, tell me, who are your siblings?
Speaker 2: My sisters, Thomasina, Thomasina Ayers, Royena Ayers [ph.], Michel'le Ayers [ph.], and, and [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, when, and when were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born September 10, 1940.
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 520963
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you describe the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Los Angeles, Los Angeles I grew up very close to the school, to the school that I went to in, in elementary school [Wadsworth Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].  That's was, wow, that was, that was about three blocks from the school.  That's where I, where I, went, wow, that was really wonderful.  I'm thing about this stuff, you know.  It's wonderful.
Speaker 1: So, the neighborhood that you grew up in was called South Central [Los Angeles, California], right?  Or, was it later named that?
Speaker 2: It was named that later on, South Central.  But, basically, I grew up in Los Angeles, California where the black people were, you know (laughter).
Story_ID: 520964
Speaker 1: And, do you--when you look back on your earliest days, what are the sights, sounds, and smells that you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  I re--I can remember the coffee, coffee, coffee cake and, and juice, I can remember that so well.  I remember that so, so well.
Speaker 1: And, and, what about the sights?  What did you see in your neighborhood [South Central, Los Angeles, California]?  What do you remember seeing as a little boy?
Speaker 2: Right.  I'm thinking about it.  I can remember seeing, seeing so many people having fun, having a good time, having a wonderful, a wonderful time.  It was--really enjoying life, enjoying life and the good things that you enjoy, you know.  So, I can remember that very well.
Story_ID: 520965
Speaker 1: So, you were born in 1940, and you're growing up in Los Angeles [California]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: At a time when, you said in a black neighborhood, at a time when there was a lot of civil unrest in the country.  What was going on in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: It's, it's, it's so hip, because we were not exposed.  We were not exposed even though my mother [Ruby Ayers] and father [Roy Ayers, Sr.] knew of everything, they, they, they didn't expose us to that.  They always say, you know, "Be careful.  Take care of yourself. But, just be cool."  I guess, I guess it wasn't important for them, it wasn't as important for them to, to show us the whole thing, you know, with all the racism and whatever, you know.  We, we did not, for the most part, we did not experience racist situations.  I went to Thomas Jefferson High School [Los Angeles, California] and most of the teacher were, were, were--a few white folks there.  But, most of the teachers were, were black.  But, most of the teacher weren't, they weren't, they weren't racist.  They weren't, they were not racist, they were cool.  I mean, Brice Taylor was one of our coaches.  Brice Taylor he play with the Four Freshman--Four Horsemen [sic. University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] you know.  Brice Taylor, but he was a coach there.  He was a wonderful man.  But, anyway.
Story_ID: 520966
Speaker 1: So, as a kid, what were you involved in?  Were you involved in sports early?  Were you early involved in music?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was involved in music at Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Jefferson Hi--Thom, Thom--
Speaker 1: Thomas Jefferson High School [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Thomas Jefferson High School.
Speaker 1: But, even before that, I read that you were given your first set of vibraphone mallets from Lionel Hampton.
Speaker 2: Lionel Hampton, that's right.
Speaker 1: How did that happen?
Speaker 2: Oh, my, my mother [Ruby Ayers] and father [Roy Ayers, Sr.] took me to see Lionel Hampton.  And, I saw him and he gave me set of vibraphone mallets.  I couldn't believe--
Speaker 1: So, you were, you were five years old.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  I was five years old.  I was, I was blown away.  Because you know, he gave me a set of vibraphone mallets.  These are, these are they, you understand.  Okay.  But, that, these are they.  But--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And, so, you know, these are not, not them but--
Speaker 1: But, that's a vibraphone mallet, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a vibraphone mallet, that's right.  Oh--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I was blown away.  I can't believe that I lost it, that I lost a pair, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Wow.  And, did that influence you deciding that you wanted to play the vibraphone?
Speaker 2: Definitely.  I, I, I knew I was gonna, gonna play, you know.
Speaker 1: But, that's, I mean, tell me what exactly is the vibraphone?
Speaker 2: The vibraphone is a sequence of beautiful notes and they're built off of the keyboard, keyboard structure on--in, in the regular piano, you know.  And, and it's such a fascinating instrument.  It's such a wonderful instrument.  Matter of fact, I've got one, two, about four sets of vibes [vibraphones] in there and there's another set--
Speaker 1: No stay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: But, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But in terms of, you know, the classic instruments that children learn to play in school, that's not an instrument that people even know.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, it was, so you credit Lionel Hampton in introducing you to the instrument in the first place (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my--oh, yes, and I loved it.  And, I've, I have gone to schools, you know, even to, to, to talk to kids, to kids about the vibraphone.  It's wonderful.
Speaker 1: When did you get serious about it?
Speaker 2: I was serious from day one.  I mean, from day one I was serious, that's--you know, serious-serious, you know.
Speaker 1: But, from age five until, when did you start playing on a regular basis?  Was it, was it at Thomas Jefferson?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But, I was playing, I was playing piano at that time because we had a piano at home.
Speaker 1: And, you mother was a piano teacher, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  My mother played piano and so I was just fascinated by the fact that I could, could play the piano.  And, like, I could play the vibes.  Oh, like I was playing, I was playing like I was playing the vibes, you know, oh, it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: And, when, when did you join, what was it the orchestra that you joined or what group did you join (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I joined, I joined the big band at Thomas Jefferson High School.  I played in a band and I played drums, and percussion and all the instruments, and the vibraphone, the glockenspiel.  It's called the glockenspiel, and I played that at all the football games and all the marches.  Oh, it was, it was fabulous.  You know, I had so much fun in, in, in just playing, just playing in the bands and everything.  It was, it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 520967
Speaker 1: Now, your high school, Thomas Jefferson High School [Los Angeles, California] graduated many outstanding people.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your, your fellow students (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lang Stanley, the great athlete.  Thomas--Barry White.
Speaker 1: Barry White.
Speaker 2: Barry White.
Speaker 1: Alvin Ailey?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Alvin Ailey, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: I'm seeing [HistoryMaker] Carmen de Lavallade.
Speaker 2: Wow!
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Stanley Crouch.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Richard Berry.
Speaker 2: Richard Berry.  I knew him, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, let's see who else, Rickey Minor the more recently the, the--he's an Emmy [Emmy Award] nominated music director for 'The Tonight Show' ['The Tonight Show with Jay Leno'].  Do you know him?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know him.
Speaker 1: He's, he's a younger man.
Speaker 2: He's a younger guy.
Speaker 1: So, when you were at school were, the people who were your contemporaries, were you all serious about making music?  Did you feel like this was what you were going to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I just knew it, you know.  With Sam Browne  [Samuel Rodney Browne] was my harmony teacher.  He was, oh, he was wonderful.  He was so, so great.
Speaker 1: And, what did he, what did he instill in you to make you believe this could be your career?
Speaker 2: "Believe in yourself, [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers."  "Roy Ayers believe in yourself."  That's one of the great things he said.  Always, he always told me, "Roy Ayers believe in yourself.  You believe it, believe it, you can do it."  He, matter of fact he told me, "Roy Ayers, teach yourself."  That's what he said, "Teach yourself.  Ayers, Ayers, teach yourself."  And, I said, "Wow."  But, but he knew that I, I could do it, you know.  It seems so.
Story_ID: 520968
Speaker 1: Now, when did you meet Bobby Hutcherson?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: You were still in high school [Thomas Jefferson High School, Los Angeles, California], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I met, I met him, I met him at a very young age.  And--
Speaker 1: And, he was a vibraphonist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you all-when--you collaborated, did you not?
Speaker 2: Yes, we did.  We collaborated a couple--
Speaker 1: What did you make?  What did you do together?
Speaker 2: We did, we did a couple of songs, couple of songs together.  And, we played together.  Oh he was, he was great.  He just recently passed away.  You know that right?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, my wife [Argerie Ayers] bought the article in The New York Times.  And, she said, "Do you know your friend Bobby Hutcherson passed away?"  I said, "What?"  Oh, I was shocked 'cause, you know, he's seventy-five years old.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Same age as me.  He's Aquarius.  And, that, you know, he passed away.  I'm so sorry that he passed away.  He was such a delightful vibraphonist, vibraphonist.  I like to say that, vibraphonist.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, but, it was really wonderful.
Speaker 1: So, as, when you were in high school and the two of you met, was that when you first recorded?
Speaker 2: That was, that was before I recorded with Leonard Feather, yeah.  I, I recorded, that was right after I recorded.
Story_ID: 520969
Speaker 1: And then, a few years later, you worked with Curtis Amy.
Speaker 2: Curtis Amy.  That's right.  Curtis Amy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, tell me who was Curtis?
Speaker 2: Curt--who was?
Speaker 1: Tell, who was he?  What did he mean to music?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  He, he meant a lot. He's from Dallas, Texas [sic. Houston, Texas].  And, he was from, a good teacher.  A good teacher and good professional, professional wise. Herbie Mann was really wonderful.  But--
Speaker 1: But, start with Curtis.  Just--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, what did--we're about to, we're about to get to Herbie.
Speaker 2: I understand.
Speaker 1: But, with Curtis, did--I'm reading that you started recording as a bebop sideman with Curtis Amy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, that's right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: With Curtis Amy.
Speaker 1: So, what did, what did you, what music did you make?  What did it sound like?  What was that music?
Speaker 2: (Scatting).  Oh, that was, that's some nice stuff.  But, Herbie, Herb--Curtis Amy was really a wonderful guy.  He was really very inspiring; inspired everybody, everybody, anybody he talked to, he was just an inspiration.  He had a magic, a magic--it was--I used to call him yes, the oh, my god--that's the first album, my god, that.
Speaker 1: Yep, that's it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: So, with Curtis though, so in 1962, he recorded 'Way Down' and 'Tippin' on Through.'  Were you featured on those albums (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.  I was very--I was featured on several albums with him.
Story_ID: 520970
Speaker 1: And then it came time, shortly thereafter, 1963 you were twenty-three years old and you recorded your first album that was yours, 'West Coast Vibes.'
Speaker 2: Right.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: Tell me about 'West Coast Vibes.'
Speaker 2: Leonard Feather, I was performing with Vi Redd, Vi Redd, a saxophonist of an older, older generation.  She was my sister's age, around that, and, my oldest sister [Thomasina Ayers] and she asked me to be on an album with a lot of West Coast musicians.  And, I said, "I'd be happy to."  And, I, I came on the album and it was really wonderful and rather than the person that did the production was Leonard Feather.  He's the writer of the, of the, he's the writer of the Encyclopedia of Jazz, Volume One, Two, and Three ['Leonard Feather's Encyclopedia of Jazz.' Leonard Feather].  And, he said, "Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers], have you ever recorded an album before?"  And, I said, "No, I haven't.  I have not.  I'm not ready."  He said, "Yes, you are."  (Laughter) I was blown away.  I said, "Wow."  He said, "Yes."  You know.  He's a white guy but really a great guy, really a great guy.  And, he said, "Yes, you are."  And, he took me into the studio, and that's my first album, that 'West Coast Vibes,' there (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yep.
Story_ID: 520971
Speaker 1: Shortly thereafter you began to work with Jack Wilson.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  Jack Wilson, a great, a great pianist.
Speaker 1: What did, what music did you make with him?
Speaker 2: My god.  So, so nice, we did 'Tippin' on Through,' [sic. 'The Jack Wilson Quartet featuring Roy Ayers'] oh so much stuff, I can't even remember.
Speaker 1: Well, and the sound.  Because as this point you're, you're developing your sound, right?  You, you've been--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --working in bebop.  And, now what is the sound that, that Jack Wilson is bringing into the mixes?  Is it still bebop?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's more bebop, more bebop.  But, it was a better organized.  He was a great pianist.  But, he told me that most of the stuff that he learned was from--what's her name--damn.  I'm sorry.  Dinah Washington.  Dinah Washington, my god.  Some of this, this is really a great thing.  Some of the people that played, played music and sang, singers, Dinah Washington, Sarah--
Speaker 1: Sarah Vaughan (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sarah Vaughan.  And, Anita O'Day, all these ladies could play the piano.  They could all play the piano.  And, most of them taught most of the piano players how to phrase, to phrase--my god.  Those, those women were, were great.
Speaker 1: So, they were the influence as well.  Dinah Washington was the influence on Jack.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, that was a jazz influence, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: And, how were you influenced by them?
Speaker 2: I guess, I guess, I was motivated from just their singing.  That's how, you know, just the phrasing.  My, one of my sister's was a great fan of Dinah Washington.  She, oh my god, Dinah Washington just her phrase, her phraseology.  Just the way she was able to phrase and, you know, with Sarah Vaughan and Dinah and all three of 'em, my god, they were just fantastic.
Story_ID: 520972
Speaker 1: You moved from, as your career is evolving, now at age twenty-five, in 1965, you began to play with Chico Hamilton.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like?  He was a jazz drummer and band leader, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  Jazz drummer and he's a great, great person.  He recently passed away, too.  But, he was ninety-some years old, my god.  He was, he was great.  I remember him, remember him. Thomasina [Thomasina Ayers] used to go with his, his brother; his brother, the actor.  He's an actor.  What's his name?  Tom--I think his name was Tommy [sic. Bernie Hamilton] or something like that.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: So, what was the style of music at this point when you're working with Chico Hamilton?  Has the, has it changed a bit?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it, it had changed quite a bit because he had a Gabor Szabo and Charles Lloyd before me, people were there and, wow.  I was surprised that he asked me to play in his band.  That's my first vibe players, as far as I knew.  But, his, his--a lady that was really admired him was the great Lena Horne.  Lena Horne admired this, this great drummer.  Lena Horne, it was a, it was a-an exception--she gave an exception to the, to the world, you know.  It was, it was incredible.
Speaker 1: And, the style of music that Chico Hamilton is performing--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is this more in the vein of jazz, cool jazz, that jazz fusion and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I would, I would say jazz fusion.  But, Chico was the great, great, Chico Hamilton was very articulate.  He spoke very, very strong, very, very, very, very wise.  He would, he would say, "[HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers is gonna, to play for you a great summer and his interpretation will blow your mind."  You know, he always said things like that, you know.
Speaker 1: But, when he was, when you all were performing?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He would never say it like he would say it otherwise.  He would say, "Roy Ayers is gonna play," oh, oh man, it was fantastic so it was beautiful.
Speaker 1: That was the best set-up, huh?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a great set-up.
Speaker 1: And, then it--around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He made you, make you feel proud.
Story_ID: 520973
Speaker 1: Around the same time, I believe you worked with Gerald Wilson.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  Gerald Wilson, he recently died.  He was, he was ninety-nine, ninety-eight years old.  And, my god, Gerald Wilson was a wonderful, my god.  So--I've had so many great leaders that I can't help but pattern myself after just about all of 'em, you know.
Speaker 1: So, this is, you're working with these people as you are maturing and finding your own sound (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: What do you feel you learned from Gerald?
Speaker 2: From, from these people?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I learned how to, how to lay, lay down sounds.  That's probably what I, I really learned is to lay, lay down sounds and cushion everything.  It's cushion you have to mold everything and mold it into one thing and then extract, extract out.  It's really a wonderful, it's really wonderful all the things that I've learned in each, each step, in each sequence, each one has been really a great reward.  Really, it's really, it's really, it's been, yeah, I've met some great people.
Story_ID: 520974
Speaker 1: You were telling me about these different artists who you worked with as you're growing up.  Now, you also went to college for a while, didn't you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I went to--
Speaker 1: Where did you go?
Speaker 2: LACC, Los Angeles City College [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: And, what did you go there to study?
Speaker 2: Harmony, music, history, and literature.
Speaker 1: But, you didn't stay?
Speaker 2: No, I left.  I left because the--Herbie Mann (laughter).  I left.
Speaker 1: So, what happened?  What did Herbie Mann--tell me who is Herbie Mann and what happened?
Speaker 2: A bass player called me up and said, "Hey, Roy, Herbie Mann needs a vibe [vibraphone] player."  It's perfect, I said, "I'll call him up."  I called him up, I said, "Herbie, can I come play with you?"  He said, "Sure."  He came--I came down to the, it was club called, the Lighthouse [Lighthouse Cafe, Hermosa Beach, California] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Lighthouse.
Speaker 2: The Lighthouse.  My god, you're good.  You got--very good.  I came down to the club it's called the Lighthouse.  And, oh, my god, everybody--seems like everybody knew who I was, and it was packed with the place, the place was packed.  And, he said, "Well, we have [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers," and people applauded, oh yes, great, great.  Oh, we kicked booty.  I, you know, kick butt, that's what we say.  But, we kicked butt, and so, Herbie, Herbie Mann said, "Would you like to go to New York [New York]?"  I said, "We ain't left," I said, this is what I said, "We ain't--we haven't left yet, we ain't left yet? (Laughter)."  We ain't left yet?  And, so, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: So, at this time, Herbie Mann is a big artist, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was his, can you place him in, at that time--
Speaker 2: (Scatting), oh, that was nice.  That was, that was a very nice song.  Herbie Mann, he did that big hit.  And, then I did another one with him called 'Memphis Underground.'  (Scatting).  Oh, that was real nice.  Was really, really nice with Herbie Mann.  It was wonderful.  It was wonderful, wonderful, wonderful, wonderful, wonderful, my god, it was just wonderful.
Speaker 1: And, as you're working with Herbie Mann, you're also working with George Benson, and Lonnie Liston Smith, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, are you all working together?  How is this--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We worked together, we worked together.  It was very beautiful.
Speaker 1: And, this is all at the beginning of many of your careers, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, yes.
Story_ID: 520975
Speaker 1: I'm looking and it says 1966, so you're still a young man, twenty-six years old.
Speaker 2: I was still kicking booty, that's right.
Speaker 1: Are you recording with all of them?  Is that what's happening?
Speaker 2: Basically, basically recording, recording with everybody, this and that.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: And, then you went to Japan--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With Herbie Mann?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Had you been out of the country before that?
Speaker 2: Once, with Chico Ham- Chico Hamilton.  With Chico Hamilton one time.  I must've went over there with Herbie Mann three or four times.  And, I, I've been there at least twelve more times.  I've done so many things.
Speaker 1: Well, when you were in Japan you worked with Sadao Watanabe.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Sadao's one--he's one of the best in Japan.  He's one of the best musicians.
Speaker 1: So, what was your experience collaborating with artist internationally?
Speaker 2: It was very positive, very, very positive.  Very good.  I've, I've always had a good rapport with most of the artists, most of the artists.  It was just, it was just, most of the artists, everything's good.  Oh, very, very good.
Speaker 1: And, was there, was he able to speak English?  Or, how did you cross the language barrier?
Speaker 2: Oh, he, he spoke very good, very, very well English.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, good.
Speaker 2: And, everybody, everybody's that speaks, everybody speaks English almost in Japan.  Usually, especially in Japan, especially in Japan, especially they, they know, they know the language.  They learn it.
Story_ID: 520976
Speaker 1: Now, you made with Jack Wils--with The Jack Wilson Quartet, you made "Ramblin'."
Speaker 2: Right, "Ramblin'."
Speaker 1: How was that received by the public?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was wonderful, (scatting).  Oh, my god.  I just thought about that.
Speaker 1: And, then 'Virgo Vibes' was your record, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember.
Speaker 1: Which came somewhat later.  Now, you have a fascination with the zodiac.  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: With the zodiac, oh, yeah.  I think, I think that Pisces people are, are, are, are my opposite, you know.  It's either, it's either four I guess, but it's four.  Pisces people are--
Speaker 1: But, you're a Virgo and you made your album, 'Virgo Vibes.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, with--and this is your music as opposed to collaboration with someone else?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: How was the sound of this different from what you had made with other artist?
Speaker 2: It was different, it was different, it's, it's interesting because when you, when you're a composer of something and it's for you, you know, not trying to be egotistical, but when it's for you--by the way, that album was produced by Herbie Mann.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So, you were still working with him.  But, he's now producing, but it's your creation, correct?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was, it was wonderful.  It's just, it was just beautiful because you get to create the whole thing, you know.  Oh, it's wonderful.
Story_ID: 520977
Speaker 1: Your next album was 'Stoned Soul Picnic'.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How is your sound evolving as you go from album to album?
Speaker 2: My sound was just great.  It was wonderful, 'Stoned Soul Picnic' for instances, like I used, [HistoryMaker] Herbie Hancock.  I used Hubert Laws.  I used Gary Bartz, saxophonist.  Ron Carter, the great bassist.  The drummer was Grady Tate.  It was so funny.  He said, "I don't have any charts.  Nobody gave me any charts."  Nobody gave him any charts, and so Charles Tolliver was his trumpeter and said, "Filet de Soul."  And, so, he said, "Oh, then I'm not gonna," and he threw the sticks on the drums, and he started to walk out.  I said, "Oh man, what's happening?"  And, then we start laughing, everybody start laughing because he was just lying (laughter), he was lying.  I said, "Oh, my god.  Grady, Grady why you do that?"  Grady Tate is such a wonderful drummer.  His concept is incredible.  Oh, it was wonderful (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, you put together a really strong--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: --band?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then 'Daddy Bug' came next.
Speaker 2: 'Daddy Bug,' 'Daddy Bug.'  I had Ron Carter, drummer, Grady, not Grady, with Herbie Hancock, Buster Williams.
Speaker 1: Mickey Roker.
Speaker 2: And, Mickey Rocker, right.  Thank you.  Mickey Rocker, wow; fantastic drummer.
Story_ID: 520978
Speaker 1: So, all of these things happened and then we get to 'Ubiquity.'
Speaker 2: 'Ubiquity.'
Speaker 1: Which really--
Speaker 2: Right.  Opened (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Set you--
Speaker 2: --up some--
Speaker 1: That changed things for you, didn't it?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, this is in 1970, you're thirty years old.
Speaker 2: Right.  Wow.
Speaker 1: How did you come up with the concept of 'Ubiquity' and what did it do for your claiming that as your, your name, Roy Ayers Ubiquity?
Speaker 2: When the young lady told, the young lady told me, "Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers], you should call your album, Roy Ayers Ubiquity."  I said, "What does that mean?"  She said, "It means a state of being everywhere at the same time."  I said, "Oh, wow.  That wonderful because I can say, I can say that to the people and I could say, maybe they, I can tell everybody I can be everywhere at the same time."  Wow, that's wonderful.  Myrna Williams was my manager at that time.  Oh, my god, she's the one, she's, she's a great lady.  She was thinking, she was thinking, she was thinking.  A word that means everywhere at the same time, my god.  So, that's what happened.
Speaker 1: And, the sound had changed by then.  Now, it really is jazz fusion.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right?
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Because you've now, I mean over the years, you've gone from bebop and kind of evolved into something that became yours (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly, yeah, that's right.  Jazz fusion, I like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, under Roy Ayers Ubiquity, tell me how it evolved.  What you, you had your first album with Roy Ayers Ubiquity in '70 [1970], how did you evolve your music from there?
Speaker 2: I guess, I guess, I guess, it's interesting, but I was thinking, you know, in terms of, of searching and I'm very concerned about people doing something with the minds and of course trying to develop, develop self, one's self, one's self concern about, about music.  I did songs like "Searching," and--
Speaker 1: Well, that was a huge hit.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That was very big, big, big hit, you know.
Speaker 1: What, what made you make that song?  What was happening at the time?
Speaker 2: It seems as though I was searching and I was searching for something and it seemed like that I had to do searching to relate to people.  And, and, and they caught on, they caught on.
Story_ID: 520979
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then you also made another huge hit which is 'We Live in Brooklyn.'
Speaker 2: Right.  'We Live in Brooklyn,' Harry Whitaker wrote it, right, right, right.  Harry Whitaker wrote, wrote that song.
Speaker 1: That has become iconic, for sure. Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, with rappers too, right.
Speaker 1: But, at the time, you know before we get to the, the more recent times, but at the time when you, when you recorded that, what was going on in the world that made this anchor in Brooklyn [New York] so important.
Speaker 2: Well, we, I guess, 'We Live in Brooklyn Baby' because the song, the song made sense when my piano player, Harry Whitaker, he died too.  Doggone, so many great guys that pass on, you know.  But, Harry Whitaker said, "Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers], you should do this song."  And, when Ron Carter was playing the bass finger, Ron could not get the bass finger together.  He did get it together but he could not get it together.  And, so, Harry Whitaker is so funny he said, "We got 'em," (laughter).  It was so funny because Ron Carter is such a genius of a bass player and he plays everything.  He could play anything.  He couldn't play it (scatting).  It was very difficult for him to play that (scatting).  Oh, my god.  And, so, Harry said, "We got 'em," (laughter).  That fool's so crazy.  I couldn't believe it.  I was, I was crazy because I was laughing.  I said, "Oh, you crazy man, you're crazy."  He said, I said, "You gotta be going crazy."  He said, "Yeah," (Laughter).  Anyway, but that was, that was interesting because he said, "We got, we got Ron Carter," (laughter).
Story_ID: 520980
Speaker 1: So as you're making this music, interestingly you are now being recorded by a British label, Polydor [Polydor Records].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, how did you move from being--?
Speaker 2: From, from Atlantic [Atlantic Records]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  From Atlantic from Polydor?
Speaker 2: It was time for the, the contract was up.  And, so, I told Herbie Mann, because Herbie wanted to, wanted to manage me.  But, he really didn't--he was still hot.  He was still hot, and he still had years to go.  And, so, when the cancer, the cancer came in later, later on.  But, Herbie had died.  Doggone, he was wonderful.  It was just wonderful.  But--
Speaker 1: But, it was time for you to move to a different label (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What is this?  You know what that is?
Speaker 1: This is just making sure that you're on video.
Speaker 2: Oh, you can see me?
Speaker 1: I can see you on video.
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.  You outta stop.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 520981
Speaker 1: Now, we're at the point where blaxploitation films are very popular, right?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And, you created a soundtrack for one of those movies, 'Coffy.'
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Featuring Pam Grier.
Speaker 2: Pam Grier.
Speaker 1: The one and only Pam Grier, right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: Tell me about creating the music for that.
Speaker 2: That was an--I met Pam Grier.  When I met Pam Grier I went, I went to hug her but I couldn't, I couldn't hug her because she had so much breast.  And, I was trying to, I was trying to get over and I was, I was, it was too much breast.  And, I had to do like this, put the hands--but she wasn't obese or anything, she just was heavy, heavy breasts, you know.  But, I said, "Oh, Pam, it's so nice to meet you.  I never met you before."  I said, "It's a pleasure."  But, it was really a gas, once you did.  Oh, it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now, creating the soundtrack for a film, what is that process like?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, that was and understanding, I--the president of the record company [Polydor Records], his name is Jerry Schoenbaum, and he said, "Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers], can you do a film?"  I said, "Of course.  Of course, of course."  I never did a film in my life, you know, but, but, I never said that.  I said, "Of course."  He said, "Well, these people at American International Pictures they wanna see, they wanna, they want you, would you come out, come out next week?"  I said, "That's cool."  So, I went out there and they went through the whole, the whole trip of the video and all the machines.  They said, "All you have to do is write, create music."  "Cool."  I said, "That's my business."  So, it was perfect.  It was perfect, you know, you'd be surprised at how many people get films, you know, these are connection people, people.  These people with connections, you know, all kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: So, you weren't, you saw the footage and then after seeing the footage you went back and made the music?  You didn't make it to--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --match the scenes necessarily?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, I matched it, yeah.
Speaker 1: You did match it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I matched the whole thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was interesting.
Story_ID: 520982
Speaker 1: Now, in 1974, you are now thirty-four years old and you released 'Change Up the Groove.'  Still, this is all part of your collaboration with, well Polydor [Polydor Records] is still putting out your music?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, this one, this is one that later, when you were mentioning a moment ago, a lot of your music has been sampled.  In fact, perhaps, you have been sampled more than any other artist.  That's, that's what--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's what the research says.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, that album, A Tribe Called Quest sampled music from that album.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What do you think it is about your music that makes it appealing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it's intriguing.  It, it's hyp- it's like hypnotic.
Speaker 1: Hypnotic.
Speaker 2: Hypnotic, thank you, hypnotic.  I think it's a vision inside of people's minds that automatically makes them like it.  It makes me wonder.  I say, "Wow, what is that?"  It's really special, you know.  I guess, it's a special trait that I have with the, with the music and whatever.
Story_ID: 520983
Speaker 1: You worked for a number of years with Polydor Records.
Speaker 2: Right, twelve years.
Speaker 1: So, that's a, that's a long run.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And, what made it a good experience to work with them?
Speaker 2: What, what made it a good experience, because they allowed me to create my own music.  They didn't interfere.  They did not interfere with my creativity.  They were very good that way.  Unfortunately, unfortunately, I guess, I have my gripes with everybody, whoever it is, you know, so.  They, I think that, that my gripes were kind of like my attorney used, used, used them against the company, you know.  So, they, they were slighted.  They were slightly, I guess, slightly sided, sidelined, you know.  It just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, then, so just in terms of the business, because the music industry is a tough business.  And, often it's the artist who end up on the short end of the stick.  So, in this case, are you saying it was more, your shrewd attorney was able to work it out for you but maybe not so much for them?
Speaker 2: Well, not, not so much for them.  But, for me to a certain degree.
Speaker 1: But, the relationship ended after twelve years?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, then what record label did you begin to work with?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to any label, I started getting my own albums.  But, I started recycle, I recorded something with Alicia Keys, differently.  And, I charge, and I charged her two thousand dollars, and she sent me check for nine thousand.  I said, "What? I guess, I'm really worth it," you know.  Seriously, 'cause nobody, not even the big companies.  I said, "She sent me a check for nine thousand, nine thousand dollars."  I said, "Wow."  She--Alicia Keys was really very professional.  Matter fact, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Don't, don't--
Speaker 2: I'm not going anywhere.  I'm just, I'm just looking at that.  I was looking--she sent me these mallets.  She sent me those--matter of fact, I just put up (unclear), but, all my, all my awards.  So, it was really great.  She was really wonderful.
Story_ID: 520984
Speaker 1: So, after you left working with Polydor [Polydor Records], you did a lot of independent projects.  [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers, let's see, RAMP.   RAMP became an outlet for you to publish your work, correct?
Speaker 2: Right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And, what does that stand for, RAMP?
Speaker 2: Roy Ayers Music Production [sic. Roy Ayers Music Productions].
Speaker 1: Right.  Roy Ayers Music Production.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, now, there was one album that you made out of that.  I guess, this is now in what years are we, 1977, '78 [1978]?
Speaker 2: Wow.  Right.
Speaker 1: But, being your own production company wasn't, didn't end up being what you wanted to, to be?
Speaker 2: It's really heavy, it's really heavy, when you said, "Seventy-Seven [1977], '78 [1978]," I said, "My god."  I'm think about it, you know, 'cause the years go past, you don't realize, you know, that many years.
Speaker 1: So, how did it compare having the record label behind you with Polydor and then doing it yourself through RAMP?
Speaker 2: It's, it's kind of different, but it's, it's a lot different.  Let me think, but, you know, a lot, a lot different because when you have your own creative energy and you're going, you're going through it, it's cool.  It's really cool because you don't have, have to answer, answer to anyone.  You kinda like get your own answers, you know.
Story_ID: 520985
Speaker 1: Did you record, 'You Send Me' through Polydor [Polydor Records] or through your own?
Speaker 2: That, that was Polydor.
Speaker 1: That's one of your biggest hits, isn't it?
Speaker 2: That probably was my biggest hit.  'Everybody Loves the Sunshine' is the biggest hit.
Speaker 1: Well.  And, now, I read with 'Everybody Loves the Sunshine' that, in part anyhow, it was inspired by you being in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and so much smog, you wanting that sunshine.  Do you, is that true?
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: So, what, what was your experience like?  I mean, L.A. is known for being so beautiful.
Speaker 2: Right, it is.
Speaker 1: But, tell me about the genesis of 'Everybody Loves the Sunshine.'
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's, you wake up to flowers and the sunshine and it's a beautiful day.  It's like, it's like, it's like everybody, I dream of every day like of being beautiful like that.  Like it's so, it's such beautiful sunshine and the beautiful vibrations and everybody's just grooving.  I had a good time.  And, I have a good time out in California.  But, I, I didn't like California.  I love, I love New York [New York].
Speaker 1: When did you move to New York?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Sixty-six [1966], 1966.
Speaker 1: And, so, you've lived here in New York City since 1966?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, what made you know this was your home?
Speaker 2: I think this, this is my home.  I love, I love, I love New York.  It's just the energy, you know, personified.  It's energetic.  My country, my country, (singing) "My country 'tis of thee; (laughter) in the sweet land of liberty; of thee I sing," okay, but, I love, I love New York, New York is--
Story_ID: 520986
Speaker 1: So, New York [New York] became home base.  But, you also, well, you travel all the time.  In your travels you met Fela Kuti.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: When, when was that?  And, can you tell me about that experience?
Speaker 2: When I went over, when I went over there--19--well, what year is it? 1970s.
Speaker 1: Late '70s [1970s], I think.
Speaker 2: Late '79 [1979], right.  Late '79 [1979], you know, and so I'm the only African, African musician.  This what a guy told me from Nigeria, told me that, that I was only one that ever record with him, record with Fela, Fela Kuti.
Speaker 1: So, you met Fela when you were on tour for your music?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, you all connected right away?
Speaker 2: Oh, we connected right away.
Speaker 1: And, did you record then or did you come back?
Speaker 2: We came back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We came back.  And, I recorded and toured with him.  It was fantastic.
Speaker 1: So, now, his sound was very different from your classic sound.  So, when you worked together what, what were you making?
Speaker 2: I've, I've changed my sound.  I've changed my sound.  Matter of fact, I'll play some of it for you in a minute.  You know, when you're getting ready to leave and everything.  But, I've change my music.  I've changed a lot, a lot.  It's nice.
Speaker 1: So, you're, your collaboration with Fela Kuti turned into, how many, how many records did you record?
Speaker 2: I did one, one record.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I did one side, one side is called "2,000 Black" [2,000 Blacks Got To Be Free"] and the other side is called "Africa, Center of the World."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, that's, that's where we went out.  We, we have never done anything else.  But, unfortunately, but, but, I did, I did do another thing with Fela Kuti.  Wow.
Speaker 1: 'Music of Many Colors.'  What was that?
Speaker 2: That's an album.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's the album.  That's--
Speaker 1: 'Music of Many Colors.'
Speaker 2: We did that album too, together.  It was really, really wonderful.  'Music of Many Colors,' let me see.  Yeah, that's the album.  Thank you.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: So, what was your, you--what was your experience of working with an African artist?
Speaker 2: It was really wonderful.  I hadn't, I hadn't ever, I had never, I had never done any, any artist from Africa.  I've done other artists, but an artist of this magnitude, he was very, very big throughout the world.  And, we vibe together, vibe together.  He was a man with twenty-seven wives.  And, he was I guess, he liked a lot of women, you know.  He liked a lot of women, you know.
Speaker 1: And, at this point, you're married [to Argerie Ayers], correct?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm married, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so, you, didn't you get some flak for working with an artist who has--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: There was no--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Issue about it?
Speaker 2: I guess, no--
Speaker 1: Nobody said anything to you?
Speaker 2: No problem.  No problem, I guess, no, no, no problem.
Story_ID: 520987
Speaker 1: So, when you were working with Fela Kuti, tell, now, how, how did he dress?
Speaker 2: Just, whatever I have on, you know.
Speaker 1: But, what did he, Fela Kuti, when, did you see as we were just describing, what, how did he dress?  Did he just have on his underwear and that was it?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no.  But, he would sometimes be out in his underpants.
Speaker 1: And, perform that way?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and perform that way.  Yeah, but, he would usually had a t-shirt on or something, a t-shirt--a shirt on.  But, but, you know, usually, you know, he didn't give a damn.  He did not care about anything, you know.  Well, he cared, but he cared about, you know, he didn't care about, you know, well, how he looks, you know.  He looked, he looked nice.  But, he didn't care about it.
Speaker 1: He wanted people to see his body?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that, I think he wanted people to see the body.
Speaker 1: Very good.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 520988
Speaker 1: So, now, when we, when we move into the '80s [1980s] this is when not only are you making music but hip hop artists begin to sample--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --your music.  There're some artist don't like that; being sampled.  How did it come to your attention?  I read that your, that one of your children let you know that you were being sampled.
Speaker 2: Right.  Exactly.  My son, my son, Mtume [Mtume Ayers].  I named him after Mtume, the artist [James Mtume].  And, I named him after Mtume, Mtume is a--I told him I told him that, "You're named after this great artist."  Mtume is very nice.  But, he always made money (laughter). No, that's right.
Speaker 1: So, wait.  Now back, we're going back to the sampling of your music.  So, which artist have sampled your music over time?
Speaker 2: Oh, everybody's sampled it, damn near sampled it.  Did you see that, that movie, what's it called?  I forgot the name of it.  But, what's it--they did it with--what's the guy's name, damn.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's all right.  Well, I have, I have, you told me about Alicia Keys.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then Mary J. Blige sampled your music, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: And, and I think even earlier than them then, because starting in the '80s [1980s].
Story_ID: 520989
Speaker 1: And now at the same time, you, you created Uno Melodic [Uno Melodic Records].  What was that?
Speaker 2: Right, Uno Melodic is called a label.
Speaker 1: That was your label?
Speaker 2: Label.  That's my label.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, on that label was it your music only that you were creating, or other artists as well?
Speaker 2: Well, other artists.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I used, I think Sylvia Striplin, and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Ethel Beatty, James Bedford, wow, a number of people, my god.
Speaker 1: And, for yours, you made a lot of album on there with Fela Kuti you did 'Lots Of Love,' you did 'Silver Vibrations,' 'Drivin' On Up,' 'In the Dark.'  These are all, well, no, 'In the Dark' was on Columbia [Columbia Records], so well--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Columbia, right.
Speaker 1: But, so--
Speaker 2: Columbia, yeah.
Speaker 1: While, Uno Melodica, is that's what called?
Speaker 2: Uno Melodic.
Speaker 1: Uno Melodic.
Speaker 2: Uno Melodic, yeah.
Speaker 1: During that period you were pretty prolific.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, how are you managing being an artist, traveling all over the world, and running a record label?  Are you actually running it or you got somebody else running it?
Speaker 2: I was running it.  And, but--
Speaker 1: So, how are you doing all these things at the same time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was kind of crazy because, you know, you gotta have arms and legs and people working with you.  So, I'm using my daughter.  And, you know, she complains about, "I want, I want more money," (laughter).  She'll be in here pretty soon.
Speaker 1: What's your daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Ayana [Ayana Ayers], A-Y-A-N-A.
Speaker 1: Now, you have three--four children?
Speaker 2: I have, one, two, three, three children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, tell me who they are.
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Tell me you children's names.
Speaker 2: Mtume Ayers, Ayana Ayers, and Roy III; Roy Ayers III.
Speaker 1: Got it.  Got it.  And, Ayana works with you in the business?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, has she been doing that for a long time?
Speaker 2: At least ten years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She'd been working on, you know, ten years, yeah, oh.
Story_ID: 520990
Speaker 1: You moved from your own label [Uno Melodic Records] to Columbia Records in the mid-'80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, through that period, then you made this album 'In the Dark?'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: With Roy [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers] and Stanley Clarke, Grover Washington, Jr., Paulinho Da Costa, Tom Browne, this a big album.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  It was big album.
Speaker 1: And, you said that over time, your sound had changed.  What's your sound like now, when you get to 'In the Dark?'
Speaker 2: Well, it's more African oriented.  You know, it's more African oriented, I guess.  It's kind of like a groove, the groove, African, you know, groove.
Speaker 1: Do you think that Fela Kuti inspired that?
Speaker 2: That what?
Speaker 1: That Fela Kuti inspired that lean toward the African groove (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  I think, I think so, yeah.  I think, I think so.  It captivates it, it's captivating.  It grooves on you, you help, you can't help it.
Story_ID: 520991
Speaker 1: And, then, it seems you also did a lot of work with Lonnie Liston Smith.  So, what was your relationship with him?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was great, it was great.  Because--it was great because, it's good.  He's kind of like quiet.  He's, he's, he's quiet.  Lonnie's very quiet.  He gets to a gig a day early.  Always gets to a gig a day early.  You know, he's gotta, he's gotta find, get tune up, make sure that everything's in tune.  He's a workaholic.  Lonnie's around my age.  And, so, he's just a workaholic because he's very good.  He's very good.  He plays the piano differently like, but he's on time.  He's really on time.  He's on time which is very important.  He's a downbeat, everything.  Everything time.  So, it's very good.
Speaker 1: So, you made the album, 'You Might Be Surprised.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: That featured, he was featured on that album, correct?
Speaker 2: Let's see, Lonnie--
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: Does it say?
Speaker 1: Lonnie, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lonnie Liston Smith?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see.
Speaker 2: Was that Lonnie?
Speaker 1: Hold on.  Yes, Lonnie Smith and the Jazz Explosion [New York Jazz Explosion].
Speaker 2: Oh, right.  Okay.
Story_ID: 520992
Speaker 1: And, then an interesting thing happened, you're living in New York [New York] all this time, but Los Angeles [California] Mayor Tom Bradley makes Roy Ayers Day.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Back in L.A [Los Angeles, California].  They didn't forget you.
Speaker 2: Well, all my sisters were there.  Wow.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: And, at this point, you're back in your neighborhood, right?  Do you go visit your old neighborhood at that point?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But, I had, you know, I never go there.  I never go there because everybody's gone.  Everybody's, you know, everybody, everybody that used to be there, they're gone.  Almost all their mothers and fathers are dead, you know.  And, basically, a lot of people have moved back into--and moved to new houses, you know.  Most of the area is, is, is Spanish people.
Speaker 1: So, the neighborhood is no longer the cultural hub that it was when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I used to live right across the street from the telephone company.  But, everybody is over there, it's new.  The people are new.
Story_ID: 520993
Speaker 1: So, in the late '80s [1980s], you had a period of time when you performed regularly at Ronnie Scott's Jazz Club, now this is in London [England].  So, that was a very popular club at the time, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my god, I played there so many times, that's right.  I think I played there most of the time more than everywhere else, my god.
Speaker 1: What made it such a magnet?
Speaker 2: Because I drew, I drew very well.  I worked there for one time three weeks, three weeks.  And, just about every night was just about sold out.  Except maybe Monday, Monday and, Monday and Tuesday.
Speaker 1: And, this is a large club.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at least--
Speaker 1: Two hundred fifty seats, it says.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And, so, who was your clientele?  Who were the people coming to see you?
Speaker 2: Oh, they're lovely people because they love [HistoryMaker] Roy Ayers, and I love them, you know.  It's wonderful because the British are, are very special, very special people.  The British are really special people.
Story_ID: 520994
Speaker 1: In 1989, you released music that was very politically inspired, 'Wake Up.'
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: This is around the time when crack is taking over everywhere and it's devastating our communities.  And, this addressed it directly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What, what inspired you to tackle this social issue through your music?
Speaker 2: That, inspirationally I was very much so, so inspired because, because there was a need to say something.  That became my need.  It became my, my offering and then tried to teach people about the dangers of drugs.  To say something without, you know, hopefully to wake up, wake up, become aware.  People are so vulnerable, so loose.  They not, they're not necessarily ready to, you know, to take on the changes.  It's so much stuff out here.  It so much, so many people lost.  You'd be surprised at how many people are lost.
Speaker 1: Well, and now, you have obviously being in the music world, you'd seen plenty of people using drugs.  But, there was a difference when crack came into--came onto the scene.  What, as someone on the music scene seeing, you know, a lot of drug use, what, what made this scarier?
Speaker 2: Well, it's the destruction, the destruction of people that are becoming, you know, I was watching this program called, "The Living Dead" ['Drugs, Inc.'].  Have you seen that?
Speaker 1: Unh-uh.  But, I'm aware of it.
Speaker 2: You should, you should see it because, you know, it's so many, so many, so many people that are just unaware.  And, not only, not only there but white folks and black folks.  It's really bad.  And, that's so much drug abuse that now things are worse than, worse than ever in many areas, that people are getting strung out.  My god, people are getting strung out after all that stuff.  All the years of looking at this and now it's in the white areas, and also of course, in the black and whatever.  I can't, I can't understand it.  There's, there's really no, no education really.
Story_ID: 520995
Speaker 1: In 1993--
Speaker 2: Ninety-Three [1993].
Speaker 1: In '93 [1993], you're fifty-three years old and the hip hop world really comes to embrace you in an even bigger way.  So, there's--you release 'Good Vibrations,' and you appear on 'Guru's Jazzmatazz' ['Guru's Jazzmatazz, Vol. 1'], right?  So, being approached by this big hip hop artist at a time when you're career is doing great and now here's the young folks coming up asking you to be a part of what they're doing.  Describe what happened there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, yeah, yeah, well, you know, this is a, it's a guy named, a guy named Tyler, The Creator.  Have you heard of Tyler, The Creator?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Oh. Tyler, The Creator called me up and asked me to be on his record.  And, I got a letter from him and everything and he told, he said, he said, "I want you to be on my album.  But, can you, can you do it in three takes, three songs, in three songs?  I just need, need you to put 'em in there."  So, I put 'em in there and he sent me the money and everything.  Everybody was paid, and everything was a hit.  And, I heard people, people told me about, they told me in Sony records [Sony Music Entertainment], Sony Records, he's on Sony Records.  I had no, no idea that it was Sony Records.  But, people told me that he heard me, they heard me on Tyler, The Creator ['Cherry Bomb'].  I said, "Wow," you know.  It was great.
Speaker 1: Well, and then, Mary J. Blige, at the beginning of her career is when she sampled "Everybody Loves the Sunshine."  And, that, it was on her--
Speaker 2: It was big hit (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'My Life' album.
Speaker 2: It was a big hit.
Speaker 1: A bit hit, and that album went triple platinum.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Which was her launch into the big leagues.  And you, you were part of that.
Speaker 2: Right.  I hear you.  That's right.
Speaker 1: What was it like working with Mary?
Speaker 2: Working with her and also I did, did some songs with her.  I did some more songs.  I, "Searching," she did "Searching," and another song.  Some young guys from--
Speaker 1: The Roots?
Speaker 2: Black--no, black guys from, I can't think of the guy's name.  But, the, they were producing her and it was very nice, very nice.
Speaker 1: Well, and you also worked with The Roots.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I worked with The Roots, right.
Speaker 1: And, this is, again, in the beginning of their career.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So, what, what was your experience working with these young cats as you--?
Speaker 2: It was, it was wonderful because it was, it was good.  It was very, it was very good that--
Speaker 1: Did you feel like you were teaching them?  What as--can you describe a moment that you remember?
Speaker 2: I can describe the moments, it seems like, it seems like the moments that I'm talking about, the moments--I'm just talking charge.  I said, "Well, listen I think you should probably start at the bridge and move down--."  I'll say something and everything's cool (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, they listen to you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they listen to me.  That's right.  I say cool, it's cool.  It's really cool.  But, they have very good attention span.
Story_ID: 520996
Speaker 1: You made an album called, is it 'Naste'?
Speaker 2: 'Naste,' yeah.
Speaker 1: And, was--so, tell me about that one.
Speaker 2: I'll tell you the words, can't think of the words, wow.
Speaker 1: Well, you've made, how many albums have you made?  'Cause so, I mean, I'm asking--
Speaker 2: Ninety-one, ninety-one albums.  Ninety-one albums I can't believe--
Speaker 1: So, you can't remember the words of every single one of them.
Speaker 2: I can't remember.  I can't remember.  I just wanna remember, remember those words.  What is this one?
Speaker 1: This is another one.  This is the 'Spoken Word.'  This is 'Spoken Word.'
Speaker 2: 'Spoken Word?'
Speaker 1: Yep.
Speaker 2: Is that Bonita Brisker?
Speaker 1: That's you.
Speaker 2: No, is that, is that on there?
Speaker 1: Oh, Bonita Brisker, yes.  In 'Spoken Word,' yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  She's good.  She's an actress and she is good.  And, she was, wow.  What is this right here?
Speaker 1: This is spoken--this is 'Smiling Faces.'
Speaker 2: Oh, my god.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just can't see it.  Oh, no, that was another one.  That's another--somebody else--
Speaker 1: So, ninety-one albums.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: What keeps you going on to the next one (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's more than anybody, right?
Speaker 1: And, of way more years than you've been on the planet.  What keeps you turning out one after another?
Speaker 2: I keep turning 'em out, I got some new stuff, you gotta hear it.
Speaker 1: When are, when, what is your creative process like?  When, when, when in the day are you making music?
Speaker 2: When in the day?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'm over there doing my taxes right now.  The taxes are late.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Uh-oh.  Make sure you make your music.
Speaker 2: I just gotta pay, pay a hundred dollars, and pay 'em that, that's cool, but you know.  (Unclear) paying my taxes that's what I have to do.
Speaker 1: But, your creative process as an artist, can you describe that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I guess, there's an old saying is when you, when you, when you do what you do and you do it to others, you do it to others too.  And, you do it to the hoodoo.  You don't mess with the voodoo (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, tell me, in the--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You're crazy.
Story_ID: 520997
Speaker 1: In your evolution of your music, 'cause you've been, you've been making music ever since you were a young man, but you told me you've been married for forty-four years.  When did you meet your wife [Argerie Ayers]?
Speaker 2: I met my wife, wow, we met at, we met at--where did we met?  Oh, we met at a club.  It was a club, a afterhour spot.  I mean, a afterhours spot but it was a club.  And, that's where we met at an afterhours spot.  And, so--
Speaker 1: And, where were you, in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: In New York.  And, I said, "What's your name?"  And, she said, "My name is Argerie."  I said, yeah, "Audrey."  She said, "No.  Argerie, A-R-G-E-R-I-E, Argerie."  I said, "Oh, that's nice."  I said, "My name is Roy, R-O-Y [HistoryMaker Roy Ayers].  And, so, she said, "Roy."  I said, "No, no, no.  R-O-Y."  And, she said, "Roy."  I said, "No.  Roy," (laughter) I was just kidding.
Speaker 1: You're just messing with her.
Speaker 2: I was just messing with--and so, she, she was with, with a friend and she said, "The brother's trippin'.  The brother's trippin'."  So, I said, "That's all right."  That's all right.
Speaker 1: And, you've been together ever since?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we've been together.  She still, she's still a, she's still a crazy bum.
Speaker 1: And, you said, she's a teacher.  What does she teach?
Speaker 2: She teaches elementary school.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Excellent.
Speaker 2: That's elementary, you know, so.
Story_ID: 520998
Speaker 1: Now, I'm looking, in, in recent years, you have, you collaborated with Erykah Badu.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Erykah very nice.
Speaker 1: And, then in, you, you're music was in 'Grand Theft Auto'?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Grand Theft Auto.  I told the kids to get rid of that job.  Get that other job, you know, the--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You were in that, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, tell me what, what do you see for the future?  You said you are now, how old are you now, in 2016?
Speaker 2: Sixty-four.  No, 2000--
Speaker 1: Sixteen [2016].  How old are you right now?  You just had a birthday.
Speaker 2: Seventy, seventy-six year old, oh, seventy-six, oh.
Speaker 1: So, as you look into your future, what do you see yourself doing?
Speaker 2: I see myself climbing to the top of the mountain.  The top--
Speaker 1: You don't think you got there already?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  We haven't got there yet.
Speaker 1: What's at the top of the mountain?
Speaker 2: God (laughter).
Speaker 1: There you go.
Speaker 2: I'm going to keep trying to reach that point.
Story_ID: 520999
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: My legacy is that I can make everybody happy, everybody, everybody, everybody even the negative ones.  I like to make 'em all happy.  And, 'cause I've made all kind of people happy, you know, that's--all kind of people, positive, negative, whatever, all of 'em.  So, it makes me feel good.  It makes me feel good.  And, that's what, my feeling is, it's tops, it's tops.
Speaker 1: In such a full life and career, is there any regret that you have?
Speaker 2: Maybe my first wife.  There was my first wife, you know.  But, you know, that's not a regret but it's just, it was just sad that she passed on, she passed on through another marriage or whatever.  But, you know, that--but, I'm just happy just to be here, to here to celebrate my life.
Speaker 1: What would you tell young people who might wanna follow in your footsteps?
Speaker 2: Follow me (laughter).  Follow me, c'mon c'mon c'mon c'mon c'mon follow me.  That's wonderful because I'm living a great life.  It's a happy life, but you know, it's not sad.  But, it's sad, it's sad but, it's moments, it's moments.  Moments of sadness, you know, but you know, gotta pick on up, pick on up.
Speaker 1: When you say moments of sadness, like, like what?  What are moments of sadness in your life?
Speaker 2: Moments of sadness, at first, when people die, you know, when people pass away.  Those are sad moments.  It just so many people.  Just everybody, everybody goes, you know.  Everybody dies, it's a fact.  So, there's no need in messing with that.  But, there's moments of sadness when somebody goes, you know, you know.  It's--just say, "They're not with us anymore," yeah.
Story_ID: 521000
Speaker 1: And, by the way, you told me that your home here in New York City [New York, New York] used to be James Baldwin's home.
Speaker 2: Oh, James Baldwin's, this, Jimmy Baldwin, I still talk to him, you know.  I talk to him and say, "Jimmy how you doing?"  You know.
Speaker 1: And, you all were close?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We were close but, you know, not as close as he and his brothers with, would be working with me.  But, he and his brother were just as tight.  James was really fantastic; his brain.  A real, a real nice guy though, very nice guy.
Speaker 1: Excellent.  Is there anything that you would like to share that I haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: I guess, I like your shoes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Thank you.
Speaker 2: I like those shoes.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Those are too much, girl.  So, what's that green stuff right there?
Speaker 1: This is your interview, c'mon.
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, wait, now what is that--oh, that's right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Look at this, a little green--
Speaker 1: We haven't finished your interview.
Speaker 2: A little green leaf (laughter).  Anyway, but, I like those shoes.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Very nice, very nice.  But, you look good.  You look good.
Story_ID: 521001
Speaker 1: Is there anything you want to share about your career that I haven't asked you?
Speaker 2: Well, I just wanna, wanna know, why you didn't ask me about the rip-off.
Speaker 1: Please tell me.  Tell me about the rip-off.
Speaker 2: The rip-off, it happens with a lot of musicians, especially entertainers.  And, especially the athletes, and especially the actors.  All the people getting ripped off.  And, it's a massive thing and there are people working on it but, oh my god, it takes a lot.
Speaker 1: Is that why you went from, why you left record companies, if you felt that they were ripping you off?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  And, that's why Prince left, Prince left.
Speaker 1: I know.  Is that--well, and Prince also didn't like people to sample his music.  But, you found a nice synergy there, with the sampling.  In terms of the rip-off because in your career you've worked with various record companies and pulled away at different points to have your own.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, did you make that decision because you felt that you were being ripped off?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because it's very difficult to, to gear your career toward everything out here because it's very, very important that people find, find the light.  It's kinda difficult because it's very hard to, to get into the industry whereas you have promotion people and all kind of other people that are, that are gearing toward your music.  And, then you have to pay these people to support your music.  But, that's why generally speaking, most artists that are with major labels that are doing well, they're probably are getting paid, are getting paid.  But, then a lot of times, like in Prince's case, he wasn't really getting paid.  He was, he changed things.  He changes things to, for the better.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Good.  Well--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Well, thank you very much.  I'm glad you're--
Speaker 1: Thank you.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: My pleasure.
Speaker 1: It's an honor to meet you.
Speaker 2: Thank you, my pleasure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Thank you.
