Story_ID: 245035
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'm [HistoryMaker] Veronica Airey-Wilson.  V-E-R-O-N-I-C-A; the last name is A-I-R-E-Y, dash, Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was Airey your birth name?
Speaker 2: Airey, yes.
Speaker 1: Last name?  Okay.  All right.  That's sort of an unusual last name; is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not sure how much of a story.  Obviously, it's my father's [Narciso Airey] last name, and he's originally from--his parents are originally from Jamaica, and I have to assume it was a name that they adopted from the Irish, who might have been one of the slave masters in the Caribbean at the time, so I know the name is an Irish name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I was born August 4th, 1953 in Jamaica, West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What town in Jamaica?  Can you tell us that?
Speaker 2: I was born in an area that's called Mona [Jamaica], which is in the Kingston--City of Kingston [Jamaica].
Speaker 1: Okay.  M-O-N-A?
Speaker 2: M-O-N-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's in Kingston, Saint Andrew [Parish].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm--some, some people may say jack of all trades.  Actually, I have two occupations.  I'm the owner, business owner, of an Allstate [Corporation] franchise, which is an insurance--multiline insurance company here in the greater Hartford [Connecticut] community.  And I'm also a politician--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in the City of Hartford.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you're currently the deputy mayor of the--
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm the immediate past deputy mayor.  It turns out that I will be probably be the last deputy mayor in the history of the City of Hartford.  We just recently changed our charter as of January 1st, to a strong mayor form of government, which eliminates the deputy mayor's position.  But in former years, the deputy mayor was responsible for the [Court of Common] Council, and in a city manager form of government, which we no longer have as of January 1st.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're former deputy mayor of the City of Hartford--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you're--but you're--you still retain the seat on the common council?
Speaker 2: I'm still a councilperson, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They call it the Hartford Common Council, is that--
Speaker 2: Hartford, yes.  It's the City of Hartford Court of Common Council.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is February 17th, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're currently in my office in the city hall at 550 Main Street in Hartford, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 245036
Speaker 1: Now, before I go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask as a warm-up.  They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, ma'am, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like so many things, it's hard to--I would have to say that it's probably stew peas.
Speaker 1: Stew peas?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color?  I wear black a lot, but I really do like bright colors, so I'd have to say yellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.  Anywhere in the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not just Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Not just Jamaica.  As a matter of fact, I love Barbados; I spend more time in Trinidad.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think so, no, no, no.
Story_ID: 245037
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and your father's [Narciso Airey] side.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: First of all, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My mother's name is Clariana Estelle--Estella Knight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Clariana is C-L-A-R-I-A-N-A.  Estella is E-S-T-E-L-L-A; and Knight, K-N-I-G-H-T, dash, Airey, A-I-R-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Wow.  My mother was born January 4th, 1923, and she was born in a place called Maryland in Jamaica, West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Not very.  I knew her mother, and I knew of her dad, so that would be just my grandparents.  I know that my mother knew her grandmother and her grandfather, but I had very little knowledge of them.  So I would say that I just go back to her--my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were they--are there any stories about your ancestors on that side, about where they came from and what they did and--
Speaker 2: Okay.  On my mother's side, interestingly enough, she remembered from her stories that her grandfather might have been a combination of African and Native Indian, the Carib Indians [Native Americans].  He--even when he was very old, she remembered he married someone who was sixteen, which would have been her grandmother and had tons of children, well over twelve kids.  But she remembered him as a person who had long gray hair, and his hair--he kept it in one long braid which he sat on most of the time.  So on my mother's--on her mother now, who was a product of that relationship, we always called Aunt Rickie, which her, her name was Rickenella Bogle [ph.].  And interestingly enough, I always wanted to trace that history because Bogle being her last name, there was a very famous warrior in Jamaica during slavery time whose last name is also Bogle.  So one of these days, I'm going to trace that history to see if they were any relatives to the famous Bogle.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her--
Speaker 1: Now, what is the famous Bogle's name and can you tell us the story of him?
Speaker 2: Bogle was one of the freedom fighters during the early slavery days who joined together with three other individuals, African men.  They were slaves at one time and decided to create a rebellion in Jamaica to fight for the freedom of the slaves at the time.  And out of all three of them, Bogle was the most successful, in terms of being able to motivate a large number of individuals to rise up against their masters and burn the cane fields.  And he rescinded into the hills of Jamaica, and they had a very hard time finding him and capturing him, and before they were able to do that, he was able to release a large substantial number of individuals in the--I guess, what is now known as Kingston [Jamaica], but at that time I'm sure was called something else.  So I would have to, to characterize him, I would have to say he was clearly freedom fighter for the Jamaicans in the early slavery years.
Speaker 1: Was he contemporary with Captain Cudjoe in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: No, he goes before him.  He--that was before his time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I think Cudjoe finally got the British to capitulate, I guess.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  No, Bogle was definitely before then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  There's no first name for him?
Speaker 2: I don't remember right off.  I'm having one of those senior moments.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: Paul Bogle, I think, is the name.  Paul.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 245038
Speaker 1: To continue on, my father's [sic.] grandfather--my grandfather, which is my father's--my mother's [Clariana Knight-Airey] father, shortly after she was born, he left [Jamaica] and went to Cuba and lived and started a whole new family there and lived in Cuba for the rest of his life.  I would say well over fifty years, because he was gone before I was born.  And he worked for Guantanamo Bay [Naval Base, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba] there for most of his life and ended up dying in Cuba.  So my grandfather, I--on my mother's side, I don't know at all.  I've read letters from him 'cause he used to write her back and forth, and I've seen his picture and I've heard the stories about him, but I don't know him, but he spent his years in Cuba.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And that would have been what, around the--
Speaker 1: Well, she was born in 1923, and he left shortly after that, so I would say probably in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yeah.  All right.
Speaker 1: In 1930s, yeah.  So I'm sure he'd have seen a lot there.  He was there during the Revolution [of 1933] and so forth.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, now what's your impression of your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 1: You know, I--like I said, I know more about my grandmother than I do about my grandfather, and I know her as a very hard worker.  She only had three children.  She had two boys and my mother.  But she was a laborer on what's probably equivalent to maybe a farm here.  And she spent her years raising vegetables and selling those in the market, but she did a very good job in making sure that her three children was taken care of as best as she could.  My mother actually--she actually gave my mother to her father's--my mother's father's sister to be raised after--as my mother got to teenage years.  And from my mother's stories, that she had a very difficult life coming up because she had to be kind of self-supporting.  So my mother also took on that same kind of laborer marketing; they called them higglers in Jamaica where they would take the fruits and vegetables from the farms and bring it into town and sell it there.  So my mother spent her young years between marketing those fruit and vegetables and going to school and many times she said she regret the fact that more time was spent raising funds for the family than in school, and to the point where--when she came to this country, she decided that she was going to go back to school.  So she started out like in grammar school, worked her way up until she got to high school here.
Speaker 2: Now, when did she come to the United States?
Speaker 1: She came to the United States in 1960.
Speaker 2: Okay.  1960.  And where did she--did she come to Connecticut first or did she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yep--
Story_ID: 245039
Speaker 1: My dad, and I'm not sure if you want me to talk about his history right away, but my dad was coming back and forth to the greater Hartford [Connecticut] area as a farm worker for a number of years starting in the 1940s.  And in 1956, he decided to stay here on a permanent basis and he sent for her [Airey-Wilson's mother, Clariana Knight-Airey] in 1960, so she joined him here, and the kids, there were three of us initially, and then my brother [Albert Airey] came later on, joined the family in 1962.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So well, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 1: My father's name is Narciso Fernandez Airey.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And his name is spelled as N-A-R-C-I-S-O, Fernandez, F-E-R-N-A-N-D-E-Z, and Airey is his last name.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: My dad was born January 1st, 1925.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: He's eighty years old now.
Speaker 2: Was he born in Jamaica, as well?
Speaker 1: He was born in Honduras.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Honduras.  And the story behind that is both his parents are Jamaican, but Jamaicans are probably the worst--the world's most traveled people; they're everywhere.  And they usually leave Jamaica for economic opportunities elsewhere.  So his dad was a baker and he went to work or started a little business in Honduras at the time.  He worked on a farm.  And he used to bake bread and buns to sell to the people on the farm, was probably the other laborers, and people in the town.  Now, my dad's father didn't believe in banks, so what he used to do when he sold and garnered this money, he would take the floor up, they live in a wooden house and that was attached to the ground, and he would lift one of the boards up in the living room, dig a hole into the ground, put the money in a pan and then bury it under--in the earth.  Well, there was an uprising, at some point, in Honduras where the Hondurans felt that too many foreigners were coming into the country taking their jobs on these farms.  So there was an uprising and they started burning down many of the homes on these farms.  So my dad's father, my grandfather, had gone into town that particular day, my dad, and his brother, and his mother had--were actually in Jamaica at the time visiting family there when this occurred.  And when he came back to the farm, the house that they lived in was burnt to the ground, and, of course, he was devastated 'cause everything he owned was there.  Well, he waited until everything was cool and then he took the--dug the pan up thinking his money's still in there; well, when he opened it and when he touched it, it just crumbled.  It was paper money and everything--so all his life savings disappeared in that short span of time.  So while his wife was in Jamaica, he just showed up to say that everything they owned was gone, and that's how they ended up staying in Jamaica.  But both my father and his brother were born in Honduras and that's how they have the Spanish first and second name.  So while my dad was in Jamaica, you know, he just grew up as a Jamaican, and it was the first time he needed to travel to this country, he realized he didn't have a birth certificate.  So instead of trying to get it from the Honduran government, they just created a birth certificate for him in Jamaica.  So what his mother remembered, or what they could decipher was this January 1st, so that's what he used to come to this country.  But after a number of years, he actually went back and tried to get his birth certificate and most recently, he gave me a copy, which is all in Spanish.  And I had it interpreted by someone here, and it turns out he was registered on January 1st, but he actually was born on December 22nd.  But in this history on the birth certificate, it makes a big deal about the fact that he was registered on the 1st, and they tell you who were the witnesses when he went to register and whether they were married or not.  It gives a whole life story unlike our birth certificates that just fill in your name in the blanks.  And that--it was recently we found out that he actually was born on December 22nd, not January 1st, and the town where he was born in Honduras and the whole thing, so it's--it was very interesting.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Jamaicans did travel, a lot and the story of Marcus Garvey, you have a large picture of Marcus Garvey on the wall here in the office and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he worked for the United Fruit Company in Costa Rica and then he went to England and--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: --it was a lot of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A lot of Jamaicans have connections to Cuba, to Panama.  They went to--they did a lot of the work on the Panama Canal [Panama].
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: And so you'll find our folks, I think most recently, the ambassador to the United States from Jamaica talked about having a mayor in Germany, so we're just everywhere, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Arthur Schomburg [Arturo Alfonso Schomburg], who founded the Schomburg Center [for Research in Black Culture] in New York's [New York, New York] mother [Maria Josefa] is from--a Jamaican--
Speaker 1: Ah.  Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Puerto Rico.  He was born in Puerto Rico, but his mother was Jamaican [sic.].
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.  Sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so just so many.
Story_ID: 245040
Speaker 1: What do you know about the ancestors on that [paternal] side?
Speaker 2: You know, not as much.  I knew my grandmother and I vaguely remember my grandfather.  My grandmother died in the '80s [1980s] so I--as I returned to Jamaica on a number of occasions to visit, I was able to get reintroduced to her.  I--while I was in Jamaica, I did--I don't remember her as much, because we lived with my mother's [Clariana Knight-Airey] mother, but we didn't have as much connection with my father's [Narciso Airey] mother.  So the reconnection really came in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s] in--this is in Jamaica, so that's how I got to know her.  And so the stories I know about them really has come from my dad.  But again, she was a woman who was a seamstress.  She spent her years sewing.  She did not work outside of the home, so all her work was done at home.  His father, on the other hand, was a farmer, was a farmer initially, and then became a baker.  So they had--they lived in a community called Cambridge [Jamaica], which is in upper Saint Andrew [Parish], in the hills of Saint Andrew.  And in that town and adjacent town, which is Maryland [Jamaica], they--it was their bakery, the Airey Bread and Bun [ph.] that supplied all the breads and the buns that they ate in that community, so they became famous based on their baking skills.  So he--that same skill that he took to Honduras, when he came back to Jamaica he started a business, and all the boys in the family were obligated to serve in that capacity, help delivering those buns and breads over the years.  But because my dad left Jamaica in the '40s [1940s], he wasn't as entrenched in the business as some of the other younger brothers.
Story_ID: 245041
Speaker 1: Is there a story as to how your parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] met?
Speaker 2: There probably is.  I'm trying to recall exactly what they told me.  My dad was from, as I explained, the town higher up, as you--you're in Jamaica and the section of Jamaica they lived is--it's towards the mountains.  And so my mom is from the town--you have to reach her town, which is Maryland [Jamaica], before arriving into Cambridge [Jamaica].  So my dad had to go through Maryland all the time to get into the City of Kingston [Jamaica] and they met over the years at social functions.  If there were like a community dance or picnic, that's really where they met.  And after they met, I think my dad told me he actually was seeing another woman, but somehow when he met my mother and they became close, she became pregnant with me, and my dad--his parents told him that any children that he produced, he would have to marry that woman because children need a father and he needed to be there for them.  So I'm not--my dad says I--he's not too sure he was ready for marriage at the time that he did, but his father and his parents insisted, and so that's how he married my mom.
Speaker 1: So what year did they get married?
Speaker 2: They got married in 1953.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-three [1953]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And she joined him in the United States in 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right.
Story_ID: 245042
Speaker 1: Tell us, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Probably, the earliest memories that I can remember, I remember, you know, obviously, I came to this country when I was eight years old, and so I remember growing up in Jamaica.  I remember living in Kingston [Jamaica], but visiting aunts and uncles who lived in the country areas where my mother [Clariana Knight-Airey] was from.  I remember going to school and having my own little--they used to have what is called a slate, which is a piece of actual slate material with a frame, wooded frame, that surrounds it and each one, my brother [Albert Airey] and I, both had our own slate.  And when you went to school, that's what you were--wrote your ABCs on and your numbers.  And so I remember going to a little school that involved that.  I remember when my mom left that she left us with a neighbor that lived in a part--in the town, August Town [Kingston, Jamaica] where we were, and that was not fond memories.  I remember not being treated very well by that lady and was very relieved when my--someone wrote to my mom and told her that we weren't being taken care of properly, and she sent my sister [Doreen Airey] and another friend to come and get us, and move us out of that household.  So yeah, so good and bad memories.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So now, did they--did your mother come back and forth?  Well, no, you were--I mean, your father [Narciso Airey] rather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father was--
Speaker 1: --did he come back and forth?
Speaker 2: --the one that came back and forth.  I remember--what I remember about that, even before I could actually remember what he looked like, was remembering looking forward to him always coming, and whenever he came, he bought things that were unique to America that we didn't have there.  I remember him bringing dolls, dolls that walked.  We didn't have dolls that walked, we made cloth dolls there.  And just interesting things like toys, mostly, is what we remembered about his visits.  And when he came, it didn't seem like he stayed very long, a couple of weeks and then he would be gone again.
Story_ID: 245043
Speaker 1: What were some of the--can you describe the neighborhood that you lived in, in Jamaica, and what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay.  The area that I recall living was called Barbican [Kingston, Jamaica].  This was when my mom [Clariana Knight-Airey] was there, and it's interesting because when I go back now, it's really more of a city, but when I was a kid growing up, I remember it more of a rural area with lots of trees.  The area was known for its ackee trees and ackee is--they call it Jamaican national fruit.  But it's really more of a vegetable that's--it comes in a pod, and with a little black seed and you--when you open the pod, you have to wait until it opens naturally and the pod is--once it's open, it has a yellow, what they refer to as the fruit.  But you know, fruit is something you normally could just wash and eat right away, the ackee, you have to cook it, and it's so more of a vegetable for whatever reason, they consider it the national fruit.  And it looks--when it's cooked, it looks like scrambled eggs.  You know, the Americans usually think of it as scrambled eggs.  But anyway, this area that I grew up was native to tons of these trees, and as a matter of fact, my sister [Doreen Airey], who was older, used to run a thing they called boat, which is an experience where folks would get together, and they would decide on a menu, what it is that they were going to cook, and it would involve this ackee.  She would go to the store and get from the grocer, on credit, she would buy the fish, the salt fish, that would go into this ackee and then they would make like dumplings, and whatever was native to the land is what they would cook.  They call it a boat because I guess everyone would come together and participate in this venture, and then they would share it, the meal, when it's all over with.
Story_ID: 245044
Speaker 1: The experience in our neighborhood [Barbican, Kingston, Jamaica] being a rural type experience.  Even though it was in the city, it was a part of the city that was not overly developed and still had lots of trees and forestry.  Fruits and vegetables were very easily accessible on the property where we lived.  My grandmother had a house there, and we also had a separate house on the same property.  And we actually didn't own the land, we leased the land and then we built--my mother [Clariana Knight-Airey] leased the land, and then we actually built my grandmother's home and our home on that land.  And interestingly enough, when my mother decided to move, relocate to the United States, our home was built in a way that her brother could come and take it apart and move the wood and the different pieces someplace else to create his own home and he did that with my grandmother's house and my mother's house.  But again, the community was one where everyone lived really in close proximity to each other, so you had our, what we call our yard with the two houses, but you could go next door and find a couple other houses on a different property.  And everyone--it was like everyone was related somehow and was family, and even though they weren't related by blood, they were kind of all responsible for us because my mom was away again, as I explained, selling her fruits and vegetables in the market.  And that would require that she would leave home like five o'clock in the morning, and if it was towards the end of the week, she never actually came home every night.  So if she left at five o'clock on a Thursday morning, she never came back home until Saturday evening, when everything was all sold.  So it was the community who kind of watched out for all of us and made sure that if we did anything that wasn't right, by the time my mom got home on Saturday night, she was going to hear about it.  And in the meantime, she would have a relative from the country who was older, who would live in the house with us and made sure that our needs were taken care of, in terms of food in the evening, that our clothes was washed, and that we had a chance to go to school.  So one of the things you'll find in the Caribbean island that even families that didn't have a lot, in terms of money and resources, there was always someone else who was less fortunate than that family.  So you always had a relative who was going to come from some country place, who they called helpers, who did all the washing and cleaning.  So it's interesting that my mother, who would be probably considered a laborer herself, she wasn't a wealthy woman, but she was able to have one or two people who were relatives from the country who actually came and did all the cleaning and cooking, while she was away selling these products.  And so you'll find that that's kind of like the lifestyle in many of the Caribbean islands.
Story_ID: 245045
Speaker 1: While you were growing up in--did--what were you like when you were growing up?  What did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Ah, let's see.  As a kid in Jamaica, I can--my life experiences or what I can remember all centered around school.  It's like from I was born, I can remember my parents [Narciso Airey and Clariana Knight-Airey] stressing the importance of getting a good education and so everything we did centered around that education.  So before I was even eligible to go to a real school, they have these little preschools that they would send--your parents would send you to with a slate, and you would spend a few hours a day, maybe half a day, learning to write your ABCs and your numbers.  'Cause you got to remember now, my mom did not finish high school in Jamaica, so you'll find that even when people aren't educated themselves, they have like a passion about making sure their kids get educated.  And so everything that we did, we didn't have TV, we didn't have, you know, Nintendo games, we didn't spend a whole lot of time just playing, it really was all about--you know, if they thought you were misbehaving or wasting time, they always sent you to go to read a book or go do your lessons, or go do your homework.  So, consequently, when we came to this country, it was pretty much the very same thing.  It was an adjustment for my brother [Albert Airey] and I when we came to this country, one, because in Jamaica when you're--you wear uniforms.  All the kids wore uniforms to school so you never had to worry about what to wear, you just had to make sure that whatever it--your uniform was neat, always pressed.  Coming to this country, my brother and I were the only two Jamaicans at the time in the school [Brackett Northeast School, Hartford, Connecticut] that we attended.  I was in the third grade and he was in like the first grade.  And so--
Speaker 1: Just the two of you?
Speaker 2: Just the two of us--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --well, three of us came, my sister [Doreen Airey] was in high school.  So it was a difference experience, I think, for those of us who were in the lower grades versus she who was in the high school, 'cause I think by the time you're in high school, kids kind of have a better sense of who they are, and the treatment is different.  So my brother and I, having to go to school for the first time without uniforms, my parents were only interested in making sure that we were clean, and neat, and warm because it was cold.  It was February when we came here, but consequently, we got picked on every day, either beat up or teased because we weren't in the latest fashion-wise.  You know, we probably--my mom, we--she had a polka dot sweater, she probably matched it up with a stripe pants, or slacks or skirt, and that made our life for the first couple of years that we were here very miserable, because the kids just didn't care for our accents, so they picked on us because we had a different accent; they picked on us because we dressed differently; and they picked on us because they thought--they said we thought we were smarter than everyone else.  And the mannerism under the British system in Jamaica is, you know, you're very polite to--teachers are like golden, so you treat them with the utmost respect, yes, ma'am, no, ma'am, no, sir, and that was just kind of like a joke to the kids in our class to hear us respond in that way when we were asked questions.  So we found it very difficult and found it miserable and actually wanted to go back home.  We begged our parents every day to send us back to Jamaica.
Story_ID: 245046
Speaker 1: Quite a few writers and political leaders from Jamaica that really affected, you know, African American life on the--especially on the East Coast of the United States.  You know, you go down to J.A. Rogers and Cyril Briggs and W.A. Domingo, Marcus Garvey himself, you know, all these people, Richard B. Moore, people founding bookstores and political organizations--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: A lot of that was going on in New York [New York] and I think people were much more accustomed--well, you know, they say New York is the melting pot of everything, but I think people are much more accustomed to Caribbean folks in New York and their accomplishment.  Hartford [Connecticut], on the other hand, was a conservative, rural kind of community where the West Indians were, especially children, were new to the area.  The men who came, came on the farms and they were out in Windsor [Connecticut] and Enfield [Connecticut] outside of the city.  They came to the city after the World War II [WWII] was over and had a great impact.  I think they influenced this area in a remarkable way in the sense that the West Indians who came, they were not all from Jamaica, Barbados, Trinidad, came from countries that were--I guess would be considered black countries.  So they were accustomed to being in charge and being able to feel free to go anywhere they want, so they didn't feel the same sort of limitation as the African Americans, even though they were living in the north, many of them came to Hartford from the south and were accustomed to living altogether in a certain area and not venturing out if they didn't have to.  And so when the West Indian men first came here, at the time, the African Americans lived in a certain section of the city.  They rarely went downtown.  They didn't do anything in the other bars and places like that outside of the area where they lived.  And the West Indians who came, not really knowing that there were limitations or not seeing themselves as being limited, ventured off into many of these other societies.  One of the stories I hear from one of the founding fathers of the West Indian Social Club [of Hartford, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] was, a few of them would come in, and they ventured off into an area that was adjacent to downtown, and went into this bar that was owned by Italians.  And every--they noticed that every time they had a drink, they didn't refuse to serve them, they served them, but the bartender collected the glass and he real--and then took them out in back and broke them, just threw them away.  And having noticed that, he went back to the farm and gathered up like a dozen men the next week.  They all came back and went into the bar to drink again, and they started drinking, and the idea was if he was going to break the glass, because they were blacks drinking out of it, he was going to make them break every, every glass in the bar.  And they were so determined in this that after a while, them and this Italian bar owner became like best of friends.  He looked out for their interest.  He started cashing their checks.  He started arranging marriages for them, because at the time in order to stay here, you had to marry an American--someone who was an American.  And he started creating--serving as their bank, getting them the finance to buy cars and things like that.  So that's a very interesting story that they--I've heard over the years as to how they kind of integrated the society.
Story_ID: 245047
Speaker 1: Now when you were coming up, was church important when you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, absolutely.  Education, the way we spent our youth, younger days, was, half our life was in school and the other half was spent in church.  And there were no social activities that you would partake--participate in that wasn't centered around the church.  It was just--if you wanted to do anything socially, you better make sure you told your parents that somehow it's related to an activity in the church, so yes, it was very important.  When we came to this country, we joined an Episcopalian church, St. Monica's [Episcopal Church, Hartford, Connecticut], and I think we ended up at that church because that pastor, who was Lambert, Father [Alfred] Lambert, had reached out to the farm workers and visited them on many of these camps where they--the tobacco farms where they were working, and helped to pray for them right there on the farm.  So consequently, when they left the farms, they sought out what church it is that he was the pastor of, and it turned out that it was St. Monica's.
Speaker 1: Now were you Episcopalian in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: We were Anglicans, which is, I guess, the--
Speaker 1: It's the equivalent.
Speaker 2: Equivalent of--that's the English version of what the Episcopalian church is here today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was a natural progress to move to the Episcopalian church, but instead of some people joined some of the traditional white churches, we chose to go to the African American church which was headed by Father Lambert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm a member of that church to this day, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So growing up as a kid, I participated in the YPF, the Young People's Fellowship, we--Sunday school was mandatory, and so we spent almost all of Sunday.  We started out very early with Sunday school, we stayed for the service, the regular service with our parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey], and then we stayed after for meeting with the Young People's Association, and that was how our days was spent.  And if there was any activities outside of school events, it was always related to the church.
Story_ID: 245048
Speaker 1: Now was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: In our family, because my dad [Narciso Airey] was just a lover of all types of music.  And so we had music for every event and kind of like for every day.  During the week, of course, we had to concentrate on our studies and our homework, so not much there.  But on Saturdays, my dad loved all the popular music, whether it was Caribbean, calypso music or it was African American soul music.  We spent a lot of time listening to that kind of music on his hi-fi or on the radio.  And then Sunday, he was a lover of jazz, so in the house on Sunday, the only thing that got played was jazz music.  I don't even think Gospel music was being recorded in any major way at that time, but in our household, if there was any music that was going to get played on Sunday, the only thing it could be was jazz music.  So we never really, as kids, understood it, but that's the only music that was allowed to be played, and so we just became lovers of it because that's all we were exposed to.  And my dad and mom [Clariana Knight-Airey] actually developed a little business out of their love for music and for entertaining and their need probably to build extra cash to purchase a home.  So in Hartford [Connecticut] at the time, if you went to a public dance or something that was major at any one of the hotels, by twelve o'clock everything closed down, so my parents used to cook before they went to these dances.  They would make either curry goat and rice, and my dad would buy beer and other liquor, and then after the party or the dance was over, he would invite all those people back to the house, and they would come back and we would play music and they would continue the party.  We would clear out our living room and maybe an adjacent dining room, and just have chairs.  We'd take all the furniture out and they would dance, and my parents would sell the food and sell the liquor, and that was like their second or third job.  So Saturday nights, I'm accustomed to going to bed when they go off to the dances.  We--as kids, we would take our--go to bed and sleep and then when they got home at twelve, we'd wake up and I can recall I would run the stereo, 'cause they had the hi-fi where you could stack up eight records at one time, the eight 45s on it.  So we would select the music--I would select the music, and I would stack them up and then when the eighth one was over, then I would put the--it was my responsibility to change the music again and keep folks dancing.  My dad would be responsible for the bar and my mom handled the food.  So I think they raised a few dollars to be able to purchase their first home that way.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now around 19--late '50s [1950s], early '60s [1960s], calypso was big in the United States.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: --and I--
Speaker 2: --in the--
Speaker 1: --think the first Caribbean music that really got big here, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --with [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte and all that.
Speaker 2: Wow.  It's--that was about the time I was probably being born, but I understand, you know, that's the first music that was very popular.  In the '60s [1960s], as I started to grow up, I think the calypso music continued in most of the other islands except for Jamaica.  Jamaica started moving to mento and then they moved onto like a ska and which eventually evolved into reggae music.
Story_ID: 245049
Speaker 1: Now one of the stereotypes about people from Jamaica is that they have like ten jobs apiece and, you see their jokes about it on television and stuff, you know.  And, you know, which is--stands as a stark contrast to the stereotypical view of black Americans, who a lot of them are unemployed (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have like--and these are both stereotypes but--
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, but there's some truth in the--in some of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think probably what--the Jamaicans is probably like most immigrant groups that come to this country and because our skin is black, there's sometimes this desire to compare.  But the comparison is really, probably, more to--more the fact that the Jamaicans are immigrants and if you compare that to other immigrant groups, you'll probably find the similarity the same.  The idea there is to come to this country for a better life, and the better life centers around making sure that you provide a better education for your children and you acquire some economic stability.  And so when Jamaicans, like many other immigrants who come here, that's really their focus, and they spend a lot of time trying to set that base.  And the base, obviously, is being able to be economically stable so that they can start to concentrate on making sure they prepare for the proper education for their kids, and substantial incomes for their children.  So yes, they do work two and three jobs, sometimes to the detriment to the family, because kids sometimes have to be left alone while families are out, both mothers and fathers produce it, you know, working these multiple jobs.
Speaker 1: Now did, did you have to face that kind of dilemma as a child with your parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] working a lot?
Speaker 2: I remember that there was definitely struggles in our family around the issue of work versus proper care for families, especially where my mother was concerned, because in our family, you know, the man is considered the breadwinner predominantly.  And so he knows what he has to do, and so anything else comes second, in terms of my mother working.  And my mother always wanted to work, and she wanted to have her own money, but we were young and small and children, and so there was that struggle is when would she find time to really work when she has the children to take care of?  So she was working before we came, and then when we came, there was a real problem in finding babysitters for us, so she really had to stop working full-time for a little while and only work part-time, and she always joked that she was only making twelve dollars a week and eventually, twenty-five dollars a week and somehow she was able to buy food and pay the electric bill based on that kind of income.  But it wasn't until I was in the fifth grade [at Brackett Northeast School, Hartford, Connecticut], and I came here when I was in the third grade, that my mother actually went out--went back to work full-time because she wanted to be there in the evenings when we got home.
Story_ID: 245050
Speaker 1: You talked about school in Jamaica, but what was the name of the school you attended in Jamaica and--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow.  It was a little neighborhood school and to be honest, I don't even remember.  I know it was in August Town [Kingston, Jamaica], but I actually don't even remember.  That's one of the things that I definitely don't remember, it was--seems like so many years ago; I might've been two or three years old at the time, you know.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the one here in Hartford [Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: I went to--when I first arrived here, I went to Brackett Northeast [School, Hartford, Connecticut], which is a school that doesn't exist anymore.  It was the elementary school at the time.  They were on Westland Street.  And then I left there and I went to--this is an interesting story.  We lived not very far from Brackett Northeast on Nelson Street, and that probably would be considered a middle class community at the time in Hartford.  It was a mixed community, predominantly African American, but there was an influx of Puerto Ricans that were coming into the area and there was still some whites who still lived in the community.  And so it was a very nice building.  It was a three-family--we originally lived on Capen Street and that home, my parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] lived there, but it was just too small when we came.  So immediately after we arrived, he moved and lived on Nelson Street and his boss, who--or a person he worked for at the time, Mr. Ferguson [ph.] actually owned the home and lived there also.  So he used to paint with Mr. Ferguson during the day.  That was one of his job; not his main job, but that was one of his jobs, and that was a very nice community.  And somehow my dad met this Jewish fellow who wanted--who owned a group of twelve-family-homes in--on Bellevue Street which is an area probably would be considered maybe lower middle class; definitely not as nice as where we were living at the time, because most of the buildings there were mostly apartment buildings, very dense community that we lived--that we eventually lived in.  And he convinced him that if he came and managed those properties for him, that he could live rent free, and this would be a way of him saving money to buy his own home.  And so out of the blue, without very little notice, he arrived home one evening and announced to my mother that we were moving to this area, and of course, she was distraught and we, too, was very upset 'cause we were now leaving a neighborhood that we were familiar with, and that meant we had to change schools.  But anyway, we arrived at this building on Wooster Street, and this was the first time we were going to live in a building with so many people, you know, eleven other families and it was not easy.  And the building was not all that well kept either.  It was now going to be his responsibility to keep--maintain it in a certain way and he had some struggles because the folks--there was some older people who lived and some younger people and the older people were telling him things won't change; the people in the building, they won't do what they have to do.  Why are you so choosy and picky?  And he worked--his second job was at Pratt & Whitney [East Hartford, Connecticut] as a custodian, and so he had access to bringing home the big machines that vacuum the floor, and that shine them, and he always loved to have wood floors.  So he spent a lot of time using the same machine not only for our apartment, for the entire building, shining the floor up and having them look pretty.  And it took him a little while, but he convinced those people in the building that this is the way that we want to live and that we should live.  And so even though they were telling him no way was it going to work, it did work because he was really on them all the time.  So we did--we struggled and stayed there for about a year and a half and saved enough money so we could acquire our own home.  And interestingly enough, the owner of the building, the same Jewish gentleman, was the one who owned the other building that we bought, so he always wanted to keep it in the family.  He kept the mortgage, and my parents made their down payment, so every month in this new house that we moved to, which was a two-family home, they paid the mortgage, not to a bank, but to him.  So just in case they didn't pay it, he would end up back with the house again, but we did--that's how we acquired our first home was through that process.
Story_ID: 245051
Speaker 1: School is very important, as you said before, so I take it you were a pretty good student, an attentive student?
Speaker 2: I think, I wouldn't say I am a naturally--school came natural for me.  I think because it was drilled into our heads as young people growing up that, you know, education is the key to life.  It's the only way of elevating yourself.  That kind of drilling on a day-to-day basis, and our whole life was built around making sure that we got the best education possible, that I really worked at it, to make sure that I did that little extra.  Whatever I needed to do extra to get the good grades, that would somehow get me to the next level, or to get a scholarship to go someplace else; I was the first person in my family to go to college.  But I think I knew from day one that I was definitely going to college, that was not a question; the question probably was how it going to be paid for?  And I learned early on that if you did well in school, the chances of being able to get a scholarship would be forthcoming.  So I spent a lot of time doing whatever little extra I needed to do to be able to get those good grades.
Story_ID: 245052
Speaker 1: So you spent like--how many years at Brackett [Northeast School, Hartford, Connecticut] before you moved?
Speaker 2: About two, three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Three years.  And then you--what, what was the new school's name?
Speaker 2: The new school was Arsenal--
Speaker 1: Arsenal?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --Elementary School.  Arsenal [School, Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us, now in grade school, what was your favorite subject in grade school?
Speaker 2: I would have to say math.  You know, basic arithmetic, adding, subtracting, multiplication, that really I found just easy, and consequently, became my favorite.  And I actually enjoyed--my dad [Narciso Airey] used to have these sessions where he would gather us all kids, at some point during the week, and drill us on what we know about math, especially on multiplication tables.  And I always enjoyed, you know, having all the right answer, even more so than my sister who was in high school.  And my dad was--used to point out, "Well, how come [HistoryMaker] Veronica [Airey-Wilson] knows it and you don't know it, Doreen [Airey]," you know, kind of thing.  So I would say math was definitely--elementary math was definitely my favorite.
Story_ID: 245053
Speaker 1: Now did you have any favorite teachers or mentors in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  Interestingly enough, I--the two individuals that I remember for both positive and negative, centers around teachers.  I remember my third grade teacher [at Brackett Northeast School, Hartford, Connecticut], not with any favorable--not with any positive feelings.  Her name was Mrs. Letherer [ph.], and she was my third grade teacher.  And I mentioned that my brother [Albert Airey] and I were the only two Jamaicans in the school.  We were having a hard time.  People would tease us about our accent.  And after a year, a third Jamaican young lady came to my class, and I can recall the teacher saying to her--saying to me, "[HistoryMaker] Veronica [Airey-Wilson], I want you to tell Elaine [ph.] that we welcome her to this class, and that we hope she'll have a great year here."  And the kids all laughed, because here it was a teacher was reinforcing the stereotype that we don't speak English and we don't understand English, and that's why I need to somehow interpret that for a new person for the class.  And I was a very shy and meek kid in that class, but that day, somehow, I mustered up enough strength to say, "Mrs. Letherer, Elaine understands English perfectly well and she knows what you're saying."  And so I have never forgotten that, that even though the kids were mean, that there was a teacher who somehow was not sensitive to our culture, and therefore, also created the stereotype that we somehow didn't speak English and didn't understand English.  So fortunately, by the time I got to the seventh grade [at Arsenal School, Hartford, Connecticut], my experiences with teachers were much better.  And I remember Miss [Jessica] Moses, who was my homeroom teacher; she never actually taught me a subject, but she was my homeroom teacher, and I think somehow she saw in me potentials that I didn't even think I had, at that time.  Because by now, I think my self-esteem probably was kind of low, based on all this teasing and picking, and I was probably trying to fit in so badly with the average crowd that I probably was venturing off and doing things that I wasn't supposed to.  But she somehow saw something in me that warranted her to say, "I want you to stay after school and join my drama group."  And so she identified a few kids in the school that she kind of took under her wings, and because it was school related, my parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] was agreeable to me staying after school and doing some sort of activity after school because it was school related, so that helped.  Two, I didn't have to go home with the same set of kids that picked and fight with me all the time, so I think she probably used it as a way of also getting me out of that pressure.  But she--one of the first plays or drama experience that I encountered, she had a production of 'A Raisin in the Sun.'  And she selected me after tons of folks were trying out for the various parts as mother [Lena Younger]--I played mama in 'A Raisin in the Sun.'  And this was the first time a little foreign girl was going to get up in front of all these people and actually speak out on stage and perform on stage, and after that experience and I knew that I could do it, there was nothing stopping me, really.  And so I credit her for where I am today, because she gave me that first experience of public speaking, and she really had faith in me that I could do it, and really coached and worked with me.  She was an English teacher, she wasn't my English teacher, but she really coached me and worked with me, and provided that kind of support network that I needed at the time.  'Cause again, my parents, both of them were busy by now.  Both my parents were working two jobs and didn't understand the school system, and had no tolerance for any complaints, either coming from the administration or coming from us as kids.  You know, when we went home and complained that life was really horrible and kids were picking on us, they would tell you, "Well, that's not what you're going to school for.  Just concentrate on your education and read your books and get your education.  Ignore those kids."  You know, they had no concept that it's hard to ignore someone's beating on you and bullying you every day.  But somehow, Miss Moses, she--I ran into her just the other day and she's much older now, but she always said miss.  She wanted to remind me she was never married.  She had somehow a passion for taking these kids who had potential, as she saw it, and working with them, helping them to develop it.
Story_ID: 245054
Speaker 1: You could sometimes be difficult in the household, and you got in more trouble than anybody else.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, probably in comparison to what parents call difficult today, it probably wasn't that bad, but I--at the time, you know, we were taught, you know, kids are to be seen and not heard and so therefore, you never rebelled or did anything out of the ordinary.  And I guess I was a little adventurous because I--the belt had to be taken to me on a number of occasion for if my parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] said, you come straight home from school, don't stop, I would somehow stop at my friend's house and stay later than I was supposed to, or not pick my brother [Albert Airey] up when I was supposed to because I was visiting friends.  So my rebellious--rebellionness [sic.] had more to do with trying real hard to fit in with my friends and probably staying out later than I should after school and not coming straight home as they have instructed.  'Cause they were off working and, you know, they expected after school was out at two o'clock, by 2:15, you'd be in the house and I would probably venture off until four o'clock, just before they would come home (laughter).
Story_ID: 245055
Speaker 1: Now what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I attended Weaver High School [Hartford, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Weaver High School here in Hartford [Connecticut] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I would have to say out of all my school years, that Weaver--being at Weaver were my better years.  I was on the honor roll at Weaver, in the honor society.  I had a chance to visit Greece on a school trip.  I went to Rhodes [Greece] and Athens in Greece.  I was--
Speaker 1: Now that's quite a thing to do.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, that was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, to go to Greece.  Now what year were you when you went to Greece?
Speaker 2: I was in the ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Ninth.
Speaker 2: And I--
Speaker 1: So you were a freshman?
Speaker 2: I was a freshman and my world history teacher took us, a group of students that probably was the first time in recent times, at that time that a trip had gone to Europe from Weaver High School, mainly because the folks who attended there really couldn't afford what it would cost.  But my mother [Clariana Knight-Airey] worked two jobs 'cause she was pretty excited about--I think she kind of lived what she would have liked to have done through me, and so when I mentioned that I was going, she said, "Oh, I don't have any money.  I--you can't do that."  And I said, "Oh, Ma, I really would like to."  So she started selling Avon and doing extra chores, working longer hours to be able to save up the money to do that and so she did.  And there was an assumption that everyone in the class were African Americans or was Americans, I think; it was a combination of few whites and mostly African Americans who attended this trip on our spring vacation.  But when I got to the airport and showed up with this Jamaican passport they said, "Well, you can't go 'cause Greece--if you're from Jamaica, you need a visa."  If you're an American, you didn't need a visa, but if you were Jamaican, you needed a visa.  And it was devastating because here it was, we were going to lose our money, I wasn't going to be able to go and all that we had worked on for so long towards this trip was coming to an end without any good results.  So anyway, my mother--they said we couldn't go, and the trip left and the people who my mother worked for, for the time was the Oak Hill School for the Blind [Connecticut Institute for the Blind; Oak Hill, Hartford, Connecticut] and the headmaster there took it on and had his attorney contact the different travel agencies and complain.  And they said if we could get the visa, which we had to go into New York to get, they would allow me to go with a school from Vermont.  And it was an all-white Catholic girls school, so I was the only black person on the trip, but it did give me a different kind of experience 'cause the people who went from Weaver High School, they all went to Athens and Athens, at the time, was like New York [New York], you know, it's a big city, everything is modern.  But the people from Vermont had gone to Rhodes also, and Rhodes was more of a rural country area.  It--if you've ever seen the old Romans movies with all the buildings that are made out of stone but all broken up in pieces that you--like you would see in a history book, that's really how Rhodes looked at the time, and that's really, I realize now was from World War II [WWII] when all the buildings were bombed.  So they never had a chance to really build those buildings back, so they were just there for us to view.  And that was also interesting because the people in that community had not ventured out very far either, and so they weren't accustomed to seeing any black people, and so wherever I went, they were always touching me to see if, you know, somehow my color is going to come off, or if it was a tan.  I always got all this attention.  It was interesting, interesting.  And I developed pen pals there in Rhodes that I had well through high school, because they wanted to learn English and writing back and forth to me gave them a chance to practice their English, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So then quite a trip.
Speaker 2: Oh, it was.
Speaker 1: So, so it--was it like a week or two weeks or--
Speaker 2: It was a week.
Speaker 1: A week.
Speaker 2: It was a week and half the time--eight days and half the time, as I said, was spent in Rhodes and the other half was spent in Athens.
Story_ID: 245056
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in other high school activities [at Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --clubs and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I was a cheerleader and rose to the level of captain of the cheerleading team, cheerleading squad.  I also was the--very involved in--the editor.  I was one of the co-editor of the school newspaper.  I was part of the work study program.  'Cause one of the things that I guess, and this probably came from my parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] who always was working, I kind of developed the same sort of drive to kind of have my own money and to be able to acquire my own things.  And so, you know, after a number of years in junior high [Arsenal School, Hartford, Connecticut] and early part of high school, asking and then being told no, I felt the need that I should also, I should have a part-time job so I can buy my own things.  And so the rule was if you got good grades, it's okay to have a part-time job, but if your grades fell, you couldn't.  So that was another impetus to keep my grades up, but I was able to acquire enough credits during my first and second year of high school that by the time I got to the third year, that I could actually only go to school the first half of the day and the second half of the day, I could go off and, and work.  And so I became--I joined the work--what was called the work study program that officially allowed you to get credit for your work experience.  And I worked at a bank initially, and then eventually at the telephone company, and so that's how I spent my high school years, involved in as much extracurricular activity as I could, but also, taking on a part-time job as a telephone operator, which really gave me the resources to be able to buy my own clothes, and pay for all the amenities that you need to attend the proms, and all the other things in school, and even help my mother out a little.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we were required to do that.  If you're going to work, you're going to contribute to the household.
Speaker 1: So you were pretty busy in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes, awfully busy.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now when it came close to graduation time, did you have a career goal in mind?
Speaker 2: As, you know, I was telling the young people earlier today when I spoke at Martin Luther King [Jr.] School [Hartford, Connecticut] that I always knew I was going to go to college, and somehow I zeroed in on being a lawyer, but not really having any sense of what that would entail.  And I think probably, maybe after saying I wanted to be several different things, I think back on it now, probably saying that I was a lawyer was the thing that pleased my parents the most.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that caused them to light up; all their friends were also very excited that Mr. Airey's daughter was going to be a lawyer.  So I think over the years, I started to say that I wanted to be a lawyer because that was what pleased my parents and their friends.  To this day, many of my parents' friends would say, "Oh, there goes Mr. Airey's lawyer daughter."  They never even got it that I never--I'm not a lawyer.  But because that made them happy, I kept saying that I would be a lawyer, so all through high school, I was going to be a lawyer.  I don't even think I knew another lawyer, not even my parents' lawyer.  And I went to college with that intention and the school I went, which was Ithaca College [Ithaca, New York] did not have a prelaw program, so I majored in history and political science.  I was in such a hurry to leave Ithaca, it was so cold up there, that I acquired the credits in three-and-a-half years and so instead of going on to law school, the idea was to work for a year first, since I had gotten out a semester early and then go on to law school.
Speaker 1: Now, did you graduate in '70 [1970]?  Was it '70 [1970] or--
Speaker 2: I graduated in 19--I left--'72 [1972].  I graduated from high school in '72 [1972] and graduated from college in '75 [1975].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was not until I left college and started to work for Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] where I had an experience of working very closely with the corporate lawyers, 'cause I not only wanted to be a lawyer, I wanted to be a corporate lawyer--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --'cause I thought lots of money was in being a corporate lawyer.
Story_ID: 245057
Speaker 1: How did you choose Ithaca College [Ithaca, New York]?
Speaker 2: For money.  For--they were the school that offered me the most financial assistance.  I was in my guidance counselor's office [at Weaver High School, Hartford, Connecticut] one day and I was applying to everywhere.  I'm telling you, I must have applied to ten, fifteen schools 'cause it was affordable at that time.  At that time, you could write a little request saying that the school fee--the application fee, you would like to have it waived, and most of the time it was granted.  So now I see kids have to spend a hundred dollars, $150 on application fees; we got all those waived, so it was not prohibitive for me to apply.  And I applied to places like Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey] and Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] and Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I--just anytime any application came across my guidance counselor desk, you can be sure I applied and remarkably, got accepted to quite a few of them.  I was accepted at Princeton, I was accepted at Cornell, Ithaca and several other of the state schools.  And I decided--I knew I wanted to go away.  I definitely wanted to leave Connecticut.  I just wanted to have that experience of being away.  I had no idea where Ithaca was.  I knew it was in New York, but my idea of New York was New York City [New York, New York], so somehow I thought it was close to New York City, so I didn't even know where Ithaca was.  And I applied, but it was Ithaca--you know, other schools responded, you know, 50 percent scholarship, a few dollars here, there, but it was Ithaca said we would like you to come and we will give you a four-year tuition and room and board scholarship; now how could you refuse that?  Especially when your parents didn't really have funds to pay for the school.  So I was like, "Yes, I am coming."  I never went to visit the school like kids have a chance to do now, so I, like I said, I just didn't know where it was, what it was like.  Everything I knew about Ithaca was what I got initially on that application and a brochure of some sort.
Speaker 1: Now how did you like Ithaca [New York]?  Ithaca, I think like maybe five, six years ago was picked as the best city to live the United States by Utne Reader magazine.
Speaker 2: That is amazing.  Ithaca definitely has changed over the years.  When I went there, there wasn't much to Ithaca.  The only thing was--that was in Ithaca was Ithaca College on one hill, and Cornell on the other, and in between that, there might have been one little pub downtown and the streets were still cobblestones.  You know, it was just ancient.  I have had a chance to visit Ithaca since I've graduated, and it is just remarkable.  The whole city has been transformed, so someone is definitely doing something right there.  But I just remember Ithaca, the town as being old, far from quaint, cold.  You know, the winds that used to come off the [Cayuga] Lake there, oh, it was just remarkable.  And so because of the coldness and being so far away, I was just in a real hurry to, to leave that--leave Ithaca, so I doubled up--
Speaker 1: So you really didn't like it?
Speaker 2: Ithaca was very beautiful in the springtime, but I just did not--no, I, I couldn't say that I liked my experience there, but I just didn't like it as a town.  It didn't have much to offer.  And like I said, it was just too cold.  If I thought Hartford [Connecticut] was cold, it was like double cold there.  So in my quest to leave there very quickly, I doubled up on my courses and graduated in three-and-a-half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, you were a history major and a--
Speaker 2: History and political science--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --major because without the pre-law, my advisor told me that that would be the next best thing to gain the kind of background, 'cause I was still going to go on to law school.  I was just going to work a year and then apply after, because once I left Ithaca, I really didn't have any prospect for financial resources to go onto law school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so the idea was to work and maybe even the company that I worked for would help with paying for it.  But once I decided--once I started with Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] as a claim rep and had a chance to--my background there was to investigate bodily injury complaints--
Story_ID: 245058
Speaker 1: History, I know at the time--I don't know who was at Ithaca [College, Ithaca, New York], but I know at the time, I think John Henrik Clarke was teaching at Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] part-time and Dr. Ben [HistoryMaker Yosef Ben-Jochannan] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --some other people.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever get over there to hear any of them?
Speaker 2: I remember Ithaca--Cornell having some--
Speaker 1: James Turner.
Speaker 2: --very dynamic instructors and I was always very fascinated and kind of questioned, you know, whether or not I had made the right experien--made the right choice in going to Ithaca versus Cornell, 'cause I was accepted at Cornell also.  And kind of missed--Cornell had so many more black students, and the whole experience at the time just seemed for black students, just seemed to have been much more rewarding at Cornell.  So my interaction with Cornell was limited, but we--during my last year, had an occasion when they had special events, when they brought in special speakers, had a chance to participate from that level, and that's what made me question whether or not my experience would have been more valuable there.  But I think what I didn't appreciate was the large--was how big the school was and--
Speaker 1: It was a dramatic difference, I would gather--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --between Ithaca College and--
Speaker 2: And question whether like--when I went to Cornell, I mean, Ithaca, there was only 2,400 students and, you know, Cornell, at the time, I think was well over ten thousand, so I don't think I really would have survived in such a large school, so that's the part that I certainly didn't miss.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now we'll let you graduate.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: But were there any teachers or mentors at Ithaca College that you remember that were--
Speaker 2: No.  No, not--none that really stuck out.  I was not--there was a--what they called a HEOP [Higher Education Opportunity Program] program and most of the blacks who were at Ithaca came in as a result of that special program.  But I didn't come in under that program, so I didn't have that resource available to me, in terms of the mentoring and the counseling that was provided.
Speaker 1: Did that--
Speaker 2: Fortunately, I didn't, I--you couldn't help but align yourself with all the kids who did because there were just so few of us who weren't part of that program and everyone else was.  And so I had a chance to join the Afro-Latin Society [African-Latino Society] and to attend many of the HEOP events that they had, but the kind of monitoring and counseling that those kids had, we just didn't have that available to us, and so I kind of was on my own there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what, what aspect of history did you major in there?
Speaker 2: I was a history major with no real focus on whether it was--I took just a variety of course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I--a substantial number of my credits, and that's how really I ended up at Cornell, I had a chance to study African American history and was able to get, I think about 20, 25 credits.  And there was limited amount of those courses available on Ithaca campus, and so I was able to take three of those courses at Cornell; there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --was some sort of partnership and that's how I was able, but towards the end, I really got consumed in learning more about my African history and, and heritage and how that experience brought us into the Americas and how that transcends all over, not only the U.S.--United States, but the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if there was a focus towards the end of my school term there, it was on African American history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And who is--who were the teachers over at Cornell?
Speaker 2: You know, it's been such a long time, I honestly don't remember off the top of my head who they were.  A lot of--no one that, you know, stick out in, in my mind in any major way.  There--I can recall there was one instructor who was nationally known, but I just can't even remember his name, at this point.
Speaker 1: It wasn't James Turner or John Henrik Clarke, or James Turner (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That seems to ring a bell because I think he was well--he was an author, he had written--
Speaker 1: A younger man?
Speaker 2: --several books, yeah.  What comes to mind is that that was kind of like the beginning of his career, and in later years I think he went on--
Story_ID: 245059
Speaker 1: You graduated in three and a half years [from Ithaca College, Ithaca, New York]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so you come out in 1975.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: And now, what did you think you would do?  Now had you started working with Equitable [Life and Casualty Insurance Company], at this point?
Speaker 2: No, no--
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: --no, no.  I came back to Connecticut, and all those years and every summer I had been working as a telephone operator and it paid well, it was a great job, so my thinking was, "Oh, I'll come back and get maybe a management trainee position with the telephone company."  Well, it didn't happen, you know.  They were going through hard times and they were laying off more than they were hiring.  So I started to look around, and apply everywhere, and Aetna Life and Casualty [Aetna Life Insurance Company; Aetna, Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] offered in February of '96 [1996] [sic. 1976], so it took me a while to even get a job, hired me as a claim rep.  And I just thought it was the greatest thing because they offered a company car, all the training that I would ever want, I think they were paying like twelve thousand dollars a year and teachers were probably getting about eight thousand dollars, at that time, so you can see I was--I thought it was just fantastic.  And there was a career path.  You were going to be a claim rep and then a senior claim rep and then a supervisor and then maybe you might become a manager, and this was supposed to take something like six to eight years and I'm like, "Okay."  I was just really thinking of a job immediately, because remember, I'm going to law school.  After I was there a year, I had not applied to law school yet.  Just around the time that I was about to apply, a position opened up in their corporate social responsibility department for someone to investigate internally discrimination complaints for women and minorities, and I applied.  And everything thought that was the silliest thing ever.  Who would ever give you a jump in pay and in status, they had like particular classes, and this was going to be like a four jump--four-tier jump for me and it was unheard of that they would take someone who has just come out of being trained, and move them into such a high level position.  But anyway, I applied and I met a very dynamic African American woman who was heading up this particular union and she's now Lynne MacFarlane, at the time she was Lynne Tennant [ph.].  And I interviewed with her, and interestingly enough, we really clicked because she had been given a similar opportunity to move to that department by an African American male some years before, and she, too, had gone out of the traditional career path.  And so she hired me, and it was pretty exciting 'cause now my salary was triple what I was making in one year.  And--
Speaker 1: So you're making like thirty-six thousand dollars--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at--
Speaker 2: And I was--
Speaker 1: And this is 1976?
Speaker 2: Seventy--1976, '77 [1977], yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that was big money then.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was pretty exciting.
Speaker 1: This was big money.
Speaker 2: And she was making quite a bit more than that and--but it was exciting, because now I was traveling nationally for the company.
Story_ID: 245060
Speaker 1: A very interesting story is that remember I'm just this young kid right out of college [Ithaca College, Ithaca, New York], not much business experience, and one day she [Lynne MacFarlane] said to me, "[HistoryMaker] Veronica [Airey-Wilson], we need to go to New York [New York], why don't you call up and book us at the--" I think it was the Astoria--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Waldorf Astoria [New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Waldorf Astoria.  And I called up and at the time they said the rate for the hotel room was $250 a night, and I said, "Okay.  We'll take one room."  And so the idea was that she's a woman and I'm a woman and we'd share the room.  So I went back to her and I said, "Lynne, I called up to book the room, but it's very expensive and so I took one room."  And she was just so cool.  I mean, you know, she probably could've laughed her head off or embarrassed me in some way, but she was very cool.  She says, "Listen, when the big boys upstairs travel, they don't share a room, and whatever the cost, you book two rooms."  And so--and she showed me the ropes and she told me all about what the expense accounts were like, and I didn't have to feel that I need to eat at McDonald's when I go--when I travel for the company, you know, go first class.  The best--she was a wonderful mentor, not only a boss, but a mentor.  And so from that one experience, it--and the way she handled it was just an eye-opener for me in that corporation.  So I had a very good career at Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut] for the years that I was there.  I was there for about nine years.  But what happened, why I ended up not being an attorney or not going to law school, was in this position as a equal opportunity consultant, I had to investigate these discrimination complaints, make recommendations to management, but a lot of my time beyond the investigation was spent reviewing paperwork, writing briefs, and then working with our corporate lawyers to resolve the particular case.  And for the very first time, I had an opportunity to work closely with corporate lawyers and to see what was involved on a day-to-day basis.  The part of the job that I loved the most was the investigation, the interviewing of all the participants and the part of the job I hate the most was the reviewing of these briefs and writing the position papers, and then it dawned on me, now if I was a corporate lawyer, this is what I would be doing.  I'm not going to be in the courtroom defending Aetna, I'm going to be stuck in this office with this paperwork all the time, and it was at that point I came to the realization that I would be miserable as a corporate lawyer, and I just made the decision right then and there, that's not for me.  But in a very short period of time, I came to the conclusion that at same point in my life, I really want to own my own business, and I had a chance to attend what was then called the career development workshop for women and minorities that was given by an outside firm, but through Aetna.  And we had to plan our career five years down the road, ten years down the road, fifteen years, and at the ten-year mark, my goal was to leave corporate America and start my own business, and at the time I thought it would be a fashion--something in the fashion industry.  I was thinking a woman clothing boutique, 'cause I've always had a real interest in fashion, and so that was my ten-year goal.
Story_ID: 245061
Speaker 1: Around nine years at Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut], with all the things that were going on and with this great career, I decided that I would venture off into starting my own business.  And it was a real coincidence, because I have a cousin who was coming in from New York and she was a nurse, and she felt she had been burnt out in the nursing field in New York and wanted to change careers also.  So she said to me one day, "My husband and I relocated to Connecticut, but I don't want to go back into nursing, but I'd love to start a little business and I think women in New York are wearing all this big jewelry and I think if I had some money, I could make this jewelry."  And I'm thinking, "Okay, well I have a few dollars, but I have no talent in making jewelry."  So I gave her five hundred dollars, she went to New York and she bought up all this beads and she came back and I started to try to help her around my dining room table to make this jewelry and while I was--after about an hour, I became frustrated and I went to bed, but my husband and her stayed up, and they made all these big chunky African bead-type jewelry.  The next morning I got up and I looked at these things and I'm like, "Oh my gosh, who in the world is going to wear those?"  Because we live in conservative Hartford [Connecticut], which is a banking and insurance industry, at the time we were wearing little pearl necklaces and little knobs.  I'm like, "No one here is going to wear this."  And my sister [Doreen Airey] came over that evening and she had just gotten employed by American Airlines.  American Airlines had moved their reservation office from New York [New York] into downtown Hartford.  My sister looked, looked at these jewelry and she says, "Oh, this looked like the kind of jewelry the women wear at my office, the ones that came from New York."  And I'm thinking, "Ah."  She says, "Why don't you come in on your lunch hour and sell them?"  So she made the arrangement, I took off from Aetna and in an hour's time at American Airlines, my investment of five hundred dollars doubled, and we sold off every single necklace there to these women, and so I was very excited.  And for the next six months, I spent more time on marketing this jewelry that my cousin was making than I was spending on Aetna's business, so I knew it was time to go.  So in nine years at Aetna, I decided to leave and start--go full-time into this business.
Speaker 2: So this is like 1985 or--
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, yeah, just about then.
Speaker 2: Okay, 1985.  Okay.  So you left Aetna to go into the jewelry business, right?
Speaker 1: To start our own--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --boutique--jewelry boutique.  And so we opened our first shop in downtown Hartford and two years later, we opened another one in Middletown [Connecticut], and the business was called Verjen, V-E-R-J-E-N, which is a combination of Veronica and Jennifer.
Speaker 2: V-E-R--
Speaker 1: J-E-N.
Speaker 2: J-E-N.
Speaker 1: Verjen Boutique.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  Okay.  Well, how did it work?  I mean, how did things go?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did--
Speaker 1: As I indicated, we first started out on a part-time basis.  We were getting our friends to have home shows and then we would give them a portion of what was sold that evening.  And then we decided to venture off and open our first store in the Richardson Mall [Hartford, Connecticut], and we had a phenomenal first five years.  We had the anchor store, which was G. Fox [& Co.], and we had Sage-Allen's [Sage-Allen], and our boutique was in the middle, so as clients and patrons of those two big stores had to travel from one to the other, they had to pass our fashion accessory, and we strived in getting the most unique--at this point with a store, Jennifer could not continue to supply everything by making them, so we started to seek out other designers that were unique and different.  And so our store was known, if you wanted women accessories, come to our shop because they are going to be so unique and so very different.  And--but then the economy, we had the drop in the economy in the late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, stock market almost crashed.
Speaker 1: Right.  And our anchor store, G. Fox, closed and so did Sage-Allen.  So the market--and when people have to worry about how they were going to live and how their bills were going to be paid, buying accessories was the last thing that they would consider.  So we saw a real dip in our business and consequently, decided to close the business both in Middletown and later on in Hartford, and my partner went back into nursing.  I knew that I did not want to go back into corporate America just based on the experiences that I was hearing from the women who were coming into our boutique on a daily basis; nothing had changed, the politics were just still even more difficult to deal with than in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s] when I was there.  And so you're only going to reach so high a level in corporate America and I had that taste of what it was like to be an entrepreneur--
Story_ID: 245062
Speaker 1: I just said, "You know, I'm going to look for a business that will continue to utilize those skills and gave me the freedom to do my own thing," and that's when I entered into the insurance, insurance sales, which is the--with Allstate [Corporation].  And I acquired one of their franchises and worked as a--and opened my own office.
Speaker 2: Now did you think about establishing a franchise with Aetna [Life Insurance Company; Aetna Inc., Hartford, Connecticut]?  Did--I mean--at all?
Speaker 1: No, because Aetna markets its products through independent agents, and when I saw the opportunity to open a--to start a insurance business with Allstate, they marketed the opportunity as opening a neighborhood office agency.  And initially, I thought this was something I could really do part-time, because I wanted to still hold onto the boutique.  And I later on learned that it really was a full-fledged office, not something that could--you can do outside of your home.  And so the opportunity to open this agency as a sole source of marketing Allstate products was not the same with Aetna.  Most of the Aetna agents was multi-company agents.  There were independent agents who just happened to be selling Aetna's product.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's not that way with the Allstate company, you're definitely a captive agent that's selling all Allstate products.  And so the resources to help you to establish that agency was just a better arrangement with Allstate than it was with that Aetna at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is 19--what is it 1990?
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990] now.
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety [1990].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So Allstate business--so, so you're still in that business, right?
Speaker 1: Still in that business.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Here it is, fifteen years later.  As a matter of fact, I just relocated my business to a storefront, a much larger space and added a couple more employees.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Insurance is really something that people need; if they don't have it, they wished they had, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.  Right.
Speaker 2: --in today's world, so--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  And that's why, you know, there are some people who focus only on life insurance.  I wanted to have a multi-product, multiline operation so that I can offer a variety of products, depending on the person's needs.  And in this state, car insurance and homeowners' insurance are mandatory, especially if you're--it's definitely mandatory for cars and homes.  It's--if you have a mortgage, any at all, it's going to be mandatory and it would be senseless not to have it--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so it was good to have a product or to have a business where there's definitely a need.
Story_ID: 245063
Speaker 1: Okay, does it help to be a part of a small ethnic group that seems identifiable like the Jamaican community to be able to--I mean, when you establish that kind of a business?
Speaker 2: Well, I think--
Speaker 1: Or did you depend mostly on--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it was helpful in the sense that in getting started, it was through my network of people who I had been associated with in the past who were able to either join my office and my firm, or they were able to provide me with referrals.  So yes, it played a major role because interestingly enough, my office is located in West Hartford, Connecticut and most agencies, the core of your business comes from where the office is located.  But for a number of years, the bulk of my business came from a time that was Windsor [Connecticut], on the other side of Hartford [Connecticut], and the reason for that is the organization that I belonged to had a large number of people who were from the Windsor community and therefore, referred others from that community to my business.  So yes, it played a major role.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, getting involved in insurance kind of makes sure you're in the--involved in the community, I guess, as a--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --black business--
Speaker 2: It--
Speaker 1: --person in the insurance--
Speaker 2: You know, it was--it became kind of like a natural.  When I was in the boutique [Verjen Boutique], I felt that I was servicing the needs of the women and the clients who came in, in providing them with unique opportunities to be exposed to high fashion and to produces that they would not normally get here in Hartford.  And just being in that business when you're working so closely with women and others, you can't help but counsel them on a variety of things.  And so it became like a natural to move to sales--insurance sales because you're still--I felt I was still providing a service, still had an opportunity to counsel and listen to the woes of the people who I served, and people still came to me to look--to seek out advice on a variety of issues.  So even though I'm there in a sales role, selling insurance, you'd be amazed at how much time I spend counseling and dealing with the community on other issues.
Story_ID: 245064
Speaker 1: How did you get involved in politics (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, boy.
Speaker 1: How did you--yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a interesting story in itself.  When I--as you heard, I came back to the--I grew up in the Hartford [Connecticut] community, I came back to the Harford community, built my career here.  Just around the time that I started the Allstate [Corporation] business, a group of leaders in the Caribbean community got together, and even though the bulk of the people were of West Indian descent, there were other individuals of African American descent who joined that group, with the concern that the population of the Caribbean community was evolving and growing, yet, many of these individuals who had substantial influence in the community was not involved politically.  The schools, board of education, had no representation and neither did the Hartford city council [Court of Common Council].  So this--at the time we're talking about maybe sixty thousand Caribbean folks and their des--and their offsprings that lived in the greater Hartford community.
Speaker 1: And Hartford's a--what, about a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hartford--the City of Hartford--
Speaker 1: --hundred and something?
Speaker 2: --is 130,000 people and so--
Speaker 1: So that's a substantial--
Speaker 2: --the African American--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --community out of that is like one-third, so maybe about 33,000 and out of that 33,000, I would venture to say that maybe 40 percent of that 33,000, in the City of Hartford, but in the larger community, into Bloomfield [Connecticut] and Windsor [Connecticut], there's well over sixty thousand.  So no one was being represented on the board of education in any of these towns or on the town councils.  So this group got together, and I was the youngest person in the group, and our role was to try to identify someone to run, mainly for the board of education, but with some consideration for the town council.  So we would meet week after week over a period of about six months and each time we would identify a name, it would be the responsibility of someone on this committee to go talk to the person about running of the office, board of education or the city council.  And each time we would approach these individuals they would say no, they're busy, they have a family that they're raising, they just got a new career, they just couldn't do it.  And after about six months they turned to me and they said, "[HistoryMaker] Veronica [Airey-Wilson], well, why don't you do it?"  I'm like, "Oh, no.  I just started a business and I have a young family and I got to prepare to get them to college," and so my response was no.  And they kept coming back month after month until they wore me down.  And I just simply said to my--the Reverend Collin [B.] Bennett, who later became my mentor that "Okay, I'll do it," with the intention that I would run, I'm a novice, I know nothing about politics, I would lose, and that would be the end of it, but I would have at least fulfilled the obligation I felt to represent the community.  So--
Speaker 1: Now this is about 1995 or--
Speaker 2: This is 1991.
Speaker 1: Ninety-one [1991].  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The election was going to be November of '91 [1991].  So I decided that I would run and the Reverend Collin Bennett sat me down.  Now, Collin Bennett was the first Jamaican to serve on the Hartford city council back in 1960, which was a very unique role for him, at that time, because the Caribbean community was nowhere where it is today, in terms of numbers.  But he opted to run, not only was that a major accomplishment, but he also ran as a Republican, which was also a major accomplishment in the city that's currently is probably 80 percent Democrats.  But--
Speaker 1: That is odd.
Speaker 2: He told me--
Speaker 1: How did he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He told me how he did it and he instructed me what to do--
Story_ID: 245065
Speaker 1: Before we decided how I would run, he said, "Okay.  We know that in this city with such a large Democratic Party, that the way to go would be to get them to give you one of their nominations and then it's a shoo-in."  So he decided to approach, even though he was a Republican, there was--and all these people in this room, I had no idea what their party affiliation, 'cause it didn't matter.  We were just there to get some representation on the [Court of Common] Council.  So he decided to approach the old guard in the African American community, because the trend had been to have two African Americans, two Hispanics, and two whites, those were the six Democratic seats on the council.  This is a council of nine and they--the other three seats were reserved, based on our charter, for what is considered the minority party.  But what had happened over the years was that the Democrats had a lot of infighting and a group of the Democrats left the Democratic Party and started their own party that was called People for Change.  And the People for Change party, which were really just Democrats, knocked off the Republicans who were on the part--who were on the council over those years and so it really was a whole council of all Democrats, just with two different names, two different party names.  So at this time, no Republicans were on the council, so he decided to approach the Democrats about serving--having me be one of the nominees for the council, and they laughed at him and said, "You crazy?  She's too young, too new, she hasn't put in her time.  She needs to walk the streets, she needs to serve at the polls.  She has too many things that she needs to do, and we're not going to put her in front of anyone else that we have all lined up."  So he came back and he said that, I said, "Oh, okay, that's the end of it.  We'll have to try again."  He says, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no.  Let's talk about our options."  He--I said, "Well, okay, how about independent?"  He said, "Well, there's never been anyone who have been able to win a seat on the council who has gone independent, they just don't have a base.  So he said, "Well, maybe we ought to report--approach the Republicans."  And I'm like, "Republicans?  Who are they?"  Because remember, they had not been on the council.  And I knew very little bit about politics so I said, "I don't even know a Republican."  And that was--at that point, he said, "Well, I'm a Republican."  And then he started to point out all the different businesspeople in the room who were Republicans and these were people I've always had a lot of respect for and admired over the years.
Speaker 2: Now these are black people?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  They were Alfred [A.] Chambers, Keith Tinker, Harry Hardy [Henry Wheeler Hardy], Mr. Warren [ph.], they were just all these people that were very influential in our community [Hartford, Connecticut], and I had no idea what their political affiliation was.  So--and I looked around the room, I'm like, "Oh, okay, you guys aren't all that bad."  And then he talked about the core philosophy of the Republican Party, free enterprise, family values and I'm like, "Well, that's how I've always been raised, and so it's not far from what I'm accustomed to and what I'm used to."  So I said, "Okay."  And then he said, "Okay, so why don't they approach the Republicans about getting their nominee?"  So he talked with who the leadership of the Republican Party was, and they were pretty excited about it, because remember, they, they had not served on council and they, too, was looking a chance to regain some seats on the council.  And he asked me to meet them and I sat in my office one day when these two white men showed up, and I'm thinking to myself, those are my--(laughter).  And then they invited me to their--the town council meeting and I'm telling you, the average age must have been like sixty-six.  And I--they announced that they had like ninety dollars in their treasury and I'm like, "Oh, my gosh, how am I going to ever win a seat with this kind of statistics?"  But anyway, I decided to listen to the Reverend [Collin B.] Bennett and follow his instructions about how he was able to garner support.  I was not involved politically myself, so I had no idea as to who I would turn to, to assist with this campaign, so I just started recruiting my friends who had not been political either.
Story_ID: 245066
Speaker 1: In Hartford [Connecticut], you have a Democratic city, largely and the--even the state government is Democratic for the most part.  But now, you're going to run as a Republican, okay, which is--okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you know, I think it was pointed out by Ed Brooke [HistoryMaker Edward Brooke] and some others that all Republicans are not exactly the same, and you have a tradition in the Northeast of Republicans that are--that hearken back to the old radical Republicans of the Civil War era.  You know, I don't know how many are left, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, interestingly enough, when I talked to [Reverend] Collin [B.] Bennett, Collin reminds me that the bulk of the--back in the '60s [1960s] and earlier, the '50s [1950s] actually, up to the '60s [1960s], the bulk of the blacks who were in Hartford were actually Republicans.  They were Republicans who had migrated up from the South and they were the--they were part of the party of [President Abraham] Lincoln.  You know, they had that affiliation because Lincoln had so-called freed the slaves, or at least that's what they identified with.  And it was the poverty programs of the '60 [1960] and the charismatic leaders of, [President John Fitzgerald] Kennedy and the Martin Luther Kings [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] that converted many of them.  And in Hartford, it had a lot more to do with the programs and that was offered to many of the folks that swayed them to leave the Republican Party and to join the Democratic Party.  And, you know, some of the--you know, I think when we came here as Caribbean folks, we got caught up and leaned towards the Democratic Party too, based on not necessarily the values, because I think we're always conservative in our thinking based on the so-called family values and financial, fiscal responsibility, but more because of the leaders.  The Kennedys, you know, the Caribbean people loved the Kennedys to death, and would follow them to the end of the world and the Martin Luther Kings, obviously, and so it was those leaders, whoever they identified with is how the Caribbean community found themselves.
Story_ID: 245067
Speaker 1: But they [Americans with Caribbean heritage] were always opposed to many of the programs that eventually trapped the African American community in poverty, and I think to some extent, a lot of those programs that were designed and that came out of the '60s [1960s] forced our people into housing projects and forced the black men out of the household.  They, you know, and I don't know where it--how it was out in Ohio, but if you were on welfare, you could not have a man in the household.
Speaker 2: It's the same all over, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, he always had to be hiding and couldn't stand up for his family and work to support them, because they were dependent on that check coming in.  And I tell people all the time, I think had it not been, if that--those programs had not been put into place, I really feel that the first generation of black folks would have had it hard, and they would've struggled, but by the time they had gotten to the second generation, I think things would've been much better.  Because the first generation would've struggled, yes, they wouldn't have had all that they might have needed, but they would not have ended up living in a housing project.  If it was one house, maybe the entire family would've lived in that one house, but it would've been theirs.  And when that grandparent died, that house would've been passed on to the next generation who could either have sold it for something bigger or would've been able to have some equity to maybe put the next set of kids, pay for their college or whatever.  And so if you take those same forty years or those same thirty years and put a different structure in place, I--in my mind, I think that as a community and as a group of people, we might've been better off without those programs.  I don't see how--what benefit those poverty programs really played in really advancing our people.  And I look at other ethnic groups who come here with very little, or nothing, and I watch how they operate, and how they're able to make so much more progress within a shorter period of time based on struggles, and having to go through hardship.  Now, there's nothing that will compare to the brutality that blacks faced in the South, and with slavery.  You know, you could never--I don't think anything would ever compensate for that, but I think once, especially for those that lived in the North, I think that a different experience could've put us in a much better financial situation than what happened back in the '60s [1960s].  I think they--it served its purpose for the time, but I think it was not long range thinking and certainly, didn't do anything to foster a better living for the people who it was supposed to be helping; one, one woman's opinion (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, do you think that government should play any role in alleviating poverty?
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely, but I think the--I think they have to be careful or people, individuals themselves, have to be careful as to how--what and how they accept, what may be considered handouts, because I don't really think that there's anything free.  You know, there's sacrifices that you--that you make or have to make or that you will eventually have to pay for or pay back in some way, and I think for our community, the sacrifice is just the underclass of folks that have developed over a period of time.  And I just really still strongly believe that it could've--the experience could've been different.  You know, I didn't live in the South, so I can't even say what could happen there, but from what I have observed in the North, and the changes that we've been able to make in recent times here in Hartford [Connecticut] in eliminating a lot of congregating poor people all in one community where they have no opportunity to learn from their neighbors or to see any better role model, I think have made a tremendous difference.
Story_ID: 245068
Speaker 1: Let's get you elected first.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We were--chronologically, we had you getting ready to run as a Republican candidate in--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: --nineteen ninety-one, [1991], right.  This is--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety [1990], yeah, I was elected to start in '91 [1991], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Nine--1990--
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety--
Speaker 1: In 1990--
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: --George Bush the first--I mean, the father, [President] George Herbert Walker Bush was the president, and the climate in--what was the climate here in Connecticut?  I mean, in Hartford [Connecticut], you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, there's no doubt that Hartford has been a traditional Democratic city.  We had, at the time, our first black woman mayor, Carrie Saxon Perry.  She was on her second term.  She started out--she followed Thirman Milner, who was our first black mayor and in New England, not only in Hartford, in the entire New England, and he had had a wonderful role as mayor; so did she, initially, and her second term was difficult.  She had a deputy mayor who was also a black woman, and they spent an awful lot of time fighting publicly, in the media.
Speaker 1: Fighting with each other?
Speaker 2: Fighting with each other.  Now, the structure of the [Court of Common] Council remember is that the--it was a city manager form of government, the deputy mayor is really the person who was running the city through the manager.  The mayor was only a ceremonial kind of role and if the mayor wanted to get anything done, the mayor had no vote, so the mayor really had to work through the council and have to have enough people on the council who believed in their--whoever's--the mayor's programs and issues enough to be able to put forth legislation to get those things accomplished.  And because those two people never saw eye to eye, there was always that battle.  The mayor wanting to do one thing, the leader of the council wanting to do something different and because the leader of the council controls the purse string and the things that happen in the city, there was always that tug of war.  So--
Speaker 1: Now, does the mayor control anything in the city?  I mean, as mayor?
Speaker 2: Now, but not then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not then.  It was a city manager's form of government and the person in charge is the--was the deputy mayor.  So with that infighting going on, the city was really suffering, because they weren't really concentrating on the issues at hand and not working together for the betterment of city.  They spent more--if someone proposed something that would've been great for the city, the other one was tearing it down and vice versa.  And I think people overall was becoming disgusted; the businesspeople definitely felt that they had no one who was looking out for their interest at city hall and they started to fly.  I mean, they were leaving the city in droves.  And so the community was like wow, the education system is going down, our businesses are leaving and that's our tax base; what is going to happen to Hartford?  So they started to look for other people to run for that role as mayor and they were looking for fresh blood to serve on the council.
Story_ID: 245069
Speaker 1: So the infightings within the Democratic Party continued.  They put up a candidate [Michael P. Peters] to run for mayor against Carrie Saxon Perry; he lost in the primary, he decided to run anyway as an independent.  And an interesting strategy was developed where he--after he lost his--after he lost in the primary, he identified two other individuals who wanted--who were Democrats who also lost in the primary who wanted to continue to run for [Court of Common] Council, a Hispanic and a Caucasian.  And then he approached the Republicans and asked for a cross endorsement 'cause we had no mayoral candidate.  So he asked our town committee to cross endorse him so that--and we, because we have--our governor was a Republican governor, we had the topline.  So the strategy there would be that all these campaign workers would say, "Vote for Row A," 'cause he's now going to be on Row A as the mayor.  He's really--was on the bottom of the ticket, which is probably like Row D or E as an independent, and that's a very tough position for people to find you when you're running for anything.  But now if he can get his name up on A, all his campaign literatures would simply say vote for Row A.  So all the votes that he got on Row D, along with all the votes that we got on Row A would be combined, and that would determine who the winner is, and it turned out he did win.  So it worked for us and it worked for him because we also got all the votes.  Our name showed on the Row A and it showed on Row D.  So when people cast their vote, wherever it was cast, those numbers were tallied, and so we won.  And so we started out the council with a new structure that consists of a new mayor, three Republicans in the majority and two Democrats.  So the Republicans actually, in a city [Hartford, Connecticut] that is 80 percent Democrats, the Republicans for the first time controlled the council, and it was that way for a few years till the Democrats got back into bed with each other, and the Republicans became the minority and the Democrats took over.  And most recently, two years ago, a similar sort of thing occurred when the first Hispanic mayor was elected.  Again, there was infighting with the Democrats.
Speaker 2: That's [Eddie] Perez, right?
Speaker 1: Right.  There was infighting within the team that he was elected with, and he decided to step out of that particular structure, and again, approached the minority candidates.  This time, they were already--everyone was already elected, but they were fighting over leadership role, who would be deputy mayor, who would be majority leader, and so forth.  And again, they wanted to box him out and keep him in that role as just simply ceremonial, because again, the charter didn't call for anything but that.  But he wanted--he ran for office in hopes of being a strong mayor, even though there wasn't a strong mayor format yet.  But he certainly wanted to have a voice in what--in the structure, in the say, in how the city would run, and the deputy mayor at the time, thought differently, that he's in charge and he was going to be running the city.  So Perez asked the three minority candidates, at this time we had lost one of the seats--one of the Republican seats to a Green Party candidate.  So we had a Republic--two Republicans and a Green Party candidate, and we joined with two of his Hispanic colleagues on the council, and we created a new majority and that's how I was deputy mayor.  The Green party candidate, Elizabeth Horton Sheff was the majority leader, and we controlled the council for the previous two years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now--yeah, that's all--it really, it almost sounds like an election in a European country, the way--but it's different, I mean, coming from Chicago [Illinois] where everything is so monolithic now, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --but that's interesting.  You had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it--
Speaker 2: --a lot of forces--
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 2: --at work here--
Speaker 1: Real--
Speaker 2: --apparently, yeah.
Speaker 1: Real experience.
Story_ID: 245070
Speaker 1: Now, what was your platform when you ran [for the Court of Common Council]?  What were the things that you wanted to do in public office?
Speaker 2: Right.  I wanted to immediately build a better relationship with our business community.  I felt that the city needed the business community.  We relied on them for--as part of our tax base, a substantial part of our tax base and we also relied on them for jobs, and that we needed them--we needed to pay much more attention to their needs, and to not only do what we need to do to retain the ones that we had here, but also to attract new ones.  So economic development, special attention to our business community was like a driving issue for me, and so I spent my first year really building that relationship, and getting the business community to have faith--renewed faith in the city and in our leadership, and so that was a number one priority.  Secondly, the education system was not where it ought to be, and I felt that we needed to space--pay more attention to the--to creating a better quality education, and to improve our schools in order to meet the needs of not only each child, but to meet the needs and the demands of these employers, who are also becoming frustrated because of the quality of students that we were putting out in the workforce was not able to meet their needs.
Speaker 1: Has Hartford [Connecticut] changed, in terms of what--the kind of employee they're looking--I mean, the business people are looking for now?  Are they still looking for laborers or farmers?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It has changed substantially.
Speaker 1: I knew that.
Speaker 2: At one time, this area was geared towards manufacturing and people could get a job in the factories, and didn't need very much education, you know, it was labor-intensive.  A lot of that has changed.  Many of those labor-intensive corporations have moved south where they could find cheaper labor.  They don't have to deal with the unions as much, and consequently, they can produce their products, they feel, for less.  They've even gone overseas with many of those firms.  So now we're in a insurance and financial services, banking and insurance, financial service industry, and that certainly requires a much higher level of education and training and experience, so that's becoming--that has become a problem.  And in recent times, they have been importing a lot of Indians in the insurance industry to meet, especially in the technology area, to meet those needs, because again, the idea is that the workforce in the area is not technically advanced enough to produce the volume that they need.  And while I think we have a very trained workforce at certain levels, clearly, we have--the number of schools and colleges that we have that produce undergraduates and graduate degree programs, for those people who come out of those programs, they're certainly very capable.  But when we're talking about the high school level, individuals and the entry level jobs that would meet those needs, there's clearly a problem there.
Story_ID: 245071
Speaker 1: I know you're also concerned about housing; you're the chair of the Housing Committee?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  It was during my first couple of years on the [Court of Common] Council that the shift on housing programs changed from pumping most of our funds into rental properties and subsidizing rental properties, to a movement towards more homeownership.  And we took a very bold step during those first years to reallocate our federal dollars towards more homeownership and we developed a program that was called--that we called House Hartford, which would help to prevent down payment assistance to people who wanted to purchase homes in the city [Hartford, Connecticut].  And if they lived--if they live in that home for more than five years, they don't have to pay that down payment money back, and that has contributed to well over, I think the number is probably up to about like eight hundred new homeowners who did not have to wait and save five, six years to raise ten thousand dollars to buy their own home, were able to purchase their own home immediately.  Because I feel that if a person have a stake, owning a home gives them a stake in the community, and if they have a stake in the community, they're going to treat that property better.  They're going to have more interest in maintaining it, and be more active in the community and have a more, more of an interest in making--overall, making sure that that community is the best that it can be, and that's the whole push around home ownership, in addition, obviously, to building equity for our folks and making sure there is some sort of legacy that's there to pass onto the next generation.
Story_ID: 245072
Speaker 1: Hartford [Connecticut] has a community policing program, I read on one of the brochures in here; I mean, what's your position on crime and safety?  Do you--'cause that's really something, so many young black men are going to jail.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's all over, it's nationwide.  I guess it's the same problem here in Hartford.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You know, there's a time when you--you know, I was beginning to think it was an epidemic.  Fortunately, I feel very confident now that we really do have a handle around crime.  We have not solved how to help our young black men who have gone to jail and who come out not to go back again; that is an issue that I think--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.
Speaker 2: --we really have to get some serious help from--on a federal level.  We could do our little part here, but it's really a national crisis and I think we're going to have to push to get some national resolution to that.  But I think we've come a long way.  When I first joined the [Court of Common] Council fifteen, almost fifteen years ago now, there was a lot of gang warfare that we had no way of figuring how to deal with.  And we had to bring in the state level to--we had to bring in the state department to be able to assist us, as a local community, in handling the gang warfares.  And we spent maybe around four years just cleaning up that whole situation.  And consequently, we were able to rid our streets of that whole disease that was really kind of taking over our community.  Since that time, I think we've moved forward now, and the next level that we--criminal element that we have to tackle is the drug dealers and the drug users and there's so many facets to that.  But one of the ways we--one of the things we realized recently is that, you know, these low level pushers, arresting them alone is not the answer, that we really have to try to get a handle around our suburbanite individuals who come into the city to purchase, and keep that trade going, and the big boys who bring it into this country, and bring it into this state and into this city.  So there's been a very active taskforce, which is a combination of our local police, our state police and the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation], who have made some significant inroads in recent times in cleaning out and cleaning up that area.  So I'm optimistic that one, that this city is--will continue towards being a very safe community in which to live, and hopefully, with the assistance on the federal and state level, we'll figure out what to do with so many of our young, especially our young males, who come out of prison, to somehow help them to build a life that will prevent them from having to repeat.  Because right now, the problem is, is that once you have a felony on your record, you can't--it's--I don't even think you can get a job at McDonald's, you know.  No one wants to hire you once they do that background check, and sometimes these are young people who have learned their lessons and really, who want to progress and start a new life for themselves.  But once you're out six months, you can't get a job, where do you go?  What do you do?  You end up back on the streets again, back into those same criminal elements that you left some time ago.
Story_ID: 245073
Speaker 1: You serve on the finance committee, the revenue committee [Finance and Revenue Committee], the Management and Budget Committee, so you're--this fiscal conservative approach is--you must take it seriously, 'cause you're on all those money committees, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I'm currently the individual on [Court of Common] Council who have had the longest tenure, and the only person from the original group back in 1990.  And so with that level of experience, you know, I just find that it's valuable to those committees, especially when it comes to our budget and keeping an eye on the finances of the city [Hartford, Connecticut].  In addition, in most of those committees, there's always a need to have a representative from what we call our minority party and with only three of us, we certainly end up getting to serve on multiple committees, more so than the six Democrats that are there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in 2002, you were, you chaired the Republican State Comm--Committee.
Speaker 2: [Connecticut Republicans] State Convention, yeah.
Speaker 1: State convention, right.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Now that was, I guess, a major coup.  It's not something that I really sought after, actually, but it is a position that's usually reserved for those Republicans who have really dedicated themselves to the party over the years, and may be up in age and it's like a big--it's a real big thing to kind of reward them by having them serve as chair.  And it was our governor at the time, John [G.] Rowland, who advanced my name and asked that I serve in that capacity, and it certainly was an exciting time and a fun time.  I think we had a very different convention because of it, because having me there, you know, it wasn't all this stiff boring kind of--I certainly brought a little life to it, with a lot of jokes and encouragements, a lot of comradery and high spirit, kind of high energy; I'm that kind of a person, yeah.
Story_ID: 245074
Speaker 1: You're a member of the Rose of Sharon Chapter Number One of the IUOMWH.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what is that?
Speaker 2: The Independent [United] Order of Mechanics, which is a lodge, there's probably--there's a few of them in this world, but the traditional lodges centered around being a mason or a mechanic.  You know, it dates back to ancient times.  In this particular order, the mechanics, which was originally head--world headquarters was in England, is a--this arm of it is, I'm part of the New England district order which is just a branch of--they're probably in over almost two hundred countries worldwide.  And women were not part of the lodge for years and years and years, and it's in the 20th century that women are now--women have become part of this order, and the Rose of Sharon just happens to be one of the chapters, an all-women chapter that's part of the mechanic order.  So my mother [Clariana Knight-Airey] and father [Narciso Airey] were mechanics, or my mom has passed on, my dad is still alive, and so it became kind of a natural gravitation towards providing some level of community support and scholarships that we have joined.
Story_ID: 245075
Speaker 1: What are your future, I guess, aspirations in the Republican Party?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, one of the things--
Speaker 1: Or political aspirations, period?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, you know, one of the things that I found out since I've been part of the Republican Party is that I really think there's a real need for us, as black folks, to be everywhere and not to regiment ourselves just to any one party.  I think whoever is in power, black folks ought to be able to have a say in what happens.  And while there's tons of things that the members of the Republican Party say or do or believe in that I don't believe in, I don't believe I can make a change in the whole philosophy of the party by sitting on the outside and complaining, and griping about it.  I think you have to be part of their process to be able to do that.  And while the party isn't for everyone, just like the Democratic Party isn't for everyone, I think we, as blacks, shouldn't shun from it just because traditionally, our parents or grandparents were never part of it.  I think we need new blood there to be able to have some impact and some influence, and so that's why I'm there, and that's why I don't get turned off by those people who are maybe to the far right, that I don't always agree with.  Because I think even though I'm there, and I'm a moderate, that the bulk of what I've observed from the national--the Republican caucuses is that the bulk of the Republicans are middle of the roaders, moderate Republicans.  They are just the ones that don't speak up as much and they're not the ones that create news and fancier.  So on TV, that's what you see, you see those people who are to the extreme right, because they're the ones that's making all the noise and making themselves heard.  So I would hope that my role in the Republican Party would be somehow to work with folks of like mind to advance our moderate thoughts and to move that forward, so that would be one role I would hope to play there.  In terms of my political aspirations, I clearly would like to move from serving on the town council [Court of Common Council] to the state level, and I have my eyes on either a state senate seat or a state representative seat.  We recently, in my district, a woman who had served on the coun--on the--as a state rep for years and years, Annette Carter, retired and a new person actually ran against her and won, and so I'm keeping a very close eye on what's going on.  I think in politics, timing is everything and especially for me, who is really working against the tides.  The fact that I'm a Republican in a predominantly Democratic city [Hartford, Connecticut], some--timing for me is even more critical because it's those times, many times when Democrats have infighting that I'm able to rise, because some--the community wants someone different or wants someone who is not part of that bickering, and part of the problem.  So I'm hoping to move to a state level position.  My ten-year goal, or if I had to map it out, would be to eventually serve in--as a congressperson in Washington [D.C.].  So I'd like to go to the state first and then move to the federal level as a congressperson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you ever feel that sometimes that you are too liberal for the, the Republican Party?  I mean, or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  I think there are probably others who think so.  The two colleagues that no longer are on the council who I ran with and won together have expressed that concern from time to time.  But I don't think I have to change who I am just to be part of a party.  I would--I joined this party to help to change their thinking and forward some of my agenda, not to be influenced the other way.  So it has been said, but I, personally, don't think so, no.
Story_ID: 245076
Speaker 1: We always ask this question, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes is really that I can see that we would have--the whole family oriented society that I grew up with and that I've grown accustomed to; to see that become vibrant again.  I think we have really lost that whole community spirit that I--that has really brought our people this far.  And I'm not sure what the answer is and how we get it back, but we have to start someplace and I think this generation we need to start with our kids.  There's kind of like a tendency now to say that's them, and to ignore the kids that are in trouble.  We don't seem to have enough--our churches and our elders who are really--who are pulling together and reaching out to the young people to bring them back into fold and to get them to understand that this isn't even about them as an individual, but it's about us as a group of people.  And that if somehow we're able to reach them and get them on the right track, that they're going to put our--the next generation in a much better position to be able to take on the responsibility of providing for their family and participating in this community.  So I think our black churches need to start to play, step up to the plate and play more of a major role in getting our community galvanized.  If there was one thing about the '60s [1960s], the '50s [1950s] and the '60s [1960s] was that the churches played a major role in helping to provide some focus for the community and helping our community to have a place in which that--they can reach out to, and I don't see that happening.  Too many of our churches, one, if they're not leaving the inner cities--inner cities fleeing to the suburbs.  They seem to be too caught up in the money aspect of religion, whatever that is.  But the--it's all about what you can do, in terms of providing income for that church and tithing and the whole family spirit, and pastoring to the flock seems to be somehow missing.  And I see it here in Hartford [Connecticut] and in Connecticut and I don't think, you know, from what I hear from my friends and colleagues who live in other parts of this country, it seems to be moving in that same direction, and I think that would be unfortunate because I think it's--if there's anybody that could really bring out people back together, and get them to focus on the issues that they should, it would be through the churches.  And so I applaud the few churches that I do hear of who are really taking a role in guiding their folks economically and helping them to see how they can acquire the resources that will help to build for a better community and better family.  They're providing jobs, opportunity, they're using their financial resources to invest in the community, building new homes, creating job opportunities.  I think if that was--that model was able to be filtered out into more communities, that it would really be a wonderful gesture.  I just--it pains me when I see the amount of funds that go through our black churches, that we're not even able to save a black bank, or that we're not able to have more black banks that would be sensitive to the needs of our community, and help to build wealth that way.  So the thing that bothers me the most is that I'm not sure that we could continue to count on our churches to fill that role.
Story_ID: 245077
Speaker 1: And if there was anything that I'd like to see happen immediately, is our pastors coming together, recognize the--what they could do to assist in really building, helping to rebuild the black community in so many ways.  Starting with our young people, our children, and then moving into the economic position, and being able to utilize the resources that they get from some of these same people, and put that back into our community to help to build a better society.  And I think if we could get some folks to step up, there are a few models, especially New York [New York], where churches are doing that now, and I would like to see that get spread out all over the country, and that would be a start.  Because when you start building a society from that strong foundation and from that strong base, then you're going to have individuals who will branch off from that and will be able to start building their own companies, and start hiring more people.  And the more wealth that's built within a society, the more those people will be able to help others, and we won't have to rely on government for the handouts, and then when it's not available or there's a particular cutback, then we're all devastated because we have no base on which to turn to.
Story_ID: 245078
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done so far, and you're fairly young by the standards of people that we interview, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  Great.  I'm glad to hear that.
Speaker 1: Is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't think so.  I really believe that I have been fully satisfied with my life and each one of the experiences that I've encountered; even though sometimes it was difficult, I think I really learned from that experience and it has really provided some source of strength to be able to move to the next level.  And so I can't think of anything that I would do differently.  I have two beautiful children [Stephen Airey-Wilson and Bianca Airey-Wilson] as a result of my marriage, and even though that didn't work out in the way that I would have liked, I think that was a learning experience and it helped to build and really made me stronger and progressed anyway, so, no, no, no.
Story_ID: 245079
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back at everything you've done thus far, like, what would you consider, at this point, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Now that's a good one (laughter).  I think if I had to look back over my life, even as short as it is, so far, I would say that my contribution to this society have been in the area of housing.  The fact that I have been able to help those individuals realize a dream that may never have occurred for them, in terms of home ownership, through the programs that I've instituted, I think I have served as a role model for many of the African American young people who have grown up in Hartford [Connecticut], and too often have seen other African Americans come in from outside the community and have aspired to levels that they felt was unreachable.  So I think because I grew up here, I went away and came back, but I serve as what's possible for many of them to have come from humbling--humble beginnings, from parents [Clariana Knight-Airey and Narciso Airey] who would be considered poor, and yet, I have been able to rise above all the obstacles and reached a level where I have.  I think I serve as a role model for many of those, our up and coming young people.
Story_ID: 245080
Speaker 1: You said your father's [Narciso Airey] still alive, your--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your mother's [Clariana Knight-Airey] no longer with us, but--
Speaker 2: My father's now eighty, eighty years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just celebrated his eightieth birthday, yeah.
Speaker 1: And well, did your mother get a chance to see you elected to public office?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was one of my biggest supporters, financially and morally.  From day one, she never questioned, you know, why would I want to do that?  My involvement.  She served in so many capacities.  She was the first to make a contribution, to max out her contribution to my campaign.  She assisted with preparing food the day of the campaign for the campaign workers.  She has just been like a tower of strength.  She was always there.  Everywhere I went, you know, it was me and my mom.  So I miss her, but she is--she did get to see me rise to the level of being elected and for a number of years, reelected before she passed on.
Story_ID: 245081
Speaker 1: The last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  I don't know if you've thought about this, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think I'd like to be remembered as a woman who--as an immigrant woman who came to this country for better opportunities, whose parents [Narciso Airey and Clariana Knight-Airey] brought her to this country for a better opportunity, who was able to not let them down, was able to rise above all the odds to allow--to make my parents proud.  And to be able to raise two successful children [Stephen Airey-Wilson and Bianca Airey-Wilson] who now have their own families and hopefully will be able to pass on the legacy that I obtained from my parents and that I imparted on them, they would be able to pass that onto their children.  So I think that I want people to remember and keep in mind that I'm an individual who came here as a little girl, who was able to fulfill not only the dreams of my parents, but my own dreams, and worked very diligently to impart the wisdom that I've acquired over the years onto others in the community and have made a difference in the Hartford [Connecticut] community.  One that have impacted so many lives, and only hope that my role as mentors for other women in the community would be appreciated and brought to the level where it could be passed onto others.
