Story_ID: 2656
Speaker 1: James LaRue Avery.  L-A-R-U-E, A-V-E-R-Y, June 24th, the year is 2003.
Speaker 2: Okay, and your date of birth?
Speaker 1: 11/27/45.
Speaker 2: Okay, and our location?
Speaker 1: Is at 3211 Waverly Drive in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 2: Okay, and I--and your profession?
Speaker 1: Actor.
Story_ID: 2657
Speaker 1: I ask 5 questions of everyone.  They're a little People Magazine-ish.  Just short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: All food.  I like to eat.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Favorite, favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: The ocean.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: From Amistad.  Cinque.  When they asked him, you know, when you go in that courtroom, you're going to be by yourself, he says, no, I'm not.  And they ask him to explain.  He said, "I'll have all my ancestors with me because at this moment in time, I am the sole reason for their existence."  That's my favorite line.
Story_ID: 2658
Speaker 1: Let's start with your father cause--can you just give his name?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: LaRue Lane, Jr., yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me about, give your mother's name and what you know about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Okay, Florence Juanita Avery.  She was born in, oddly enough, Atlantic City [New Jersey] and taken back to Virginia when she was very young.  Her father was Beverly Avery who was, who shall we say, not on the up and up.  (laughs)  And her mother took her back to Virginia.  Her mother used to work, worked in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for a family.  She got involved in a church there, called the Church of God and Saints of Christ which was Hebrew and based on the Old Testament.  And they had a settlement in Belleville, Virginia.  And when she got involved with that church, the rabbi of the church decided that she needed to be married.  And he arranged a marriage for her to a Sam Godwin who was from Oklahoma, McMinnville, Oklahoma, some little town in Oklahoma, who was--he was a full-blooded Cherokee Indian.  And she had two children by him.  She also, my Aunt Anna and my Uncle Paul.  And she also had a daughter by another man.  I don't, I don't, I don't know anything about him.  When my mother was taken back, they moved--this, this church had owned about 10,000 acres worth of land on the James and the Mary River.  And they had different farms.  They were totally self sufficient.  And I think Mom was taken to like number 6, is where she was taken, the, the sixth farm.  And Grandpa Sam, who was my grandmother's husband, second husband I guess, was the kosher butcher for the settlement, which meant that he knew all the rituals to purify the meat and to be able to kill diseased animals and that whole situation.  And my mother, who was the oldest girl, was the oldest girl.  And what else do I know?  Oh, and, and she had to leave school when she was 8.  She was farmed out to another family in West Virginia.  I don't know why.  She won't tell me why, but I guess to make some money or, or the woman was a member of the church and needed help.  I don't really know why, but she was farmed out to this woman in West Virginia to be like her girl of all work, I guess.  She was abused, badly abused, sexually.  And she was abused physically by the woman's sons.  I think she stayed there for a year or so.  Then she went back to Virginia with my, with my grandmother.  She hadn't met her father.  She didn't know him.  So she grew up with them.  She had to leave school to take care of the young babies that came, my Aunt Ida, my Uncle Merlin, my Uncle Paul, my, my Aunt Anna.  She was a runner.  She used to run everywhere.  She told me stories of being chased, you know, by white, white kids, boys in cars.  Of course at that time, this was 1920s, 1924, in the South, a black woman or an attractive black woman was in danger from all different areas.  So she used to run everywhere she went.  And when she was in school, they were--she used to run track, and they wanted her, you know, to be training because she was fast.  But she never got a chance to do that.  She ran away from home when she was about 16 and came up to Atlantic City to meet her father, which she did.  And he told her--he met her, and at that time he was married to someone else.  Her mother would just--I, I don't know her.  I don't know many stories about her, but evidently, she was a very nice, very nice lady who liked her.  But her father told her, bought her a whole wardrobe of clothes when she was 16 and her first pair of shoes actually, and told her that was the first and last thing he was ever going to do for her.  And she wound up getting into a beautic--beautician's school in Atlantic City.  World War II started in '41 or so.  And jobs started opening up in Trenton, New Jersey.  Now, there's a lot of things going on, but I don't really know the whole details.  She wound up going to Trenton with a girlfriend named Margaret.  And they had--they were roommates.  Of course, she also wanted to be a singer from what I, I just found that out, that she wanted to be a singer.  And so it was close to New York, and they would (unclear), and that's where she went.  And she worked in a factory up there and would go to the clubs and whatever.  It was at one of these clubs that she met my father.  My father was a boxer on the old club circuit before they had--you know, they used to go around to different boxing clubs and they'd fight or whatever.  And it was kind of like underground, you know, gangster stuff.  Anyway, you know, I don't know that much about it.  Well, she met him.  Well, when she went, went to Trenton with, with Margaret, it was a very exciting time because of World War II and everybody was working and making money in the clubs and the music, and, you know, when she'd go into Harlem [New York] and, and see all the, you know, the shows that she could see.  And she'd go dancing and, and all of these things and hang out with the party crowd, as it were.  And my father was married at the time.  She didn't know that.  He was married and he had another family.  And, well, anyway, she got pregnant with me.  And when she told him, he tried to deny it.  And he had a brother named Skinny, who was like, who was a cop in New York.  And the family was involved with numbers, numbers running.  And there was another brother that he had who died that she used to like--Groany, I think his name was.  I don't remember his name, but she really liked him and he liked her.  And he wanted to marry her because she was pregnant with me.  But she wouldn't, and because she thought that my father would.  Well, something happened and they wound, she wound up being confronted by the family.  She told me that she remembers sitting in a room in a chair and all these people around her.  And I think she was like 19 or 20 at the time.  And people are coming down, calling her all kinds of sluts and whatever.  And she wasn't.  My father was, was her first man, actually, since she was from a, she was a country girl, so you didn't--country, you didn't do that.  You didn't sleep around.  That's something you didn't do.  And he tried to deny that he was the father.  And she said she can remember sitting there and all of these people talking about her.  And she remembers seeing him.  He was sitting there too.  And he didn't say anything.  He didn't come to her defense.  He didn't say anything.  And they were just calling her or talking about her like she was dirt.  And that, that was very painful for her.  And he never said anything in her defense.  And they wanted her to get an abortion and she wouldn't get an abortion.  They tried to give her money to get the abortion and she wouldn't do it.  She wound up getting on a bus and going back to Virginia, back to number 6, which is where I was born.  At that time, it was a two-room farmhouse.  And it was my Grandpa Sam, my grandmother, my Aunt Anna and, and my Uncle Paul, all living in this house.  And we had a corner in one of the rooms.  And she'd separated it with a sheet, she told me.  The house was dirty because of all of these people, but that one little corner where we were, she made a point of keeping clean.  And she was working for five dollars a week and carfare when I was born.  And she worked for this woman.  And she used to take, take the bus into town, but she'd walk out.  She'd walk back to save money so she could buy things for me (laughs).  It was funny.  She said she remembers once that she was coming home.  It was raining.  Its sounds like something out of the back of a (laughs)--so it was raining.  And she'd had a really rough day.  And usually whenever she came home from work, she would, you know, have a little gift, little candy, little something for me.  And I would run down and greet her, you know.  And she'd give me my lit--her little gift, said she looked forward to that.  That somehow made it worthwhile.  Well, this day she didn't have anything, you know.  And I ran down to greet her.  So, she--Honey Baby--I used to call her Honey Baby, "So what you got for me Honey Baby".  Said, "I don't have anything for you."  Said, and I remember that you turned around and walked back, walked away.  She said, "I--it broke my heart." She said, "I will never again--said, that's the first time that you learn you can't really buy affection," you know what I mean.  That you can't--it has to be some, some other reason, you know.  That was a hard lesson for her to learn, but she learned it.  Said she remembers that I caught bronchial pneumonia and almost died.  And she didn't know what to do; took me to the hospital.  This is in, in Portsmouth, Portsmouth Virginia.  And they wouldn't let, wouldn't admit me because we were black.  And so she was freaking out.  She didn't know what to do so she wound up talking to the woman that she worked for.  Well, evidently, the family was a powerful family, whatever.  And the woman looked at her and said, "Florence," and she was really upset, you know, "how dare you wait."  Told her if you work for me, you're supposed to come to me.  And certainly in, in one sense it was the same kind of patronizing Southern whatever, but she remembers that the woman made a few phone calls and the next thing she knows she was ad--they, they admitted us to the hospital and worked on me and helped save my life.  So from that point on, the woman said, whatever you do, you come to me.  And that's what she did.  So I was there until I was like a year or two.  And then she finally, she managed to save enough money.  And we left, went back to Atlantic City to--and my grandfather was living in Pleasantville [New Jersey], which is like 7 miles away.  So we got there and her first, before she could find a job, she had a little bit of money, but not much.  And we were actually homeless, said we lived in a, in a bus station for a while.  We'd be in the bus station.  They'd let her sleep there, and she worked as a chambermaid at some of the hotels.  And she'd have a couple of jobs working.  And the cops once let us sleep in jail in the wintertime because we didn't have any place to go.  And her father was there, just 7 miles away.  And she wouldn't, she wouldn't ask him for anything.  And he owned two houses in Atlantic City.  And she asked him if she could rent one, if she could live in one, and he said no.  She could rent it.  So she rented it.  And then she wound up buying it.  And she bought the one next door.  She, we lived at 18 Brooklyn Avenue and I remember Christmas, Christmases.  I never really did without anything.  I wasn't aware.  If I did, I wasn't aware of it.  I can remember when we moved into that house at 18 Brooklyn Avenue.  I can remember us peeling all the paper off the walls, the cleaning and scrubbing and painting.  I can remember that.  I can remember Christmases, which were my fav--that's why my favorite time of the year is December.  It's Christmas.  It was always, it was always a joyous time.  I just remember that.  I remember my Uncle Pete who was like my father for the first 12 years of my life.  That's his picture with my mom over there.  It was funny.  He was a, he was a big man.  He was about 6'3", 6'4", big man.  He had a wife and he had two kids.  His wife was an alcoholic.  And, and so he couldn't even stay with her, but he--my mom was a barmaid.  She worked as a barmaid, which was like $35.00 a week in tips which was a great job then, you know.  After she stopped being a chambermaid--she worked a lot of jobs to try to get things together.
Story_ID: 2659
Speaker 1: But I remember my Uncle Pete because I remember riding on his shoulders.  He had big, broad shoulders.  And we looked alike.  They used to think he--I used to think he was my dad, everybody thought he was my dad.  We looked alike, and he'd just put me on his shoulders.  I remember that he was, he liked to work, you know.  He liked--he was one of those kind, one of those brothers who likes hard work.  And he would work.  And he'd drive a truck.  And I remember I would ride with him sometimes, big tractor-trailer truck.  And we'd leave like at 1:00 and drive up to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]  and pick up a load of, I don't know, potatoes or sides of beef or whatever and hang out with the truck drivers and drive back.  I was like 7 or 8, something like that.  And I remember him and my mother [Florence Avery] would argue.  And he was the only man that ever lived with us.  And they would argue and they would fight, not physically fight cause he was, you know--my mother would hit him, but he would never hit her back.  And I remember when he'd get--when they'd have a big fight and he'd get thrown out, I knew he was back because when I came home from school--cause this was at a time when you left your door open, you know, left the backdoor open at least for the kids so they could get in.  And I remember like I could come in and I could smell food cooking, and Pete would be cleaning the house.  And I knew he was trying to make up.  And Mom would come home from work or whatever, and they'd have a little bit of argument.  And then it would get awfully quiet.  And that's how I grew up in Atlantic City, New Jersey, which I thought was the greatest place in the world to grow up at that point in time.
Story_ID: 2660
Speaker 1: Describe what even your neighborhood was like in Atlantic City [New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: I lived on Brooklyn Avenue, which was between--if you know Monopoly at all, between New York and Kentucky off of Mediterranean, row houses, working-class neighborhood.  Some people had both parents.  Some people only, had only one.  And some people only had a grandparent.  The house--there was this place behind me called Thompson Street which was basically just a little--you could only get to it through alleys.  And I remember there was this guy named, named Sparkman, they moved in.  His mother was white and his father was black.  This was back in the '50s [1950s] and he looked like he was white.  He could pass for white.  He used to get a, catch a lot of hell because of that from everybody.  But he was a tough kid, you know.  It was Joe Wallace and his sister and his mother and their father.  There was an older couple next door to me.  He was a veteran of World War I and he had had mustard gas damage.  So every--he'd sit out on his porch all the time and, you know, do that thing.  Ms. Robinson used to sit next to me.  And it was a big vacant lot in the middle.  You know, just, there were about 5 houses.  It was funny because this is at a time back East, and I don't know if you know this, when, when everybody had aluminum siding.  You know, and little wrought iron fences because it was all working class and lower working class since a lot of people were unemployed.  But the houses never looked like they were.  You know, they'd be out there watering down and cleaning up and, and doing all that.  And the lot is where we played ball.  And I was, I lived about 3 or 4 blocks from the beach and aside from Christmas, the great time was the summer because I could spend all day at the beach.  I'd sleep in my bathing suit, you know, and we were all--it was a gang.  It was all gang of us, everybody--it's like back East.  It's very pluralistic.  Every neighborhood has its own little group and, and there was the West side which is where the middle class, you know, like, i.e., teachers and postal workers and firemen and all those people lived who had steady jobs.  Atlantic City [New Jersey] was a resort.  So most people were unemployed in the wintertime, you know, and you worked in the summertime to try to make money and, and, you were--if you could find a job, a steady job that lasted all year, you were doing good, you know.  And, you know, there were conventions and things like that.  But it was, it was great.
Speaker 1: Was it a mixed neighborhood or was it--
Speaker 2: No. No.
Speaker 1: --black?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, this was, you know, this was back East, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What you call the North side of town was black.  It was very pluralistic.  The Italians lived in this section.  The Irish lived over here and the Jews lived over in this section.  And, and, and that's just the way it was. It was, you know, if you wanted good Italian food, you went to the Italian neighborhood.  If you wanted, you know, a good knishes, you go to the Jewish neighborhood.  It was, it was--back East is very pluralistic.  The neighborhoods are like that, and they were cut up like that.  And even within the neighborhoods itself, it was, it was divided along class lines.  Working class, i.e. poor, barely making it people lived in one section.  Those who were doing a little better lived in another section.  You know, the doctors and, and there was only one lawyer.  And I remember when he came in.  They lived in another section.  Also, at that point in time, black weren't allowed to stay at the boardwalk hotels.  They weren't allowed to stay at any of them.  So a lot of middle-class black folks from like, New York, [Washington] D.C., Baltimore [Maryland] or whatever, had summer homes in Atlantic City.  And that's where they would come and spend the summer with their kids.  They weren't allowed to tie their boats up to the white yacht clubs so there was a black yacht club where black folks, the doctors and lawyers or whatever, could tie up there.  One of, friends of the family was the first black surgeon at the Philadelphia General Hospital [Philadelphia,Pennsylvania], whatever, and he had a boat that he--big cabin cruiser.  Well, they all tied up at this, at this, at the yacht club, which was a black yacht club which was uptown.  Actually, it was a unique time in that whites were basically peripheral to our lives.  They weren't that important.  And it wasn't in a negative way.  It's just that's the way it was.  My mother's boss was black.  My doctor was black.  My dentist was black.  My insurance, the insurance man was black.  The gas meter man was black.  We really didn't come in contact with anybody unless, once we left the neighborhood.  If we went shopping on Atlantic Avenue or you went up on the boardwalk, then you would, you'd deal with them.  This was even before integration of schools.  I went to an all-black grammar school.  They integrated I think when I was going to go to junior high school which was, which was interesting.
Story_ID: 2661
Speaker 1: Now, you've done a great job of describing sights of your childhood.  I'd like you to describe smells and sounds.
Speaker 2: Easy to do.  Christmas.  One Christmas, in particular, and my grandmother and my aunt came up for Christmas.  And they were the country.  So they'd canned a lot of things.  There were homemade peach preserves and canned watermelon rinds and strawberry preserves and, and scuppernong wine, homemade scuppernong wine and dandelion wine.  And I remember coming home just before, just before Christmas.  They'd, they'd come in and they were cooking.  And I can remember smelling turkey roasting and cinnamon and nutmeg from sweet potato pies.  And I can remember biscuits and I can remember those smells.  I can remember the smell of the sea underneath all of that because of Atlantic City [New Jersey] where I was.  Because of the way it was, it was--I, I grew--at one point in time, Atlantic City was--before gambling, it was a musical hub.  Anybody who was anybody in jazz, if they played in New York, they played in Atlantic City.  And they played at the clubs like Club Harlem, Goldies Little Belmont, Wall Street, Wondergarden.  And this was at Kentucky and Artic Avenues which was in the black part of town.  Now, also, I can smell--there was a, a barbeque stand, there was a wooden barbeque stand.  And I, I forget the name of the guy, but he used to have it set in an alley so when you came up--because clubs, the sounds were music.  I remember Sarah Vaughan and her trio would be playing at Goldies Little Belmont.  And Ahmad Jamal would be down the street at the Wondergarden.  And the Club Harlem, there would be Larry Steele's All Broads Review, 15 beautiful dancing girls and [Dewey] 'Pigmeat' Markham and Sammy Davis, Jr., which would be the trio that he played with, with his, with his father.  And Hynes, it was Hynes, Hynes and dad and their aunt owned a restaurant called Johnson's which was on Kentucky Avenue.  It was up the street.  So when you say sights and sounds, I see, I see the neon blues and electric reds of the clubs.  I hear the sounds of jazz drifting on the air.  I smell barbeque mingling with chicken and frying fish.  I see--and, and Shalimar perfume.  And, and furs.  I see black folks in, in, in '58 [1958] Chevys and '59 [1959] Cadillacs who were, you know aqua marine and white and, and this was at a time when you could sneak out and you could--we could go, and we could listen to the music.  You didn't have to worry about things.  And I knew I had--my mother [Florence Avery] had a set--I knew what time I had to be home.  I knew that she called.  She kept me home because she would, there was a signal.  She would call.  She would ring once, and I had to come back.  If I didn't--because she worked at night, if I didn't, I was in trouble.  And she would call my neighbors to find out where I was, but I couldn't miss that call or I'd be in trouble.  And she had me--I was scared anyway.  But sometimes in the summertime--this was a different time.  In the summertime, it wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't a scary thing for your kids to be out in the street.  I'm--you remember this time.  We could, you know, we could play, you know, hide and seek and, and that whole situation.  So the sights and the sounds or smells and it's, and that's where it is.  I remember my mom worked at Ice Cream Island, which was not far away as a sec, a second job.  And her best friend was this red headed Irish woman who used to work with her up there.  And I would go up there in the morning before I went to school, and my breakfast would be a milkshake with an egg in it, you know, or a malt.  It was great.  It was delicious.  It would smooth it up, make me a chocolate malt, dump in an egg, mix it up, you know.  And that would be my breakfast, you know, and I'd go on to school.  And, but again, smells of the sea always, always the sea.  The sea beneath everything.
Story_ID: 2662
Speaker 1: And what were you like as a, as a little boy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I was pretty unlike anyone (laughs).  I, I was kind of a misfit.  I really liked to read and I kept to myself a lot because I always felt--I'd spend most of my time with older people.  I was much more comfortable with adults than I was with children.  I didn't understand people my own age.  I was imaginative, dramatic I guess.  When I was in the 5th grade, they used to put me in charge of the room because I used to make up stories.  And I would keep the kids in line by telling stories, and they'd be waiting to see how it ended.  I used to write little stories for myself.  I almost, I almost died trying to get a set of [Edward] Gibbon's '[The] Rise [sic, Decline] and Fall of the Roman Empire.'  There was this place.  It was called the dump, but we called it the Wildwood, just, you know, not far.  We could--well, nothing was that far.  But there was a, and that's where the dump, where they would dump everything.  But because it was on the wetlands, there was a mud thing happening, this really black, sticky, like quicksand, you know.  And--I'll stop.
Story_ID: 2663
Speaker 1: You know, I was asking what type of, you know, child you were.  And you were a person where you said you liked to read a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, and I was also like the classic under-achiever when I got to high school and junior high.  Oh, I could read before I started school.
Speaker 1: And how was that?
Speaker 2: My mother [Florence Avery].  Education was very important.  We used to--she was a very, very smart woman, but she never had a lot of education, formal education, but she read everything.  And she would--by the time I was 11, we'd discussed all the major religions.  It used to--I used to like to read the dictionary.  That was my job.  It was when we would read, and she couldn't find a word or she didn't understand what it was, it was my job to look it up.  I'd find out what it meant.  And I had a subscription to, well, 'Jack and Jill' and 'National Geographic' and there were always books.  There were always books.  She was always curious about everything.  And so in essence, that's, that's where it came from.  And I used to like to be in my room because I had all my books.  And I loved--because I was an only child, my, my brother, and my stepbrother and sister, actually, and they came later.  But mostly it was just me and her and my grandmother, my great-granddad, who, when she moved up North, she knew she had to work cause she couldn't leave me by myself.  And my great-grandfather was living some place in a little rooming house or something.  So she asked him to move in with us, and so I'd have somebody to, to look at--he was good because I could always pull the wool over his eyes and, and whatever.  And so we all lived together at the house.  And, and so he was there.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, why do you think--you, you said you were--it sounds--let me just put, it sounds like you were a very introspective child, I think--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I mean that's what--so what I'm wondering, when you--what about reading did you like or what would you think in your quiet moments?  Were you a daydreamer or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a dreamer, I was a daydreamer.  And I used to think about things.  That's why I was very uncomfortable with kids my own age because a lot of kids didn't do that, you know.  I mean it was like (unclear) working-class black neighborhood, you know.  And everybody was outside playing and, and doing the things that they did.  And I'd go out and play too, but I was much more comfortable by myself.  I was much more comfortable watching movies or reading.  I played softball and hide and seek and did all the other things that kids did.  But, and it was funny because while all the other guys would get in trouble or whatever, my house was like the center of the neighborhood.  It's where all the kids came to hang out.  And my mother was deliberate about that so that she'd know what was going on.  And, and that's, that's the way--and they always kind of looked out for me in that sense.  If they were going to do something really bad, I, I couldn't go, which I--really made me angry because I wanted to be with the other guys, do what the other guys did.  But they wouldn't let me get in trouble because of my mom.  My mother would, would kill the rest of them (laughter) if I got in trouble.  And we had a little, our little quote unquote gang that we had, which was basically like a social club.  We'd go on, on picnics and, and whatever.  I remember my uncle was in college.  He was the first one in my family to go to school.  He went to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia].  And he would come home in the summertime.  And he had a old Buick, and one of the--yeah, it was like a '56, '57 or '58 [1956.1957, 1958] Buick, one of those big old 4-door Buicks.  And it, with dents and stuff.  And one of the doors didn't close right so you had to tie it with a wire, whatever.  And I remember we had raised money, I don't know how we did this, but we all went, took all the kids in the neighborhood, and we all piled in this car with hot dogs and everything 'cause my mother was, you know, she'd play softball with us.  So all, and we'd all play softball.  And it was just a neighborhood.  And we all went out.  We'd go out to the lake, and that's where we'd go, and, you know, we'd, we'd roast our hot dogs and, and do all these things.  And swim in the water, and swim in the lake because I always like the ocean.  I liked to swim.  I don't remember ever not knowing how to swim, actually.  There was one incident, say when I was about 4, and we went to beach.  It was this, this beach in Atlantic City [New Jersey] called Chicken Bone Beach.  It (unclear) Avenue beach,  where all the black people went.  And they could go to other beaches, but this is the beach that we all went.  And all the black entertainers that were in town, no matter where they were entertaining, they'd have cabañas along this beach which was almost a quarter of a mile of sand before you get to the water.  I mean it was a big, broad beach.  And as you walked off the boardwalk, there'd be all these different cabañas.  And there was, they called it Champagne Millionaire's Row.  It wasn't really millionaires, but it'd be like Sugar Ray Robinson, Sammy Davis, Jr., Carmen McRae, you know, all the, all the, the hoity toity, doctors, lawyers, everybody.  And they would--and that's where everybody would want to get to.  You know, Mom would say that, that's, you know, all the ladies, all the women, all the girls, all the, all the dudes were trying to, you know, trying to be in.  That's where, you know, that's, you, you'd want to move up the beach until you, you got invited to hang out up there where they'd have champagne or what not.  And I remember we were at the beach.  And my mother was very attractive, very attractive woman.  And, you know, I had girlfriends and they would all, you know, she was young in the 20s, you know.  And that's, you know, that's what you did.  And she used to tie me a rope around me, around my waist when we were by the water because I'd just run in the water.  And she would tie the rope just so she'd know where I was.  And this one, said she was there talking to her girlfriend, and these dudes were trying to talk to her, and she was laughing and talking.  And she looked around and the rope just kind of disappeared in the water.  And it freaked her out.  She just started pulling, and she pulled me out.  I was in the water, under water hanging out.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You were 4.
Speaker 2: I was 4.
Story_ID: 2664
Speaker 1: Was that your earliest memory growing up?
Speaker 2: You know, I have a lot of memories, and I don't know which one was the first.  I can remember--Christmas I remembered.  I remember the incident at the beach.  I remember, I remember going to the circus.  I think I was 7 or 8, I'm not sure.  That, well, that's like, like up, an epifocal moment or whatever because it was wintertime.  My mother [Florence Avery] worked until like two, 2 o'clock in the morning.  She'd go to work at like 4:00 and she'd be there till 12:00 midnight or, you know, till 2 o'clock in the morning if she went in at 5:00.  I remember the circus was coming to town.  See a lot of things--she told me later that a lot of things that she did, she relived her childhood, through me for things that she never got a chance to do.  So she would use me as an excuse to do these things, like ride ponies on the beach and go to the steel pier and go to the amusement parks.  It was always a lot of things that we did together.  The circus though, I remember because she said we were going to go watch the circus come into town because there were railroad tracks right, right by my neighborhood.  And that's where the circus would come in.  And we had to walk about 4 big blocks to get to the big train station where the trains were.  And it was cold.  I remember it was cold.  And she had one of these coats, this big black, from the '50s [1950s], it was one of these black, like A-Line coats, with big sleeves, but it was very full.  And I remember we walked and the sky was pink cause it was getting ready to snow.  And sometimes in the winter, the sky would just--when the clouds, when it was overcast, it would look pink.  It was cold and windy because we're right on the ocean.  And we walked these 4 blocks.  It was about 2:00, 2:30 in the morning.  And we, then the trains were coming in with the circus animals.  And we would stand, we walked and we got there.  And they were offloading and we could see the elephants.  And I remember us standing there and it's cold.  And I remember getting cold, and she put me inside her coat.  So I'm standing in front of her, and her coat's wrapped me and just my head peeking out.  And I remember feeling very, very warm.  And I remember also, well right next us there was this big, black shiny car with another, a white family was there also watching the circus.  And I remember us standing there.  And I remember looking at that car and seeing everybody inside, and they're all warm or whatever.  But I didn't think they were as warm and toasty as me.  I remember feeling very, very--I don't know, full of myself.  You know, what I mean, very secure, I guess is the word, very loved, I guess is the word.  I remember us standing there watching the circus come in and I remember, I remember we, when, when the last train came in and they'd taken off the elephants, that we walked another few blocks to the White Castle and had cocoa.  I remember because it was kind of, it was kind of daylight.  You know, we walked--was tired, but we walked.  And I remember we walked home, but I had to go to school.  She made me go to school.  I remember being sleepy in school, you know, and falling asleep at my desk.  But I really didn't care about that, you know.  It was like an experience, you know what I mean, that, that, it's a very--I don't know, pronounced memory of mine as a child.  That's why I tell people now.  So when you have kids, it's not the big things that they remember, you know.  Or it's not the fancy bikes.  It's not the, all the expensive clothes or the fancy (unclear) too, no, they don't remember those things.  It's the little things they remember.  I, I will always remember that circus.  I'll always remember that Christmas.  I'll always remember those, those times, you know.  And so I tell people all the time, if you have kids, it's not important.  The big things, people forget, you know.  The big things become just one in a series of big things, that are not any, no more special than anything else, actually.  You know, if you're used to getting those.  But it's the little ones, the small memories, you know, the family dinners, the hard times and the good times that, that crystallize in your life.  And I was very fortunate.  I had a lot of those.
Story_ID: 2665
Speaker 1: Now, where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to Indiana Avenue [Elementary] School in Atlantic City, New Jersey.  It was an all-black grammar school.  The teachers that taught there had taught there for like 20 years because this was at a time when a black person with a college degree was very limited in terms of what jobs were open to them, what they could get.  You were either in the post office or a teacher.  You know, you might be a doctor or a lawyer, but that was very, very seldom.  But as far as any other major job, you couldn't get those.  And you would get that because they had retirement benefits and all these other things.  So the teachers who taught there and taught there for 20 years, a lot of them had master's degrees in different things.  I remember--it was nurturing in that everybody assumed you would succeed, from the teachers to the janitors.  They, they all--it was like a family.  Once you got into that school, you were protected.  They didn't tolerate a lot of nonsense.  So when it was, you know, you had to work so hard to fail, it just became easier to pass, you know (laughs) because, and this was in a day when they could call your mother or they'd call your parents.  And, and one of the things your parents would say to you would be if I have to leave work to come to school to see about you, you know.  And it was, and it was a time when corporal punishment played a very different part in a black child's life.  There were things that you did, simply things you didn't do.  And the school was, was interesting in that I remember we sang 'Lift Ev'ry Voice and Sing' before we sang the national anthem.  We had pictures of [Charles] Drew and, and Mary McLeod Bethune and Harriet Tubman and all these black heroes were like in the room in pictures.  So you knew who they were.  You would do all your, you know, your, you know, reading and all that other stuff, but there was a since of, of accomplishment that kind, that played in direct contrast to the message you were getting from the larger culture, the larger society.  We'd have books where, you know, black histories or, or whatever would be minuscule at best.  So the teachers would supplement it from their own things.  It was important to them.  You were important to them, and you got that sense.  They had special classes, special ed classes where people could, you know, who were slower or whatever for whatever, get extra help.  It was also a time when they had tracking, which meant they would test you and they would put you either on a college or track or a--it was an experiment I guess, or just a general education track.  And if you got put on a college track, that meant that you got exposed to foreign languages.  I started getting Spanish when I was in kindergarten.  This guy named Mr. Hughes would come in, who later wound up being my, my high school Spanish teacher.  But they would come in to the schools, and even in kindergarten, maybe once or twice week.  And you would have a little Spanish lesson, you know, just to familiarize you with the language.  There were certain kind of little enrichments things that were there.  I remember in kindergarten I got in trouble because I could already read, you know.  My mother [Florence Avery] taught me how to read.  I learned how to reading from reading directions on like an oatmeal box, things like that, little things, because I, I sometimes, because mother worked at night, and I had to make my own breakfast, you know.  She couldn't, she wouldn't get up--she couldn't get up.  So we had to learn--she did once or twice until I learned how to do it.  And she'd point out, you know, this is how you turn on the stove and what you do.  You got to be careful, blah-da-da.  If you burn yourself, I'm a whip your butt (laughter).  That was always the admonition.  You know, you get hit by a car, I'm a whip your butt, you know.  You walk out and you get killed by a train, I'm gonna whip your butt, you know.  It never made any sense, but it was enough to scare you.  And so that's, that's what that was.  And so I'd have to get up, and I'd make my breakfast.  And my granddaddy [Sam Godwin] was there also.  So he would, you know, he would help and, and do those things.  And I learned through him, but I knew how to read when I went to kindergarten.  And I remember they, they--one of my discipline reports they sent home was that he reads voraciously but never the things he's supposed to because I used to like to read classic comic books.  Remember they used to have those little classic comic books or they'd have, you know, 'Oliver Twist' and all those things.  And so I would always--I had a huge collection of comic books, especially, you know--and I think that's probably one of the reasons, one of the things that taught me how to read was that I loved comics, you know.  And I'd always get these comic books and, you know, 'Aqua Man' and 'Superman' and 'Batman' and, you know, the 'X-Men' and all of these things.  And, you know, I'd read the pictures and eventually, the words started making sense and, and that whole thing.
Story_ID: 2666
Speaker 1: Why do you say you were a classic under-achiever, and what--did that start happening more when you went to--did you go to junior--was there a junior high school or did--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to junior high school.
Speaker 1: And what, what was the junior high school?
Speaker 2: It was Chelsea Junior High School [Atlantic City, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think it was the first year of integration.
Speaker 1: In Chelsea?
Speaker 2: At Chelsea.
Speaker 1: At Chelsea High, okay.
Speaker 2: It was my first time going to an integrated school.
Speaker 1: So how was that like?
Speaker 2: It was, you know, it was, it was kind of dramatic.  See, what happened in junior high school, they talk about hazing now.  See, the 8th graders, I remember the first day of school, when you're in the 7th grade, when you're leaving grammar school.  And we had to walk to the school.  And all the 8th graders would be lined up on the sidewalk the first day to see all the 7th graders come to school.  And they would like beat them up or, you know, and take their lunch money or bully them or, you had to pass that gauntlet to get in the school.  And I can remember my first day, and I was terrified cause there were all kind of stories about what happened.  And, you know, children exaggerate and that whole situation, especially if you're male.  A boy, you know, you got to be tough.  You got to be all these things.  And I was pretty soft, but I had to keep that quiet.  But I can remember walking down this line.  And the biggest kid in that school was Harry Brown.  And he was almost 6 feet.  He was, he was big.  I think maybe he got left back once or twice or whatever, but the thing that nobody knew was Harry Brown lived in the old, the old village which was projects right near my neighborhood.  But he had a micro--he had a telescope.  And he used to love to watch the stars.  And his mother and my mother [Florence Avery] were friends.  So Harry and I wound up being friends.  And I used to go over to his house all the time, and we'd look at the stars together, you know.  I didn't know what they were, but we would look at the moon and we'd look at the planets.  But he was this big, muscle-bound, tough guy that everybody was afraid of because he was so big.  And I can remember walking down that line and seeing Harry at the end of it, and he came out and walked me in the school.  So word got out that I was a friend of his, and they left me alone, you know.  But that was another that nobody knew that about him, but me.  And it's interesting how that kind of, how learning somehow or, or anything--because when you're a kid, anything that makes you, separates you from the herd, anything that makes you different is something you don't want, you don't want to be.  You know, so we didn't talk about, and we never talked about it, and nobody ever knew.  It was like it was the worse, you know, the best kept secret was that he was into astronomy, you know.  And he was very smart.  So I don't know why he got--he might have had like a learning disability or something, but he was a very smart kid.  But he had a lot of trouble in school for some reason.  And so he was very tough, big, tough guy.  And it kind of helped me along.  And in junior high, I don't know where I got the message that it was, it was, it was easier to, to keep my achievements low key so I wouldn't draw attention to myself, for some reason.  I don't know why, why that, why that was, you know.  And again, because of this tracking thing, they'd still test you.  And after, at the end of junior high, they'd determine (unclear) you're going to go on to college preparatory in high school or general education, getting ready for a trade.  And they would test you at the end of your junior high, at the end of your 8th grade year.
Story_ID: 2667
Speaker 1: And I was going to go into college preparatory course, but about that time, my mother [Florence Avery] met this man and decided to marry him.  I never liked him.  I told her I never liked him.  But she was trying to think--she was feeling guilty because she was a single mom and she couldn't give me everything that she wanted.  He was a radar technician at this point in time, worked out at Navfac [Naval Facilities], the Naval Air Station [Atlantic City, New Jersey], which was a pretty spiffy job for a black man at that period in time.  And so she's thinking that they could, you know, we could work together and accomplish and blah, blah and that she was making exceptions.  Only later did she find out that the only reason, cause he made a bet with somebody else, that he could have her.  But, of course, she was, it sounds very strange, but my mother was very untouchable in that sense.  Well she had a boyfriend now and then, but it wasn't, it wasn't something she made a habit of.  She was very prudish, very careful of, of who she was.  And I think a lot of that comes from her not having a lot of power over herself when she was little.  So when she grew up, she wanted to have more control over her life and just her body and who she was.  And so she was very careful with that, you know, very specific.  She just didn't give that away lightly like a lot of other people did.  And a lot of it she said because she was angry because when she had to come back home to have me [an illegitimate birth], the people were like, well, I knew that would happen.  She said that she got very mad because people expected her, they expected you to have--you know, if you had one, they expected you to have more, that you were just loose, a loose woman.  I mean it's funny how in the working classes and the lower classes, how strict morality can be, how strict the demands (unclear) people don't realize that, you know.  But a loose woman in say, in upper classes or whatever, can be overlooked or moved on or, or not dealt with.  But when you're, coming from a farming community or you come from a really work--the only thing that differentiates you from trash is how you carry yourself, so it was very important to carry yourself a certain way.  And, and I don't know, I don't know where I picked up these double messages in terms of what she meant, but it, it was always like school was boring.
Story_ID: 2668
Speaker 1: School was always boring, not in elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Junior high school, not in elementary.
Speaker 1: Now, what--was the, you said it was traumatic.  Was it traumatic, did the, it being, you know, mixed, was that--that had no im--impact on you?
Speaker 2: No, it really didn't.
Speaker 1: Teachers.  Were the teachers (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: The teachers.
Speaker 1: Were the teachers nurturing?
Speaker 2: No, they weren't.  The teachers weren't nurturing at all.  They, they could be very abusive.  They were very abusive.  So that you got to a point where you didn't want to draw attention to yourself either for good or for bad cause if you did good, they would really get on your case and try and make you screw up.  So the best thing was just to keep your head down, you know, and be average, make a C as opposed to an A, you know.  That's not all the teachers.  Some of the teachers were, were very different.  I had a few teachers in junior high school who demanded more, who, you know, wouldn't let me get away with anything.  When I went into high school, I wound up getting into Honors English.  Honors English was taught by Ms. High who was one of the few black teachers in the school and she taught Honors English.  And she had a reputation in that school as being extremely tough.  You know, we were writing poetry.  You're writing short stories.  You were reading [Robert] Frost, you were reading, you know, [William] Shakespeare.  You were reading e. e. cummings.  You were doing all of these, you know, [Elizabeth Barrett] Browning, all of these things.  And she was very, very tough on the white students.  Now, when I--the first, when I walked into her classroom, and I saw that she was a black teacher, I figured, oh, well, I've got this made.  I'll just sit back over here in the corner, and I'll be fine.  She wouldn't allow that.  She made me sit in front of her desk, you know.  She'd be sitting where you are, and I had to sit right there.  And I was always on.  It was amazing.  And there were papers that some kids would get A's on and I would do a paper comparable to that and get a C.  And I would be, well, well, that's not fair.  She'd say, "Yes, it is."  I said, "But he said the same--" "He's different, no, you can do better.  And you're going to have to do better in my class."  That was one of the few classes I had in high school that I got my A's in because I actually, because I liked it, you know, because I really liked English.  And I liked reading and I wanted to be a writer.  And I liked writing.  I wrote--there were a couple of poems and a couple of short stories that I wrote.  And she put it in the school paper.  And, and those kind of things.  And little, little publications.
Story_ID: 2669
Speaker 1: I had Latin I and II.  I remember hiding my books.  I remember I had to do my homework in study hall because I couldn't, I couldn't carry these books on the school bus, you know.  I, I couldn't do that.  I mean all my boys would see it and they'd just, what you trying to do?  See that was the interesting thing because what I found--not what I found, but what I started thinking about later on was that when did achievement start to have a color?  I don't understand that.  I said because I was getting A's or spoke a certain way or, or I wanted to achieve something, all of a sudden, I was being white.  So you're telling me concomitantly that if I get F's and fail and, and speak like I don't have any sense, that that's being black.  I don't understand that, you know.  So that was always--and I think that's still an issue that happens in a lot of, of poor black neighborhoods, that, that intelligence is not necessarily determined by how much money you have, but the nurturing of it and, and the ability to get that blossom becomes more difficult because of all the, the negative input you come, you get from that kind of, from standing out, from sticking your head up, you know.  Maybe it's not just, not just, not just black people, but I mean--it, it is in a sense because we're a cultural mire in which we are, you know, the way that the cultures that we, we grow up, how that culture affects us as a people, you know.  And, and depending on your family and your training and what your, what your, what you're used to, if all of a sudden a child is born into a family that's full of, you know, thugs and thieves or whatever, and he comes home with a different sensibility, then it's more difficult for him to have that nurtured because there's nothing around him.  I, I remember reading an article once about the touchstones of intellectualism, that if a child grows up in a house where there're books and pictures and newspapers.  And he sees his parent or parents reading and they engage him in that kind of intellectual dialogue, then he's more disposed to incorporate that in his life and make it richer.  But if he grows in a house where he never sees a book, where there's not art, where he doesn't see his parents read or engage in that kind of intellectual discourse, it's less affecting.  It's less a part of his life.  It's much more foreign to him, much more difficult for him to incorporate that or believe that that's, that's something that's important, you know.  And I was lucky in that, and it wasn't about money.  I was lucky in that the environment that I grew up in was one where, where intellectualism was important, where reading was important, where, where I could see that; where there, as a person I would have had a hunger for intellectual stimulation, you know, who reached for something else.
Story_ID: 2670
Speaker 1: We were talking about who influenced you or other people--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was Mr. Hughes who was my Spanish teacher.  And there was another teacher that I had, Mr. Randall, in 6th grade.  He's the one that used to put me in charge.  And it was interesting in this school because, excuse me, 6th grade was the last grade before you go to junior high school, but most of the 6th grade classes at, at Indiana Avenue School [Atlantic City, New Jersey] were taught by men.  And most of these guys were, were vets.  So they didn't brook any nonsense.  And this was at a time when corporal punishment was used in schools.  So you could act up, and they could take your little butt into the coatroom and whip your butt, you know.  If, if you went to the principal's office on principal for anything, you got a swat.  That was just the way it was .  You know, you can't do that now.  But that's the way it was then.  And I'm sure there were teachers who abused it, but I, I don't remember them.  But, but what kept you in line was the fact that you did not want to go to the coatroom because you also had to get up in front of everybody and walk up and get swatted.  So it wasn't just the swatting, it was the whole, the whole process of having to stand up in front.  And everybody'd laugh at you, even though they could get it too, but they would laugh at you.  Mr. Hughes, Ms. High, who was very, was, yeah, cause she kind of fed my knowledge, fed my, my hunger for--she turned me on to things that I didn't know about, you know, [Elizabeth Barrett] Browning.  Who knew about these people?  You know [Lord] Byron, [Mary] Shelley, [John] Keats, [John] Milton, you know, e.e. cummings, Frost, Robert Frost, as well as, as Countee Cullen and, and [Paul Laurence] Dunbar and Langston Hughes and, and all of these people that, you know, that just, you know, came into it.  I remember reading 'How Do I Love Thee?'  "Let me count the ways.  I love thee to the height and depth and breadth my soul can reach, feeling out of sight for the answer being an ideal grace."  Elizabeth Barrett Browning, remember that?  And so, and it was just, there were so many influences, you know, in, in that sense.  But in terms of knowledge, in terms of, of--my mother [Florence Avery] was very demanding.  I keep going back to my mom, and I, you know, because, well, I have to.  I mean I really have to because that's, that's where a lot of it comes from.  And people, you know, and people say well, you know, you're, you're trying to idealize it.  I said, no, I'm not.  I said, I was there.  I know what it was.  In terms of consistency, in terms of the person who was there all the kind, that I knew was there all the time, the one who pushed and prodded and demanded all the time, be that good, bad or whatever, it was her.  It wasn't anybody else.  Well, [Uncle] Pete was the first 12 years, and that he helped me figure out how to be a man in the sense that you know, a man keeps his word.  Man works hard.  He does what he's supposed to do, what he says he's going to do.  And he takes care of his family.  That's what he does, you know.  That's what he does.  And in terms of achievement and other things, and all these other things, that was, that was something else.  The world was open to me, in fact, because my mom wouldn't accept racism as any kind of way to restrict whatever achievements you could make, you know.  Sure, her whole thing was, I remember complaining, well, you always got to be 10 times better.  Well, then, god damn it, be 10 times better.  If you know that, why are you whining, you know.  So, but it's not fair.  Well, that, life is, that's the way it is.  If you know that, then do that.  I mean it's up to you.  I mean you have to do whatever you have to do to close the loophole so that at the end of the day, the only reason you can get denied is because of the color of your skin, not because of your lack of achievement.  And if that's the only reason they're going to deny you, then that's something that they have to deal with, not you.  That's something that, something they're going to have to come to terms with in the long run, you know.  And when, when the spirit looks down, he will see that.  That's a flaw in their character, not a flaw in yours because you've done what you're supposed to do.  But you make sure you do that.  I remember her whole thing was, you know, you can be whatever you want to be.  If you're going to be a dishwasher though, god damn it, you be the best dishwasher.  If you're going to scrub floors, you're going to scrub the best floors, which was interesting to me because later on in life, I heard a story about Paul Robeson, who when he got a scholarship to Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], at a time when it was very restrictive, he showed up at the dormitory.  And there were very few blacks, and they didn't have black folks in dormitories at Princeton University.  And he showed up at the dormitory, and the woman who was in charge of the dormitory assumed he was something else, and said, oh, and she took him to the room and said, okay, well you have to clean this room, didn't even ask him.  He didn't say anything.  You know, he just showed up and she assumed he came for maintenance, you know.  So she took him to this room, this huge room, and said he had to clean.  You have to clean it top to bottom.  So he did.  He didn't complain.  He didn't do anything.  He went in, and he cleaned that room from top to bottom, scrubbed the floor.  She came back and looked and said, oh, "Well you did this too well, obviously--who are you?  You're here for something else then," you know.  And that was his protest.
Story_ID: 2671
Speaker 1: There were these teachers influencing you, but you say you were under-achieving in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what, what grades were you getting?  What were your grades?
Speaker 2: One quarter I'd get straight A's, next quarter I'd get straight F's, drove my mother [Florence Avery] crazy, drove my teachers crazy.  They gave me an I.Q. test because once a year, they always gave you I.Q. test.  Counselor said this, he can be anything he wants to be.  It's no reason for this.  My Spanish teacher said he's got the most beautiful accent.  He speaks beautifully, but he keeps flunking these tests.  I don't know what's going on.  My mother was like, for the first year or two, she was just down there all the time.  And then she said, you know, what, you're making me crazy.  I got to stop this or I'm going to kill you (laughter).  So, so, you know, we tried the (unclear), we tried this, you know, and I think it was just my own kind of rebellious, whatever.  I didn't want to read what they wanted me to read.  I didn't, you know, I didn't do it, you know.  Geometry somehow I could never get.  I don't know why.  Maybe I just didn't study it correctly.  When I had French, I had Latin, I, well, I had Spanish, and I had Latin.  I had Russian and I had Italian.  I had Italian in junior high school, and my--they had a Russian Club in, in senior high school.  And I had Spanish because I, I like languages.  But I could, liked to speak them.  I didn't really like all that grammar, you know, I'm writing them and reading them and figuring all that out for somehow, but every once in a while, Mr. Hughes would get on me, and I'd, you know, I'd get A's in his class, then I'd get F's and screw up or whatever.  And I think a lot of it was my own rebelliousness cause I was, I was a (unclear) kid.  I was, I was, I was strange in high school.  I have to admit it because I played football when I, I was in my sophomore, no my junior, my sophomore year, junior year.  I was walking down the hall going to class and a football coach, Coach Boyd, he looked--I was 6'4" in high school, 265.  And he looked at me, and he said, "Boy, you play ball?"  I said, "No."  He said, "Well, you do now."  So he drafted me for the football team which was the first time that I really had a kind of a social life cause before then I was like, I wore black, navy blue, olive green and dark brown.  I didn't wear anything bright, anything to draw attention to myself cause I was big, and I was always big.  And I was always the biggest thing in class, you know.  Even in kindergarten, I couldn't sit at the other little desks with the other kindergarten kids, you know, because I was a, I was a big kid, you know.  So that always--I wound up always being the center of not necessarily positive attention which really kind of screwed with me, I guess.  I don't know.  Even as I'm talking to you and I'm thinking of these things.  I really didn't, never thought about it before.
Story_ID: 2672
Speaker 1: Now, when you--was it assumed that you were going to go to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia]?  Was that assumed or was that--
Speaker 2: No, it was assumed that I was going to go to college.  That wasn't an assumption.  We knew I was going to graduate high school.  There was no consideration.  There was absolutely nothing around that would even suggest that I wouldn't graduate high school.  I would either graduate high school or I would die (laughter).  You know, and there was no room for discussion.  It was, no.  You know, that possibility wasn't happening.  And college was a foregone conclusion.  Now, because of my abysmal academic record in high school, my choices of colleges were limited.  I got a scholarship to Virginia State because I had, I played ball and I was very, very good.  I was good.  I was going to go to state championships and all that.  And I got a scholarship to go to Virginia State because my uncle was a basketball coach at Virginia State.  And later on I found out that we had a cousin who was a treasurer comptroller.  I didn't know that.  But, and I wanted to go because in my junior year, well, the beginning of my senior year, a Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] alumni, from Howard University, they had this program where they would come to schools and they would take certain black seniors to spend a weekend at Howard, you know, just so we could see what university was like.  I think you had to have a certain GPA or be recommended by some people or whatever.  And, and I was taken.  I went down to Howard for the first time to see a black college campus, historically black college campus.  And it, it--I just, you know, but also what you have to remember is in Atlantic City [New Jersey] at that time were Omega Psi Phi and Kappa Alpha Psi, all the black Greeks.  They used to have what they called the 'Mambo in Sportswear 'and pin relays used to be held in Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] which was like the social event of, of the black social season, you know.  And the Mambo in Sportswear which means that people would be working all summer and all year to save up money so they could buy outfits to go to these things.  And it was just, you know, party, party, party.  And you were, that's just, it was just exciting though.  And it was, it just, just was like the hip thing to do.  I remember going to Howard and, and seeing all the sororities, you know, the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta] and the AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alphas] and all that.  Deltas were fine.  They were just fine, and Howard University was just--see, because also what, what you know though at that point in time--this was like in the, in the, in the early '60s [1960s].  And so most of these, these campuses, they were just--and it's always interesting, how it's always full of women.  Girls were achieving a lot more than the boys were for some reason, you know.  And people don't say that a lot, but it was the girls were doing well in school and the girls who were getting ready to go to college.  And that's where you wanted to be.  That's what would make you want to do that.  I was always very shy around girls.  But, you know, wanted them, but I was shy.  And I remember going to Howard and, and seeing that weekend and just seeing the campus.  I thought it was the most beautifully campus I'd ever seen until I went to Virginia State.  And I remember, when I got my scholarship to go to Virginia State because you had to report in Aug, in August because we were football players.  And the football players always came first.  And I'd never been there before.  This was Petersburg, Virginia.  And, and the campus sat up on a hill right above the Appomattox River.  And you would come through this town of Petersburg, which concomitantly also happened to be one of the centers for the KKK [Ku Klux Klan].  But the interesting thing was that the whole economy of the town hinged on a historically black college.  That was the biggest employer in the area.  And it was like a reversal in fortune.  You would see a black woman in, in a station wagon with her hair rolled up taking her children to PTA [Parent Teacher Association] and you would see little white kids living in, in little shacks sitting on little bricks.  It was a, a strange reversal of fortune in that sense because there were a lot of, you know, faculty and, and alumni and students there.  And I remember--because you came on this road and you crossed the bridge, crossed the Appomattox and you made another turn and you came up this hill.  And as you came up the hill, all the buildings were red brick, like Monticello, red brick and white column porticoes and, and green lawn and trees.  It just, it was just a beautiful campus.  And I couldn't believe that I was there, you know.
Story_ID: 2673
Speaker 1: And I can remember going there [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia], and I remember my dormitory.  And I remember the first, you know--football practice was hard.  It was hard.  It was August and the coach was like, we had this--we had to run the stadium in full gear.  It'd be like 90 degrees and you, you know, this, this huge stadium.  And then we had this huge hill, sand hill.  We had to run up and down this hill and sand with all, full gear, you know, and full contact scrimmages and, and all of these things.  And I can remember that the person that was going out for my position was the biggest person I'd ever seen in my life.  It was this black guy from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] who was 6'9", huge and mean.  I'll tell you how mean he was.  I later on found out that he got locked away for life, for stabbing a man over $5 in a poker game.  That's how mean he was.  He was actually the one that, that screwed up my knees because he clipped me in practice from behind and my knees got screwed up.  And we had a fight.  So I had a, I had a--see I didn't have a chance to be as singular and introspective as I would have liked to have been.  There was always a façade.  I had to be social and hang out.  And, and there're, there're rites of passage for me, that one has to go through.  And, and being 18, 17, 18, 19 is a very difficult and dangerous time, you know, for male or black males specifically; for men, in general, but for black males specifically.  And so I'm put in this situation, and a jock situation, in a football situation--I was a Philosophy major.  Mostly everybody else was like, you know, PE [physical education].  (laughter).  You know, so I had Philosophy and French and, you know, and, and composition and all these other classes and everybody else, they couldn't understand that.  They had physical therapy and these things.  And, and I had, I remember I had this, I had this, this coat, this chocolate brown leather coat that I worked all summer and saved for.  You know, cause you had to work and save money because you wanted to get a nice wardrobe if you're going to go away to college cause you want to hang out, you know.  You got to look good. You just can't go with all that rag, raggedly stuff.  And, you know, Mom [Florence Avery] wasn't going to buy me no chocolate brown leather coat.  That cost too much money.  I'm sorry.  You, you can get a--wear the cloth coat or whatever.  But as far as this other thing is concerned, said, I'm just supposed to keep you warm.  Now, all that other stuff, the style, I--that's, we can go around here to Anny Blatt or whatever, one of these little old discount places.  We'll get a coat that'll work.  I said, I'm not, but I don't want that.  So I had to work.  And I, and I got this coat, and I remember I went to a dance, and I got to get my coat, you know, you had a coat room, you put your coat up.  And my coat, it disappeared.  I couldn't find it.  Somebody had stolen it.  Well, later on at another dance--I'm upset.  I don't know where it is.  So I'm back in the dormitory, and this is like a week or so later, and he comes in wearing my coat.  We live in the same dorm.  I know my coat.  And you're just going to walk by me with my coat on.  So I jumped on him.  I have never fought like that in my life.  I'm not a fighter, but I fought him.  I fought him because I had to.  I'm terrified the whole time, but you couldn't, I just couldn't let him do that, you know.  And I remember that, yeah.  And by the time--and in the process of trying to get the coat, I'd ripped it and everything else, but I got my coat back, you know.  And we were like, uneasy, and right after that is when in, in practice, he got me from behind and screwed up my legs.  And they didn't screw them up that bad, but it became very traumatic for me because you had to--I had to deal with him all the time.  And I had to deal with all of these other things all the time.  I don't know what--and, and I was just, you know, that's sort of a strange time for a person anyway.  You know, you come into, coming of age and you got conflicts and you've got things to resolve and, and issues and all kinds of stuff.
Story_ID: 2674
Speaker 1: I remember we had a Sympathy March.  They'd found the bodies of the three Civil Rights workers [James Cheney, Michael Schwerner and Andrew Goodman] and we had a Sympathy March from the campus [Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] supposedly through downtown to a square.  And I remember that the counselors came in, who were nonviolent.  They were from SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  And they came in and they tried to counsel us on nonviolence.  And I was supposed to be--they specifically talked to a lot of the students who were from like Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and New York and New Jersey, okay, because we--see I was never a follower of Martin Luther King [Jr.].  I admired him, you know, but nonviolence, I didn't, I didn't quite get it.  I didn't understand it.  I was more in line with Malcolm X, you know.  I just, I didn't understand that cause if somebody is going to throw a pie in my face, I'm going to knock him out.  I just am, I have to, you know.  And this was all in direct conflict to who, what my nature was as a person.  There are very few times in my life when I had those kind of confrontations, you know.  When the person that you are inside, as the person you're trying to be, becomes in conflict with, with some other outside stimulus that makes you choose, you know.  So it was a very, very strange time for me.  I didn't make it.  I didn't make the march.  I mean I went, I walked down and they were calling me names, and it was fine.  And I had on a sweater, yellow sweater.  And this guy's in a Ford, blue and white Ford convertible, '54 [1954], something like that, old, ducktails, you know, hair curly and greasy, and hanging down and, you know, rednecks and all that, call all kind of names.  I'm fine, I'm fine as long you don't touch me, I'm fine.  Well, they threw, threw the contents of a jar at me.  I found out it was urine cause as soon as it hit, it was (sound) like that.  And I tried to jump in the car and beat them up, but people grabbed me and sent me away, sent me back to campus.  So I was removed from that march, and it just got--and so this is sixty, '64, '64, '65 [1964, 1965,1966].
Story_ID: 2675
Speaker 1: So there were a lot things happening, a lot of conflicts going, a lot of choices and decisions that one had to make.  And I was too, I was very conflicted about a lot of things, I guess.  So, and my grades suffered, bad grades, again.  And messed up my knees again and so when I went home that summer, I got word that, you know, I was going to have lay out for a semester and that my scholarship was under reconsideration.  And my mother [Florence Avery] was very upset, very upset.  And she wasn't about to settle for that.  So we had a real rough time that summer.  We just--at one point, we didn't speak.  We didn't, we weren't talking.  She put a padlock on the ice box, you know.  At one point, you know, when she went off, out of the house, she went to go to work, she had a different job by then, I had to get up and leave the house, go somewhere, go look for a job, do something.  You just not going to lay up in this house all day long, you know.  So she, you know, and her thing, I found out later, she said her whole thing was, she recognized something in me, that I would be just as content to stay at home with her for the rest of my life, you know; just live at home, find a job and that's it.  Said, and she'd too, not too many, but a few men who were like 40-some years old, living at home with their mama.  And she said, simply, I'm, "I'm not going to have that.  I'm not going to let that happen to you," you know.  They weren't married.  They were just living at home, had a girlfriend, but they never went out in the world by themselves.  And she was like, it's not going to happen.  So it was a miserable summer, and I got really pissed off at her.  I was angry.  I hated her, I was furious so I figured I'd show her, very smart 18-year old.  I joined the Navy.  And I was at--going to the library and I looked right across to the post office.  They had recruitment.  And also they had lotteries at that point in time for the draft.  And my number, once I got out of school, because what you have to understand is that there were a disproportionate number of blacks and browns and poor whites in the military.  And that their numbers would shoot up to the top of the draft pick, and my number shot straight up.  So I had to join something.  And I went in to join the Air Force and they wanted me, but they wanted me to wait for like a month.  I couldn't wait because I couldn't stand it.  And right down the hall was the Navy.  So I went in and joined the Navy and they were ready to take me within 3 days.  And I never even thought about the Army and the Marines.  That wasn't happening.  And I didn't tell my mother I joined the Navy until the night before I left.  I figured that was my way of getting back at her.  And I was just pretty stupid because she really wanted me to do something anyway.  And I, I remember packing, and she was like, "Well, what are you doing?"  I said, "I'm packing up.  I'm leaving."  "Leaving?  Where you, what are you talking about?"  "I joined the Navy, I'm leaving tomorrow.  I'm going to boot camp."  And she said, "Good."  She said it was hard for her to say that.  She said, I never--when I found this out later, she said, when I left in the morning, she--I went by myself.  I went down to the bus station by myself, you know.  I took the bus by myself.  She didn't see me off.  And she said she was just, she was tired, I'm sleeping, you just go ahead, just write me when you get there.  And what I found out was that she cried all that day, said, it tore her up, you know.  She said, but she was afraid that if she showed anything, any of kind remorse, that I would just back out of the whole thing and stay home.  So she couldn't do that.  But she was terrified cause see, they were starting to, to, you know, Vietnam was starting to kind of roll right along.
Speaker 2: And ship people out.
Story_ID: 2676
Speaker 1: You were in the service, how long?
Speaker 2: Four years.
Speaker 1: Four years.
Speaker 2: See, to show you how brilliant I was, two weeks after I was in boot camp, they started 2-year enlistment.  (Laughter)
Speaker 1: I didn't know they had 4-year enlistment.
Speaker 2: That was all there was.  That was all there was.  They started that later.  They started two-year enlistments later.  But 2 weeks after I was in boot camp, they started 2-year enlistments.  I was, and I was in for four.
Speaker 1: Now when you, did you, did you spend time in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: I only spent time on the ship off the coast of Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they say ships can be very claustrophobic.  Did you find that?
Speaker 2: Extremely claustrophob--well, it was claustrophobic on the ship.  I was stationed on--first I was stationed in Tainan, Taiwan on a Chinese Air Force Base.  There was a Navy compound, 21 Navy personnel at the end of the flight line.  Our job--we were connected--we were supposedly a beach master unit, connected to a Navy station in Taipei [Taiwan].  Our job was to keep track of the Marine and Navy pilots who were bombing Laos and Cambodia when we weren't supposed to be and also to get the little black boxes from the spy planes.  They would come in every once in a while.  And we were right down the flight line from an Air Force base, from a U.S. Air Force Base, which also was involved with covert activities that were happening in Laos and Cambodia at a time when we weren't supposed to be there.  And so I was there.  And I was the only black, there were two of us.  One guy was, well, I didn't even know what he was.  I think he was from, I'd--he was just strange.  He was a lifer.  He'd been for like 20 years and everybody else was from like Mississippi or Arkansas or Georgia, rednecks.  It was very difficult.  I used to get written up all the time.  Again, I had this rebellious streak.  I don't think I drew a full paycheck.  I would always get, you know, docked a certain amount of money for being a smart, a smartass, a wise-off because I couldn't, I wouldn't take their abuse.  I remember they had--I was sitting in the NCO [Non-commissioned officer] Club.  It was only--in one little place, it was like a little bar.  And the cartoons they were showing, well, they made some very racist cartoons in World War II, Disney did.  Coal Black and the Seven Dwarfs.  Oh, yeah.  And all kinds of really, really racist stuff.  And in the far East, they were showing a lot of these things.  And it's like that kind of racism that traveled with us overseas.  The little Chinese kids would be following you down the street trying to see your tail because some of the white G.I.s said that black G.I.s had tails and they'd want to see them.  They'd look, where your tail, where your tail?  You know, so you had to deal with that.  And so in a sense that was the most restrictive situation.  Air Force was different.  There were brothers in the Air Police and what not in the Air Force.  And they wound up being my friends.  When I, when I left there, I was stationed on USS Shelton DD-790.  It was a World War II class destroyer, little flat bottom which meant it had a shallow draft.  And it rode really rough in rough seas.  And that's because we could get close to shore and fire support for our task force.  There're usually 4 or 5 destroyers, and a cruiser and an aircraft carrier.  And I was on WestPac and we took part in the Tet offensive.  My ship escorted the Pueblo back from--the Pueblo was captured by the North Koreans and fired upon.  Well, my ship went in when they released it.  And we were supposed to escort it back home, and we got fired on too by the North Koreans.  We fired support for the Tet offensive.  We fired support for a number of, of operations within Vietnam.
Speaker 1: Now, what, how did that experience change you on the surface because up--really up to the--it sounds like when you were growing up in Atlantic City [New Jersey], it was still sort of sheltered and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was extremely sheltered.
Speaker 1: And then you went off to Virginia State [University, Petersburg, Virginia] and that's--you were sort of finding your bearings--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --a little bit.  And then you're off on your own, own and--do we have two minutes?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: My question is how did that, how did that change you?  I mean what--
Speaker 2: That changed me profoundly.  It made me much more independent, much more willing to risk, to follow my own particular bent, beliefs.  We had a saying, once you've been in the service, when we got out and I started college, there were people who were like killing themselves.  I mean serious, literally killing themselves over grades, you know.  They'd get a C and they would jump out of windows.  This was at UCSD [University of California, San Diego] and other places.  And my whole, our whole attitude was, you know, and they would sit there and take stuff from professors that we wouldn't take, that I wouldn't take because our whole attitude was, what you going to do.  Make me join the service, send me to Vietnam?  Been there, done that.  What you going to do?  Nothing.  You know, and so it became much more confrontative, much more assertive in terms of who and what you were as an individual.  And this is during the '70s [1970s], you know, late '60s [1960s], '70s, which a lot of protests were happening because there were a lot of, lot of vets.  They did a survey that the average--the median entering age for a college freshman was 23.  And these were usually, you know, returning vets [veterans], returning G.I.s whose whole attitude towards education and authority was very, very different.  So that's how it changed me.
Story_ID: 2677
Speaker 1: So you get back.  Now, were you, what, where did you do basic training?
Speaker 2: San Diego.  I went--I, I chose to go to California.  I wanted to go as far away as I could.  So I went to California.  I did basic training in California.  I did a school in California.  I joined the Navy, I wanted to be a communications technician interpreter.  And when you join the service, they test you.  You know, you go to boot camp and they test--they give you an I.Q. test again, an aptitude test, ability test.  And I tested.  I was able to be the rating that I wanted, but when they came in to counsel me, I found out I'd have to re-enlist for another 6 years.  And that wasn't happening.  (Laughs)  So I chose to go to, to A School rather than Radio School.  And they sent me to Radio School instead.  So I was a radio, radio communications technician.  And so out of boot camp, which was in San Diego, I went to A School, which was in San Diego, Radio Communications School.  And from there, I went right on to, to Taiwan, Tainan, and then from Tainan, Taiwan, I got on to a ship.  I went on to the Shelton which was based out of San Diego.  And I was on there for two years.  And, and that's where I was, and when I got out of the service, I got out in August of '69 [1969], I decided to go back to school.  And so I'd signed up at--it was funny because I, you know, you have all these plans when you're in service.  You're going to save all this money so you'll have all this money when you get out.  I wound up with like 500 bucks and a U.S. Savings Bond.  And they gave you a round-trip ticket from your point of embarkation, your point of--where you enlisted.  So I went back home when I got out for like, I don't know, about a week or so.  But I, I couldn't stay.  There was nothing there for me actually.  All my friends were friends I had that we really didn't have a lot in common, but friends were still there.  A lot of friends were already in the service or had been drafted and weren't there.  So there was nothing, nothing for me to do there.  And the town [Atlantic City, New Jersey] was going down at that point in time.  The wonderfulness of my childhood I guess, you know, was like over.  And, and the city itself was kind of dingy and losing it, so, and so I went back to California.  I decided to stay in California, you know, which was a scary decision.  I was 20, 21.  I didn't know anybody.  You know, when I got out, and my ship went back out, almost all my friends went back over to WestPac, would be gone for another six months.  So when I got back, luckily, I'd, I'd found an apartment, and--it was funny, the first night I was back in California, off leave, and I had found this apartment.  I had paid my, my rent, $85.00 a month studio apartment.  But see it was way out in San, in San Diego on Market Street.  The airport was downtown in San Diego.  I had to take the bus because I didn't know anybody to pick me up.  I didn't know anybody.  I didn't have anybody.  It was just me.  And they took--the bus picked me up at the airport.  And I remember changing, carrying my little luggage all the way out to Market Street in the south, in southeast San Diego, quote, unquote "the black section".  And I had a studio apartment, and when I got there that night, my gas, lights and telephone hadn't been turned on yet.  So my first night in California was spent in a studio apartment in the dark, in the corner, terrified cause everybody I knew was 3,000 miles away.  I didn't know anybody.  I didn't, I didn't have a car.  I didn't know where to go.  I was all alone for the very first time in my life.  There was no one I could call.  I could call my mother [Florence Avery], but what could she do?  She's 3,000 miles away.  She didn't have any money, nothing.  There was nothing.  Just me.
Story_ID: 2678
Speaker 1: And so--and then I had to go to [San Diego] City College [San Diego, California].  I had to figure out how to get the, the bus.  First I tried the bus, but these were your hippie days.  So then I decided, you know, let's do this.  So I started hitchhiking.  And I'd hitchhike to school.  And that's how I met a lot of my friends, from hitchhiking and from going to City College.  And I met my buddy, Tony, who had just gotten--and at this time a lot of guys who'd just gotten out of the service, most people I met were ex-G.I.s like myself, because we were the only ones that had anything in common.  People who hadn't been in the service, we really didn't have anything to talk about, you know, no, no way to share those experiences.  And so when you found out that somebody had just got out of the service, it was an immediate bonding thing.  And so that's where a lot of my friends were.  And this was like, you know '70s [1970s], cultural nationalism, you know.  I got turned on to a lot of black literature at that point in time, things flash back.  I was still writing.  I still wanted to be a writer.  And I remember reading all this wonderful black poetry and, and, you know, Nikki Giovanni, [Amiri] Baraka, you know, all those, all, you know, And so--and then I had to go to City College.  I had to figure out how to get the, the bus.  First I tried the bus, but these were your hippie days.  So then I decided, you know, let's do this.  So I started hitchhiking.  And I'd hitchhike to school.  And that's how I met a lot of my friends, from hitchhiking and from going to City College.  And I met my buddy, Tony, who had just gotten--and at this time a lot of guys who'd just gotten out of the service, most people I met were ex-G.I.'s like myself, because we were the only ones that had anything in common.  People who hadn't been in the service, we really didn't have anything to talk about, you know, no, no way to share those experiences.  And so when you found out that somebody had just got out of the service, it was an immediate bonding thing.  And so that's where a lot of my friends were.  And this was like, you know '70s [1970s], cultural nationalism, you know.  I got turned on to a lot of black literature at that point in time, things flash back.  I was still writing.  I still wanted to be a writer.  And I remember reading all this wonderful black poetry and, and, you know, Nikki Giovanni, Baraka, you know, all those, all, you know, Fabio, Sarah Webster Fabio, all these people, you know, and all this stuff.  And being excited about it, plus it was an exciting time, politically and, and culturally and, and that whole thing.  And so I got to be, you know, friends with these people.  And then I start--I hooked up with someone, and we started writing, putting together little poetry shows, you know, with poetry, dance and music.  And you put it together and, and you do it, and it was a wonderful thing.  About that time, I met another friend of mine, with Tony Toliver and myself and there was like three of us.  And we rented a big house.  We lived together in a house in, in Emerald Hills, no in Valencia Park in San Diego because I, in my studio apartment, I lived there.  And Tony lived somewhere else.  And there was this other guy named Rick.  And we all went to City College, and we were sitting down there talking, you know, doing what one did in the '70s [1970s], and decided, well, hey, you know, and we were all ex, ex-vets [veterans].  We could put our money together and rent a really big house, you know, as opposed to these little studio apartments.  So we could split the bills.  And we, and we did.  And we had a blast.  (Laughter).  You know, and so we partied, and we went to school, well, you know.  It was great.  And I got involved with someone and, and I moved in with her, the first time I'd ever lived with a woman, first, the very first time.  And, and that didn't work out.  But I'd already moved out of the house and so when that broke up, I had to figure out somewhere else to go.  And I did, and I met somebody else, friend of another friend I met named Roy.  And I met another woman, and we started being, going together.  And then Roy and the other woman, we all, we, we moved in together.  And we split, you know, we shared a house because she was living with her mother.  And her, she was a victim of sexual abuse.  Her father had abused her sexually and, and her mother was there.  And her brother was in the service, was in the military.  And later he got, he got killed.  He was on an aircraft carrier and fell over and disappeared.  They didn't know whether he fell or whether he jumped, but he disappeared.  And it was just a, it was just in City College it was a great time because, you know, you met, we met all these different people.  I met all these different, different people.  My friends looked like the United Nations at that point in time.  That's what it was about.  The woman I was with was black and my, and my buddy, Roy was, but I had all these other friends that we just hung out, hippie friends, is what I'd say, my hippie days.
Story_ID: 2679
Speaker 1: But this was, this was what--it was expansive time in many ways.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, extremely.
Speaker 1: Yes, I mean you were talking about early, early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Early '70s, yeah, late '60s [1960s], early '70s.  I got out in '69 [1969], August of '69.  So from that period on, the next 10 years was just a, a roller coaster, exciting things.  A (unclear) people.  I moved into a house up in Hillcrest with Roy and, and Pat, and right next to us was this big house.  It was a commune, and we got to be friends with them.  Yeah, I, I, I don't know how to put a, you know, I just, I moved around.  And I, I wound up living in a big house and we were all friends and there were friends who were like members of the Communist Party and worked for the 'Daily Worker' and then there were friends who were in--I remember I applied for a job at the Parks Division in San Diego [California] because I was, I wanted to be a writer, and I got this job where I'd be making like $600.00 a month.  And all I had to do was ride around all day and turn the water on and off, which was a perfect job for a writer.  But at the same time, I also got a job with this black organi--organization called the [Before] Columbus Foundation, which was connected to Amiri Baraka and, and they wanted me to write and to design language--reading, reading, reading, arts and--reading and language arts program based around the seven principles of Kwanzaa, you know, umoja, and all this other stuff.  And that was exciting.  And so I decided to take that job instead.  And my paychecks bounced twice.  (Laughs).  Okay, because I, you know, I'm working proletarian and yeah, (laughs), you know, and so my paychecks bounced.  And I wound up losing my apartment, and (laughter) you know, and all these other things and getting set back even more.  And, and I moved back into the big house.  And I'm living with my friends and, and all that.  Then I, you know, and I moved--I was living on Front Street.  And I got a fellowship to go to London [England]--no, in, in the meantime, in [San Diego] City College [San Diego, California], one of my, my teachers, Lymon Seville, who's since passed away, asked me to audition for a play.
Story_ID: 2680
Speaker 1: Now, had you been doing acting--you talk about writing, but had you been acting to, up to that point and to--okay, tell me about that?
Speaker 2: I had read--I had read poetry because I could read.  See, I, there was--I had a gift I didn't know I had.  But I could ready poetry.  I could pick it up off the page as well with [William] Shakespeare, I could just pick it up off the page.  I didn't necessarily know what I was saying, but once it, one or two passes, and I could pick it up and I cold read it like it was supposed to be read.  But I didn't know the techni--I didn't know trochaic, iambic, you know, I didn't know, you know, action verbs and all those things in terms of technical scansion of breaking down a classical piece of literature.  I didn't really know all that at that point in time.  And so anyway, Lymon [Seville] asked me to audition for a play.  It was 'J.B.' by Archibald McLeish.  And it's the story of Job and it's told like a three-ring circus.  And God is played by Mr. Zeuss and he sells peanuts and popcorn, no he sells hot-air balloons.  And the devil was Mr. Nichols.  And he sells peanuts and popcorn, no, he sells, yeah, he sells peanuts and popcorn.  And the trick is that, depending on where they're playing, they switch roles, so God and devil switch roles.  And it, it was an interesting play and that was my very first time on stage doing a play.  And I loved it.  I just absolutely loved it.  And then I--
Speaker 1: What did you love about it?
Speaker 2: I loved the rehearsal.  I loved the process.  I loved examining the literature and becoming somebody else.  I found out that it was, it was one of the few things, acting was one of the few things that everything you'd ever been interested in or curious about or know anything about, you could incorporate it.  You had a place to use it, and a place to examine it.  And that the level of intimacy between you and the people, and perfect strangers, within 4 to 6 weeks, you two would be, could be (unclear) both playing naked with each other.  It was an amazing process to me, you know, and the things, the effect that it would have on audience and people.  I mean it's a first time.  You know, I've read poetry in public with friends and we put together all of those things, and that was fun.  But this was, I don't know, it was just something about it that I enjoyed.  And--
Speaker 1: And this is what year?
Speaker 2: '70 [1970], '71 [1971]?  '71.  '71 or '72 [1972].  And then the next, the next girlfriend of mine was into the theater and I really wasn't, but she was.  And heard, heard about an audition that was out at the University of California in San Diego, a Douglas Turner Ward play, The Days of Absence [sic, 'Day of Absence'], and so she, I, I took her out there.  And I'm sitting in the back of the audition process and the director, who was Dr. Floyd Grafton at UCSD who's--he's a wonderful man.  He's crazy, but he's, he's wonderful.  He's a man who teaches drama and he mumbles.  You can't understand what the hell he's saying half the time.  And I'm sitting in the back, you know, watching the audition process, and he looked at me, and he said, "You, you come to audition for my play?"  I said, "No, I didn't."  He said, "Well, you do now.  Come on up here, come on."  And so I auditioned and I got a part, got one of the lead roles in the play.  And that was the first time I'd met him, and what wound up happening was he winds up having a little group of us all, black actors, you know.  And we just went on from play to play together.  And that's really where I learned.  I learned by, by doing.  I never really took classes.  I just started performing and we would do all these things.  And I learned so much.  And there was just a bunch of us.  And we got really into the creative process and we formed our own little theater group.  We, we did--I did my envo--after that play, I did my first [William] Shakespeare, '[The] Merchant of Venice.'  They had an audition and they called and they asked me to audition.  I don't know why.  I guess they'd seen me in a couple of plays in or whatever.  And I went out and I auditioned for it and I, and I, and I got the role.  And I did it for a while.  I didn't know where I was and I wasn't that impressed with the Old Globe.  I didn't know that it was the premiere theater in San Diego.  I didn't know that it was, you know, the Shakespeare--the, the premiere theater in San Diego.  I didn't know that.  It was just a place to work as far as I was concerned.  And I did that and, and we did 'Ceremonies in Dark Old Men', and we won a, won an [Old Globe] Atlas Award for that.  All of this was with Floyd and, and a bunch of us.
Story_ID: 2681
Speaker 1: And we wound up trying to start our own little theater company called Rainbow Repertory Company.  And it was funny because the National Endowment of the Arts, we put on a show for the National Endowment of the Arts to get a grant.  And it was, it was music, again, it was singing and poetry and dance.  And the quality of the talent was just spectacular. I can't explain it.  I like to tell people that San Diego [California] was having a renaissance at that period and time and didn't realize it because there were some amazingly talented people there.  And we could live there because it was cheaper to live.  It was cheaper to live, and we were all artists and we were all broke.  And we were all serious about it.  And we did it.  And we did this performance for the NEA and we wound up getting CETA [Comprehensive Employment Training Act] grant, you know.  There's a lot of other things that happened in between.  It's just kind of capsulating the whole situation.  And we got a CETA grant and we, we--it was funny because it surprised us.  We didn't expect it.  And by the time it had come through, all the people that were supposed to be in charge were off working, doing other things.  So me, my buddy, John, and another friend of ours named Gary Morgan, and Anasa Briggs.  Anasa, they came and told her because she was like the (unclear) titure, the head of the whole situation and Floyd [Grafton].  But Floyd was a professor at the University [of California, San Diego].  Anasa was working somewhere else.  So she got this grant for a hundred and some thousand dollars and didn't know what to do with it and dumped, came and dumped on Gary Morgan and, and John.  And so we said, oh, well, I guess we'll have to do this.  And so John and Gary and I got together.  And, of course, Gary was, was financial, you know, he knew how to handle all the bookkeeping.  You know, I didn't know how to do all that.  And John could be the front man.  He could, you know, smile and grin and, and be in charge and be out front and do that.  And I was like the director, artistic person who directed some of the shows.  And it was a great time.  It was exciting.  We wound up doing six shows in 12 weeks, putting together 6 shows.  We had two shows running at the same time.  Did Melavana Rag, We did some other things.  We had a women's poetry show that would go to the prisons that we did.  Our first problem was the name, the name was Southern California Black Repertory Theater.  And CETA didn't want us to use Southern California Black Repertory Theater because they thought we were being restrictive.  So we had to, you know, we used the name, but we had to hire other people.  Our, our mission was to do black theater, to hire black actors and, and create some stuff.  So we had to hire other people and we did.  But we did it anyway.  And, and we did 'Sizwe Bansi is Dead'.  'The Island', by [Athol] Fugard because there were only two, there were two character plays.  And John Wesley and I did them.  I played Sizwe, and he played Bantu.  And then in 'The Island,' I played Winston, and he played the other guy.  And we did that because we could--it was cheap to (unclear).  And Luther James who was a wonderful director and also a professor at UCSD [University of California, San Diego] who studied at the New School for Social Research in New York [New York], who studied in Russia, who, you know, was just amazingly international kind of brother, you know.  Director, that's (unclear) I learned amazing things from him.  And we did that, and while we were doing the show, the Oregon Shakespeare Festival [Ashland, Oregon] , Michael Addison, who was head of the department at UCSD knew someone who was head of the Oregon Shakespeare Festival.  And they were, they wanted to do those two plays.  This was '79 [1979], '78 [1978], '79.  And people weren't really that--I think it was, South Africa was still hot then, you know, apartheid and all that.  But the artistic director called Michael and told him that they were having difficulty finding actors that could do Sizwe and fit into the regular company, i.e., do [William] Shakespeare and the classics.  I didn't understand how they were having any problem doing that.  But they said they were.  So Michael invited him to come down and see our production of 'Sizwe' and 'The Island'.  And they came down.  And we were doing it on the road because we were trying to raise money.  So we were in Santa Barbara [California] and we, we went--somewhere that we'd go?  We drove to Santa Barbara, and we drove up North, I think we were in San Francisco [California], Berkeley [California], somewhere.  And they came down, and they saw our production.  And they liked it, and they asked us to bring our production to the Oregon Shakespeare Festival.  The Oregon Shakespeare Festival is the oldest Shakespeare Festival in the country.  They get most of their revenues through the door.  They make so much money, they could turn down grants, which was unheard of.  They draw from Seattle [Washington], San Francisco and they're internationally known.  It was the first time they'd ever asked an outside production to come.  It was the first time they'd ever asked a black production to come, period.  We were the only two black people in the (unclear) river valley in Southern Oregon.  (Laughs).  It was, it was a trip.  It was a, a great experience.  And doing a South African play, that these people had absolutely no idea what was going on.  And we were the hit of the season.  We were the hit of the season.  And it was funny because we had closed rehearsals because we knew it was expected.  We knew it was demanded.  I think we were prepared for this.  We knew that in--we would be held under the microscope.  As a matter of fact, when we there, after the company introduction, whatever, we were called aside by the secretary of the artistic director of a company.  We were called aside to the office for a private interview with her.  And she gave us the lowdown on where we were.  It's called Southern Oregon for a reason.  Okay, and we were told that, in no uncertain terms, that we had to be very careful, that, you know, women come from San Francisco and all over.  And their primary goal is to sleep with actors in the company and 95 percent of the audiences that came were white.  So she told us in no uncertain terms, you know, to watch ourselves and not be involved.  It wouldn't be tolerated.  They were also very anti-gay there.  They had beat up a couple of actors.  They used to call the company Shakes-queers.  Then Medford [Oregon], which was a few miles away, at Grants Pass, which was a home for reactionary survivalists and right-wing extremists, Medford was the same way.  And that whole area, it's like, it's only Eugene [Oregon]--Eugene was very liberal and left-wing, but other than Eugene, there's nothing else.  And so we were there for two and a half years.  And we did 'Sizwe Bansi is Dead'.  We did 'The Island.'  I did 'Othello' there.  And they reprieved it the next year and we did it again.  And it was great.  And then--
Speaker 2: Now, when you said (unclear) okay.  When you were talking about, you know, having been there for, you know, the two and a half years, you were saying--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  We were there for two and a half years.  Then, well, I was there for a half a year by myself because John (unclear) was there for 2 years and then they re, remounted my 'Othello' and he left.  And I was there by myself for the next 6 or 7 months.
Story_ID: 2682
Speaker 1: I could have stayed, but there was, Ashland [Oregon] was this kind of place that's so good it's dangerous.  There were people who have been there for 15 years.  You can't build a career.  I mean you can have a wonderful life, you know, because it's a beautiful little town.  It's very, the people are very receptive.  The children have wonderful little schools.  You could stay there in a company, just do these little roles and, and never have to leave.  But that would be it.  That would be all.  So I left.  And I moved down to, back down to San Diego [California].  I didn't have any other place to go.  I bought a, a little Rambler station wagon for like $500 and drove it back down.  I drove up to Seattle [Washington] to (unclear) and looked around there, and saw friends and tried to work there.  And then I kept driving south because that's the only place I had to stay and I drove back south and I was sleeping on a friend's couch in San Diego.  And, and another friend of mine called who was, who we'd done theater with in San Diego, you know.  And he had, he had left and gone to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and became a casting person.  First, he was a carpenter.  You know, he was building sets on--then he wound up getting to be an apprentice of the casting agent.  And he wound up being in casting and casting at Universal Studios.  And it was interesting because just the kind of people that it was, you know.  He was--Melvin, Mel Johnson.  And he just, he just was.  And he happened to call one day.  He found out I was staying with Roy, a friend of mine.  And he said, "What are you doing?"  And I said, "Well, I'm sleeping Roy's couch and trying to get my resumes together."  I had no desire to come to Los Angeles [California].  This was--or Hollywood.  This was never a place I wanted to come because I didn't see anything here for me, necessarily.  I'm not classically handsome.  I'm not little.  I'm a big guy.  And that can be a problem because most people, most of the actors are very short.  They're little people, you know, and, and that can be an issue, especially then.  But it was '83 [1983], so what the hell.  And he talked me into coming to L.A. and I lived on his couch, slept on his couch in the Valley and I would take a bus, you know, or I'd drive my car eventually, across into Hollywood to try to find an agent.  He set me up to meet agents.  The first agent I met was on Vineland, out in the Valley.  I remember because, this very first agent I met in Los Angeles.  And I had all my little, my, my reviews and my resumes together.  And I walked into his office, you know, and I'm all excited.  And he looks at my picture and my resume, resumes.  And he reads my reviews.  "Well, no doubt you're a talented actor."  I said, "Oh, thank you."  "But black actors aren't making us any money this year.  See ya."  That took me by surprise.  I mean I'd just been doing [William] Shakespeare for two and a half years for God's sake.  What are you talking about?  You know, I didn't say that.  I was just--because I was outside the office before I realized what he, you know, what he'd meant by that (unclear) because I just wasn't used to dealing with that.  And I got angry.  I got very angry.  And I said, but you know what I'm going to do.  I'm going to find me a job, and I'm going to come back, and I'm going to take him to lunch, somewhere expensive, like Chasen's or Le Dome, something like that.  And I'm going to take him to lunch.  And we're going to sit down, and I'm going to say, "Come on, please.  Order whatever you want, the most expensive, please put this on my tab.  You know I'd love to stay here and talk to you, but I got a job.  I got to go.  Bye-bye."  And I did go back to do that to him, but he was out of business by then.  So that's the way that goes.  That just shows you things.  And luckily, then Melvin set me up with another agent, the Light Company on Robertson, Robertson Boulevard [in Los Angeles, California].  I remember because I took a bus.  I had to take a bus in, and it let me off on Sunset [Boulevard], which is like a mile, half a mile from where the office is.  And I had to walk down Doheney, (unclear) was Doheney.  And then I had to cut over to Robertson and go down to, to the Light Company which was above the Ivy.  This is a very trendy restaurant.  And there was--so it was about 6:30, 7:00 o'clock [p.m.] by the time I got there.  And I couldn't stay long because I didn't know if I was going to be able to get a bus to get back.  And I remember walking into the office, and there's this guy that was sitting there like, you know, like Swifty Lazar, big, big glasses, big pinky ring, big cigar.  And again my resumes and whatever, and I'm getting ready for--you know, I could see he's getting ready to send me away.  You know, he's reading my stuff.  And it just so happens that one of his assistants comes in and says they have, they're calling for, you know, they're looking for football player types for this British overseas airways commercial.  And so he looked at me and he said, "I tell you what.  If you go out on this call, if you get the job, we'll sign you up."  And he sent me out on the call, and I got the job.  And, and they signed me up.  And I meant they, that they would--that didn't mean that they would represent me.  That meant that they would take their 10 percent for whatever jobs I could find for myself.  (Laughter)  So luckily, my friend Melvin kept calling me in to audition for things for, you know, Universal.  And I kept getting jobs.  I mean he couldn't get me the job, but he would call me in to audition when they were calling for me.  So I got jobs on 'Simon and Simon,' 'Hill Street Blues.'  I did a 'Hill Street Blues' that was supposed to be one day.  I wind up coming back for three.  I did 'L.A. Law.'  I did a whole bunch of things.
Story_ID: 2683
Speaker 1: Actors often talk about finding their voice, and I'm wondering, do you remember--did you ever say that you ever found your voice?  Or when you found your voice as an actor, your sense of, you know--
Speaker 2: Sense of what?  No, no, seriously, what?
Speaker 1: Your sense of, you know, the inside, the inside part of being an actor.  I mean the inside--
Speaker 2: The in--
Speaker 1: --cause you said that, you know, I could read, I could make things come across the page, you know, that was--and I know your training came afterward, but I'm just saying, when did you find that, that internal voice?
Speaker 2: You know, I think I'm still looking for that.  But actually, and this is going to--I don't mean for it to sound this way, but it's a fact.  We are a product of who and what we are and what we come from.  And as an African American involved in this culture, when I look at the, the achievements of African American artists, and I think they all have a piece of my voice.  And I think that because of them I even had the idea that maybe I even had a voice.  And that's what started me to look for it.  I could see, you know, I remember watching, well, Sidney Poitier, I remember as a kid watching the few black movies that there were.  I remember in the '70s [1970s] hearing about--because we were out on the West Coast.  We weren't on the East Coast.  We weren't there with the Negro Ensemble Company.  We weren't there with all the other black companies that were happening in New York, with indeed the theater movement that was happening in New York at the time.  But we were out here, and there were other little, little groups happening.  And what it made you do was, was examine your own aesthetic.  And so once we settled on, once I, I went and, and strangely enough, the poetry and the literature, and black literature specifically, even though I was grounded in European literature as, as we all are in the European tradition of, of aesthetic and what's going on.  But there's a, there's a, there's a black, a black sensibility and certain rhythm that comes through.  I, I can only describe it musically like most of us have as in jazz and, and blues and whatever, those interesting beats and music things and rhythmic things that move you into it.  When you started in the '70s [1970s] and you started listening to the black poetry, there was a definite difference between them and, and, and Elizabeth Barrett Browning or Robert Lewis Stevenson or e.e. cummings.  Now, they were all valid and important, and I admired them, but there was something that was much more effecting about, about a Nikki Giovanni or whatever.  And it's because they were reflecting experiencing, I guess, that we shared.  But in terms of developing a black voice was more about developing a black esthetic.  And what that is, is when I say that, because black is the presence of all colors.  It means that incorporates the European, it incorporates all of the influences that created the culture in the (unclear) era in which I grew, grew up.  When I started doing black theater, like 'Days of Absence.'  That was like of wonderful--'Ceremonies In Dark Old Men' or, you know, 'First Breeze of Summer' or, we did a production of 'Death of a Salesman,' black production of 'Death of a Salesman'; didn't have to change it because the issues that are dealt with in that play are universal.  We did, and we did [William] Shakespeare.  The issues that are dealt with are universal.  Now, the sensibility, there was a European sensibility, but in order to make that accessible for me, as an African American actor, it first has to come through me as an African American person.  And, and--and the incorporation of all of those things that makes me up, that helps me see this, and to bring my own particular thing.  When we did 'Sizwe Bansi is Dead' and 'The Island,' by [Athol] Fugard, the issues that are dealt with there are universal, specific to South African in terms of oppression, in terms of, of--especially in 'The Island', which is the most political of the piece, where it talks about the things that are, are Caesar's and the things that are man's, that God's law and man's law are sometime in conflict and one has to choose between God's law and man's law.  And God's law is the most important.  So being able to identify that particular definition, you know what I'm saying.  And so I, in terms of a black voice for my own particular voice as an actor, that's something I'm, I think I have, but I think I'm, I'm still seeking to define, you know.  I don't know when everyone does that.  It's says like, you know, when did you become a man?  I don't know.  I'm still becoming.
Story_ID: 2684
Speaker 1: With your theatrical training, was there any particular part or role or experience that you think sort of catapulted you forward?  You know, during that theater, before, just--I'm just trying to establish some things before you get your television (unclear).
Speaker 2: 'Sizwe'.  It was the most affecting piece of theater that I've ever done in my life.  'Sizwe Bansi [is Dead]', and 'The Island', by [Athol] Fugard, the most affecting--it's the first time I saw--not the first, but it was the most affecting point of political, social, esthetic, moral, or coming together, being able to express and, and feel, the most affecting thing where you actually lose yourself in that.  'Othello', interesting enough was also eye opening for me.  It was the first time that I could actually lose--I, I lost myself in, in the classical text, in that character and that, and that, and that issue.  It was hard work because there were things that I, as a person, had a difficulty with.  I had a problem with someone being that gullible in terms of Desdemona.  I had a problem with a lot of those things.  But I had to work it out and just ride on the language.  I learned how to trust the language.  And I think a lot of that comes from my own particular fascination with poetry in terms of the beauty of the English language, in terms of, of how it can effect you and, and what it does, which is why I believe in training, which is why, you know, the writing and all of those things because it's, it's about, it's about the word, the spoken word, the written word, that which brings you on, moves you, sort of the vehicle that moves you into everything else.  And, and it's interesting because now-a-days, it's all visual, you know, T.V. and movies and special effects.  It's mostly visual.  It's not literal.  It's not about the word; it's about the image.
Speaker 1: Now, would you say it was the CETA [comprehensive employment training act] grant that really got you going into theater full time, you know.  I'm just wondering if that--because there was money and you could--was that?
Speaker 2: Well, I was doing it any way.
Speaker 1: You were already doing it?
Speaker 2: I was doing it anyway.  I was--
Speaker 1: So, what, when (unclear) that you decided you wanted to pursue to this as a career?
Speaker 2: You know, I--probably not until I moved to L.A [Los Angeles, California].  I was just doing what, you know, I never really thought about it.  These things happened.  I enjoyed--I just kept doing them.  I wound up making a little (unclear).  I wasn't, I never looked--maybe I should have, but I never did.  It was just what I did.  And when I went--it was what I did, and it's what gave me the greatest satisfaction.  I didn't see anything else out there that was, that was--gave me the kind of satisfaction that I got there.  And maybe it all, all goes back to childhood where I actual (unclear) or notion or whatever's, I don't know.  I'm not that deep in terms of being able to pinpoint those issues.  But, but things came along and I just went along, and I went along.  And I got more involved and I couldn't, and I, and I could incorporate all these other things.  And it was just--it became something that I did.  And when I went to Ashland [Oregon], it was the first time, the first time that I'd ever--because when I was doing theater before, I was going to school.  VA [Veterans Affairs] checks (unclear) make the money, but the important thing was the theater.  The important thing was doing that.  That's what I did.  Everything else was just a means to an end.  The CETA grant came along, and all of a sudden I was getting paid, you know.  Then we, we got to Ashland and that's all I had to do.  But with the CETA grant, we had to be responsible for everybody else.  We had to go through all these other changes to try and make things work.  We had conflicts with the board of directors, you know, and that whole thing.  We're trying to keep them out of our business.  We're trying to, you know, we're trying to do theater, and you're trying to make us--well, why are you doing this?  And it's like, look, if you really wanted to do this, why didn't you take the grant and do it yourself?  Are you going to leave us alone and let us do this or are you going to micro-manage us to death?  You know, so--but when we went to Ashland, all of a sudden, I didn't have to do anything but act.  I had to go to rehearsals, you know.  And I could spend all my time working on that craft, working on that particular piece.
Story_ID: 2685
Speaker 1: We had a challenge with 'Sizwe Bansi is Dead' and 'The Island'.  It was almost like--because we knew if we screwed up that their--the next time they or they asked a black actor or actress to come there would, would be nothing.  So I tell people and they don't understand, I said, being black is a political statement.  And mainly because you're never seen just by yourself.  It's like, it's like the resonation of, of a pebble in the water.  You can--when people look at you, they don't just see you, James Avery.  They see everything else that you represent.  They see Civil Rights, they see affirmative action, they see the mother; they see the rapist, they see everything you've ever been, everything you ever were.  There was a book a long time ago called 'The Black Book' and, and I loved the back of it.  It said, inside my covers, I hold everything we have ever been or everything you've ever been, every place we've ever seen, you know, every sin we've ever committed, you know, every victory we've ever achieved, within the covers of this book.  I am everything we ever were.  And it's like we carry that with us.  Now, whether--I don't think it's a conscious, it's not a conscious vision on, on other people.  It's just a subconscious resonator, you know what I'm saying.  So that, that, so that brings that up.  So they, you'll see that, you know.  affirmative action, what do you think about that, you know.  What do black people--well, how, I don't know what all black people think.  I don't know them all, you know.  But then, but these aren't issues--and I wonder sometimes if maybe that's also true in the social context of who and what we are in this country.  And if it's true about the majority as well.  And I think it is.  I think we, we both see each other as political entities.  And that we never see--we wait, maybe we're a little more forgiving, you know, a little more less ready to make those assumptions about someone, you know, but ready to defend our self if and what we are.  It was like when we went to Vancouver [British Columbia, Canada] for the first time.  Growing up in this country as a person of color, you have automatic receptors that come out, no matter where you are.  No matter what you've achieved, no matter what kind of, of situation you're in, black tie, Million Dollar Plate or whatever, you're ready.  Your little feelers are out, ready to pick up the little, whatever they can have, and how you deflect it.  We went to Vancouver, my wife [Barbara Avery] and I, and our little receptors were out, but all of a sudden, there was nothing there.  I remember we were riding around once, we were looking--and you said, well, let's go find out where all the black people live at.  I said, okay.  So we asked a black Canadian that we saw walking down the street.  Where do all the black people live at?  He's like, excuse me?  We live all over, what do you mean where do we live at?  We said, oh, (laughter).  Boy, did we feel stupid (laughter).  See now, that would be a question that in the context of the United States was perfectly valid.  But in the context of Canada, it's like, what are you talking about?  You know, and I'm sure that--I'm not trying to make that some kind ideal, but it's in terms of our, our own kind of socialization.
Story_ID: 2686
Speaker 1: Did you have any adjustment (unclear); I mean any issue of adjusting to like commercials and things like that?  Was that just natural?  I mean your--
Speaker 2: It was a job.  Okay.  I needed a job.  I wanted a job.  One of my, my instructors told me when I was in school, Eric Christmas, wonderful character actor.  He was in 'Harold and Maude.'  He played the preacher in 'Harold and Maude'.  He did a bunch of other things.  He told us all once, he said, "You know you're only an actor when you're acting.  The rest of the time, you're unemployed.  So it would behoove you to work as often as possible."  And I don't believe in, in those kind of restrictions.  I went to school with people who said they would never do television.  They would only do theater and film.  My whole attitude was, given my background, well, obviously, you have trust fund or something because I need a job, you know.  And this is what I do.  And as an actor, you're supposed to do all that, but I don't think actors put those restrictions on themselves.  They talk about movie actors and tv actors, I don't we put that restriction on ourselves.  Most of the movie stars you see today start out in tv  What else are we supposed to do, you know?  Or you do a commercial.  You get paid.  Well, of course, you're supposed to be able to do that.  What else you're supposed to do?  We're supposed to say well, "I'm sorry, I can't do that?  I don't need the money."  Excuse me?  No, if you're an actor, you're supposed to act.  And you're supposed to do it all, commercials, stage--the only problem, issue I have with is that L.A.[Los Angeles, California] was the first place I'd met people who'd never done a play.  I don't know how you can call yourself an actor if you've never done the theater, if you've never done the stage, you know.  That's like somebody who walks down the street and finds a brick and says let me build a house.  I don't understand that.  How can you learn the craft?  But then again, L.A. is also a place where the craft is not necessarily respected, you know.  It's how well can you play the game in terms of cameras and film.  How well can you play the game?  How well can you play a script that's not really stretching you?  It's just taking advantage of who you are as a person.  And a few actors--there's Dustin Hoffman, both of those guys [ref. to Jon Voight] from [the film] 'Midnight Cowboy'--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: No, no, it was Dustin Hoffman and, and the blonde guy--I can't--
Speaker 1: Um, (unclear)
Speaker 2: Jon Voight, Jon Voight was a wonderful actor.  And you see him in a million things, and he changes and he does and he does who he is.  The closest person that comes to that is Johnny Depp in terms of the choices that he makes, in terms of films and things that he does that are never the same.  And he's not limited by pretty boy or whatever, you know.  There are a lot of people who want to make a lot of money.  And that's fine.  I guess I would probably take a lot of money too if, just being James Avery was enough to get me $20 million a picture.  (Laughter)  I would just, I would take it, you know.  But see, that's cause Groucho Marx said it best--"We know what you are.  We're just haggling over price."
Story_ID: 2687
Speaker 1: Well '83 [1983].  I worked, I worked pretty steadily from '83 [1983] on.  I mean like I said, you know, there were things I can't even remember.  I was in 'Fletch', signed with Chevy Chase, Simon & Simon [tv series]--God, I, you know, I can't even remember all the things I did.  I did L.A. Law, 8 or 9 times.  Every time I turned around, it was because--well Hollywood was very different then.  You, a person could make a living just being, guest starring on different shows.  It was a lot more, a lot more tv, a lot more episodics, a lot more shows going on then than there are now.  And you could make a nice living just guesting on shows, never having a series.  I got 'Fresh Prince [of Bel-Air]' in '90 [1990].  I'd had another series before that with Robert Hays, called 'FM' and, and then I did a movie with Vanessa Williams.  And then after, after 'FM', then we got Fresh Prince, and I did Fresh Prince.  Then I did 'Sparks' for a couple of years, which was a great show, what had gone wrong (unclear).  But there was a political situation--
Speaker 2: Can I ask you about 'FM' though, was that--what was your character in that film?
Speaker 1: I was a DJ.  I was a classical DJ for this radio station.  It was John Kassir, Pat [Patricia Richardson]--I forget Pat's name, but she was on [tv sitcom] 'Home Improvement'.  She played the wife on Home Improvement.  And John Kassir was, well, he's, he's basically a voice actor and stuff, but he's, he's a great guy.  And Robert Hays was just funny, a wonderful person.  We had--and that was Brandon Tartikoff, Brandon Tartikoff who was, he was a dear, dear, wonderful man.  I worked, I worked a lot for NBC and Brandon was, he was, he liked me.  And I liked him.  And he was--Brandon Tartikoff and, and Ed Weinberger are--who I did 'Sparks' for, are two very, very people--were two--well, Ed is still here, but Brandon's gone.  But they were, they were wonderful men in that they cared about quality and you could do business with them on a handshake.  It didn't matter who you were, you know.  If they said they were going to do something, they did it.  And they, and they would take care of you, you know.  I miss them.  I miss, I miss Brandon.  He was a good man.
Story_ID: 2688
Speaker 1: Tell the story of even how you got with, you know, Fresh Prince of Bel Air, I mean how that, how that all came--
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, that was, that was, that was funny.  That was funny.  Like anything else, you know, I was still under contract for 'FM', which was--for some reason, I don't know, they were screwing around.  We kept, we did, it took like over a year to do 13 shows.  I don't know why.  But it did.  And in the meantime, they called me when--I was looking for a job actually, waiting, you know, for some auditions.  And they called me and told me they were auditioning for a pilot for a rapper, this new rapper called the Fresh Prince.  Well, I don't know who they're talking about because I don't listen to rap so I really didn't care.  All I cared about was, okay, fine, where am I going and where are the sides and what do I do?  And so they gave me that.  And so I went out to the audition in '90 [1990], '89 [1989], '90 [1990], I don't remember.  And it was funny because there were auditioning with me for Geoffrey and the father.  And [Joseph] Joe Marcell who played Geoffrey had just flown in from London [England] where he'd done like 'Seven Guitars'  or--he did, did an August Wilson play [Joe Turner's Come and Gone] in London.  And they saw him do that, and they brought him over to audition for this.  And, and--well we were laughing and talking outside and having a good time.  And what I found out later was this was like the final callbacks.  They had called every, every black actor in Los Angeles [California] and beyond.  They'd done, been in New York, and they were just back here in L.A.  And they were just--everybody was in.  I think it was like the final callbacks.  But I didn't know that.  So I didn't worry about it.  And so, okay, so my turn--matter of fact, Geoffrey, Joe and I were laughing and having such a good time, they made us come out and move because we were being too loud.  So anyway, they called me in, my turn came.  I walk into this long, this room with along table, chairs on each side, all these suits sitting around.  And I look over and there's this kid sitting over here with his hair turned, his cap turned back and his feet up on the table.  And they give me my sides.  And so I looked at him, and I say, "Take your feet off the table.  And look at me when I talk to you."  And we do the scene.  Because I didn't care.  You know, I had another audition right after that.  And that was fine.  And so I did it and, and I left and we had a good time.  Then I went to my other audition.  I did that, and then I came home.  And by the time I got home, my agent had called and said I got the job.  Well, that kid was, was Will [Smith], was Fresh, Fresh Prince.  And I got the job.  And then the next week, we shot the, started shooting the pilot.  And it was amazing because it was a wonderful ensemble of people.  And we really liked each other.  We had a wonderful time, had a wonderful time.  And that's how I got that.
Speaker 1: Was that--you, you had experienced ensembles before, but earlier--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was this, was this sort of like that or even more magical?
Speaker 2: It was even more magical because we actually enjoy each other's company, even off camera.  And we would go have lunch together.  And we would shop together.  As a matter of fact, we started getting memos because we'd take too long at lunch because we'd be just laughing and talking and--so they had a really great craft service so we could just stay there and do it.  And we'd go Christmas shopping together and we just, we just had a great time.
Speaker 1: Now, FM, had it had more than one series--were you--did you do one, more than one year?  You said (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was your, this was your second series--
Speaker 2: I had to get, yeah, I had to get released from the contract.  I was still under the contract to 'FM', but Brandon [Tartikoff] allowed me to go ahead and do this, audition for this show because left, you know, I--left up to NBC, I wouldn't have been able to.  But there was--which is probably why I didn't get into the first batch of processes.  But Brandon made a point of getting me into this audition.
Story_ID: 2689
Speaker 1: And here you developed--I mean you really developed this distinct persona from, you know, from Fresh Prince [of Bel Air] and it was, and I want to state from a, you know, from the tv audience because there were a lot of, you know, you have the [Bill] Cosby which said, image that said that--said, you know, well that's a different type of family.  And here you have 'Fresh Prince', you know, that sort of, you know, shows a different type of black family.  And I was wondering what the audience was telling you, you know, through their fan mail.  One, did you--
Speaker 2: Oh, they were--what they were telling us was that this was not a black show.  It was only a black show because black people were cast, but the issues that we dealt with were universal.  And that's what we found out, we found out with this show.  And I don't mean that in a negative sense in terms of it not being a black show.  I mean in terms of, of, of--and it's a perfect example of what I'm talking in that the family structure that we created or was created with that show, was something that could be anywhere.  And what was so unique was, not unlike the Cosby, is that the kids never got away with anything.  There were people who were parenting.  When I was in the Bahamas, there was a woman who teaches, who worked with disadvantaged kids or worked with families and children at risk.  And they would use these different shows to teach their classes in terms of the problem solving and solutions that we would have for different issues with our kids, you know, with the kids on the show.  And it was, it was interesting to me.  And, you know, I'd go down to--and this was across, across cultural boards.  You know, white families, Asian, Latino, nationalized American citizens, immigrants who'd just came would see the show and watch it, and, and, and love it.  I mean we'd get fan mail from all over and everyone, you know.  And it's, it, we--of course, you don't realize, you realize this in ret--in retrospect.  But it was, it was wonderful in that sense.  And it was humorous.  See the thing, but what's happening now, see situation comedy, it's called situation comedy because the comedy comes out of the situation, okay.  Most of the (unclear) quote unquote "situation comedies" nowadays are simply joke-line, joke-line, joke-line, joke-line, specifically on a lot of black shows.  That's just what it is.  Every line, every other line is a joke.  But the situation is lost, you know.  What the conflict is and resolution is lost.
Speaker 1: So who is the creative team behind this show?
Speaker 2: It was, well, Benny Medina, supposedly it was based, part of it was based on his life.  There was a couple--I can't remember their names.  They were, they were in, they were--and what was so good about it early on was that it was truly and ensemble.  So the thing is a hit show can't be carried by one person, no matter what they say.  And Hollywood still tries to make that happen.  Most hit shows come about because of the ensemble, not just one person.  That's true of any show, 'Will and Grace', 'Dharma and Greg', any of these shows.  Lucy Arnaz [ref. to tv series 'I Love Lucy], you know, it's a combination.  She's, like she might have run it, powered it, but it's a combination and interaction of the people who are on the set and with the, the writers and the directors, which is what we're missing nowadays, which is why they're doing a lot of reality shows that don't require that.  And then all the comedy and conflict comes from these people who are total strangers.  They don't have to pay them a salary to do it.  They don't have to write them a script for them to perform it.  They could just turn the camera on and edit, and there you go, and let people go, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, was there an episode that was your favorite episode?
Speaker 2: Oh, there, there were two.  I loved the pools, poolroom episode and I loved the episode when Will's father comes back, you know.  I love those two.
Speaker 1: And what did you--were you able to form (unclear) at all or have any input (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, we always had input.  We always had input.  And there was a way that, there was a way to do it.  I remember one show in particular, I know--but we always, you know, had to voice our opinion.  There was one show in particular where they had Ashley, my youngest daughter, say in front of her father, to me in my face, "Damn, Daddy, I just--".  And I remember at the table we, that Monday, we both looked up at the same time, both Tatyana [Ali] and myself.  We looked up at the same time, and said, "Oh, no.  No, no, no, no, " because that wouldn't happen.  There's no way in the world--and these are just cultural difference.  Maybe in, in their families it wouldn't be an issue, but in an African American family, there's no way in the world a daughter would ever, ever say that in front of her father.  Maybe in her room, (laughter), you know, with the door shut, but she would never do that.  No.  Because before you know it, the child would be sliding off the wall.  I'm sorry, baby, but you--I didn't mean to hit you.  You know, it's just not--it's a matter of different, different rearings.  And I think there's a, it's a bigger issues too because they did a study once--and I'm kind of getting off the subject, I don't mean to.  They did a study of, of the place of corporal--you can edit it out--they did a place of, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, I would like you to comment just more about the, the series and how it really affected you because here you are.  You've had, you've had steady work, but this is, you know, a long-running series.  And 'Fresh Prince', it ran on, what?
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: Six, okay.  So it ran 6 years and that's, you know, steady income.  It's a very, very, very popular show.  It even helps mainstream in many ways, you know, rap, you know, or Will Smith and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and things through rap.  And it serves a lot of purposes.  It shows a family that's upstanding, you know, in many ways, but it has the comedy attached.  So I'm just wondering, but from your prospective, you know, as an actor involved in this ensemble company and, you know, a company, you know, you say is the, sort of became family.  How did it change your life and, you know--
Speaker 2: It spoiled me.  It spoiled me.  It's so hard to audition.  You know at some point you figure--it's what's one of the hardest things with Hollywood, it's like you always have to prove yourself, you know.  It's like, and then they tell, you say, after 6 years on a hit series playing a father, and forget all the 7 years before and all the variety of things that you've done, but all of a sudden all they see is, this person.  And they say that's, that's it.  I said, but it's not the audiences that see you as that.  It's the people who cast.  It's the people who write and that whole situation.  You know, and they assume that.  And they forget about all the training.  They forget all the variety of roles and things that one has done before.  And it spoils you as an actor because of what you made and because financial considerations, because of just, just etiquette, you know.  And, and, and sometimes you have to watch yourself.  You can't become bitter because you could become bitter because you'd wonder, well, you know, how come I keep seeing white actors go from series to series to series, series to series to series to series.  And they had a movies, movies, series, series, movies, movies, but over-exposure only applies to me.  You know, or, or why is it so difficult for you to think that the audience won't buy me in some other role?  You know, or why, why is it so hard to find out or to give someone a chance to try something else.  Isn't it a proven entity?  It's proven that the person steadily and does the work and delivers whatever it is you ask of them?  Isn't that enough?  No, it's not.  And that might be the hardest thing to deal.  You know, all of a sudden you have to work on not becoming bitter about it, and you have to continue to hope and strive for, for the best.  And that, that, you know, simplistic, simplistically as it may sound, you have to continue to believe that if you do good, good things happen to you.
Story_ID: 2690
Speaker 1: So, is there anything about the 'Fresh Prince of Bel Air', that period that you would like to talk about?  Anything that, in terms of your growth, anything else that you would like to talk about from the 'Fresh Prince of Bel Air', period.
Speaker 2: No. (Laughs).  I mean I covered it.  I mean it was, it was a wonderful time.  It was a wonderful time, you know.  There were some things--well, a couple of conflicts, but other than that, that's just the way it goes, you know.
Speaker 1: But you didn't have any experience--you know, sometimes people say that they were not well managed I mean I'm just wondering who was advising you.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I wasn't like--there were a couple of things.  I got a chance to do a couple of films which I wasn't allowed to do, which kind of made me angry.  The films weren't necessarily a success, but I mean, I wanted to be able to do that so I could build another career when the show was over.  Some other people got a chance to do that pretty much.  I didn't.  Not a lot, only--well not a lot at all.  And it really doesn't matter at this point, but and, and maybe it was representation.  I don't know what it was, but, but that's just not the way it worked out.
Speaker 1: Do you feel that you were typecast at all, that once--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --People saw you in that role, it's been hard to, to transition past a certain character (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, because, well the thing about acting is, you're not supposed to let them see the work.  You know, if you play this character, then they have to assume that it's you.  If they can see you acting, you're not a good actor, you know.  And so, the more naturalistic, the more realistic, the closer to you, you play it, the more convincing it is.  So in a sense it's a double-edged sword.  You do a good job; you make people believe that this character, then it's hard--it's not necessarily the people.  It's not the people necessarily who see the role, and it's not necessarily the negative thing if they remember that you did Uncle Phil on 'Fresh Prince'. It's the casting people, the producers and the directors who get myopic.  Okay.  People like what they're familiar with, and if they, the producers and directors would, you know, not glam on to that.  You know, when you watch a film or something, there're people, there're certain people you watch.  I remember when I was young, and I watched character actors, and they would, they would all be in, all these different movies, but I loved seeing them because I knew them.  I knew who they were and I loved watching them do their work and do different things.  So it's not the people necessarily.  You know, it's because the producers and the directors are always looking for that next new, biggest whatever.  And it's a very, a very, a disposable kind of income.  And it's not on race, it's not based on race.  I want to make that clear because I know too many wonderful actors of varying ethnicities who, just when they hit their stride in their 40s and, and 50s, especially women, in the 40s and 50s and they've just got their full wonderful fruition of everything they've ever learned or whatever, but it's hard to find work.  And they go back to the little 18 to 25 year olds who are boring.  It's like, I mean--nothing personal with 'Felicity' and everybody else, but I don't particularly care about little 18-year old's life.  There's nothing in their life that interests me in the least, nothing personal.  You know, and what, and what their shows are usually about is about sexual awakening.  It's getting some or giving it up.  Is she going to sleep with this person; is she not?  Is he going to get this girl?  Is he not?  There are other concerns in life besides those.  And they don't seem to be dealing with it.  And all of those shows just seem to be that same kind of issue, you know.  And the problems I had with it, the problems I have with, with, with, is the lack of variety in terms of--and the lack of employing the wonderful ethnicity, the wonderful multi-culturalism that is America, you know.  The wonderful influences of all these different cultures and the acting.  I don't know where you--if you grow up in New York, that's the most ethnically diverse city in the world.  L.A. [Los Angeles, California] is a wonderfully, hegemonic kind of thing, you know.  I mean there's, you know, there's Korean food and, and, and, you know, Mexican food and Salvadorian and, you know, Polish and Irish and Italian and just plain old Nebraskan.  I don't know, but all of these things are thrown together.  And that's where the spice is.  And I don't see anything on television that reflects that.  Most things are cop shows or medical shows.  But in terms of just total shows that deal with people, I don't see it, you know.  Okay, they're still going to try it with 'Friends' now.  They're going to bring a black girl onto 'Friends'.  Please.  Why has it taken them so long?  These people live in New York [New York].  Number one, they couldn't afford that apartment.  Okay, not in Manhattan [New York], you know.  How can you live in New York and not be involved if any, with anything else, with anybody else of any stripe at all?  How can you live in L.A. and never, never know anybody else?  Well, I guess you could do that here.
Story_ID: 2691
Speaker 1: I know that, you know, everything is cyclical in many ways, but--what happened because it's not as if these shows weren't getting the ratings?  And they, you know, and they were not all, you know, flash in the pan show?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And, and your character, you know, as [Uncle] Phil, even that was viewed as--it gave a lot of black business people, you know, upper crust, you know, what they consider the black upper class-- a sense of, you know, we're cool, you know.  (laughter).  But what do you think, I mean what happened here.  You know, why did it just--was it because, you know, the, the leadership at NBC changed, you know, or was it--?
Speaker 2: I really, I don't know.  It might have been that.  It might have been a combination of things.  I mean the only color that really matters in Hollywood is green.  You know, and Will [Smith] had a chance to make a lot of money.  And that's fine.  But we also could have made money, the whole show could have gone on for a few more years, but that's fine.  That's not even an issue.  And I think in this town, the constant search to make more and more and more and more means that they constantly look for ways to do that.  If you notice how they jump on the band, bandwagon with realty shows.  If one reality show is a hit, the next thing you know, you got 30 or 40.  You know, if one cop show's a hit, the next thing you know, you got 40 or 50.  If one medical show's a hit, there you go, another one.  But see what people forget is that the industry was started by--was the--the basic tenant of the industry when it was started was good stories told well.  They didn't say good cop stories.  They didn't say good medical stories.  They didn't say anything like that.  They said, good stories told well, you know.  And I think that they--and, and I don't know if the industry's being run by creative people any more.  It's being run by businessmen who look at the bottom line.  It's not being run by creative people who are willing to take a chance.  And a lot of times, a lot of the shows that come on that are interesting, they, they, they're gone before anybody finds them, you know.  They don't take a chance.  'Cheers', a perfect example, they were going to cancel 'Cheers'.  But people wrote a long with it.  'MASH', and there're other shows that, that all of a sudden they're, they're like classics, but left to businessmen and other people, they would not have been.  They would not even exist, you know.  But people have to be willing to put themselves out and take a chance on something to make it work, to see if it's going to work.  And, and I think they get a little too impatient.  And I think it's because of bottom line, businessmen in charge as opposed to creative people, myopic production and creation in terms of people wanting to see and writing their own stories about them, what they think they would like to see on television as opposed to taking a chance and challenging, you know, an audience or a group of people.  There are any number of shows that were done, you know, with mixed couples, say, I'm not advocating that.  But I mean there was any number of shows, but rather than, than challenge that and keep it on and keep it on, they took off because well, it was too controversial.  But yet and still they'll put on a show, a reality show about people, couples on an island with somebody else flown in to try and screw over them and break them up.  What's morale--what's moral about that, you know.  And maybe it has to do with an audience.  Maybe it has to do with whose watching, but I don't know.  I've never met anybody that had one of those little black boxes, you know, those Nielsen [Media Research] things.  I've never even known anybody whose known anybody who had one of those boxes.  So who's making these decisions about what the people watch.  And then with the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] thing going on and people trying to loosen controls and that, because you're trying to control the media.  So you're going to want, want one person's point of view is going to be both in print, in tv, on movies and on radio.  So that limits what?  That limits the amount of information; that limits how you affect yourself.  You control the media.  You control the population.
Story_ID: 2692
Speaker 1: I'd like for you to review your career, because people may not know all of the things you've, you know, you've done in your career.  So I'd like you to review some of it.  And I'd like you to talk about 'Sparks', you know, you were--there was the W, wasn't there a WNET series, you did the travel, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I just-.
Speaker 2: --the travel club [Going Places].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, God, what--you want me to tell you what--everything I've done?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean just some of them--the highlights of it, filming that's all I'm saying--
Speaker 2: All right, I got a degree in drama and literature from the University of California at San Diego.  I had a fellowship to go to London [England] and studied Shakespeare at LAMDA [London Academy of Music and Dramatic Arts, London, England] for a year, which I did.  We started our own theater company called the Southern California Black Repertory and Rainbow Rep [Repertory Company] which I did.  I worked in the Oregon Shakespeare Festival [Ashland, Oregon] for two and a half years.  I moved to L.A. [Los Angeles, California] in '83 [1983].  My first show was Tales of the Black Monkey--'Tales of the Gold Monkey', sorry about that.  'Tales of the Gold Monkey' and [TV shows] 'Simon & Simon', 'L.A. Law', 'Hill Street Blues', I can't even remember them all, a whole bunch of stuff.  Movies,'Fletch', 'Eight Million Ways to Die'.  I can't remember all of those either.  Theater, at the Ahmanson [Theater, Los Angeles, California], we did 'Romeo & Juliet'.  Plays I've done, 'Merchant of Venice', 'Coriolanus' and 'Merry Wives of Windsor'. 'Othello', 'Sizwe Bansi is Dead', 'The Island' by [Athol] Fugard, 'Much Ado About Nothing 'at the Long Wharf [Theatre, New Haven Connecticut].  We did a black production of that.  All kinds of stuff, TV, again, TV shows, Fresh Prince [of Bel Air] for 6 years, but 'FM' before that, 'Sparks', 2 years on 'Sparks' --.
Story_ID: 2693
Speaker 1: Did you like your character on 'Sparks'?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you like the--did you think that there was a chance for the same type of ensemble?
Speaker 2: Oh, there was.  There was.  The only reason 'Sparks' got canceled was a political, political situation.
Speaker 1: What do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: Ed Weinberger and [Dean] Valentine, who was the president of UPN, hated each other because Ed Weinberger used to--see Ed Weinberger wrote for Dick Gregory.  He did Valerie or rather, 'Mary Tyler Moore'.  He did the Valerie Harper show ['Rhoda'].  He did, he did a bunch of things. And he was on 'Amen' and him and Valentine had a conflict on 'Amen' and, and Ed had him thrown off the set.  And when Valentine got to president of UPN, the first shows he got rid of were Ed Weinberger shows, which were [The] 'Good News' and 'Sparks'.  So again that was something that had--and they did it at Christmastime.  They came in and let everybody know that they were gone on Christmas.  And the money that they had for 'Sparks', they put into the new 'Love Boat' [Love Boat: The Next Wave], which failed miserably and 'Desmond Pfeiffer's Secret Diary' ['The Secret Diary of Desmond Pfeiffer'], which showed one show. That shows how arbitrary things can be cause 'Sparks' was a good show, and people like it.  And it was, you know, it was one of the top-rated shows on UPN.
Story_ID: 2694
Speaker 1: Now, do you believe, cause a lot of times they say that--well, with Fox and now UPN, that, you know, they start with black shows, though UPN has been going pretty well with black shows, but it starts, and then they--you know, as soon as they get an audience, they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, that's been the history.  That's been the history of their shows.  Now, the WB is going for the 18 to 25-year olds.  Most of the shows they have on are directly geared toward those.  UPN, the shows that they have are, or they have, all of the "black shows," quote, unquote that are on television who have been ghettoized all on UPN.  Most of the other networks have either one or two black people at the most.  The other night I was watching some show and I saw three at the same time on a show, which was, no, what was that?  No, that was, that show was cancelled.  It was called 'The Sentinel'.  It's a great show.  But that, again, that was a, a different thing.  That was a very, a reality.  But that's about it.  So if you're not working on UPN or guesting on one of those other shows, once or twice, that--now, think about how many people, how many actors there are and think about how many actors are working.  And that'll let you know what's happened, you know.
Story_ID: 2695
Speaker 1: If you had your role that you could play right now, what kind of role--what roles do you have still left in you?
Speaker 2: I've got, I hope I have a million roles left in me.  I want to play a child molester.  I want to be a villain.  I want to do something, something that, that's different that I can do.  That's fun, I mean, you know, that the bad guys were fun.  It's the evil villains who are the, you know, the most challenging.  Good guys are pretty boring.  They pretty much do the same thing, but it's the bad guys, those are the ones.  I could be a villain (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughs) But they have good guy images out here (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh.  (simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Laughs).
Speaker 1: I'm just saying that--okay.
Speaker 2: Well, it is.  Well, you see the thing is, it's not just good guy images.  It's--and I, and I worry about that too because start limiting.  They don't want to have this image or that image.  We need as many images as possible, a variety.  And you have to acknowledge that.  You have to acknowledge the existence of bad as well as good, of marginal as well as exceptional.  You have to see the whole spectrum, you know.  It cracks me up when people--I believe in history.  And I don't believe in whitewashing history.  If you're going to show me a movie that takes place in the '30s [1930s], and we're in a social situation, don't show you sitting next to me on the table because we're not.  We wouldn't be there.  Okay.  I mean and, and that's just the way that is.  Let's play it the way it is.  If you--I had people who were like, well, I'm not going to--I don't want to be a maid or a butler.  Well, we were maids and butlers.  What is wrong with that?  It's an honest job.  That doesn't mean you have to be, you know, just because you serve people doesn't mean you're a servant.  You know what I mean?  A lot of us were raised because people were housekeepers, cleaners, maids or whatever and if it wasn't--they didn't, hadn't a had those jobs, we would not be here.  There's nothing wrong with that, you know.  Everybody, it's like, you know, back in the '70s [1970s] and it, well, we're the son of kings and queens.  Yeah, but everybody can't be a king and a queen.  You had to have a trash man or somebody to do the work.  You know what I'm saying?  King and queens metaphorically, yeah, but not in actuality.  You know, everybody couldn't be rein, reincarnated as Cleopatra, come on.
Speaker 1: So, so do you feel pretty dismal about the future of black Hollywood here in this--I mean because it is amazing to me that there are shows that are all--I mean just all white.
Speaker 2: There are.
Speaker 1: There're a bunch of them that are all white as the--
Speaker 2: Yes, there are.  We don't exist.  I don't feel dismal.  I can't allow myself that.  I can't allow that luxury.  If that, if I felt that way, then I'd have to slit my wrist or, or, you know, get a job as a bus driver.  And I have to, I have to believe in, in the eventual, the eventually that, you know, America--I don't even know if I could say America, but that we as a people, truth will out, that somehow they'll, they'll--we're survivable people.  We're a, a creative people, that somehow that this, this will turn around.  I cannot allow myself to say that this will not turn around, you know.  I see it, but it's going to be up to us.  It's up to, it's up to everyone.  We cannot just accept these things, but it can't be just us.  It has to be about, about the larger majority as well.  They have to see the world.  The reality is that the only minority that exists in the world are Europeans.  There're more other kinds of people than Europeans.  Okay.  And in order for us to be in the world, and it is a world economy, then we're going to have to learn how to deal with all those kind of, of peoples, which is why I live in the neighborhood that I live, which is totally mixed area.  I believe in that kind of, of multi-culturalism.  I believe in multi-culturalism.  And America is a multi-cultural nation.  And that's what makes it unique.  It's a multi-cultural nation.  People from every country in the world and every religion in the world live here.  If they can't make it work here, it's not going to work anywhere.  And if the images that are projected are still the images of a monochromatic society, with a monochromatic culture, then we're not going to survive that.  But I have to believe that that will change.  And, but it's up to us to do that.
Speaker 1: And what do you see as African American's role in that because, you know, in many ways the people who make, you know, who--Melvin Johnson, what is he doing right now?
Speaker 2: Mel got burned up.  He's doing, he was in head of casting in Universal Studios.  And I'll tell you what burned him up.  It wasn't ethnicity.  He said when he learned how to be a casting person, when he got into the business, you had to go to every play that there was, off or off Broadway.  You had to go all the time.  You had to try to see every film, independent that you could, so you could know who was there.  So when people sent you pictures in, you would know these people.  And you could get an idea of who and what they are.  Now-a-days, there are casting agents who take great pride in telling you, oh, I never watch television.  Or I don't like going to the play.  I don't like going to the theater, which is why you wind up seeing a lot of the same people, doing a lot of the same things all the time.  The casting agent was supposed to be aware of who and what was out there.  And he was very good at his job.
Speaker 1: So he got burned out?
Speaker 2: He got burned out.  And he's at a Universal Studios now in, in  [Orlando] Florida.  I see him--I do the, the Candlelight Processional at [Walt] Disney World every year.  Well, I have for the last 3 or 4 years.  Hopefully, I'll do it again this year.  And he lives in, in Orlando.  And so I see him every year.  They have a, a bed and breakfast in Maine, him and his wife bought.
Story_ID: 2696
Speaker 1: What other things do we need to know about James Avery, you know, in terms of, you know, where you are and, you know, now, and what your--you know, what you want to do with your life?
Speaker 2: I would love to be able to have something left behind that's more profound than just a TV show, you know.  I really, I love who I am.  I love what I am.  I love the culture I come from.  I wish other people did.  I understand who I am.  I understand who we are as a people, and that's not to denigrate any other group of people.  I think we're an amazing people.  I don't know if we're aware of that.  I think--I would love to see that come to fruition, that the gifts that we have to give are freely given and freely accepted by those around us.  And that we can accept those gifts as well.  And I would love to be able to influence the youth and to share that with them.
Story_ID: 2697
Speaker 1: Would you say that there is a black Hollywood now and how would you describe that?
Speaker 2: I think there is a black Hollywood, but I don't they, they have the power that they think they have (laughs).  There is, but you see there's a thing--there's a difference between permission and prerogative.  Black Hollywood is still looking for permission to do what they need to do.  And I think they get seduced, they get seduced by the larger, the larger picture.  See, back in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s], people were known as race men or race people, which meant you did things that uplifted the race and uplifted the group.  Now-a-days it's about making the buck and getting the bling-bling.  And there's a certain shallowness that's happened, and I don't know where, where that's come from.  I look at the quality of the stories that, that quote, unquote black Hollywood seems to be telling.  And there's so much more that could be told.  And I'm not just saying--I don't want to just limit it to quote, unquote African American stories.  I'm talking about the unique perspectives that can be brought to other areas as well and the fact that people can be employed according to their ability.  Black Hollywood should consist of more than just movie stars and directors.  It should be writers, technicians, sound, light, all of those things.  And, and (unclear), you know, black is in the color of things, is the presence of all colors.  Not one.  All colors, you know.  So there should in that sense always be a black Hollywood.
Speaker 1: But you know, we, in Chicago [Illinois], where we had a black mayor [Harold Washington], we believe that we missed the boat and Chicago will never, ever see another black mayor.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And I, and I'm wondering here, you know, in Hollywood if the boat was missed, you know, in that sort of, you know, '90s [1990s], '80s [1980s], '90s [1990s], you know, period, and would--do you believe that there's still another opportunity?
Speaker 2: I always believe there's opportunity, whether or not we can take advantage of it is, is one thing or another.  I mean they moved on to a, I think (unclear) it's going to be a Latino mayor, and then there's going to be an Asian mayor.  And I don't know if the mayor that's going to be whatever they're going to be, is, is going to be able to do whatever they're supposed to be.  But that's fine.  It's America.  It's supposed to be that kind of multi-ethnic.  I think that you're, you know, as long as you're willing to do what you have to do, I think, I don't think we've missed any boats, you know.  I don't think we have.  We have to deal with issues.  It's about the candidate, whoever it is and how willing we are to do that.  I think it's, in a sense it's, it's important that the quality of the man fits the quality of the job.  You know what I mean, and that who's, who's willing to do it.  We as, as--you see the thing is, we've been brainwashed for 400 years.  And that because of civil rights and all these other things, it only happened within the last 50 years, a hundred at the most.  You cannot remedy those issues that took so long, and to divide us as a people, both black, white, green and yellow, and think that someone you can legislate these things, and in 50 years they'll be cured.  They won't be.  Institutions were created that inculcated all of those, all of those, those racist and, and divisive attitudes.  And until they're dismantled or even recognized that they need to be examined in a dispassionate kind of way, there's never going to be any change about that.  Well, I hope that there will be, you know.  I don't know if it's going to happen in my lifetime, but I, I think we can move toward that.  And I don't, I don't think we've missed any boats.  I think we might have missed an opportunity, but the boat is still at the dock.  So at the most, we've missed a ride (laughs).  We missed a cab, I don't know.
Story_ID: 2698
Speaker 1: Now, what--are there any black shows on TV that you particularly like today?
Speaker 2: I like--well, I'm trying to think.
Speaker 1: (laughs)
Speaker 2: (Laughs) 'Soul Food'.  See but Soul Food is on HBO.
Speaker 1: Right, but I mean, you--
Speaker 2: I'll have to correct you.  (Unclear) Showtime.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Showtime, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'Soul Food'.  But Soul Food's on Showtime.  Not everybody has access to Showtime.
Speaker 2: But it's very popular.
Speaker 1: I love 'Soul Food'.  It's a great show because it's dealing with, it deals--and that's, but that's an example of what I mean in terms of dealing with, with issues.  Oh, excuse me, of a family.  Hello.  You know, dealing with issues that are, you know, that are not about, you know, crack dealer, whatever, about a fam, families.  And so 'Soul Food' is one of the shows I've been on which I've enjoyed and it shoots shot of--they shoot it in Toronto [Ontario, Canada] as a matter of fact.  It's a wonderful city, you know.  Yeah, but the writing that's on 'Soul Food', the issues that are covered on 'Soul Food', it's a, and--see and it's interesting too because primetime television always pooh-poohs the idea of a black dramatic series making it.  They have Laurel Street or the show that James Earl Jones [Feast of All Saints] did.  And instead of it getting at the time because what they're trying to say is that nobody else is interested in that family.  They're interested in us as comedians, but not as serious issues.  Well, why should we be  interested in little 18, 19 year old boys and girls and the problems in their life, you know.  There's a show on, there's a show on called 'American Dream'.  That's my period in time.  I grew up in that period in time.  They got the Dick Clark Show on.  They've got a black couple dancing on the Dick Clark Show.  Black couples did not dance on the Dick Clark Show.  They weren't allowed to.  I know that, okay.  There are other--and, and that's kind of like, that's another problem with the issues.  And, and dealing with the issues that there are.  There're only two, they only have two black people on that show, the guy who works for the guy in a, in a electronics shop and his son.  Now, they're beginning to move into the civil rights issues.  Let me see, Clifton, Clifton, Clifton guest starred on there once about a preacher or something like.
Speaker 2: Clifton Davis?
Speaker 1: Clifton Davis did, a nice guy.  I like him.  And, well, hopefully, we'll have to see--I haven't seen it since.  Maybe it's like off for the summer.  I don't know.  You know, but I mean, but Soul, 'Soul Food', or shows like 'Soul Food' should be on network television because all of us could learn, could learn about that, you know.  You could learn about the, the things that concern a family, concern a family, you know.  Asians are totally underrepresented on television.  It's like they don't exist.  They don't exist, you know.  There are none.  There are no family--have no families.  They have no life.  They don't exist.  You know, they have no interaction with anybody else.  We don't see them.  Maybe [Bradd] B.D. Wong on, you know, Law and Order [Special Victims Unit], but every once and a while he comes in.  But other than B.D., I don't know where they are, you know.  But we've got to work on that.
Story_ID: 2699
Speaker 1: You know, either in front of the camera or behind the camera, some of the most brilliant people you've worked with that you consider brilliant in, in this industry?
Speaker 2: Oh, brilliant in performance or--?
Speaker 1: Either, either--I'd like you to address both.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, got to think.  I never worked with him, but I think he's brilliant, Morgan Freeman--Beah Richards, Beah Richards, Cicely Tyson--Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee (pause) oh, who--not just them (pause) Shelley Jensen, one of the resident directors from [The] Fresh Prince [of Bel Air].  He was just wonderful, fast, boom, bip boom bip.  And I like Carsback (ph).  Oh, eeh, I'm sorry.  I didn't know, are, are we filming?  Stop!
Speaker 1: (Laughter). (break in tape)
Speaker 2: In terms of, of that kind of brilliance, you know, it's hard to remember, but there, there are people that I've admired, you know.  Morgan Freeman I think is brilliant, brilliant actor, wonderful actor.  I met someone last night who I remember watching all my life--I was always an admirer of character actors, you know, who played characters.  Alfred Hitchcock I thought was brilliant, absolutely brilliant.  Ossie Davis, Ruby Dee, brilliant. Beah Richards, brilliant, you know.  Brilliant, Lynn Thigpen who's passed away, wonderful, wonderful actress, you know.  [S.] Epatha Merkerson who does L.A. Law [sic, Law and Order], but who's a wonderful stage actress.  August Wilson, you know, he's wonder--brilliant, for what he writes.  Oh, God, the list goes on and on.  And past that, you know, Frederick Douglass was brilliant, brilliant, timely.  I know he's not on TV or camera or media or anything, but he is one of the most brilliant people I think that ever existed.  There's so many.  There's so many.  It's hard to, to name them all.
Story_ID: 2700
Speaker 1: During your interview, you, you talked a fair amount about your mother [Florence Avery], and, you know, and there's been so much love that comes, you know, that's come out of your and for your mother.  And I'm wondering what she thought of your career when you first started.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And what she, you know, and that she's been, she's still alive and has been able to see you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can tell you exactly she thought (laughter).  I remember telling her, I said, "You know, Mama, I'm going to be an actor."  I was in college.  I had done my, my second play or whatever, and I was excited. "I'm going to be an actor, mama."  "Uh-huh, what's your job?  Where you working?"  She didn't understand that.  She said, it used to be my--it was funny because when, when we got up to Ashland [Oregon], I finally had a, I got some money and I flew her out.  That was the first time she'd ever seen me perform was Othello at the Oregon Shakes [Shakepeare Festival, Ashland, Oregon].  And I can remember--and she came to the show everyday that she was there.  And I can remember like the last day when she was going to leave, you know, we had a standing ovation and--well, we had standing ovations every night.  And she came back and she was all teary eyed.  And I, I didn't understand it.  She said, you know, "I used to say my son the bum; now, I have to say my son the star."  You know, broke my heart.  Said, she, one of her dreams was, she said to be somewhere, she said, sitting somewhere, you know, with a bunch of people and they don't know who I am, but to hear them talk about my son and how wonderful he was.  And she had that because you gave me that.  I could sit there in the audience and they were just saying, "Oh, he was wonderful, blah da dah.  And I could just sit there and pat myself on the back, say, yeah, he's mine." And so she's, you know, she's been really excited about it.  I try to do everything I can for her now and give her the world.  She's been to Europe and Africa, Hawaii and, you know, skiing the Poconos [Pennsylvania] and I want to broaden her life as much as possible.
Story_ID: 2701
Speaker 1: Now (unclear), I'd just like you to touch upon your relationship with your wife, Barbara [Avery].
Speaker 2: Barbara, Barbara is--
Speaker 1: Because you don't hear, you know, about stable homes.
Speaker 2: Barbara is my gem of the ocean, you know.  We were friends in college.  We knew each other in college.  We didn't go together.  I was with somebody and she was with somebody else.  She's since gained some sense and got the quality person.  (Laughter)  In college we were friends, and I remember I admired her.  There was something about her.  It was her passion and her intelligence.  And we didn't have a lot of interaction, but we were friends.  And about 15 or so years later, I'd broken up with someone and so had she.  And a friend of mine talked me into going down to San Diego [California] and seeing a play.  And she came in.  And she said, "Avery?"  I said, "Barbara?"  She went to hugging me and hitting me upside the head with this big silver bracelet, and she's been hitting me upside the head ever since, and the heart.  Once we got involved--she forces me to be a better person.  And I need that.  And I force her to be a better person.  She needs that.  So I think we bonded from mutual need, and that need continues to grow, I think.  I don't know where I'd be without her right now as a stabilizing force in my life, especially here in this town.  Very, I'm very, I'm very fortunate.  I'm, I--it's funny, you need someone who has goals and strengths.  And the funny thing is, and she's going to hate me for telling this, when we first--our first, when we first got together, her and my mother [Florence Avery] had a few conflicts.  But I never knew, under, understood what it was.  But it took her mother and her sister to let me know.  I remember sitting in [Washington] D.C. with Bea and I think it was Gloria, and I was like, you know, "I don't know why they have such conflicts."  And Bea looked at me said, "Because they just alike.  Don't you know that?  They are just alike."  And they are.  They're smart.  They're opinionated.  They're strong, but those are the kind of women I've been attracted to, you know.  And I'm very fortunate.  I'm very fortunate.  I love her very much.  But more important than that, I respect her very much.  I appreciate her very much, that she has goals and ideals, you know, things that she wants to accomplish.  You know, and that she has a very strong moral sense, you know.  She thinks too much sometimes, you know, just over thinks everything too much, but then again, so do I.  I pick too much.  So we kind of balance each other out.  You know, we call each other on our stuff, which is what we need.  You need that in life.
Story_ID: 2702
Speaker 1: Let me ask you what your hopes and concerns for the black community are because, you know, you came out of--your story is really in many ways amazing, a contrast of, you know--but we, you know, today we, we associate poverty with, how do I want to say this, with--
Speaker 2: With restricted opportunities?
Speaker 1: Right and deficiency.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And there was nothing deficient about your growing up.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: But I mean I look--when you look at the black community now, today, you know, do you--what are your hopes for--
Speaker 2: I hope they realize who they are and what they come from.  They don't come from a race of victims.  They might have been victimized, but they were never victims.  I hope they can allow themselves to grow into their greatest potential, which is infinite.  I hope they see the gifts that they have which have affected and shaped the whole world.  There's no place you can go that we have not affected and shaped the whole world, you know.  I mean the African diaspora is amazing.  Africa is still at the center of that whole situation, but I hope that nationality and nationhood doesn't get in the way of a broader global sense.  The problem that happens with African Americans in this country is that you get too myopic and too concerned with your own particular issues, you know, instead of realizing that there's a whole world out there.  And we have to broaden our prospective.  And that's within us as a people.  We were bred for that, whether we like to admit it or not.  There are strengths and, and there are weaknesses as there are in any group, but the strengths out number the weakness.  But it takes us; we have to be the ones that'll come to a solution to that.  We can't keep looking outside for a solution to the issues and the problems, you know.  There are problems in, in, in--see--and in a, in a way what I hope for the black community is the same thing I hope for quote, unquote "America in general".  I love the idea of America, the idea is fabulous.  It hasn't been achieved, but I love the idea.  The Declaration of Independence is a wonderful document.  It spells out exactly what a country should be about, but it hasn't been achieved, you know.  We, as a people, our, our goals were spelled when, in the Negro National Anthem, Lift Every Voice and Sing, you know.  And our goals should be the betterment of mankind, the betterment of mankind.  And that happens, mankind in the generic sense, and that happens if we make better people of ourselves.  We need to be more loving, more supportive, more caring and more trusting of each other as a people.  And once we can do that, then we can be more loving or caring and more trusting of other people in the world.  And a gift is only a gift if you can give it, you know what I mean?  If we can give that gift, then the world can move on.  I just have to believe that the future of man ha, mankind hinges on the ability of people to get along and love each other.  And the most fundamental part of that is to be able to love yourself.  So I hope that we, as a people, learn how to love and respect ourselves, and to not cheat us of our own greatness.
Story_ID: 2703
Speaker 1: And for young African Americans who want to get into the business, you know, show business or into theater, what advice would you have for them?
Speaker 2: Be sure of what you want.  You want to be an actor or a movie star, if you want to be a creative person or rich, you know, be sure of what you want.  Business, getting into the business is one thing.  Getting into your art is something else, you know.  If you want to be rich and famous and wear the bling, bling, be a Mercedes mechanic.  You can do that, you know.  Or you can get into the business, you know.  But if you're going to do that, you have to have training.  Don't denigrate that.  I'm, I'm a great believer in training.  Just because you want to do something doesn't mean you're prepared to do it.  If you want to do something, then you have to prepare for it, you know.  You can't dismiss it.  You have to work at it because nothing's going to--nothing comes to a sleeper but a dream.  Is that an old statement, you know.  You can dream all you want, but you got to work at it.  You got to prepare yourself.
Story_ID: 2704
Speaker 1: I want to know what you would like to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered--God, I've never had to think about that, for being an honest, loving, caring person.  That's what I want to be remembered for.
Speaker 1: And your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope I can leave--see, I have grandchildren.  I hope I can leave them with a sense of being valued and treasured and loved.  I want to leave that.  I want to leave that--if I cannot--I want my people to know that too, that I love them.  I care about them, and I want the best for them.  And that was foremost in my mind.
Story_ID: 2705
Speaker 1: Does the, the adult James Avery ever talk to the child, James Avery?
Speaker 2: Always.  As an actor, how can you let him die?  That's, he's the one that has all my stuff.  He's the one that has all my secrets, you know.  Sometimes it's scary to get down to him, but I, I try to keep my child alive.  You have to do that.  I, I--you know, there were things that might have tried to, you know, to kill him, but I, that child-like honesty, the child that's in me I hope is still alive.  The world is always new.  I want that excitement in my life, and I think, according to my wife, I'm nothing but child, so (laughter).  You know, I talk to him all the time.  He keeps me honest.
Story_ID: 2706
Speaker 1: I think that was in like 1950 something.  I don't know the exact year, but it was at the Club Harlem in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  And that's my mother [Florence Avery] and my Uncle Pete.  He was my, my dad for the first 12 years of my life.  He's dead now.  He died of tuberculosis I think in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: You have to say--okay, and spell.
Speaker 1: That's my mother Florence Avery, A-V-E-R-Y.  And my Uncle Pete.
Speaker 2: Pete Avery?
Speaker 1: No.  Pete--what was Uncle Pete's last name?  I don't know.  All I knew--
Speaker 2: Okay, we'll call him Uncle Pete.
Speaker 1: [James Avery's mother, Florence Avery, and his uncle Pete, Atlantic City, New Jersey, ca. 1950s.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2707
Speaker 1: That's, that's my sister, Monique and my mother [Florence Avery], my brother, Jackie.  That's my stepfather, John Collette, and that's me in the back.
Speaker 2: [James Avery (left back) with (from left) his sister Monique, his mother Florence Avery, his brother Jackie, and his stepfather, John Collette, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2708
Speaker 1: And that's, that's me.  That's on the first--that's the job that got me my Screen Actors Guild card as a matter of fact.  It was 'Scavenger Hunt'.  And that was in like, what?  I don't know, that was in like, that was in, oh, that was like in '78 [1978], '78, '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: [James Avery at the set of Scavenger Hunt, ca. 1978.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2709
Speaker 1: That's my friend Carmen Lo--Carmen DeAcuna, who was the girlfriend of my best friend.  And that's me.  And that must be 1974, maybe.
Speaker 2: So '74, that's the same year you read--did you say '74 was the year--
Speaker 1: No, that's not 1974.  That's, that's, that's 1978, yeah, '78, [1978] '79, [1979] somewhere in there.
Speaker 2: Did you say Carmen's last name?
Speaker 1: DeAcuna.
Speaker 2: Spell it.
Speaker 1: D-E-A-C-U-N-A.
Speaker 2: [James Avery with Carmen DeAcuna, ca. 1978.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2710
Speaker 1: And that's, that's my sister, Monique, me in the middle, my brother, Jackie and my mom [Florence Avery].  And that's in the '70s [1970s], early '70s.  I'm home for Christmas.
Speaker 2: [James Avery with (from left) his sister Monique, his brother Jackie, and his mother, Florence Avery, Atlantic City, New Jersey, ca. 1970s.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2711
Speaker 1: And that's my mother's [Florence Avery] graduation picture.  I think she was 17 there.
Speaker 2: [James Avery's mother, Florence Avery.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2712
Speaker 1: And that's my wife, Barbara and me in Paris [France] on the Baton Mouche.
Speaker 2: [James Avery with his wife, Barbara, Paris, France.  From the collection of James Avery.]
Story_ID: 2713
Speaker 1: That's my mother [Florence Avery] and me.  I don't remember how old I was, on the beach at Brigantine, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: [James Avery with his mother, Florence Avery, Brigantine, New Jersey.  From the collection of James Avery.]
