Story_ID: 57052
Speaker 1: I'm going to have you state your name, spell it for us.  I need also for you to give your birth date and today's date and we'll go from there.
Speaker 2: Today is the second, right.  I want to get that right.  I can get the other part right.  So you want me to do it now?  My name is John Atchison, J-O-H-N, and Atchison.  Let me put in the middle name because I don't use it much but really--my father gave me the name so it's Wilbert, it's Johnny Wilbert Atchison, Jr.  Johnny, J-O-H-N-N-Y, Wilbert is W-I-L-B-E-R-T and Atchison is A-T-C-H-I-S-O-N, Jr. of course, you can abbreviate that whether it's Jr. or Junior (laugh).  Okay and I was born February 15, 1941 and today's date is April 2, 2001.
Speaker 1: I need your birth date.
Speaker 2: Oh I said--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh yeah you did say your birth date, sorry.  I also need--well we're here in Chicago, Illinois at HistoryMakers and I need your profession.
Speaker 2: Well right now I'm, I guess, technically I'm a cosmetologist.  Some people say I'm a hairstylist, an educator so I'm doing both, I'm styling and I'm educating.
Speaker 1: So you are an entrepreneur, really a business man.
Speaker 2: Yeah some people say that as well.  I'm learning that one.
Story_ID: 57053
Speaker 1: Now we start out--I'm going to ask a couple of things.  I'll ask the question--just try to pause before answering.  Don't refer to me, you know like just a third person because I'm not going to be seen and I think with that said, there is no right or wrong answers anything.  I ask five sort of People Magazine questions at the beginning.  They have no relevance so don't worry about it but what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Good question, oh boy.  I like to eat so my favorite probably would be sardines.
Speaker 1: That's a first.  Sardines and crackers, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue
Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring time.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh I love to ski so I would have to say anywhere in Colorado where there is some great skiing, Steamboat, Vale [Colorado]
Speaker 1: You must do those black diamonds, I bet?
Speaker 2: No, I did a black diamond following the woman that I just met a year ago (laugh).  Don't care to do them anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay that was true love, then.
Speaker 2: Right
Speaker 1: Almost gotten killed.  No and then the last question I have is what is your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Favorite--.
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: It goes with my teaching and I don't where--I either heard it from some motivational speaker and it's, "treat a person for what they can become" well "treat them for what they are, then you make them worst but treat them for what they can become, you make them better".
Story_ID: 57054
Speaker 1: (unclear) Okay we're going to get started and I want to--I'd like to ask you first about your mother.  Her name is Edith Atchison, that's not her maiden name and I was wondering if you could tell me what her maiden name was and what you know about her family?
Speaker 2: Edith Virginia Bell McKissick, that's her maiden name.  What do I know about my mother's family?  Gosh, pretty big and from what I know in South Carolina.  Her grandfather--my mother has seven brothers and sisters.  One passed away and my grandmother [Gertrude McKissick] was an Indian, an American Indian.  Gosh, what can I say, the McKissicks they were related to the Floyd McKissicks who started this--I forgot this Soul City back then.  I guess the thing that I remember mostly about my mother's family, they were sensitive, caring people, very spiritual, you know.  My grandmother, grandfather [William McKissick] went to separate churches but they were very strong in teaching us and getting us to go to church and studying the Bible, believing in Jesus and that.  That's the thing I left with.  My grandmother, we called her Mama Gert, her name was Gertrude and she was like the mother of the community.  I remember her having us churn ice cream to sale to raise money for the church and lemonade and things like that.  She was quite a special woman, my grandmother and when she passed it was sort of like a reunion because people came from all over for her funeral and it was really one of the most enjoyable times of my life even though it was a sad time, it was a most enjoyable time because I got to see family.  Some I hadn't seen in years, some I had seen, friends and neighbors, it was just a wonderful time.  My mother has since taken over that role, she's called Mama Edith.  She's the only sister that stayed at home, the rest of them--her oldest sister went on to become the first African American back then I guess it was Negro to work for the phone company.  She will never let us forget that, even today and another sister who is a nurse and the sister that I--that motivated me go into the hair business was her next to the youngest sister.  The other sister became a nurse like I said and Josephine.  Josephine was my mother's next to the youngest.  She was an outstanding hairstylist and I watched her and she motivated me to go into the business.  The brothers in the family, they were my role models, you know.  Very strong men, it's interesting that I adopted them as a role model when I was younger because they were closer to my age and they were doing things that I thought was exciting.  Later on though, my father [John W. Atchison], I mean I find him to be just outstanding.  Still alive, he's blind; he's been blind since he was in his thirties.  But just a phenomenal man, I love the way he loves my mother, I love the way he even though he's blind, he wants to take care of her and just full of wisdom and I enjoy going talking to him, I think he's outstanding and she--they are still together.  I can still go home.
Speaker 1: And home is Spartanburg.
Speaker 2: Spartanburg, South Carolina, yeah.
Story_ID: 57055
Speaker 1: Tell me about--McKissick, is that spelled M, small C, K-I-S-S-A-C-K?
Speaker 2: I-C-K
Speaker 1: I-C-K, okay and you referenced that they were the McKissicks of Soul City.
Speaker 2: Well no, they were related.  Floyd McKissick, they were the McKissicks that have an architectural firm.
Speaker 1: Oh yes the McKissicks here in town is a good friend of mine.
Speaker 2: Okay and there's a connection there.  Roberta Flack Arthur Prysock, they are all cousins of my mother's [Edith Virginia Bell McKissick Atchison].  I remember them mentioning that to me as I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Now did she ever talk about growing up at all, herself or what it was like?  Was that the town that she was raised in?
Speaker 2: You know, as far as I know.  My mother didn't talk--well let me put it this way, we didn't talk to her.  I think that she would have a lot to say if we were to sit down and talk to her and since you mention that, that's what I plan to do because I remember going home and my grandfather [Will Atchison], my father's father I spoke to him.  I used to tape my conversations with him because and I think I did that with him because my mother's father [William McKissick]--we actually lived with my mother's father and my grandmother [Gertrude McKissick] and so I was with them daily as I was growing up.  I got to know them from that point of view as a child but I never sat down to just have conversation and ask them questions about some of things that there were experiencing or how they felt and so on.  So--and I haven't done that with my mother, you know.  I mean, I call her weekly but we don't get into that kind of conversation.  I mean it would be interesting.
Speaker 1: Yeah it would be because sometimes you gain some interesting insight that you don't know or learn things.
Story_ID: 57056
Speaker 1: Now your father [John W. Atchison], do you know if the Atchison, where it comes from, you know, because it's a different--it looks like a little different spelling.
Speaker 2: I want to return to the McKissicks for a minute and that question.  It made me think, I know during the funeral they were discussing McKissicks and where it came from.  It was--they were slave descendants.  There was a white McKissick and that's how they got the name and I think with the Atchison, it was the same thing.  Now there was a lot of talk about Atchison Topeka Santa Fe when I end up telling my name is Atchison and so there was an association there.  During the--we did some background work on our family because we have a reunion every year--every other year for Atchison and every year for the McKissicks.  As far as I know, we've gone backward to my grandfather's father.  I understand he had about twenty kids or something like that but I don't remember very much about my grandfather's father.  But my [maternal] grandfather [William McKissick] he was an entrepreneur from the start.  I don't he ever worked for anyone.  Property--he started the first school bus for black kids in the country, he sold--he had a farm and he sold milk, he had his cows and he used to tell me the story about having this black Ford and he would keep it immaculately and black on the inside.  The inside of it was black and he would put his milk in the back so that white milk would just stand out and he had the best quality milk.  I mean it topped the milk that was sold from the whites that--it was just--he had a growing business there and he had property.  He was always doing something and when he passed, I mean he had much land that he left for my father and their brothers--and his brothers.
Speaker 1: Now, did he-were they both from Spartanburg, do you know?
Speaker 2: Someone said we were from a town called Newberry, South Carolina.  I went there to try to find out some things about the family when I first heard about the reunion.  That--I didn't find out very much because I couldn't find anyone at home when I went to their homes and the records in the courthouse had been burned down.  When the courthouse was burned down, the records were destroyed.  But I just heard that we were from Newberry.
Speaker 1: But you did try at least try to do that type of checking.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 57057
Speaker 1: Now how did your parents meet?
Speaker 2: You know I don't know that because my father [John Atchison] and his brothers drove cabs and today--well see my father is blind so he's not driving.  When he had sight, he owned a service station back during the war and the times were kind of rough and he lost his service station.  His brothers eventually bought the cab company and the younger brother who's the only one who went to college, he came back home and he's the ultimate entrepreneur in my hometown.  He owns limousines and he owns busses and he owns real estate.  He's like the--we call him the of South Carolina--of Spartanburg.  He's big, huge busses, limousines so he bought up all the small cab companies, he had a monopoly.  At the airport, his limousine service is the one that takes you to and from the airport to Greenville [South Carolina] and Spartanburg.
Speaker 1: Now you were born in Spartanburg.
Speaker 2: I was born in Spartanburg.
Speaker 1: Okay you let's see--you have two other siblings, right?
Speaker 2: Right, actually I have two sisters.  One sister I've never met, okay and my brother Freddie and my sister Audrey.
Speaker 1: Where do you fit in the equation?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Story_ID: 57058
Speaker 1: So I want you to share some memories of sort of growing up in Spartanburg [South Carolina].  What was--first I'd like to go with the young John Atchison who, what type of person was he, was he shy, was he well mannered, was he devilish, was he--?
Speaker 2: Very shy and could be devilish if I was, I wasn't aware of it.  My father [John Atchison] was very strict, number one, he was very strict and my mother [Edith Virginia Bell McKissick Atchison] was like I said, soft and sensitive.  She went to church, my father drove a cab.  He worked all the time.  Now he's into church, but when I was growing up the things I remember and probably the most fun time, I had--I was crazy about cowboys.  I loved going to the movies to see Allen Rocky Lane and Whip and Wilson and the Durango Kid, I mean I really enjoyed a cowboy thing and I was so into it that I would build a horse.  I would take--there was a leather factory near the school and on the way home we would take the scrap leather and I would make holsters for the guns, you know, for all my friends in the neighborhood, right.  We would have these quick drawing--because we'd go to the movies every Saturday to see cowboy movies, then we would come back and pretend that we were the cowboys.  We would do little quick draw things and shooting the gun and carrying on and I know at one time I wanted to buy this fancy new holster set.  My parents, we weren't wealthy but we weren't poor either and so my dad wouldn't get it for me so that's when I started making it.  I would take leather, cut it out, take shoe laces and use that to stitch up the sides and make the leather--I would make them low so they would hang real low on your leg so you could pull the gun out faster.  If somebody wanted them high, we'd do that and then I would make a horse--I made a horse in the backyard.  I took two by four, put it in the ground and put a board across the wood and then put a bucket for the body of the horse, wood reigns for the leather and I made a saddle out of the leather with stirrups and I used to ride that horse in the backyard.  I had a ball, you know.  Kids from the neighborhood used to come over to ride my wooden horse that's stuck in the ground.  We would do all kinds of things like side saddle riding because we saw the cowboys shooting Indians, hiding on the other side, we'd play that.  We would get the girls involved, in terms of being dance hall girls or whatever and hiding.  I really enjoyed cowboys.  I think--I have to laugh because my father stopped me from playing cowboys, I think I was about twelve years old.  He said son you have to cut that down besides there is no black cowboys anyway (laugh) and that broke my heart and it destroyed me and I found out later on, of course, there were black cowboys and black cowgirls.  So if he only knew then that I was going to go out west to be a cowboy that was my goal.
Speaker 1: Now what did you like about them, what appealed to you about it?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think watching these guys back then it was more good guys and bad guys.  There was a lot of good guy/bad guy thing and the good guy always won and it's something about the cowboy being free and riding out and going from place to place.  'The Lone Ranger' wasn't a big hit then but these guys were going in to a town and solve problems and run the bad guys out and I was just--I enjoyed that whole thing that good guy/bad guy and the good guy winning.  Unfortunately we don't have that--the bad guy wins now (laugh).
Speaker 1: (Unclear). Never gets caught.
Story_ID: 57059
Speaker 1: Are there other members--how was growing up in Spartanburg and what was that like?  What about family life and your friends, I'd just like you to maybe share a few more anecdotes.
Speaker 2: To me it was wonderful.  It was a great experience.  We did things like shoot marbles and we would--I was thinking about making horses out of branches from trees.  We lived across the street from a railroad track and so we had these banks but we had a lot of sandlot football and I wasn't a big football fanatic like a lot of the other guys in the neighborhood but I would get out there and get involved.  I wasn't going to join the football team for me getting all beat up and everything it didn't appeal to me.  So I eventually joined the band when I was in high school.  So I was a trumpet player in the band and I thought I was pretty good.  Later on the sound of being in a band and guys--and hearing the band members play poorly was irritating to me and that's why I stopped and that happened when I moved to New York [New York City, New York] because that was--they just won't as serious as they were in Spartanburg [South Carolina].  Spartanburg the band leader he was on it.  We would do concerts, I really enjoyed that.  Didn't know of Miles Davis then but had--you know I later on met him as a hair stylist.  But had I known him, he would have been an inspiration to me.  But I enjoyed that.  We had close family ties.  We celebrated Christmas and Easter, brothers and sisters, lots of cousins, lots of neighbors.  It was a great community.  We lived on a street which was a dead end street.  We were at the top of the street, down the block there were a lot of families with children and we all played together, hide and go seek, you know all the things kids do.  We made things, we had our skate boards, we made out of skates and two by fours, you know.  We would fancy them up with flaps and bottled tops on the side to make them flashy and sharp and I enjoyed that.  We got up in age and it was cars.  So, my father [John Atchison] never bought me a car, he let me use the family car because I would offer to wash it every--on Saturday so I could get a chance to drive it (laugh).  They would let me drive to church and that's how I drove and one other thing that my father insisted that we were going to work hard, we were going to work regardless.  I remember moving to New York to stay with my aunt to sort of babysit her daughter and I would come back home for the summer because my goal was to go back to South Carolina and do what, I don't  know but I didn't intend to stay out in New York.  So when I would go home in the summer, father said well you're not going to come down here and just hang out, you're going to go to work.  So the work that was available for these young black guys was picking peaches.  So we used to pick peaches from six in the morning until six at night for $6.00 a day.  You talk about hot, hard work but that was the work that was available.  So a peach truck would come through the community, we'd be there at six in the morning or before and we headed out to the peach fields to pick peaches.  Now that wasn't enjoyable, we tried to make fun out of it.  A couple of my buddies and I, we were going to sneak off and hide and then come back at the end of the day and the truck left us because we hid too long (laugh).  But anyway they came back and picked us up walking the highway.  But that was a fun time, of course with that $6.00 you'd go to the little candy store afterwards--after you go home and get cleaned up and you'd have a girlfriend so you'd buy her a soda, some cookies or whatever, you know, some Mary Jane candies and Kits and whatever and just hang out in the candy store with the girlfriend.  It wasn't enough money; I guess we could have gone to the movies if you saved you could take her to the movies.
Story_ID: 57060
Speaker 1: Now how was Spartanburg to grow up in, what kind--how large was it and--?
Speaker 2: You know I really don't know the population, I would say maybe 10, 20,000 people at that time, it's grown now.  Our world--my world was to school which was on the other side of town.  When I started it was close to me, the same side of town and when I went to high school, Carver High it was on the other side of town.  So we didn't branch outside.  I never knew there was a state park like down the road from where I was born until we had a family reunion and we used it.  Here I am in my late twenties when that happened.  So we went to school, we came back home, we went to church.  We knew about going uptown but we didn't deviate off the path that was pretty much given to us.  Our parents were fearful that we could get into trouble because racism was--it was a lot of segregation back then so that was a problem.  But in our world, we enjoyed what we were doing and we had fun and we had our own community.  I remember gosh, it saddens me now to think about what we lost due to integration because segregation sort of puts you in the position where you had to develop your own.  So we had our own medical clinic of doctors, barber shops, restaurants, drugstore; we had everything there in the community that we needed.  We didn't have to branch out.  I mean, if we went uptown of course, we didn't have a shoe manufacturer; we'd go uptown and buy the shoes.  The primary needs where there in the community and then integration came and there is no more Liberty Street and there was no more medical clinic, things just left.  I can go home now, the whole street's gone, it's not even there anymore.  So you had a thriving, economic infrastructure and it just saddens me that that's just not there anymore.
Story_ID: 57061
Speaker 1: To ride down Liberty Street and see the black businesses, I never really--I don't know where the spirit or desire to open up my own business came from, I didn't think about it when I was in high school but when I think back, what I saw the men in the community--I would say 90 percent of them, they had their own business or they were doing--driving cabs, they were doing something that was their own.  I didn't see them so well I got to go to work.  But even my grandfather and I didn't know that he worked for the railroad--he used to work for the railroad and he was a chef.  But the rest of the guys, my father [John Atchison], his brothers they all had their own businesses.  I never thought, okay I'm going to go into business because my father and his brothers went into business.  I saw a need, you know I just thought okay here I am a stylist and I'm looking at these other stylists--once I decided to become a stylist because that was--it took me awhile to really get up the courage to do that.  I saw--at this point I was coming from rolling skating--ice skating and I went Vidal Sassoon's [Salon], they were on Madison Avenue [New York City, New York] and I was looking in the window and I saw these British guys.  At that time the guys would come over from London and they had Beatle type haircuts and the place just looked--I said that's the kind of place I want to own one day.  Now I hadn't gone to beauty school, that probably was four or five years later that eventually I started a beauty school.  But I saw--I said you know it's knowledge, it's not white people are better or this is better, it's knowledge and I said once we get the knowledge, we can do this thing and that's what I kept my focus on.  Eventually I worked for Vidal for five years.
Story_ID: 57062
Speaker 1: Schools that you went to, you know where you went to elementary school and where you went to college, I mean to high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I couldn't think of those schools.  It was Carrier Street [Arwright, South Carolina] was when I met Helen (unclear) and fell in love.  Then I left Carriage Street because my family moved to Hamburg [South Carolina], it was this side of town called Hamburg so the other side of town.  We lived in the country when I was going to Carrier Street out in Arkwright.  Oh my goodness, I just had a flashback of something that happened to me--an experience that happened to me and it's amazing how it relates to where I am today.  But anyway we moved to Hamburg and I started going to Highland High School [Highland Elementary School, Spartanburg, South Carolina] and from Highland High School, I went to Carver [Carver High School, Spartanburg, South Carolina] in seventh grade and from Carver then I went to New York [New York City, New York].  Highland was elementary and then I went to--.
Speaker 1: What was your flashback?
Speaker 2: I was thinking--I'm a Christian now, believe in God, Jesus Christ is definitely the love in my life and it's sort of like a renewed relationship I'm having.  But I was just thinking, I went to a church and the minister prophesied over me, right.  So she said that the devil wants to have you because he knows that you would be a good person for the Lord.  I was thinking back, I had an experience when I was very young of the devil chasing me and I actually saw this red person with a pitchfork.  I must have been at that time four or five maybe six or seven, somewhere around there.  I think I was out late one night and neighbors next door--probably doing something wrong and I was on my way home at night and this devil, red with a pitchfork was chasing me, he didn't catch me and I was thinking about what this prophet was said about devils on your heels and he wants to catch you (laugh).  So you've got a choice, you're going to have to live your life right and it just made me think of that, that's all.
Speaker 1: You said you weren't active in sports but you were active in the band.
Speaker 2: Yeah I played in the band, played trumpet.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: But I didn't do any sports in high school.  I played sports--I played basketball in the neighborhood when I came to New York.
Story_ID: 57063
Speaker 1: Now New York [New York City, New York], tell me how--you were how old when you went to New York?
Speaker 2: Sixteen, seventeen
Speaker 1: Your mother [Edith Virginia Bell McKissick Atchison] sent you up there because what, to help your aunt out, is this your Aunt Josephine?
Speaker 2: To help my aunt who's a nurse who had a daughter who wanted to stay with her but because she worked nights, she wanted someone to be in the house with her.  Of course at sixteen you can't keep a sixteen in the house in New York, okay.  From the country, I wanted to hang out and see what's going on.  So I was out at night a lot but thank God I didn't get into any serious trouble.  I never--I think my parents--my father [John W. Atchison] like I said was strict.  I got my share of whippings for sure and my mother consoled me afterwards.  Never told him my father was wrong in whipping me but just advise me to straighten up so it wouldn't happen.  So I didn't get into any serious trouble, I tried different things but I always--end the back of my mind thought about my mother.  When I was introduced to drugs, I was hanging out with a lot models later on in life and I just thought my mother if she saw me doing this, she wouldn't approve of it.  It just wouldn't fit right so I couldn't explain it to my mother so therefore I couldn't indulge in it, you know.  In some way she would always come up when I was going in the wrong direction.
Speaker 1: So you get to New York, this is a whole different experience, right.  But you had been visiting there before?
Speaker 2: Came there one time, the only reason I jumped at the opportunity to come up and babysit, when I first came up they treated me--you're coming to New York and your aunts take you to Coney Island and you do all this wonderful things and it seems like nobody is working and everybody's having a good time and then when I came up to live, nobody had time to do anything (laugh), you're on your own, right.  I said what happened, I'm ready to be involved to going to Coney Island every weekend or every day, you know just doing stuff.  They showed you everything when you come up for two or three days or a week to visit.  So I was kind of lonely when I got here.
Speaker 1: So now were you babysitting or were you--you had took your--you were living where, what was your--(simultaneous) (unclear}?
Speaker 2: In the Bronx on 170th Street off of Prospect Avenue, I guess it's called and I hung out with the guys in the neighborhood and we would play stickball which I never was good at so I ended up chasing the ball more than I ended up hitting it.  So I didn't like that at all because I was from the country, I didn't know how to hit this old ball with a broom handle.  I joined a little singing group, wanted to sing Frankie Lyman, was hot then so you wanted to--everybody wanted to be Frankie Lyman or Shep and the Limelight's, or the Cleftones or somebody, one of those guys.  Then I went to Morris High School  and that's when I joined the band here, they just were not as intense on playing well like they were in the south and it just drove me off and I just got out of the band.
Speaker 1: So what year was that, was that your junior year or--?
Speaker 2: 1956, September 1956.  I remember that because my uncle would come home with his new bel air Chevrolet, green on green and he let me drive it (laugh).  It was a '56 [1956] so it was new and he was going back to New York so I came back with him.
Story_ID: 57064
Speaker 1: So now--so you--'56 [1956] you were--were you seventeen at the time, no sixteen?
Speaker 2: I think I was sixteen [fifteen years old]; I'd have to do the numbers on that one.
Speaker 1: Okay so was there anything that sort of captivated your interest after you dropped out of the band or was it just typical teenage years?
Speaker 2: Typical teenage--I didn't have any aspirations to be anything.  My idea was always doing this because my aunt wanted me to.  I remember when I was in Commerce [High School of Commerce, New York, New York] and I took accounting and I seemed to have been pretty good at it and they wanted to know if I wanted to prepare to go to college.  I wasn't thinking about going to college, didn't want to go and guys who were kind of halfway smart, they used to make fun of me because I had the country accent.  I just wasn't a good student, really wasn't a good student.  School just did not impress me; I think had I stayed in the south, it would have because it was such a priority.  You went to high school and then what college are you going to, were you going to try and play football or whatever, you know.  Coming to New York [New York City, New York]--the guys that I knew there interest were different.  They either wanted to be singers like Frankie [Lyman] or they--one guy wanted to run off and buy a motorcycle and go to California across country on a motorcycle.  It was just crazy stuff.  I sort of got caught up in that and I didn't have any desire to be--other than be a singer, couldn't sing, couldn't sing at all (laugh) but you get in a group and nobody could tell, you know.  So I just waited my turn and barely graduated from high school.  I transferred from Morris [High School, Bronx, New York] because my aunt moved to Manhattan and started going to a high school Commerce.  Barely got out, the only reason I graduated, I think, I knew my mother [Edith Virginia Bell McKissick Atchison] wanted to come to my graduation and I said well I'm going to have to do this thing and get all my homework in and do what I have to do to graduate.  And my goal was to go back south, I started working in the Garment district after school, a friend got me the job; hard work, whew--.
Story_ID: 57065
Speaker 1: How was that?
Speaker 2: Horrible, you pushing--see I was a little skinny guy.  I remember working with this guy who had a lot of muscles and he used to push these garment racks and bales of fabric up and down a little elevator and the back was dirty.  Oh boy that was rough, you know.  My other friend who got me that job, he worked for a clock company so he was out going around fixing clocks, his job was glamorous, my job was rough.  I didn't like that eventually I got a job in a hospital as a nurse's aide and still not knowing what I wanted to do, still thinking I'm going back home, I want to go back home [Spartanburg, South Carolina].  The few times that I did go back to visit, there was nothing there to do either because I wasn't prepared to do anything.  I had this idea of becoming a stylist but I was a little concerned about that or what people would think back then, you know.  So eventually I was twenty nine when I finally got the courage to do it.  I had gone through the hospital as a nurse's aide and worked in a transit authority as a railroad clerk and then I started going to beauty school on a student loan.  By then I had a family so I was making enough change to support my family, bought myself a car.  I had a goal, I wanted to work for--to get a civil service job that was the thing, all my buddies were getting a civil service job and they said oh you can't get fired if you get a civil service job.  So we used to work out at my house doing weights because we all wanted to be policeman but I couldn't pass the eye test.  So I said okay, I'll be a bus driver, couldn't pass the eye test.  So I was fit, physically I could handle it, couldn't pass the eye test and I'm glad that I didn't do it because it wasn't my thing.  My brother [Freddie Atchison] became a transit policeman and my cousin became a bus driver.  So they made it, I didn't.
Story_ID: 57066
Speaker 1: So I decided--I've been wanting to do this, I used to sit on the subway, watch women and say if she changed her hair style, if she did this she'd look great and I don't know watching my aunt work, seeing her, go and visiting her beauty salon and just watching the things that she was doing and turning out, it was interesting.  But that wasn't enough to motivate me to become a stylist because I didn't want to have the stigma of being something that people looked on as gays were stylists, right.  Then I saw two guys had a shop called Gentlemen's Three, they had the car, they had women; they were living the life.  I said oh this is alright, you know.  So I started school, I had to take an assessment of my life, here I'm working at the token booth and I always tell the story that it was my likeness of women that motivated me at that time because was trying to talk to them as they caught the train, they were always running to get the train so that wasn't working out.  If I'm a hairstylist, they've got to sit in my chair.  I started beauty school and there was a guy there named Charles Rome, he was a fireman and we became buddies and while I'm in school, I'm learning how to do this thing like pin curls and rollers and that kind of stuff and boy my fingers were hurting.  I would go home at night and my fingers would hurt because I'd never used them that way.  As I'm going through school and I'm still working in token booths so guys would ask me what are you doing, because sometimes I would bring a mannequin in the booth and I'm practicing on pin curls so I could pass my state board and some of the officers--transit policemen would come and talk with me and I would explain to them what we were learning, what was going on and I noticed that they would be very attentive.  And it just sort of built up my self esteem that I could capture somebody's attention in terms of explaining what I'm doing and they were fascinated by it, the whole experience and I'm thinking boy this is something--they're going to think I'm kind of-my father [John W. Atchison] and my brother said what's come over John he wants to be a hairstylist, what is that all about.  And my buddies, man you don't want to be a stylist, all you're going to do is hair in somebody's basement.  My sister does hair that all she does.  Let's be a cop, let's do something more manly.  Anyway I followed my dream, I knew it was something I wanted to do but I needed a good reason to overcome that and once I started, I just fell in love with it.
Speaker 2: Tell me why you thought you did it, I mean what intrigued you about it or what appealed to you?
Speaker 1: Like I said, when I used to ride the subway and I would see young women, young girls that I could see them looking better.  I could change that hairstyle, I said if they had a different outfit on they would really be sharp and so that sort of you know being in a position to do that and--I had a girlfriend and she asked me wash her hair once which I did and I used to love the smell of hair.  I enjoyed the smell of it when you're dancing with a girl and you could smell whatever she had on the hair, pomade or whatever, I used to love that smell.  I just thought it would be something that I would enjoy.  I remember washing my girlfriend's hair and we heard that an egg was a good conditioner, I put egg in her hair, you know.  The problem is I rinsed it out with hot water so now we got to (laugh), that was long before I became a stylist.  I will never forget that, I don't think she had me wash her hair anymore.
Story_ID: 57067
Speaker 1: So you're in school and you're enjoying it now what are you learning in school, what do you find fascinating, what don't you--?
Speaker 2: It was a challenge, like I say when I would talk to other people about it, they were excited about it.  You know I could hold their attention and so that gave me self esteem.  It was something that you know, not knowing what I wanted to do, didn't have any specialty, didn't have an education other than high school and you're looking for self esteem and I couldn't sing.  I figured if I was going to sing, I'm on Apollo stage and the girls are hollering and I throw my shirt out there, you know you feel like you're the man.  I had nothing going for me so being in beauty school and learning and then being able to share that and getting people to listen to me, oh man that was like--it just gave me self esteem.  I eventually graduated, I would study hard, I would volunteer even though I was shy, I would volunteer to speak in class, present in class to get over that shyness because that was major.  I worked at nights, had a full time job in the token booth so when anybody wanted to volunteer or model for a facial, I was down, use me I can go to sleep, now right while you're working on me.  I met some very interesting people and I just enjoyed the challenge, the pin curls and roller set, passing the state board set and then having a buddy like Charles [Rome] who was a fireman.  So we could hang together and support each other and he was serious about doing it.  He went on eventually to open up a shop himself.  So I just enjoyed, I don't know.  I enjoyed--I loved to make a woman look and feel good, I enjoy that.
Speaker 1: So where did you go to--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Wilfred Academy [Wilfred Academy of Hair and Beauty Culture, Jamaica Queens, New York]
Speaker 1: Okay, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: Wilfred--.
Speaker 1: Wil--.
Speaker 2: Yeah W-I-L-F-O-R-D [sic, Wilfred].
Speaker 1: So how long is the program there?
Speaker 2: At that time it was 1,000 hours, I think the cost was somewhere around $1,000.  I was coming home from the transit job--from the token job, riding the bus and I saw a young lady with a uniform on and I don't know whether I was curious about the uniform or curious about talking to her, I don't which it was but anyway when I struck up a conversation with her she said--I told her I wanted to be a hair stylist and she said why don't you come up to the school, apply for a student loan, that's what I did.  Because I told her I couldn't afford it, you know.  So I got off the bus with her, went up there and applied and I got the student loan and that's how it started.
Story_ID: 57068
Speaker 1: So now okay was there anything, I mean there are different parts of cosmetology school but everyone is learning how to do hair, right?
Speaker 2: Well cosmetologist covers a broad spectrum.  You have your nails, you have facials.  You called them estheticians but I think the broader scope of it is cosmetology and some people would say okay that's just hair styling end of it.  But now the opportunities were not as great as they are today--I mean then as they are today.  When we started it was working in a shop.  I used to work in a shop and do wigs and it was Charles [Rome] who encouraged me to go into Manhattan [New York, New York] because I was working in Queens [New York, New York] he said apply for a job, people aren't doing any teasing because it was learning how to tease.  We wanted to be able to tease that hair and have it stand up because that's what we were impressed with in school.  But he said man they're not teasing hair, they're cutting hair.  So he was working--at that time he'd gone downtown and gotten a job with I think it was Paul Mitchell [Salon].  It was Bendel, Henri Bendel's and he told me to go down there and apply for the job which I did, didn't get hired.  At that time it was like a token black in different white shops and he was the one and only there.
Speaker 1: But I want to ask you about doing the wigs.  Now is that the job you got right out of school?
Speaker 2: I got a job with my aunt first and I used to do a lot of chemical haircuts that's when you over straighten the hair and it breaks off.  I used to pray a lot over the heads because I didn't know.  There was no formal training beyond school and they don't really teach you in the school salon work.  So I worked with her for awhile then there was a woman on another side of town, she wanted me to work at her shop and she had these wigs.  Well I hated doing wigs, I love working on people.  So she would leave me in the shop, she told me I'm the manager.  Manage who, I was the only stylist she had so who was I managing (laugh) and she had these four girls who were like these church members or whatever.  So they would come into the shop two, three times a day, man.  I'm saying okay and they were flirting right, so I'm like I don't want to be bothered, I don't like doing wigs, I want to get out of here.  So Charles [Rome] told me to come downtown, I welcomed the opportunity.
Speaker 1: So you were doing wigs just to style the wigs and then have them--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Sit in the window.
Speaker 1: Oh so when she--would you cut them or you just styled them?
Speaker 2: At that time I was styling them, I didn't know anything about cutting.  So I would style them and put them in the window so she could sell them to the people in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Now what year are we talking about at this point?
Speaker 2: '69 [1969], '68 [1968], yeah.
Story_ID: 57069
Speaker 1: And so okay so you're doing that-Charles [Rome] gets you to come downtown [New York City, New York] and--tell us that story.
Speaker 2: I applied, where he was working [Paul Mitchell Salon] I didn't get hired, they didn't need anyone and I'm walking around and going into various shops.  I went to the top shops at that time, Kenneth's [Salon, New York City, New York].  I went to Vidal Sassoon's [Salon, New York, New York], okay then I went downtown to--the guy who was the top guy, a black guy in New York was Walter Fountaine.  He and a guy named Rudel [Briscoe] and they had just broken up their shop and I got a job as an assistant working with Walter and a guy in Walter's shop named Lloyd Rota (ph.) from Bermuda.  He had trained in London [England] so he had these little scissors and he was cutting hair and he was real cool, I mean he was so smooth and I assisted him and Walter.  I used to just watch him, study his style because I loved the way he handled his clients and hair but I had been intrigued with the Sassoon thing because when I was roller skating-I came from a ice skating rink and I passed his shop.  I didn't know it was Vidal Sassoon's at the time, I just knew I liked the ambience of what I saw in the window.  When I was working at Walter's I used to go to Sassoon's to apply and I told Walter [Fountaine] I was interested in working with Vidal [Sassoon] and he said he knew him and he really wanted me to stay with him but if that's what I wanted to do then fine.  So I would just keep going to Sassoon's every month I would go and apply, they didn't need anybody and I'd just keep coming back.  Eventually I'm going to get hired, they will get tired of telling me no and eventually I got hired as an assistant.
Speaker 1: So tell me what world that opened up for you and what period of time--how long have Vidal been around?
Speaker 2: I really didn't find the year that Vidal came over, I might have read it someplace but I think he came over in the late '50s [1950s] okay and he revolutionized the whole hair cutting, hair styling thing because his emphasis was on cutting and blow drying and everyone else in New York was teasing, back combing big hair.  So that was a hot shop to be in.  I didn't know that at that time, I just knew that I liked the ambience and I wanted to learn.  After my experience with Walter who when I started with him, I wasn't a stylist, I was an assistant.  Now I'm still working in the subway selling tokens.  So when I finally got hired the fellow who hired me became a mentor later on, a guy named Edward Wadsworth [Green], he's not here anymore.  But I kept going there and when I got hired oh boy we--they worked you, sweeping floors, getting coffee for clients, washing towels and gowns, assisting blow drying, curling hair, shampooing and then two nights a week they would train you in hair cutting and I stayed there for five and a half years.
Story_ID: 57070
Speaker 1: What did you consider very significant about that experience?
Speaker 2: To me it was my--I didn't want to go to formal school that was the university for me, that was college.  When I resigned [from Vidal Sassoon Salon] I told them I was graduating because it was like an education.  I came to Sassoon's with an attitude that I wanted to get the knowledge, I wanted to learn how to cut hair.  I wanted to be the best I could be and I wanted to go open up a shop and create jobs and that was that vision that I always had.  When I talked to them, I tell them ultimately that's what I want to do, open up a shop so I could hire African Americans.  Because I believed that one day we were going to have the entertainers and so forth and professional women who would want to have their hair in a professionally run shop and they weren't going to be in the neighborhoods all the time, neighborhoods are bad.  But they are going to be downtown, they are going to frequent shops, they want to have the glitz and the style and the ambience and the professionalism and I visualized that somewhere in my life.  I don't know--properly when I looked into that window and I said this is what I want to do.
Speaker 1: And what makes their training so significant; I mean what did you learn about cutting?  Like you said did you learn anything about chemical treatments or it was namely cutting?
Speaker 2: Mainly cutting the chemical came later from my Aunt Josephine.  She was an expert at that, she was sensitive to hair, she was concerned about the care of hair, she was a good stylist, she wanted hair to move and not be greasy and heavy and she just had a philosophy for so many years of being in a business and doing hair and later on that became a good marriage for us because what I had learned was what was happening then, the cutting edge type thing, cutting hair.  The African American community was seriously cutting hair and what that taught me in that experience that was discipline, the importance of being an apprentice, working with an artist and in London [England] it was like two years, I think, before you became a stylist if not longer (unclear) might be longer than that.  But the system that Vidal [Sassoon] had in place was just incredible.  In fact, I use it today in my shop because it's developing talent.
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about that system a little.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 57071
Speaker 1: You said that he [Edward Wadsworth Green] was at the shop.
Speaker 2: Yeah he was a manager at that time, Edward Wadsworth.
Speaker 1: Was he helpful--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Very helpful, he hired me number one.  He told me later, he was looking for a black person to hire but it had to be the right one because he knew the stress, and he knew the intensity of the program and even that he knew I was going to have to go up against--I guess I was Jackie Robinson of Vidal Sassoon's [Vidal Sassoon Salon, New York City, New York] at that time, I guess.  But he knew that would--I would have to take a lot of blows.  Now that didn't bother me because I grew up in the south so and I knew what I wanted, I knew me, I was comfortable with myself in that regard.  But like I said I went there seven times, I would go every month.  He purposely didn't hire me; he wanted to see would I keep coming back.  He said I wanted to know and even still, once he said he was going to hire me and he was going to call me to let me know when to start, he didn't so I called him.  Prior to that though I bought a book, I bought scissors, I said okay while I'm waiting let me learn who Vidal [Sassoon] is and what he's doing and how they cut and I want to get into all of that so I can be ready.  So I bought the scissors, I bought the book, step by step how to cut hair.  I go practice on my wife and anybody I'd go around cutting anybody's hair who would let me cut their hair.
Speaker 1: When did you get married?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1962.
Speaker 1: Is your wife involved in the business?
Speaker 2: No, she went to beauty school eventually but she didn't want to do it, really.  Yeah we were separated off and on; it was a pretty rocky marriage.  We were together and then we were not together.  When I started beauty school we were partially together.  I thank God for her because during--along the way she helped me, I needed a receptionist, she came down and helped me out as a receptionist.  When I was managing because ultimately I became the manager of the Vidal Sassoon's and I ran--he had three shops at that time.  She was very helpful and we're friends today, I really think that she is a special woman for dealing with me, she's very special.
Story_ID: 57072
Speaker 1: So that's what I'm trying to understand the salon part, this opens up a new world though because you've been--this is downtown [New York City, New York], you've been up--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: Better than the hood, right.
Speaker 1: So there is a whole different client body--you know client base and everything.  So what are you learning during this whole period that's sort of revelations to you?
Speaker 2: Well I tell you what I didn't learn was how to be in a place like that from that place, I learned that from my parents [John W. Atchison and Edith Virginia Bell McKissick Atchison].  Courtesy, thank you please, you know just good manners.  I learned that at home so they didn't have to teach me that.  What I saw was a system that was working, a system of training, a system of discipline in business and I respected that because I saw that kind of discipline at home.  I saw my father with his business and my uncles, I wasn't aware at that time as a young person that that was something special because it was just the norm.  Like I said, when you saw men in the neighborhood they were going to work, you know people worked and so my family instilled that in me to be respectful.  We went to church, we had to respect our elders, we address people by their last name and I just took what I was trained and taught into that place and my focus was on learning the technical skills of cutting hair and the system of the training.  And it was rough because the guys who were training me made it very difficult for me at times and they would challenge me while they were teaching me they would look for mistakes in my work, far beyond some of the other guys who would come through because they were the buddies of those guys, they hung out together, they got high together and I wasn't into the getting high scene.  I just kept my ears open--you've got to understand, I was twenty nine at the time, thirty years old somewhere around there and so I knew what I wanted to do.  It wasn't like I was coming at a party; I came there to get the information to build a business to create jobs that was my goal.
Speaker 1: Now when you were managing were you also doing hair at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I tried that system when I started my own business.  I realized a manager and a hairstylist--it's rough but I managed the shop, we had about sixty employees and I did hair all day.  So if it is a client problem, a staff problem, I had to stop with my client to go solve that problem and then in the evenings, hold meetings and it was rough.  I didn't know--see I had no training, no formal management training, I had no college education, I am just doing this on my gut.  When they gave me the job, I really was scared to take it then I realized well if I don't do this, I'm going to be scared to my own one day so let me do it anyway.  I mean I was scared, sixty people and I'm the one who's got the final say, it was tough.  Eventually I realized I had to go to school, I didn't want to go to school but I realized that I had to.  So I started taking courses in voice and diction because I wanted to be able to speak better and I said let me--I didn't want to have--get a little of the country out of me, you know and I took supervisory courses, statistic courses, accounting and like I said supervisory, management courses.  So I started going to NYU [New York University] taking courses so I could do the job because I didn't know what I was doing, I really didn't know--they say you're the manager because Edward [Green Wadsworth] had left at that time, he had gone on to do another business.  The guy who had replaced him, he had some other aspirations to go on up and work as Vidal's [Sassoon] administrative assistant so he wanted to move out of the hair thing all together and the guy who was his assistant, he was a jerk.  I mean he was making a mess of the business.  So they had some discussion in the office and they chose me to manage.  Well now I'm the manager over the guy who was--he was supposed to be the manager so I've got problems with him and the rest of the staff, it was a mess and I didn't know what I was doing.  So I survived it but it was rough.  It wasn't until I started taking classes and learning management--getting some management skills that I was able to manage the shop.
Story_ID: 57073
Speaker 1: Now you--after five and a half years you said you left and then what did you do at that point then?
Speaker 2: I started my own salon maybe about five blocks away from Sassoon's [Vidal Sassoon Salon, New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Had you been saving up your money and hoarding it or--how did that work?
Speaker 2: No, I saved some but not enough, I borrowed from a friend.  Actually it was a young lady who worked at Sassoon's that I dated and she in turn wanted to be manager so when I left--I was a general manager at that time.  So I trained her and as I was going to school [New York University], I was sharing information with her and when I left I gave Vidal [Sassoon] three months and I told him I had someone who I felt was qualified to manage the shop once I left.  Vidal always respected me for doing that because when I--the office was in California, so I flew to California to give my resignation and I used my own money to do it, I didn't use company money to do it and he said he wanted to do some type of partnership with me if I would name the shop Vidal Sassoon they would give me support.  But by that time, I had aspirations of John Atchison and the training and the, you know, developing talent myself.
Speaker 1: So when you opened the shop, this is an exciting thing, right?  Finally you've gotten into your own shop; you worked at your own shop.  Okay so what are you looking at, what other position in the marketplace are you trying to garner?
Speaker 2: Didn't know about that (laugh), didn't know about market positioning, I'm a hairstylist, I'm cool.  I've got models, Beverly Johnson, Iman all of those women were coming to me, you know.
Speaker 1: You had gotten them--they had met you through Vidal Sassoon--tell me--see you're skirting over this.  You're not talking about the reputation, you're just like I went to Vidal Sassoon, I worked for five years, I was general manager but you're not talking about the reputation you were garnering during that time.  Don't skirt over that, that's the time to tell all of the story.
Story_ID: 57074
Speaker 1: Okay the reputation--I think word of mouth basically developed the reputation because I did good work, okay.  The clientele that I had would go out and talk about me and the African American--the blacks who came to Sassoon's [Vidal Sassoon Salon, New York City, New York] heard about me being there, I was the only black stylist there.  So they heard about me and they started coming.  Barbara Graves, Earl Graves' wife started coming so she told Earl about me.  I think I got Camille [Cosby] later after I opened my shop.  I started doing the models--the black models.  There was a young lady who worked for Mademoiselle Magazine.  They were doing a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] issue.  They wanted to take a team to Spelman and do makeovers.  It was the first time a magazine had ever done a college issue.  So I went to Mademoiselle for an interview with my lunch and the girl said I'm so impressed with you coming in sitting down talking to the senior editor and asking her if it's alright if I eat my lunch while we interview.  I was hungry and it was natural for me (laugh).  So I went over to talk to them about--to interview for the job.  So with that I got hired to do this job at Spelman. So they flew us down to Spelman with makeup and a styling thing and everything and we did a whole spread for Mademoiselle Magazine.  Well that got my name out there as being a stylist in the black community.  My clientele at that point was probably 90 percent white during those days because there weren't that many people coming to Sassoon's.  Barbara Graves and Iman, and Beverly [Johnson] and I would meet the models and I would do a lot of the models hair for photo shoots, and testings and things like that and that's how my reputation got out there.
Speaker 2: Well what did they like about you?  That's what I'm saying, I mean I know--there are other people--you know Sassoon is a technique so is it because you could do their hair different from the other stylist or you're just damn good--I mean what is it?
Speaker 1: Well I had mastered hair cutting, okay.  I was like-I was chosen to be on the artistic team and then I became the manager so I was at the top realm on both--in both areas, right.  And being the only black stylist and then I became manager--general manager well that was impressive to people who heard it plus I could really do hair and I guess being straight had something to do with that too.  I wasn't-I didn't dog women out, I treated them with respect so and when I worked with the models, it wasn't like I was trying to hang with them all of them.  I did what I had to do and I would be professional about it.
Speaker 2: Were you partaking in the fashion world too because you know this is a whole different field than what you were doing before at your--in the hood as you say.  So were you participating--I mean because the life--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 1: I did hair for fashion shows, I did magazine-you know editorial for magazines, I did Harper's Bazaar, Glam and Vogue, Mademoiselle, Redbook, McCall's.  I was called to do a lot of those shoots.  Some of the models were white, some were black and I think the young lady who I did the Spelman article with, she was hooked into Mademoiselle so that was a natural hook up there.  The other editors came, I guess as a result of hearing about me and the models and the photographers that you get to me, they refer you to different jobs.  So it's like networking and once they know you're good. But that wasn't my goal; I really didn't look forward to doing that.  I did that so I could get some magazine credit.
Story_ID: 57075
Speaker 1: Now can you share like I asked if when you were young if you could share some stories with us?  I'm wondering if you could think of like two to four stories to share of people you met or a haircut gone bad or (laugh) or a haircut rescue, I mean what?
Speaker 2: When I opened my own shop and I knew I wanted to be known as a haircutter.  I did not want to market myself as a hairstylist.  I knew enough hairstylists and I knew that area was locked up, okay and I wasn't the best at styling anyway.  I was better at cutting, I knew nobody could out cut me, black or white, I knew I was bad at the time, ego was flying.  I just began to market myself as a haircutter.  So the work that I did was different, it was new, it was done on chemically straightened hair, nobody had ever seen chemically straightened hair cut the way I was cutting it.  The shapes that I was creating were different and it was all from the techniques at Vidal [Sassoon Salon, New York City, New York] that I had learned there and I was just applying that technique to a different fabric.  I used to tell my buddies that we want to come up with something different.  I'd say man look, this is basic one and one is two.  The only thing that you can do is apply this technique to a different fabric and to me black hair was a different fabric to cut.  So I began to create different shapes out of it and that got me attention and eventually Essence gave me a spread.  They didn't want to touch me in the beginning because I wasn't doing the conventional thing but Stephanie Mills came and she--I cut her hair in this very dramatic shape, blew it dry and didn't curl it.  She wanted it curled; I said, "I'm not curling it" because my artistic integrity was at stake.  She said, "Well you will never in life do my hair again" (laugh) and I didn't and she's come back to the shop, later on in years, she used another stylist.  She used one of my stylists and I tease her now, I say you remember the time you told me--she was doing the Wiz, then that was back when she was doing the Wiz.  You told me I would never ever--and I said boy I'm telling you, you kept your word too (laugh).
Speaker 1: That's funny. Are there any other stories?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, like that one.  No I can't think of any.
Story_ID: 57076
Speaker 1: Anything that you can see as an important milestone in your development?  Like any contacts made or was--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I think a person who has really been very supportive and helpful is Camille Cosby.  I think that she's exposed me to a lot.  Minnie Riperton, I met Minnie Riperton--I don't even know how but I had just opened my shop.  I don't know how she became a client and she came to me and my shop wasn't finished and I was having a problem opening the shop and I didn't have any sinks in yet and she still wanted me to do her hair. So I shampooed her hair in the sink in my apartment, over what was going to be the shop and she and her driver came upstairs and we sat around and talked.  And she was the first entertainer that flew me to California, anyplace to do their hair.  She was doing an album cover with this guy [George] Hurrell who--this photographer shot the studio actors and actresses.  Those great black and white shots with the gray shadow affect and everything and he was doing the shoot.  I didn't know how famous he was but I knew his work.  So I got a chance to work with him which was wonderful but she liked me and she flew me out.  I met her husband [Richard Rudolph], her family, she took me to the restaurant where you just sit down and eat on the floor or something like that.  But that was a great experience meeting her and being her friend, she was real special, really, really special, liked her a lot.  And I didn't understand her music at that time, later on I can appreciate it now but I didn't appreciate it back then.  I was into more of a different kind but her as a person, wonderful person.  And Camille, was it Gloria Foster who recommended her to me?  Diahann Carroll had heard about me and she told Gloria Foster, Gloria told Camille, and Camille was going all over New York [New York City, New York] trying to get stylist to do her hair and just trim it and make it look nice and when she came to me, she didn't want it cut short, she did want a lot cut and I trimmed it and shaped it and she liked the style of the shop, she liked my professionalism and she liked the work that I did and she kept coming back.  One day she said cut it all off and I was shocked.  I wanted to cut it off anyway, you know because she had a lot of long hair, curly but I cut it off and that just started a major relationship.  She wouldn't let anyone else cut it but me to the point where she went on vacation and she would fly me with her on vacation including my wife.  It was like--she exposed me to a lot of places I never would have gone, to experiences I never would have--being flown on private jets and going to the south of France and just exposing me to things and appreciating my work.  Even today, I'm creating a style for her for the Essence Awards [Essence Music Festival] next week--not next week, this month now.
Story_ID: 57077
Speaker 1: So you--a whole new world opened up, really with that.  You sort of hesitate when I asked that.
Speaker 2: I was thinking about this whole new world and was I really thinking about it as a whole new world or was I thinking about it as being just grateful that I had an opportunity to--for my work to be appreciated.  That was more than anything, from the beginning when people were like oh you cut so wonderful, I love your cuts.  I didn't understand what the whole fuss was about.  When I was at Sassoon's [Vidal Sassooon Salon, New York City, New York]and my clientele was building, I knew I wanted to build a big clientele and I knew how I was going to do it.  But people began to appreciate my work, you know because I knew was going--my personality I was going to be what I thought a stylist was supposed to be about, okay and that was polite and charming and all the things you know, and you smile at the right time and do all the things and I enjoy doing it anyway.  So it wasn't like I had to act it out, okay.  So I enjoyed being that way; that was me anyway.  So I knew I had that part down but it was the technical part, I didn't know really how good I was to other people and people--they would come back and they would fly in from different places for me to cut their hair and I didn't get it.  And I always worried about what is this that they are coming back for, you know?  And as things were happening, I still didn't--I didn't know what it was.  Why me when they had a lot people who can cut hair.
Speaker 1: So now you--when you approach a head of hair can you talk about that moment?
Speaker 2: That was like a whole new world.  The actual working on the hair, seeing the growth pattern, capturing the movement of the hair, the bone structure, the look, how it would frame a woman's face, the things that I could do with hair as I'm cutting it.  How I could cut it and make it perform and grow in a different direction.  How I understood the movement of it and the growth pattern from a cutting aspect and it was like without the help of anything, blow dryer, rollers or anything, I could cut that shape in there and I loved that.  That was like--I would get lost into it.  It was like being--making love, I mean to see that hair move and you're controlling it, you know.  I mean, I just loved it.  And then I knew everybody can't do this, you know.  Even though there are a lot of stylists they can't cut hair and understand that they can do what I can do.  Now I knew there were guys that could but there were very few, very few guys could really cut hair.  And I was there, they said the guys in London [England] were really the best, I went to London and I checked them out and the best guy Sassoon had, I worked with him.  Roger Thompson, he passed away about two years ago and I worked with him.  Studied him--I studied all the guys who were supposed to be the best in the world and I was there and that just made me feel--it was amazing.
Speaker 1: So in many ways you're very much an artist?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll take that.
Speaker 1: You're very good.
Speaker 2: People say that and I always tell people if you study something as hard and intense as I did with cutting, you will be good too.  I mean that was my feeling.  Now what motivates you to do that; that I don't know.  Well I can't say I don't know, I say I know because it comes from God.  I think God puts the talent in you.  He puts the gumption in you to just go ahead and do it.  Now you've got to get up and do it and that drive--it just like blew my mind.  Even today if I can get a great head of hair and the freedom to cut it the way I want to, I will play in it all day long.  I could just cut, just minute pieces, just getting it--perfecting it.  Getting it to move but you don't have time when you're doing clients to do all of that.  You've got to get to the next client so you do your very best but give me no limits, great head of hair and any texture and just watching it move.
Story_ID: 57078
Speaker 1: What do you consider a great head of hair, then?
Speaker 2: Healthy, hair that's healthy, okay with a lot of character to it and basically all hair has character once it's healthy.  We beat it up so much, you know.  Over process it, color it and even chemically straightened hair has a lot of--that's like another step because remember I was trained on white hair, curly, wavy, straight.  I understood the movement, the growth direction, growth patterns, fall patterns, all of that and I'm teaching that now.  When it comes to black hair, you got curly hair.  I did the most interesting shapes in afros back then.  Everybody was doing them round, I was doing them squares and angles and all kinds of shapes.  But I was cutting them using a technique where when they grew out, they kept that shape.  You didn't have to pat them into place and then I took that and applied it to ones hair that was chemically straightened like that.  I used to teach to the Japanese and they would tell me chemically straightened was very close to their hair because it was so straight.  Once it's been straightened you have to work with it the same way.  So they felt I could teach them which I understood that texture too, you know.
Story_ID: 57079
Speaker 1: So you opened your shop when?
Speaker 2: In '75 [1975]
Speaker 1: In '75 [1975] so that's been twenty six years?
Speaker 2: Twenty five years yeah going into twenty six.  We just had our anniversary, we had a great time.  We did an auction and raised money for the students I'm mentoring now.  I shouldn't say I am; we are because my staff is--I love them because they buy into my philosophy of helping and training.
Speaker 1: So what are some of the lessons you've learned along the way with your shop?  Because that was a whole different thing manager--well sort of I mean you--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: What I learned managing, I didn't know how to manage, that's what I learned.  I learned that I needed to work on me.  Whenever I was having a problem with staff, having a problem with clients, having a problem with the business partner which I did because I--my cousin and I worked together and my brother [Freddie Atchison] worked with me and it was working on me, knowledge learning more about how to do a particular thing because I wasn't prepared for this, I just had the dream to do it.  And so not having any formal schooling in management; didn't go to college to get a degree, jumped into it.  So I learned, I guess, people skills on how to relate and a lot of that was studying too.
Story_ID: 57080
Speaker 1: And I see how my behavior caused a lot of the action in my wife.  She had her own challenges too but I was not being helpful, I'm selfish, it was all about me.  And I thought I was a good guy but I see now that if I understood where she was coming from, if I took the time to think about it but when you're young you don't see where the other person is coming from.  You don't see the pain that you're causing.  So now I can look at that and reflect and I must admit that happened as a result through spiritually one thing and then being in a relationship with a woman now who lets you know where the pain is and then I'm carrying enough to look and I'm old enough and wise enough and occasionally it slips back in now what's her problem, nobody else complains (laugh).  You know you go through that.  But then I have to give it some thought and it may take me a day and I back away and just really think about it and say okay how much am I contributing to this and is she seeing it from my eyes or what okay and if that's how she feels about it then it's real for her.
Story_ID: 57081
Speaker 1: (unclear) That's nice, reflective, you've matured.  Now okay so you were saying that education that was the next step in your business.
Speaker 2: That sort of came about through a friend of mine, Felipe, Felipe Bascome called me, he was with me today and he was working for [John] Paul Mitchell at the time and he used to come to me when I was working at Sassoon's [Vidal Sassoon Salon, New York City, New York] and said look let's train, let's teach and at that point I was building my reputation.  I wanted to build a reputation so that I could eventually open my own shop.  So I wasn't about joining forces with anybody to do anything.  I had my cousin and my aunt Josephine who had the major chemical background and straightening hair and once I got the shop I began to train my own staff using the same system that was at Sassoon's.  Felipe had been going out teaching on the circuit for Revlon at that time and I should say Felipe was our teacher for a hair care company--I hate to give him--but that was the fact of it.  So a guy named Bill Madison who was sales manager, they hired me because Felipe told him that I did the same type of work he did.  So they hired me to do a job, work on platform and I had never worked on platform before but I knew how to cut hair.  I had never taught hair before but I knew how to cut so they assumed that Felipe was excellent on platform.  So I went on after him and he--I tried to emulate him and I was terrible, it was the worst thing I could have done.  I knew how to cut but I didn't know how to capture the audience, he was the master at it and he still is to this day.  So I decided to be me on stage when I do platform work.  So--and I get my props being me and when he comes on he does his thing.  But eventually he lost his shop, he had his own shop too and I was building up this training program within my shop and had a team of stylists and so he said why don't we join and you can use your name because your name is--people recognize your name more.  Mainly because of the work that I had been putting out, the haircuts and the stylists really were impressed with what I was doing and they would say very impressed with your work, I saw the shapes that you were doing in so and so magazine and I said okay.
Story_ID: 57082
Speaker 1: So we started a training program and it went into what we call the CEC, Cultural Events Committee.  I started this because it was sort of like an Essence Awards for hairdressers.  At that time I was the only one getting publicity and Art Dyson who's work (unclear) he was getting it through a company and I was getting mine through what I had generated through PR [public relations].  I felt there were a lot of top stylists out there in the black community at that time that were not getting exposure.  So this was an opportunity to create a platform for a stylist to show their work.  So I called a meeting with--it was Susan Taylor --a group of people at that time to form this organization called The Cultural Events Committee.  Jerry Lewis, he was the president of the Jackie Robinson Foundation, a great group of people and we were going to honor a guy named Frenchie [Camello Casimir].  I felt Frenchie was--I had gone to Paris [France] and Alexon [unconfirmed spelling] was the top guy.  Older guy, he was the main man in Paris and I said well in our community Frenchie is the main man.  He was from Haiti, he had the style charisma and I said he needs to be honored.  So I went to Johnson Products Company and asked them would they finance it and we had a big gala at Lincoln Center [center for performing arts in Manhattan, New York, New York].  It was first class, Frenchie was honored that night and then all the top stylists--it was about eight or nine top stylists came and they all had models and they'd show fashions and hair in honor of Frenchie.  It was a special night, we had lot of volunteers because people were friends of Frenchie's and we raised quite a bit of money that we gave to the Fresh Air Fund, the Dance Theatre of Harlem and different organizations.  So that went on for four years and at that point I started something I really didn't know what I was doing either.  I didn't know how to run an organization and we would have students from the board of education that we would give scholarships to and we would give them the opportunity to train and present their styles on stage with us and just recently--a few years ago--we started up The National Cosmetology Education Counsel which was stemmed from that Cultural Events Committee which we eventually-Felipe and I eventually changed it to Cosmetology Educational Counsel.  We wanted to keep the same CEC.  So that started the education and mentoring, and how did the tape thing start?
Story_ID: 57083
Speaker 1: I was doing a class in Barbados and they videoed it and so I said you can video this tape from my class if I get a copy of it, you can have a copy here.  You can do what you want to do with it over here but don't try to sell it anywhere else.  I said I'll sell what I have so when I brought it back and looked at I said man this is pretty good.  Let me edit this down and see if I can package this. That was my first collection of tapes.  It was three haircuts, I taught and it was everything I knew about haircutting, I threw in there, it was great.  I still consider it my best and we still sell those today and that was fifteen years ago, it had to have been at least--if not fifteen, I would say close to it, maybe twelve years ago.  So as old as they are, the information is still good.  I started what I call the John Atchison Training Center because people would say teach me how to cut hair, teach me how to cut hair.  A lot of black stylists wanted to learn how to cut hair.  White stylists want to learn how to cut black hair.  So I started the training center which was sort of--it was informal and it's still not formal because the next phase we're going to a beauty school, an accredited beauty school.  But people were flying in from all over the country, from Martinique, from the Caribbean, different places wanting to learn how to cut hair.  From Paris [France], from London [England] to learn how to cut hair and that started the educational program and then over time I just kept putting out tapes.
Story_ID: 57084
Speaker 1: Now you've started a hair care line.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was sort of looking at what's next and people saying you should have your on line.  I interviewed on television and people said you should have your own line.  So okay then I should have my own line, let's do it because I was repping different lines, I repped Soft and Free for the guys in Atlanta [Georgia], Avlon.  Like I said I did a short job for Revlon.  I think I would work for Soft Sheen and then I said if I'm going draw, everybody's coming and they're selling products because I'm standing up here teaching haircutting why don't I have my own product and that's when I started working with a chemist and sells.  An airline stewardess brought me some oil called palma christi oil it's like a castor oil from Haiti.  She said this oil can make you a lot of money and that was back in 1976, '77 [1977] and I kept the oil in my drawer, I never used it.  I tried to use it but it was so heavy, back then I didn't want anything heavy on the hair.  I would cut it, I wanted the hair to be free and move.  I wasn't concerned about health, my aunt [Josephine] was doing that; that was her job to keep hair healthy, mine was to cut it and create different shapes.  So I said I wanted a product to have a hook, I wanted to have something in there that was special and I did more research on palma christi and found out that the Haitians used it for hair and skin and they claimed that it grows hair and I said okay.  I had a young lady working with me, Claire Luben (ph.).  She was from Haiti, she knew about the oil and another guy who worked on my team was Lionel Hong Long, he was from Haiti and he knew about it.  I said boy, it's right here so let's put that in the product and that's how the product line began.
Story_ID: 57085
Speaker 1: So what are your plans for the future?  You were just talking that you have--you just are feeling in your stride right now so what are your dreams and sort of aspirations going on?
Speaker 2: I see a school, I see a school, I see the product line developing to be stronger, getting people who know business.  What I found out about the product is that I didn't know the business.  Not having that education that I keep going back to that because one of my goals is to get a degree and then I went to school last year and I'm not doing it this year but I will probably start back in September, take some more courses.  Eventually I want to get a degree that's one thing.  People say well you don't really need it and when I was in school the kids wanted to know why are you here and you've got a business and all that, I say but I want that degree.  That to me is what I've always wanted now that I understand the importance of education.  But the school, the products, I think right now that's it.  I had a little side thing, I said I wanted to model.  People say you should model, you take good pictures, you hear that people tell you that and I've often thought about it just as a side but right now if I have extra time, I'm not going to devote it to the Lord, I'm going to devote it to the school--developing the school and developing the products and keep that education going.  I think it is so important.  I have two books that I'm working on now.  One on the hair care industry, this is not the title but it's about why salons fail and what to do about it and the other one is--that book would be about the whole aspect of hair.  Because you can get a lot of information in different places but it's not in one book and I think a book that teaches stylists how to be professional--you know if you're going to open up a shop, to things that you need to look out for, like insurance, knowing how to do taxes and hiring and dehiring [sic] and building a team and just being a business person in addition to all the styling parts.  Because that part--a lot of kids don't know, they just come out of beauty school and say I want to open up a shop and they go rent a booth someplace.  They don't know how to develop a clientele, they don't understand client retention, they're just looking at one client one time and I want to write a book on that, well I am since I want to I'm doing that now.  Don't know how to write but I'm writing, I'm just writing the things that come to me.
Story_ID: 57086
Speaker 1: I put out a tape once on management along with a friend of mine, Lionel and we were selling that; we stopped selling it but I've been listening to it and realized that we hit every aspect of the business.  We made all the mistakes just put the tape on in a book form.  The other book is on--I was thinking of a beauty from the inside out, thinking about the spiritual aspect of feeling beautiful, believing that you can be beautiful, the physical part of it of the skin, the hair, nails the whole nine yards and I was going to involve some special people in it.  People who are specializing in areas like dermatology, have them write something on it.  I want a minister to write something about the spiritual aspect of preparing yourself, to believe in yourself, the importance of having God in your life and that book would be also a step by step book that leads you in one year a complete and total beauty.  You know, exercise, eating right, a routine for that on a daily basis.  If you texture of hair is this, this is what you do to it, that's how you care for it.  It sort of a guide for something, it's a plan that you can work by sort of like a workbook.  I think people would enjoy reading a book like that that they can refer to on a daily basis that they can use to help keep themselves in top shape.  Those are the things that I see doing and also one last thing, I was telling my girlfriend a few months ago, I don't feel I'm connected--I'm not doing anything for the Lord so a friend of mine, Stella Davis started this organization called The Christian Cosmetology Educational Association--no Christian Cosmetology International Association and I started a chapter now what that is we're having bible meetings--bible study at my shop every second Monday and we're inviting hairdressers and clients and anyone who wants to come but primarily it was for hairdressers who are having challenges with their business, having challenges in life.  Okay we will share the word and talk about different things in the bible.  Just try to give each other advice and I committed myself to doing that, I just said Lord, just use me, that's going to be my contribution.  So I have a client who just started coming to me.  A woman who has this big church and I was telling her about it.  She said I will come and speak, I said wow.  I didn't know what we were going to do.  The first meeting, the second meeting, I have six ministers that volunteered to speak.  She said your salon is not going to be big enough to hold everybody who is going to come.  I said praise the Lord, I'm with it whatever, it's amazing.  I am so excited about that, our first one is Monday coming and it's like I am--I'm just excited about it, I think it's great.  We've got more people wanting to come; I've got to rent chairs now.
Story_ID: 57087
Speaker 1: Hair in the black community is always been an issue about hair in the black community--I mean you know people want their hair--and it's an areas where there have been several people if you go back to Madam C.J. Walker, you know they excelled and have been able to make a living and then even if you look at the small operators, there are lots of small shops that have existed.  There were large hair care companies and I'm just wondering as we sit right here in this new century, where do you see the potentials for success for blacks in this industry?
Speaker 2: That is a good question and I'll tell you my feelings about it all.  I don't want to start with if we don't and I'm just going to start with the opportunities.  Well let me start at the beginning.  What this industry has done from the beginning has bought homes and educated families, taken care of families, supported them for years.  I guess the only industry that we as blacks can really control because we don't control an industry.  There is no industry other than church that we control.  So it has been like the foundation, economic base for the black community.  You go into a neighborhood, the most businesses you're going to see in a black neighborhood are going to be beauty salons and barber shops.  Then came Madam C.J. Walker and before her was Annie Malone, and Annie Malone she worked with Annie Malone and Malone had a system like Madam C.J. Walker.  She had products, Madam C.J. Walker was able to market hers to what it became.  Then you had George Johnson and then after him on and on, right.  And those businesses created great opportunities for black stylist to work platform, represent products, to travel and gave it self-esteem--like I said the main thing that hair gave me was self-esteem.  To be able to make someone beautiful, make someone feel good and also feed my family and put my kids through college--in college they didn't finish but.  I've seen it do so much in our community like no other business that ever existed.  There are no other businesses I can say have been so meaningful to our community and now to see Soft Sheen [Carson] being sold and Johnson was sold and different companies are going, it's sort of scary, it hurts.  It hurts on one side, it's disappointing on one side but it's dumb.  It is dumb of us to not come together to figure out a way to hold on to this one industry that has done so much and has the potential to do even more globally.  I was talking to one of your colleagues out there, he asked a similar question and I said well selling your company is one thing totally but partnershipping [sic] and merging is another way to go where you still have some say so and control to determine where the money is spent, where the help goes, where the dollar goes to help.  I did hear about Soft Sheen being a great economic base for Chicago [Illinois].  I don't whether that still exists now.  So when you take that out of the equation, you weaken the community.  So now we become consumers again, we don't control anything and as long as we as blacks to not control some kind of industry, we'll always be at the table waiting for a handout because you can't go there and bargain, you can't go and say I bring this and this is what I want.  You ought to go in there and say what are you going to give me, well I'll give you what I want you to have and so I think it's a sad point and I don't think it's too late but I do think that from this salon level that's going to be attacked or moved in on.  Because people are going to go where they can get good hair service and that's why I feel it's so important that me as a teacher do what I can do on the level of teaching young people how to prepare themselves to be good business people, good entrepreneurs.  Not just do hair and go out and party but understand the business, understand what the potential is of earning money, of developing something that's there in this industry.
Story_ID: 57088
Speaker 1: But John, that's why I'm sort of curious, why were you not--why didn't you create John Atchison just like Vidal Sassoon created Vidal Sassoon [Salon, New York City, New York]?  Why wasn't the focus on sort of multiplying yourself and that way and having salons around all over the country because it's not just--what you're really doing.  It's not just in our community there is still an issue as you have spoken on of professionalizing salons.  There is still most of them are sort of ma and pa creations.  You may not--things don't run on time-you know all kinds of things.  They don't know how to cut and so my question for you is why not--if you say--why are you looking at products and not the salon?
Speaker 2: That's a good question because I approached that end of it and said okay.  People say why don't you do a chain?  I looked into that part of doing a chain and it just came around this year that there's--I can see a way to do it, prior to that I didn't know a way to do it.  I studied Vidal [Sassoon] and sort of emulated myself to a point after Vidal, looked at opening up another salon.  So I would open a salon in California and started a system there.  We're planning to do one in Atlanta [Georgia] and I thought about Chicago [Illinois] and then my focus shifted from that and I said products.  Now why products?  Because the salon business has changed so drastically in terms of the cost to do a salon now.  It's much higher than it was when I started or when Vidal started.  Not to say that it shouldn't be done.  You need more and bigger money.  So what I saw was the products would be the foundation.  Now I will always have the salon but the products will support the salons.  Now what type of salons do I see being involved in?  From the products we go and we select salons that are going to be John Atchison salons.  They won't be owned by me, they will be owned by the people who started them but the system they use will be the John Atchison system.  The educational system, the program, the products that they use, they get the support from us that way and we will be the base for whatever information they need.  We'll bring in the top talent; we will bring in management, people to assist them in developing their business.
Story_ID: 57089
Speaker 1: Why do you think black should continue to pursue this business?
Speaker 2: It's a billion dollar business, one thing and what it has done--the foundation, I mean it's the one thing that we have now control over if we look at closely, analyze it and learn what we need to learn about it.  Because laws are being changed now to--it would really knock us out of the business.  We won't be able to meet the standards, we're not operating properly and so because other companies--general market companies are seeing how much money we spend, so they are finding ways--you know you go in and you get your congressman to lobby against laws that change--that effect us where they are prepared to deal with the change because they're in on making the change and we get caught off guard and then we are out.  So it's learning that and getting that information out.  So I just talk to Dr. Wanda Nelson who is head of the National Beauty Culturists' League [nonprofit organization with the aim of improving conditions in the cosmetology industry] and she's on the committee and she was sharing that with us.  And so we're going to meet and whatever I can do to help get the information out and then provide the education to prepare us for the changes that are coming.
Story_ID: 57090
Speaker 1: When you think back on your--when you were young and growing up in Spartanburg [South Carolina] and playing cowboys and Indians and where you are now, how would you sum all that up?
Speaker 2: Still playing cowboys and Indians, the bad guy and the good guy.  It wasn't cowboys and Indians so much, we didn't go against the Indians but the good guy and the bad guy and I still want to see the good guy win.
Story_ID: 57091
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: God gave me a talent and I don't think he gave it just for me to use and get personal gain from.  I just want to be known that I did something that helped someone else, moved to the next step in whatever my talent was or is, you know.  So I wasn't just a waste here, I helped somebody take another step.  I enjoy that, I enjoy when I see a stylist come in and work with me and can't hold a scissor and when they leave they're bad, they've got confidence and they can go open up their own business and I've seen with several of my stylists to do that.  That makes me feel good.
Speaker 1: Alright, any other statements?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laugh) when I'm going home I'll think I should have said that (laugh).  Thank you for the opportunity for me to get it.
Speaker 1: It's amazing though when you think about it.  You're very modest about you--I've talked to other people and they say you didn't tell me about this and you didn't tell me that (laugh).
Speaker 2: You know because I don't feel like I've done it yet.  I really don't think I've done it.  It's not complete, it's not complete.  It's not time for me to sit back and brag on anything that I've done.  I did what I--did while it was there and sometimes I didn't do what I should have done while I was there and those were the mistakes and I learned.  I had a good wife and I didn't do what I should have done.  I had good opportunities in business to do things, didn't do it.  I see all of that, what a lot of people see is--they see things that are out front that I cut hair well, they don't see the mistakes I made and that--I know my mistakes and I know how difficult it's been and I know how easy in some ways it has been.  And I know the people who helped me to do it, then I know I didn't do it by myself.  So that keeps me where I am, where am I going to go, it wasn't just me, it was all of us.  You're helping, give the opportunity to sit here--I never sat in a place in a chair with lights on me and a camera, you know.  All this time, what is it two, three hours and somebody drilling you (laugh).  Now I know why the guy said (hands held up) I did it, I did it.
Speaker 1: You did fine--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Story_ID: 57092
Speaker 1: Go left to right and tell us who it is, when it was taken [Matthew Hickey].
Speaker 2: Well that first person is me, John Atchison.  The guy seated, that's Billy Bowles he was married to Susan Taylor [American editor, writer, and journalist, she served as editor-in-chief of Essence from 1981 through 2000] at one time and the other fellow on the right is Walter Fontaine [Fountaine].  I worked with Walter when I first started, one of the first salons I worked with
Speaker 1: Fontaine is F-O-N-T-A-I-N-E [Fountaine]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: If you could say picked up on the right, if you could spell Bowles and Fontaine. [Matthew Hickey]
Speaker 2: Well I think I better look on the paper there and make sure we get it spelled right, that's the thing.
Speaker 1: I'll shoot it so that they can see it.
Speaker 2: Okay because I don't want to misspell their names.
Speaker 1: So is that when she had her--she had a line or she had a--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 2: A line of cosmetics?  I don't know, I don't know whether they were married then but I do know that she was married to him years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, I shot the caption so we can pick it up from that.
Speaker 2: Okay, that was one of the first magazine articles I did.  We worked together on the shoot.
Speaker 1: That's a nice picture.
Speaker 2: That's a friend, Dr. Yvonne Knight.
Speaker 1: You need to spell her name and give maybe date if you can think of it.
Speaker 2: '90 [1990] or 2000, that was in 2000.  Y-V-O-N-N-E, K-N-I-G-H-T.  Yeah I know but during this--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: We just create a still from it and we use your voice to create a caption.  [Matthew Hickey]
Speaker 2: It's just for archival.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh gosh I can't remember the year here.  I wasn't prepared for that, probably '97 [1997], I would say.  That was an award, it was produced by Jackie Dee out of Atlanta who is another hairstylists and my daughter and my son came and that's me receiving the award.
Speaker 2: Okay go through left to right.
Speaker 1: Tracy Atchison, now Tracy Brown.  She just recently married and that's my son, John Atchison, III.  You want all of that, okay.
Speaker 2: How does Tracy spell her name? [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: T-R-A-C-Y
Speaker 2: Okay [Matthew Hickey]
Speaker 1: That's Phylicia Rashad back in the early days of the 'Cosby Show' when it first started.  So Bill brought me into the style the casts' hair for the Cosby Show.  We did that for a magazine and its part of a press release.  That was me when I was thinner, no gray hair.
Speaker 2: Boy that was--had to be 1976.
Speaker 1: Who took that picture?
Speaker 2: Yes, Livia Hammond
Speaker 1: Lydia?
Speaker 2: Livia Hammond
Speaker 1: Okay, H-A-M-
Speaker 2: H-A-M-M-O-N-D, she does incredible work.  We were over at her apartment, we were kicking it and she pulled the camera out.  That was around the same year.  That was--I went away to a tennis camp to take tennis lessons.
Speaker 1: Why didn't you tell me you were going, you could take me with you. [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: I didn't do so well.
Speaker 1: This is what you say; this is when you just defeated Arthur Ashe.  [Matthew Hickey]
Speaker 2: Right, right (laugh).  That stack was the rejects over there.  The one you were looking at over there.  First spread and the young lady is Louise Heath.  I think Louise is acting now, she is somewhere out in Hollywood.  I'm not exactly sure; I haven't seen her for awhile.  The year had to have been '75 [1975] maybe-no earlier than that, it's more like '73 [1973], '74 [1974] somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: I ended a pre-rolling tape when you started so if you could say once again what the publication is. [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: A beauty trade magazine, Bernice Calvin's publication and that was the very first back in '73 [1973] or '74 [1974].  The model's name is Louise Heath, she was a client and she went on to California to study acting.  So she is an actor.  The one on the left is--definitely there is an age difference but I was at golf and tennis challenge, Black Enterprise Golf and Tennis Challenge and one of the sponsors I'm wearing their hat.  It didn't improve my golf at all but--.
Speaker 1: Do you know what year that was?
Speaker 2: That was about two years ago so this happened in 2000.  That's me at--what am I, two.  Don't ask me the year.
Speaker 1: You think you were two or four?
Speaker 2: Okay, we'll say four
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: I don't either at this point.  My mother would probably have to speak on that one.
Speaker 1: Hang in there for a second while I get a couple of frames (unclear). [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: I like that sweater though.
Speaker 1: It's pretty.
Speaker 2: They don't make them like that anymore.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: That was the year of the Million Man March.  What was that--in '95 [1995].  Wow, that many years; '95 [1995] in DC, the Million Man March, the first one.  My friend and I, Felipe Bascome went down.
Speaker 2: I bet you were glad you were there?
Speaker 1: It was the most energetic, just powerful.  It was powerful to be there and experience that.  That's me with my sister, that's my sister Audrey at a family reunion.  That had to have been probably '95 [1995], '96 [1996].  Audrey Howlette, H-O-W-L-E-T-T-E.
Speaker 2: That's your press photo.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a press photo.  That was shot a year ago, maybe a couple of years ago.  No, it was two years, 2000.
Speaker 2: You were using what photographer? [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: Joe Grant, G-R-A-N-T.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: In '96 [1996] I took my mother on a cruise, first cruise for her.  Just the two of us, we had a great time.  That's Barbara Bush, the first lady at that time.  That was when George Bush, Sr. was in office [forty first President of the United States, serving from 1989-1993].
Speaker 2: So what's the circumstance?
Speaker 1: That was the Kennedy Center Awards.  I was--Cicely Tyson [American Actress] invited me so I was with her for that event.  It was the Kennedy Center.  They honor personalities and at that particular time Harry [Harold] Belafonte [American singer, songwriter, actor, and social activist] was one of the recipients.
Speaker 2: That's really a honor.
Speaker 1: Oh yes it's phenomenal.  I don't know what year that was, that's me in the salon.  So that would have to have been seven, ten, fifteen maybe twelve years ago.
Speaker 2: Where was the salon located?
Speaker 1: On 44 West 55th around the corner.  That was the first salon.  Yes a hairstylists, she was a part of our team her name is Renee Montgomery.  She was part of our styling team out of Houston, Texas.  That gentleman there is my son, John, III [Atchison].
Speaker 2: And what were the circumstances?
Speaker 1: The circumstances, we were at my parent's home and what year are we talking--probably five years ago, might be longer than that, though.  Okay, this is George Wallace and Dr. Yvonne Knight and myself on the NPN [National Professionals Network] Cruise, that's when I met you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was fabulous.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: This is in California about four years ago and I got an award from Spelman College [Historically Black College for women in Atlanta, Georgia] for my support and help.  They said they wanted to give me an award and I said okay, I'll take it (laugh).  That's my nephew, Cedric Chris Howlette, yeah that was probably about four years ago during Christmas.
Speaker 1: Again Howlette is H-O-W-L-E--.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: E-T-T-E, right.
Speaker 1: Make sure we get these spelled right.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: H-O-W-L-E-T-T-E--That's my son about six years ago at a hair show in Atlanta [Georgia].  He used to work the shows with us.
Speaker 1: And his name again?
Speaker 2: John, I'm the junior, he's the third.  That's a well respected and well known hair stylist, Sammy (unclear) Barry Fletcher, he's well renowned, he should be in HistoryMakers as well.  He's in--outside of DC [Washington, District of Columbia], I think he's in Maryland [Baltimore] somewhere close by.  That's my father on the left, my daughter, myself and my son.
Speaker 1: What's your dad's name?  [OFF CAMERA VOICE] John
Speaker 2: Oh that's right.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: We actually call him--our full name is JOHN Wilbert Atchison.
Speaker 2: That's your full name?
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: So are there nicknames or is just John, John?
Speaker 1: Well I was called--my father's nickname was Pepsi and when I was younger Pepsi, Jr. then I became June bug and then my son, his name is J.  He gave himself that nickname.  This is Hazel Dukes, she's a president of the New York State Chapter of the NAACP and that was, gosh about eight to nine years ago in Houston, Texas at the NAACP Convention.  This was in the early '90s [1990s] that's Earl Graves [American businessman, founder of Black Enterprise magazine], myself, Hazel Dukes, Rev. Floyd Flake or Dr. Flake and Percy Sutton and this was in the early '90s [1990s].  At Flake's church they honored me for my contributions and support and work that I did with the church.  This is my former boss, Vidal Sassoon [founder of Vidal Sassoon international hair salon brand]at an awards ceremony which had to have been twelve years ago when they honored him and all the stylists that used to work for him came out and presented some styles, that's a model which I don't remember her name.  Okay that's me in a classroom probably at (unclear) show in Atlanta [Georgia] doing a hands-on hair cutting class.  It happened around '96 [1996].  This is more like '98 [1998], no this is '96 [1996], '97 [1997] Michelle Wise Wright, she's doing the book.  We're kicking with the book, the book is going along great.
Speaker 2: Have you seen--I (unclear).
Speaker 1: I didn't see them all because I've been working with Susan Taylor and the different ones that I was assigned to work with.  She got married, Michelle Wise.
Speaker 2: She moved in the meantime?
Speaker 1: Yes that's me cutting a model's hair in a classroom in Atlanta [Georgia] some years ago.  How many years ago?   Maybe '92 [1992], '93 [1993].  That's looks familiar, I think we did one like this, in the salon--the first salon.  Yeah that looks nice.  Now that's me with my brother, Freddie, Freddie Maurice Atchison.  He's in Atlanta [Georgia], that was at a family reunion probably back in the early '90s [1990s].  Yeah Bingham (?) shot that.  I don't know--certain people I pull out because of--people might get--.  This Proud Lady Hair Show in the late '80s [1980s] and we're doing a hair presentation for it.  This is Jackie Jackson the Reverend Jackson's wife, Jesse Jackson's wife at a '84 [1984] convention and so I volunteered to go up and do everyone's hair during the convention, connected with Reverend Jackson's party, daughters and Maxine Waters [United States Representative for California's forty third congressional district] and all, that was '84 [1984], right.  Oh that's my daughter, Tracy [Brown] again.
Speaker 2: Is that the same one?  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: No different picture but it's--we have one with Tracy in it.  What is your other daughter's name?
Speaker 2: Desiree
Speaker 1: Desiree  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: That's the one I don't have with me.
Speaker 1: That's the one you don't have.
Speaker 2: That's Robin Givens; she flew in for me to cut her hair.  This is 2000; I was getting ready to leave for a trip.
Speaker 1: This salon?
Speaker 2: NO that happened in the first salon on 55th Street.  That's Robin Givens' shot, it was shot here with the hat on.
Speaker 1: This wasn't around the time with Tyson, this was afterwards?
Speaker 2: It was around the time with [Michael] Tyson.  Actually it was--they hadn't really gotten heated up.  But they had just met.
Speaker 1: I keep thinking about that TV program, the interview.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah everybody brings that up.  This is Webster McKnight who is my cousin and this was back when we first started the very first salon.  We were partners in the salon when we first started.  We are wearing our promotional tee shirts without funny hairstyles.
Speaker 1: Did you say a year for that?  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: Oh 1976, yeah 1976.  This young lady is a model, Winsome Newsome is her name.  We're talking at least seven years-eight, nine years ago, early '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Can you spell Winsome Newsome?  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: W-I-N-S-O-M-E, N-E-W-S-O-M-E.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she married a Newsome.
Speaker 1: That is amazing.
Speaker 2: And that's an award show where we were honoring Susan Taylor and that's my partner in the educational school that we have.  His name is Felipe, F-E-L-I-P-E Bascome, B-A-S-C-O-M-E.  And this is a hair presentation--well this is me in uniform speaking at a hair presentation in 1988.
Speaker 1: Were you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No I was at AME [senior pastor of Greater Allen African Methodist Episcopal Cathedral], Floyd Flake's church.  I was a member there and they saluted me there and Percy [Sutton] came along with Earl [Graves] and Hazel [Dukes].
Speaker 1: We should cover his life.
Speaker 2: I know--.
Speaker 1: This was an earlier picture--.
Speaker 2: Did you get (unclear) award?
Speaker 1: Yes, but it had a little tip on the thing so and the glue came off of the stand.
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Don't worry about it.  This is Felipe Bascome again and myself.  We are older now and a little bit fuller.
Speaker 2: What year was this?  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: Oh may eight years ago
Speaker 2: 1996?  [Matthew Hickney]
Speaker 1: Yeah, that would be a good guess.  Now I know why people put the dates on the back of the pictures because I--.
Speaker 2: It's a dangerous thing
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm telling you.  So we're going to say this is '96 [1996].  That's me; we were at a trade show.  The coordinating ties were our uniforms, colors.  This is another model, this is probably 1977 back in '76 [1976], '77 [1977] doing a photo shoot for one of the magazines, I don't know which one.  It might have been Essence [monthly magazine for African American women].  Oh boy we're talking early--probably 1970.  That was back in the super fly days (laugh).
Speaker 2: Where was it that you took this at?
Speaker 1: This one here, I don't even remember that's why I say it was around the time that Super Fly came out.  (Unclear) my hair style and the shirt. Okay? Now, and my daughter that we don't have is Desiree. Yeah, Desiree Atchison. And I'll (unclear)-we're together until-
Speaker 2: Alright.
Story_ID: 57093
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is John Atchison's daughter, Desiree.  She's one of two daughters.
Speaker 1: Would you give the date and place that we're at and you're at and your name. Do a slate, voice slate.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is Larry Crowe for the HistoryMakers.  Today is March 4th or is it the 3rd, what is it the third or the fourth?  March 3, 2002 we're in Harlem [New York City, New York] and--.
Speaker 1: 25-  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: 2531 Frederick Douglass Blvd. and we're shooting this picture.  This is a picture of John Atchison and his daughter, Desiree [Atchison].  One of two daughters of John Atchison.  [LARRY CROWE]
Speaker 1: Rolling now.  [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: I don't know-I don't even know who it is. Is that his daughter too, do you know?  [LARRY CROWE]
Speaker 1: You just have to say what you know. [OFF-CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 2: Is that his wife, daughter? [OFF-CAMERA VOICE]
Speaker 1: Excuse me here. This is the second of two photos that were given to Julieanna by John Atchison after we finished the photo session yesterday.  He had been looking for photos of his daughter, Desiree.  We do not believe that the woman in the center is his daughter.  We don't have anything from Mr. [John] Atchison indicating what this photo is or who the other people with him are.  We will probably have to contact him and obtain that information.  So that's the best we can do at this time and this concludes the second of the two photographs that we are shooting, adding to what we shot yesterday.   [OFF CAMERA VOICE]
