Story_ID: 238933
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, we're just going to start by slating the interview.  And I'll open by saying, my name is Regennia Williams and I am the interviewer, and Matthew Hickey is the videographer. And we have no observers this morning.  And I'd like to continue by slating by letting you know that I'll address you as Mrs. Antoine or ma'am throughout the interview.  And would like to get started by asking if you would please state and spell your name including your middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is June Sallee Antoine, J-U-N-E, A-N-T, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Sallee.
Speaker 2: Can we start over (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Should we start from the very beginning or--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  No, it's fine.  Just continue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You can just continue by stating and spelling your name including the middle name.
Speaker 2: My name is June Sallee Antoine, J-U-N-E, S-A, double L, double E, A-N-T-O-I-N-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And would you also please state the date of your birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Sandusky, Ohio on March 3, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And today's date is?
Speaker 2: And today is March 18, 19--2004.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview, with the address.
Speaker 2: We are being interviewed at our home on 2699 Endicott Road in Shaker Heights, Ohio.
Speaker 1: And your occupation, please?
Speaker 2: I am a retired educator, and I am also a retired music school administrator.  And I am currently, not yet retired from some volunteer work.
Story_ID: 238934
Speaker 1: Now the next set of questions is, we describe as being People magazine-ish type questions.  And we first of all ask if you could tell us your favorite food.
Speaker 2: Oh, dear.  I unfortunately like most foods (laughter).  And, but I love all kinds of foods.  I like ethnic dishes, Italian food.  I like French prepared foods.  And, of course, all American foods.  And if you, I guess one of the things that we always loved was roast turkey and the, we used to have, have a lot of spinach.  And my favorite dessert is pie.  And a variety of pies, apple pie, mincemeat pie, lemon meringue, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Well, one reason we're still in Cleveland, Ohio area, is that I like the different seasons.  We were born, or I was born just sixty miles west of here.  And, of course, I love the winter.  And as a child I loved the snow but I love the warm weather, I love the changing seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I have, maybe I should say I really like red (laughter).  And I also, I go through different periods.  Sometimes I notice I have all blue, and then I notice I have all green (laughter) or all black so, I think it depends.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how about a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I have really been very busy but in the last few years I've had some beautiful vacations.  I have a cousin, Dr. Patricia McConnell, Patricia Barnes-McConnell, in Michigan, and she has a home in Rhode Island.  And we have gone to Rhode Island for the past two summers and that, it's been beautiful.  Our sons also, our three sons gave us a fiftieth wedding anniversary trip to Alaska and that was the second cruise that we've ever had.  And the first was for our fortieth anniversary and they sent us on a seven day cruise of the Caribbean.  So those are my favorite holidays.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And the last question for this section, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that one of the things I remember from really when I was an adolescent, I was in the Colored Girls Federated Club [sic. National Association of Colored Girls, National Association of Colored Women's Clubs, Inc.], and our motto was "Lifting as we climb."  And that's sort of always stayed with me as an idea that whatever I am doing, that I wanna try to share it with others and to help other people as I progress.
Story_ID: 238935
Speaker 1: We'd like to get information on your family background.  And so the first question is, if you could please tell us something about your mother, what was her name, and where was she born, and if you have any information about her, her childhood, her growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother's name was Cornell Collier Sallee.  And she was born in Frankfort, Kentucky in 1894.  And she told me that she was a foster child.  And her foster mother was, I think, a friend of her grandmother, and she was married to a Methodist minister.  She had sons who went to Tennessee and opened stores, shoe stores, I believe she said.  And I just think that she had a wonderful education, although at that time, I think they went to the tenth grade.  But she really was an--she had to have been an excellent student.  One time we, my niece asked her what her favorite subject was and she asked if she loved to read.  She says, "Oh, yes, but my favorite subject was math."  And I said, "Oh, really?"  Because I thought I had been encouraging my students, my children to be interested in math but I guess they probably inherited it from their grandmother.  But I think the other thing was that she enjoyed school but she was the, one of, one other thing she did tell me was that her foster mother had been a child house slave.  And so, but she didn't really speak about those things and I never felt comfortable to ask her any more.
Speaker 1: And that was in Kentucky?
Speaker 2: That was in Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And did she share with you any special stories about growing up in Kentucky, which is pretty hilly, isn't it--
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: --as far as the topography is concerned?
Speaker 2: Well, I know my father [Charles Sallee] was born in the hilly countryside but I don't know what, Frankfort is the capital, I don't know what the topography is there.  But I remember she said she loved to, her, to make the ice cream.  And she said she would just beat it and beat it until it would overflow and then should would eat all the overflow then she'd have to beat it and beat it again (laughter).  So that was one of the things I remember her telling me.
Speaker 1: All right.  And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother was tall, and really basically had been very slender.  She told me she used to eat yeast and everything to put on weight.  But she had, and this relates a little bit to her childhood too, she had long hair, and she often was teased about that until one day she told me she just turned around and she had to defend herself (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now what was the source of the teasing?
Speaker 2: The long hair.
Speaker 1: And what in particular about it?
Speaker 2: Because it was straight.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So these are African American children--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --teasing her about hair that's Caucasian, perhaps in appearance?
Speaker 2: I think, probably.
Story_ID: 238936
Speaker 1: And I'd like to ask a little bit about your father [Charles Sallee], who you said was also from Kentucky?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was born in Harrodsburg, Kentucky in 1886.  And he was, where my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] was an only child, he was in a family of sixteen brothers and sisters.  And they, I went there one year after I was an adult, and it was a hilly place.  But also I could just, it was a place where Shakers had a community.  So I thought that was rather a coincidence that I was living in a Shaker community now and he had lived in a Shaker community as a child.
Speaker 1: And with a family of that size are they in a town or a community or is it more a rural experience that they had (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it was probably more of a rural experience.  I know that his mother [Rebecca Sallee] was a nurse and a midwife.  And I think that he, his family were builders.  They were carpenters and bricklayers and plasterers.  My dad was a plasterer.  And he was a special plasterer.  He had studied in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and in ornamental plaster.  And so he did very beautiful work.
Speaker 1: So it's similar decorative art that is--
Speaker 2: It is decorative art.
Speaker 1: Not a flat wall, necessarily--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that were plastered?
Speaker 2: Definitely not.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all the cornices and the special ceilings and you can see, actually today some of his work in Sandusky, Ohio in the Second Baptist Church, and it is a beautiful plaster work there.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father as a person?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was tall, my father was short, (laughter) and he was very, very outgoing.  And he really, he could relate to everybody.  I mean he could relate to the very poor, he could relate to the very rich, he could relate to black and white.  I mean he--and his business, and he had to because he was self-employed for really all of his life.  And to raise a big family, we had fourteen children in our family, and to raise a big family and to survive through the [Great] Depression of '29 [1929], Depression with a big family.  And one of the things I always felt very good about, you know, he was able to maintain our home and our family, and, in fact, I went from the hospital, Good Samaritan Hospital [Firelands Regional Medical Center, Sandusky, Ohio], to the home, and I, and lived in 1929, and lived there until I went to college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] in 1947.  And so it was a very special place that he had, had built.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were his brothers helping him, I know you said they were all skilled artisans?
Speaker 2: Well, they were in different places.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So he's primarily doing this for himself?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the family?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: There in Sandusky.  Okay.  And I'm wondering since you said he came from a very large family in Kentucky, if he shared any special stories about growing up in that state?
Speaker 2: Well, one time he told me that, about a visitor to his family.  And this, children had done something that was naughty and the parents had said they were going to give them a spanking.  And he said, but with the visitors they had forgotten about it.  And so this gentleman said, "Oh, did you forget the children's spanking?"  So they were really annoyed with him.  So the next time he came, he sat by the fire place and went to sleep.  And he said they pulled a coal from the fire place and put it up beside his boot (laughter).  And, and it really went through and he said, he was, he said it was so comical to them and he had to put his foot in a tub of water (laughter).  So, so they did those kinds of things.  They also did, I guess little amusing things.  He remembered his brother making a crutch for a chicken whose, he had amputated the leg and then made a crutch for it.  You know, kinds of things kids would do in the country.
Story_ID: 238937
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestry through Kentucky and other areas in the country?
Speaker 2: Well, I just recently went to the Internet and I found my dad's [Charles Sallee] mother and father.  I knew their names but I didn't know when they were born.  So it was interesting, I found both of them, and my [grand]mother was Rebecca Sallee, and her husband was James.  And I found only one Rebecca.
Speaker 1: And those are your paternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: My paternal grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There was only one Rebecca in the 1880 census, U.S. census, and she was listed as black and married and estimated time of birth was 1862.  And then I went for James, I found several Jameses, but there was only, some were white, some were mulatto, and one was listed as black, and married, and in the same place that my aunt was, and he was born in 1862.  So I felt very certain that this was my grandfather because he and my grandmother were listed as living in the same location.  The, he, it was the only James in that location--
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: --and who was listed as black and married.
Speaker 1: And can you tell from the records if they were enslaved or free at the time of their birth?
Speaker 2: I really don't know but I think, I do want to research that, I do want to find out.  I remember one aunt saying that, that she felt that their mother was really just totally African, and that their father was part Native American.  And so, but their mother, my grandmother was really very accomplished because she, as I said, was a nurse and a midwife.  I met people here in Shaker Heights [Ohio], a lady who was a nurse, who when she saw my father's obituary, she asked me about Miss Becky.  And I said, "Well that was my grandmother," and she said, "Well she delivered all my sisters and brothers."  And I also, from a cousin, knew that she was a great horsewoman and she rode sidesaddle.
Speaker 1: Oh my.
Speaker 2: And so that's, that is pretty much what I know about her except she was coming to Oberlin [Ohio] to live with my aunt, Margaret [Sallee] Barnes, and my dad's sister, and she was over seventy-five and I, my oldest sister [Rebecca Sallee Stanton] was getting married and she and the Italian peddler who had just come by with fruit, and they came in and they, they danced (laughter).  And so I knew she was really a very active person.  She had been a very active person.
Story_ID: 238938
Speaker 1: Do you have similar kinds of information about your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, because I don't really, my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] was raised by a foster mother.  And I know about, that she was married to a [Methodist] minister.  They had a very, I would say probably a very high middle-class background because of some of the things, and I did see a picture once of their, her mother, her foster mother's sons.  And it reminds me of some of the paintings that I've seen, you know, they were on a sofa with very beautiful clothing and then, of course, you know, boys at that time they had long Shirley Temple curls, (laughter) you know, so they were very middle class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what did you say your mother's maiden name was again?
Speaker 2: Collier.
Speaker 1: Collier?
Speaker 2: C-O-L-L-I-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In case someone watching this tape has that information that would help you trace that family, to the other side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, in fact, one time she saw a picture in the Chicago Defender and she said it was, I think, her foster mother's grandchild who was like, it wasn't a councilman, it was a different title, but, and his name, last name was Grant [ph.].  So that's part of her background.
Story_ID: 238939
Speaker 1: With those roots then deep in the heart of Kentucky, I'm just a little curious about how the family got from south of the Ohio River way up here on America's north coast to Sandusky [Ohio].  Can you tell me about that experience for them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes.  My father's [Charles Sallee] brother, one of his, well his older sister, I don't know whether the, you know, all the order, but his sister, Maggie, who may be listed as Margaret E. [Sallee] Barnes graduated from Kentucky Normal [State Normal School for Colored Persons; Kentucky State University, Frankfort, Kentucky] in 1900.  And shortly after that, I think, she went back home in Harrodsburg [Kentucky] and was teaching.  And then later, I don't know what date, but married James Barnes, and they moved to Oberlin, Ohio.  And so I knew that their first child was born in 1908 in Oberlin, and so I don't know when they actually went there but before 1908.  My father was younger and he, they also had a, he had a brother in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  So one brother had gone, an older brother had gone to Pennsylvania and I think he was a minister.  And my father lived with him and finished high school and then went to this trade school to learn the ornamental plaster work.  Then he came back to Kentucky, and he and my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee], sometimes I think they eloped (laughter) in 1909, and came to Ohio.  And he was in southern Ohio, and I know they said briefly in Dayton [Ohio] because he told me about the Wright Brothers [Orville Wright and Wilbur Wright] and also they knew a great deal about Paul Laurence Dunbar.  In fact, we had his books, and we'd memorized practically between all the family members all of his poetry (laughter).  And then they went to Oberlin.  And my brother, my oldest brother Charles [Sallee, Jr.], was born in Oberlin in 1911.  And then after that they went to Sandusky where my dad began his business and continued until, you know, he was no longer able to work.
Speaker 1: So we have the beginnings then of the Sallee household in Sandusky.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: By the second decade--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --of the 20th century?
Speaker 2: Well, probably about 1912 or '13 [1913].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because all, every, all the other children were born in Sandusky.  Charles was the only one born in Oberlin.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so the others were all born in Sandusky.
Speaker 1: Including [HistoryMaker] June [Sallee Antoine].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In 1929.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 238940
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up in Sandusky [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I don't remember a whole lot.  I do remember when my younger sister was born, you know, because she was born at home.  And so I was, I had, I was four.  So that is really my earliest, clear, sharp, memory was at that time.
Story_ID: 238941
Speaker 1: I went to Campbell Street Elementary School [Campbell Elementary School, Sandusky, Ohio] and loved school.  All of us went to Campbell Street Elementary School including Charles [Sallee, Jr.].  That school was founded about 1886 and I was there recently, it is still there.  It's a big stone elementary school and it's still in operation.  And the principal, I always remember, she was a tall, well, of course, a child thinks you're tall, but she was a tall lady with a long skirt.  We had a wonderful elementary school.  We had, it was quite, I think advanced.  We had speakers in every classroom.  And Ms. Emeline [Baumeister] would just go whisking through the school.  And it was not until I went to junior high and I met her sister, Miss [Edna] Baumeister who was an English teacher.  And she said oh, you're from Campbell School.  She said, "Then you know my sister," and I said, "Ms. Emeline?" and she says, "yes."  Well, I never knew her name was Emeline Baumeister (laughter) because the teachers, the students, everybody called her Ms. Emeline (laughter).  So that was my elementary school but I have very fond memories of elementary school.  Every year we had special trips.  We went to the Toledo Museum of Art [Toledo, Ohio] to see the Egyptian collection.  We went to Columbus, Ohio to the state department.  We went through the state department and the treasury department and they let us touch one hundred dollars in bonds.  And they said, "You can always say you had your hands on a one hundred thousand dollars (laughter)."  And as a fifth grader I think that was quite impressive.  And then the other trip was always to the, a village in Detroit [Michigan], outside of, Dearborn Village [sic. Greenfield Village, Dearborn, Michigan], you know there for The [Henry] Ford [Museum, Dearborn, Michigan].  So I think that we had a very progressive school.  We had music.  We had special music room, special art room.  And we had music lessons.  We got all the symphonies, the Puritan suite [ph.] and, you know, all of that right in our classroom with--and, we started instruments, first violin in fourth grade and then wind instruments with the, in fifth grade.  Which, I continued in music then through junior high school and high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio].  Violin up through junior high and then I was asked to change to viola because it seems I was fairly good at reading.  And so then I played viola in the junior high orchestra and the senior high orchestra.  So we had every day.  Didn't really study privately, but, but we did a quite nice job, and we took trips to Cleveland [Ohio] to the Cleveland Orchestra and that.  So I really have very fond memories of my schooling in Sandusky [Ohio].
Speaker 2: And you said all of the children in the family went through that same school system, the public schools in Sandusky?
Speaker 1: Yes, all, every, we all went to Campbell Street Elementary School.  We all went to the one junior high school.  And at that time, the one high school (laughter).  So--
Speaker 2: And you also said there were fourteen children born to your parents [Cornell Collier Sallee and Charles Sallee]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And Mr. Sallee, Mr. Charles Sallee [Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Is the oldest.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eleven [1911.]
Story_ID: 238942
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, we were talking about your early life in Sandusky, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were just starting to tell me about the experiences of the children, the Sallee children, in the public schools in Sandusky.  So can you tell me all the names of your siblings, some of the siblings who went through the system?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the names of the, our siblings, many of whom I did not know because they died before I knew them.  But after Rob, after Charles [Sallee Jr.] was a brother Robert [ph.], and Leroy [ph.] and Roderick [ph.], and Rebecca [Sallee Stanton], and before Rebecca, Cora Louise [ph.], then after Rebecca, Henry [ph.], and then me, and [HistoryMaker] Regina [Williams], and [Angela] Marlene [Sallee Blount].  Marlene was the last child, and she was born in 1931.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so your mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] then spent twenty years--
Speaker 2: No, I'm sorry, in 1933.
Speaker 1: Thirty-three [1933].
Speaker 2: Because--
Speaker 1: That's more than twenty years--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --your mother devoted to giving birth to her big family (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yes.  Now, she was at home all the time and, and my dad [Charles Sallee] was always working (laughter).  Yes.  So, in fact, when he would go to work because he had to drive his own business, of course, he worked all kinds of hours.  We never knew what time he was coming home except on the day we had to vote.  He always came home in time to pick up my mother to take her to vote.  And that was one of the big impressions as a child, that importance for voting.  And I have always voted from the time I was old enough, and I never miss voting because I think it is a sacred duty.
Story_ID: 238943
Speaker 1: I remember you saying just a few minutes ago, that you were introduced to music very early on in life in the elementary school [Campbell Elementary School] that you attended at Sandusky [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the, in thinking about your great big beautiful family it's not quite enough members for an orchestra, (laughter) but I'm wondering if any of the other children were interested in music--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --if there was music outside of the school as part of the family life?
Speaker 2: In fact, starting with my, with Charles [Sallee, Jr.], with the oldest, he had violin lessons.  And, in fact, I think he was being interviewed one time and he said he didn't want to be in music because he didn't feel that was his best (laughter).  But we all had music.  And either the violin or piano.  And then we all recited, we learned poetry, and so we would do those things after dinner, you know, first one, then the other.  And my father [Charles Sallee] was a--and mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] were great audiences, and especially my father, you know.  He would just clap and (laughter) even stomp his feet to the--after we would perform.  So, so we got great encouragement in the arts.
Speaker 1: Were either of your parents musically inclined?
Speaker 2: My father really had a beautiful tenor voice, and my mother took voice lessons especially, you know, during the [Great] Depression and the WPA [Works Progress Administration], I know she had a voice teacher.  We used to mimic her, with her exercises.  And then at our church [Second Baptist Church, Sandusky, Ohio] we also had family nights.  And several families would go together on a Sunday evening, and there were some families like mine and then there was a Carmen [ph.] family.  They had about thirteen children and every one of them, now talk about an orchestra, each one of them played a different instrument (laughter).  But in our family it was mostly violin and voice and piano and speaking.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I know others can't see this but I'm looking at a beautiful grand piano in your living room, I'm wondering is that for you or someone else in the family?
Speaker 2: No, that's for me.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you continued with the piano?
Speaker 2: Yes, I started piano in junior high after I had been playing violin and they needed someone to play in the Sunday school.  And so at that time the lessons were fifty cents a week.  So they paid for my lessons and I played for the Sunday school and later the church, and continued that until I graduated, you know, I was a senior in high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And, and that's the family church or another congregation?
Speaker 2: No, in a family church.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 238944
Speaker 1: Second Baptist Church [Sandusky, Ohio], which has a history of its own.  We were really a designated church that had housed runaways.  And we were just five minutes from the bay and the, Sandusky Bay going into Lake Erie.  And so we are now officially recognized.  The church was started in 1842, or '49 [1949] rather.  Because in 1999 we celebrated 150 years.  It's always been in black hands since 1849.
Speaker 2: So before the Civil War?
Speaker 1: Before the Civil War, by freedmen and ex-slaves.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: I know there are, in this year, in 2004, there are a lot of people who are trying to document Ohio's history in the Underground Railroad.  And, in fact, we're looking forward in July, I believe, to the opening of the [National] Underground Railroad [Freedom] Center [Cincinnati, Ohio] right there on the border of Ohio and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Kentucky in Cincinnati [Ohio].  But, and you say, Second Baptist--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in Sandusky [Ohio] is now designated--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --as one of the stops--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --on the Underground Railroad in Ohio.
Speaker 1: In fact, in the late '20s [1920s], the craftsmen, members of the church really encased the old walls because of the history.  They raised the building, and the current building is what they then remodeled.  And that is where all that beautiful artwork.  My brother has paintings of John the Baptist baptizing Christ, and Christ with carrying the cross.  Panels that my dad had made frames for in plaster for him to do later because he was always in art.  He was always an artist from an elementary child.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So we'd be able to see art work created by Charles Sallee, Sr. and Charles Sallee, Jr.--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --at historic Second Baptist--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --in Sandusky?
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's on Decatur Street and as I say, it's just about five minutes from the bay.  And there is a little museum connected with the library called the Follett House [Museum, Sandusky, Ohio], and there on the second floor, there is a cane that the members of the, our church gave, I think it has a silver top, and it was given to a Sandusky white lawyer who when, after the 1850 law where they could come for runaways--
Speaker 2: Oh, the Fugitive Slave Law?
Speaker 1: Fugitive Slave Law.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: They came and tried to get these runaways.  He told them that they had to present some papers, and of course, when they came back with the papers, they were gone.  And so they give him a huge fine.  And the, the members of Second Baptist Church just as a simple token of appreciation for what he had done for some of their people, gave him this cane and it's in the museum there.
Story_ID: 238945
Speaker 1: I'm just a little curious, since you've given us so much wonderful information about the African Americans who are coming through Sandusky [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --on their way to greater freedom, perhaps in Detroit [Michigan] or Canada or some other place, but I'm wondering about the free African American community in the 19th century and also early 20th century, what life was like there.  As a member of the Sallee family are you a member of a tiny African American close knit community or a very diverse community where race doesn't matter so much?
Speaker 2: Well, it's both, because every, six days a week, it was very diverse.  On our street there were three black families.  And our neighbors to the left and the right and in front of us were German and Dutch and French, and down the street there were Italians.  And so we had a very diverse neighborhood.  In our school [Campbell Elementary School, Sandusky, Ohio], in a class, maybe first grade class I think I was the only one.  And in the other classes, the most that ever, there were four blacks and I have a picture of my, oh, I should show you that, of my fourth grade class and I think there were four.  And when I graduated in junior high, there were not many.  But then in junior high it was from the whole town.  In senior high [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio] it was from the whole town.  And we had the largest graduating class of blacks in my class in 1947 up to that time, and there were twelve or thirteen if you counted one girl who sometime passed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's in a class of how many approximately?
Speaker 2: Almost about three hundred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So not even ten percent?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And that's the largest?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think when Charles [Sallee, Jr.] graduated, he was the only male and there were two females.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: That's interesting to, to have in six days of the week those kinds of diverse cultural experiences, but on Sunday--
Speaker 2: And then Sunday it, then all of, it was a black church [Second Baptist Church, Sandusky, Ohio].  And then people from other cities, you know, so you had your church friends.  And, but we'd have--birthday parties were always big in our family.  And so at the birthday parties then all of those friends were at the birthday parties.  Then as I mentioned, there were some civic organizations like the Federated Colored Women's Clubs [sic. National Association of Colored Women's Club, Inc.], which was named after my aunt, Margaret E. Barnes [Margaret Sallee Barnes] from Oberlin [Ohio].  And then there was the Federated Colored Girls Clubs [sic. National Association of Colored Girls].  So I started my kind of social civic work as an adolescent in that club.
Story_ID: 238946
Speaker 1: You talked a little bit about your high school class and that there were just a small number, there was just a small number of African Americans in the class, but I also happen to know that you did very well in high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio].  So you tell us a little bit about what kind of student you were and where you got that drive to excel?
Speaker 2: Well, actually the drive to excel was something that our parents [Charles Sallee and Cornell Collier Sallee] were very strong on.  And my dad always said that if there's anything worth doing, it's worth doing well.  And we were just expected to do well.  And my mother as I, when I would write something, she would look at it and she would say, "Well can't you make that more succinct?"  Can't you, you know, she would criticize it, she wouldn't sort of tell me what to do but she would just give those types of criticism.  And so my English papers were always well done.  In fact, in the eleventh grade in American history I wrote a paper that my teacher didn't believe that I could have written.  And it was because my parents, it was information on black history that I got from home and that I included in my paper.  But I was an excellent student always from first grade [at Campbell Elementary School, Sandusky, Ohio] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Can we pause for just a minute (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 1: --to talk about this paper?  This accusation of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --is she accusing you of plagiarism or--
Speaker 2: Well, she thought I couldn't, I could not have written that paper.
Speaker 1: So it's someone else's work?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I got an F, which was not a failing grade, but it was like a D in the ABCD.  We had E for excellent, G for good, and F for fair, and P for poor and failing.  But I got an F and I just went to the principal, and my father came with me.  And so the (laughter) principal said just look at her.  She's just seething, she's just so angry.  And I said yes I am (laughter).  Because I was an excellent student, and why would I get an F in that course and I got all Es and Gs in every other course.  And so, of course, he couldn't change it.  He wouldn't change it, but the, it just showed the lack of knowledge on the part of the history teacher, who I actually loved.  She was, she'd always had a very fine model on the--everyday there was something interesting on her board, and she was an excellent teacher.  My teachers were very good.  And I, but I was angry with her, and I took it as high as I could, and, in that my little protest.  But from elementary school, even in first grade, my teacher, because there were few blacks, they made every effort to be inclusive.  And I can remember, it's kind of a silly thing, but on Valentine's Day we exchanged valentines and, and I remember her, her name was Gretchen Erkman [ph.].  And she sent me a Valentine, "If riches were horses, and beggars could ride, I'd saddle the swiftest and race to your side (laughter)."  Now isn't that something to remember from when you're six years old?
Speaker 1: That reminds me of something else.  I remember that poem too.  If wishes were horses and beggars were ride and someone would be by my side.  No, it's wonderful that you remember that (laughter).  Because I remember the same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But, that was that, and I remember we read about some children that had a party, so we had a party.  We had long tables, we didn't have chairs, I mean we had chairs and tables and so we had to have a line where everyone measured the flour and the sugar, and beat the eggs et cetera.  They made, and then someone made the lemonade.  And I was on the committee that went to her house to bake the cookies (laughter).  You know, she just selected about three or four to go, a committee to bake the cookies.  And so I always felt included in everything.  We had an elementary orchestra, and then we had a city elementary orchestra.  We were dismissed early on Wednesdays to go to the high school for our elementary orchestra.  So that was always an interesting part of, of being included in--
Story_ID: 238947
Speaker 1: --Then of course, in high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio]--the only really negative thing was that at the time in junior high, we didn't swim in the pool.  For some reason, I think people thought the brown would rub off (laughter).  But, no, that's, so, but at any rate, I know my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] went up and talked to the principal about that and he said, "Well, your children could swim."  And she said "No, I said I mean all."  And she would not say okay for my children, she said all of the colored children should be able to swim.  My, one of my older brothers, (laughter), Leroy [ph.], the family, a tale is that Leroy just ran and jumped in the pool (laughter).  So he was the defiant one, at that time, for that regard.  But then a lot of the clubs, which some people said were exclusive, but that wasn't completely true because my brother, Henry [ph.], was in the dramatic club.  He even directed a play at the high school, and he acted in plays.  And so it really, it was really what you, I guess, I don't know, whether he was, he played basketball and so he was on the team and, and he was well liked in the school.  Plus he taught all his friends how to dance.  And he'd have the basketball team over to our house and I know my, I remember my mother making a big spaghetti dinner for all the basketball players and then they danced and, you know.  So there were always, we always had a mix of interactions.  But another interesting thing that our next door neighbor, we spoke every day but we were not in and out of each other's houses.  It was just a general respect and there was no real desire or effort to be integrated any place where, you know, it wasn't just welcome.  I had friends from elementary school that we still meet every five years.  Our high school, from 1947 every five years we've had a reunion.  And the last reunion, we decided it was gonna be too long to wait to five years, so there's gonna be one this year which is midway.  Unfortunately, I'm going to be in Italy with a choir singing other and, you know, that is how much, all important that is to me that I had this ambiguous feeling even about that trip.  I said, "Isn't there some way I can come home early so I can go to my reunion?"  But, we have a large number that come from Florida, from Texas, from California, from the Midwest, from the East.  And so there was something special around that time about school.  And we, we would always have almost like a second little reunion of our--of the Campbell Street School [Campbell Elementary School, Sandusky, Ohio] (laughter).  So it was kind of interesting.
Speaker 2: Well, it seems then that, perhaps there was a color line--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --even here in the North but not rigidly drawn.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, there were just places like restaurants.  For a while in the theaters where they wanted you to sit in the balcony.  I had a dear friend whose name was also June, June Forsyth, and her family had come from Jamaica.  And so we went to the theater, and so we just went downstairs and the (laughter) the usher kept coming and he'd tap us on the shoulder and say, "You're supposed to move."  And we would just look straight ahead and not pay him any attention (laughter).  So that was that.
Speaker 2: This was in high school?
Speaker 1: Yes (laughter).
Speaker 2: Civil disobedience.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But, you know, and, of course, she had gone up to the sixth form, I guess, in Jamaica and had been accustomed to being very free.  And then, of course, came here about junior, senior high school.  It was in senior high that we were, all through senior high we were good friends (laughter).
Story_ID: 238948
Speaker 1: We've talked a little bit then about the color line in Sandusky [Ohio] and other places--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: But with your being born in 1929, the beginning of the era of the Great Depression, I'm wondering about class issues in your community.  This depression hit, it hit hard, and the rich began to suffer along with the working class and the poor, but as a child do you remember times being very tough or reflecting back on it and talking with your parents [Charles Sallee and Cornell Collier Sallee]?
Speaker 2: We--well, actually we had a very nice house.  In the center of the city on Center Street.  And we had a very good school.  And we always had food.  We, I, do know, actually my dad's work went down because he was a builder and unfortunately, I know Charles [Sallee, Jr.] told me earlier he had like fifteen to seventeen men working for him.  And because I know Charles would say he had asked if, dad once, "Well why do you still work, you have all these men," you know, he says, well, because he wanted to see to the excellence of the work.  And so he was, he always worked.  During that time, he made a good living.  My mother was one of two women who had her own car at that time.  And not when, during the Depression, it was Charles and my older brothers and sisters who had the luxury (laughter).  But I was the Depression baby (laughter) and my two younger sisters [HistoryMaker Regina Williams and Angela Marlene Sallee Blount].  But still we didn't think about it.  You know, everybody seemed to be about on the same level.  And then there were, I was aware though there weren't--I was in a small group of girls, we'd had a little club, we'd come and meet on the steps of the school and I knew, like, one's father was a doctor.  One's was a lawyer.  I mean they were professional whites in the city, and, but I don't know, I never really thought about that big a division, although there was division, but it really wasn't that--in school, we were good colleagues and friends, and we all had the same shared experiences.  Probably because I was a good student, I was in a special reading group.  We had books, we read books, we had 'Moby Dick' [Herman Melville].  We had books I didn't see again 'til high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio].  And so that I had, was blessed and fortunate to be privy to these special kinds of opportunities that were there.  And I remember that times were tough, and I remember my dad talking about, laughing about sometimes people were on these lines to get welfare.  He says but, you know, at that time people, they were embarrassed.  They were ashamed to take welfare.  Nobody wanted to take welfare.  And I think he was fortunate to be able to do some work, not the amount of work that he had done before, but we were able to, people lost their homes and we were, we kept our home.  And so, and earlier my mother had household help with the children.  They had someone, you know, and because they were close.  And so actually, I didn't really, I think money was not really always talked about, you know.
Story_ID: 238949
Speaker 1: And you ask about who was at home, now see my older brother Charles [Sallee, Jr.] was in, by the time I, see, was about five, Charles was in college.  So people used to ask, "Well why would you let him go to school and, you know, you have all this big family."  And my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] said that's what he wants to do and that's what, you know, he--"Well why would a colored boy take art?"  And she said, "Because that's what he wants to do."  And she always encouraged us to do what we wanted to do.  My, I was in music.  She encouraged me in the music.  My sister next to me, [HistoryMaker] Regina [Williams], wanted to be a nurse.  She encouraged her in nursing.  And [Angela] Marlene [Sallee Blount] went in social work.  And she could, and so whatever we wanted to do, my brother, Henry [ph.], also is an artist.  He did some college work but he was more of a bohemian artist.  He traveled around the country and where we're not supposed to be accepted, he just put on a turban, (laughter) and said, and so he was accepted in Louisiana and in Georgia and different places in the South.
Speaker 2: So not accepted as a brown skinned Negro--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but accepted with a turban--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --as a brown skinned Indian?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: How crass.  Okay.
Speaker 1: So that's, so that's some of the humor that is a part of our family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well, we're coming to the end of another segment but I wanna come back to something that you mentioned earlier in connection with the Great Depression in Sandusky [Ohio], because you said during the WPA [Works Progress Administration] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: Some members of your family were able to pursue the arts.  And so--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: --you've got your brother off during the Depression studying art--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --at the postsecondary level.  And then folks in the community benefiting from the WPA.
Story_ID: 238950
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, in talking about the economic downturn and the Great Depression, you said it was often embarrassing for a lot of families to admit that they had to accept relief in the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --form of transfer payments or free food that's distributed in the community because a lot of folks were losing their jobs.  But then I'm thinking about [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt's New Deal--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the 1930s and the availability of some work and other programs through the WPA [Works Progress Administration].  This made work program that says, if you're able and willing to work then you oughta have the opportunity to do that work whether you're a white-collar artist and writer or if you're someone who digs ditches and build roads and constructs public buildings.  I'm wondering do you remember anything about the impact of the WPA Programs in Sandusky [Ohio] during the 1930s?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I really wasn't terribly knowledgeable about that except I know that my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] studied voice with a voice teacher and that was, I'm pretty certain, a WPA project in the arts.  And, of course, here in Cleveland [Ohio], my brother [Charles Sallee, Jr.] was with the--on some of the WPA visual art projects.
Speaker 1: And this is Charles again?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And, of course, as I said my father [Charles Sallee] always had a little business so, he did his work and he was not on the WPA programs.
Speaker 1: Now, many of the treatments of the New Deal era, the Roosevelt era in American economic history, often celebrate the coming of the WPA in the mid-1930s and especially the federal funding for the arts.  And I'm just wondering, and this is thinking back on that now, how do you feel about government support for artistic endeavor?
Speaker 2: I think it is very important.  In fact, I spent quite a bit of time recently trying to advocate for Issue 31 for Cuyahoga County [Ohio], because part of that in the economic development was for the arts, and so I am an advocate for the arts.  And--
Speaker 1: And how did that issue do?
Speaker 2: It failed.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, yes.  But I think that I'm also a member of the Ohio Citizens for the Arts, I'm on the board, and our task is to advocate for money for the Ohio Arts Council through the Ohio legislature.  And so yes, it's extremely important.  And I know that at time different parties seemed to be more receptive to that.  Our family had been Republican.  And I think my father and mother probably after the second, maybe even, how many times was Franklin D. Roosevelt elected?
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: Four.  They probably changed about the third or fourth time (laughter) because they were pretty dyed in the wool Republicans.  My aunt, in fact, in 1940, my dad's sister [Margaret Sallee Barnes], was an alternate for Governor [John W.] Bricker at the National Republican Convention [sic. Republican National Convention].  So that's how deep into Republican politics that side of the family was.
Speaker 1: Did the family talk a lot about politics and why African Americans were so loyal to the Republican Party until the '30s [1930s]?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, because of the fact that it was, well [President Abraham] Lincoln was Republican.  But, and I think that just like my father in particular and other men in the church, knew the history and they preserved the walls of that original church [Second Baptist Church, Sandusky, Ohio], that house that became a church building because of the history of I think the same, by the same token, voting, it was such a difficulty in getting voting that it was very important in our family.  And my father was the one that talked more about the politics and that kind of thing.  And I remember him talking about Marcus Garvey and how he admired his independence and the entrepreneurship but he said, "We have too many hundred years of blood, sweat, and tears in this country," and so the one part that he didn't agree with was going back to Africa (laughter).  So we had made our contribution here, we should be proud of it.  We were not ashamed of the fact that some people had been enslaved, because they contributed greatly to the growth of this country, and which gives us ownership.
Story_ID: 238951
Speaker 1: There's a lot happening in America and Sandusky [Ohio] in the 1920s and '30s [1930s].  And it seems like you're aware of, or the family is aware of what's happening at both levels, the local level and the national level--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --with [Marcus] Garvey, and [the Harlem] Renaissance, and the WPA [Works Progress Administration] is helping to fuel with the support for the arts.
Speaker 2: Well, as I said we had the Paul Laurence Dunbar book and we learned so many of those--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --pieces.
Speaker 1: Why Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Be, I think because my parents had lived in Dayton [Ohio], and they knew about Paul Laurence Dunbar, and he was, we just, we loved his poetry.  We loved really all of the dialect, and at the same time, my brother [Charles Sallee, Jr.], my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] gave my brother a book of [William] Shakespeare, 'Complete Works of Shakespeare.'  We were, I remember my father [Charles Sallee] taking me to hear Roland Hayes.  The great--
Speaker 1: Who was?
Speaker 2: A great tenor.  And Roland Hayes, at our high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio], came to our high school for a concert, and he took me to the concert.  But I also learned my mother had records of [Enrico] Caruso.  We were just taught to take pride in everything that African Americans were accomplished in, and along with all the other accomplishments of other people in the country.  And so really I think we were really raised to be Americans first.  We were good Americans.  We were, at that time we were colored, then we were Negroes (laughter).  Then we were Afro-Americans, and then African Americans.  But by whatever name we're called, I guess, a rose by any other name (laughter) if you can take that analogy.  But no, we were always proud of our history and what we'd accomplished, and I know my father's sixteen brothers and sisters, you know, I know that all the women were entrepreneurs.  My, one aunt was, lived in Chicago [Illinois], she was a modiste.  I mean she could tailor men's clothes.  She could work in furs.  She would go into wealthy homes like in the winter and make spring clothes.  In the spring and make summer, you know, and she, so she was excellent in her field.  And then my aunt, who was a politician and an organizer of women's clubs.  My aunt, Margaret E. [Sallee] Barnes in Oberlin [Ohio], who was the one that went to the [1940] Republican [National] Convention.  She had an office in Columbus [Ohio] when Governor [John W.] Bricker was, you know, a small area.  But she also had a laundry.  She had a laundry in her home.  And she did, she had like a professional laundry.  She did laundry from the college.  And then another aunt had a tea room.  And one here in Cleveland [Ohio] had a boarding house for students.  And so they all had--they were all entrepreneurs.  And they inherited it from Kentucky and, and, you know, being born in the 1880s of parents [James Sallee and Rebecca Sallee] who were born before the emancipation.  And so really, they, I think they always felt empowered.  And, but, and sometimes if something was wrong or someone would say something that was not complimentary, or used the N word, my dad said, "You're as good as anybody, you're better than most."  And he said, "Everything that you do, if it's worth doing, you do it well."  And you, and then he also said, "You have to be excellent," and my mother supported that.  And he said "If you don't get what you're prepared for, you're a better person for having the education."  Because at the time, people used to say what would my brother do as an artist.  Well, he spent his life and he has done nothing but work related to art, even in the [U.S.] Army when he was in World War II [WWII] in France.
Story_ID: 238952
Speaker 1: The idea of excellence, with my sister [HistoryMaker Regina Williams] was the--in the first class of African Americans to enter the nursing school at Mount Carmel [School of Nursing; Mount Carmel College of Nursing] in Columbus, Ohio.  Now at home, there was a hospital nursing school.  They didn't accept colored.  And so I was at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] at that time and found out about Mount Carmel and Jewish Hospital in Cincinnati [Ohio] they were both going to accept colored in 1949, in fall of 1949.  So she was in that first class that graduated from Mount Carmel.  And then later went on with a master's [degree] and a Ph.D. and--to be one of their outstanding alumni, to be honored as outstanding alumni.
Speaker 2: And this is your sister, Regina--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Sallee Williams?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Dr. Regina Williams (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And so those were areas, well and my younger sister [Angela] Marlene Sallee Blount in social work was--actually went to New York [New York] to visit, went to the United Nations [UN] and was employed during the time of the great Dag Hammarskjold.  And she was employed as a guide.  And then later went in, back to her work as a social worker, and other areas and ended as a federal probation officer.  So there are different types of careers, and we didn't all do one thing.  Whatever we happened to be interested in, that's what our parents [Charles Sallee and Cornell Collier Sallee] encouraged us to do.
Story_ID: 238953
Speaker 1: Well I'd like to go back now and get some of the details, moving from this period where the foundation is established in that rich family life in Sandusky [Ohio], getting you to the high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio] and then to talk about how you make that transition from high school to college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], because you're gonna go away to school.  And then to talk about what you take with you, you know, from that family foundation.  So tell me about your senior year in high school and how you decided on a college that you would attend.
Speaker 2: Well, I was in the a cappella choir, and by that time I had started taking voice lessons.  And I still played the viola in the orchestra but I was taking my college prep courses.  And I also decided I needed to take a typing class in case I needed to work.  So I took some business.  And so by taking extra classes, and that was possible partly because in ninth grade we were tested and I tested out of ninth grade English, and so I, so that left, I had started, in ninth grade I could start my tenth grade English.  And then by senior year, I had an extra course that I could take.  And so that's how I was able to do the college prep and the business and all the music.  And I--there was an organization at home that wanted to honor an African American student.  So they went to the high school and asked the principal who the highest ranking graduate was going to be.  And he said, well, not, it was not all, I, it was I.  But not only was I the highest ranking black student but I was one of the highest ranking, I was in the upper 10 percent of the class.  And so they were so pleased they had a special program, and they invited to speak Jean Murrell Capers who was, I guess, running for council, and she came and gave a great inspirational speech, so I met her when I was a senior in high school.  And then afterwards and talking, found that her parents, were from Kentucky and that their family (laughter) knew my aunt [Margaret Sallee Barnes] and our family and especially our aunt in Oberlin [Ohio].  And so, and she had actually worked with my aunt for the young adults in the Federated Colored Girls [sic. National Association of Colored Girls], [National Association of Colored] Women's Clubs [Inc.] (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: Could you just say a little bit about how Jean Murrell Capers had distinguished herself as a professional?  I know you said she was running for city council--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but in what community and what was her--
Speaker 2: Well, she was in Cleveland [Ohio].  And she later became a councilwoman in Cleveland and later a judge.  And so we are still very fond friends and sorority sisters (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what sorority is that?
Speaker 2: Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The red (laughter) and cream.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Crimson and cream.
Story_ID: 238954
Speaker 1: So I suppose then after being honored at the commencement for the high school [Sandusky High School] in Sandusky [Ohio], then you're going to college and perhaps that's where you're introduced to the sorority [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority].
Speaker 2: Well, yes I was.  I had an interview with my principal about going to college.  And he asked me where I'd like to go.  And I said, well, you know, I would really like to go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] or Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] because--and my personal reason, I didn't really tell him, but I had been in school with all whites, predominantly whites and all white teachers, and I thought it would be interesting to go to Howard or Fisk and be in that environment.  But I really couldn't afford to do it.  And he just turned to the bookcase and pulled out the catalog for The Ohio State University [OSU, Columbus, Ohio] and he said, "Well, what about Ohio State?"  And, you know, in those days you accepted what your parents and your guidance counselors and your principals recommended.  And so I thought about that and I said okay.  And I went to Ohio State.  Actually, it was a wonderful little experience for me.  My parents [Charles Sallee and Cornell Collier Sallee] took me there and I enrolled in the arts and sciences college.  And it really did what my family had said, which was you get an education to be a better person.  So I really wasn't planning a job.  In fact, I didn't know what I was going to do except I did I want a college education.  And so, and dad had always said, "Just prepare, and when you are prepared, something will emerge, and if not, you're a better person for having the education."  So with, but we all had to pretty well work our way through.  I mean, it was possible at that time, it's not possible now, but at that time we did not have extra monies or anything.  It was a tight kind of thing.  In fact, I was prepared to come out after two years to let my sister [HistoryMaker Regina Williams] go.  And that was in a zoology lab that I had a white partner and I mentioned that I was going to stop out because my sister wanted to be a nurse and I really wanted her to come.  And she mentioned about the hospital schools of nursing.  And I said yes, but they don't accept coloreds.  Next time she came to class, and I wish I knew her name because I owe her a lot, she told me about Mount Carmel School of Nursing [Mount Carmel College of Nursing, Columbus, Ohio] and Jewish Hospital School of Nursing in Cincinnati [Ohio] that were going to accept colored.  How she knew that, I don't know.  But that is how I stayed at Ohio State and Regina came to Columbus to the Mount Carmel School of Nursing.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Which is now Mount Carmel College of Nursing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what year did you graduate from high school and start at OSU?
Speaker 2: Oh, in 1947.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Story_ID: 238955
Speaker 1: World War II [WWII] is happening during your high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio] years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then the Cold War era beginning just as you begin college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  That reminds me, my oldest brother, Charles [Sallee, Jr.], was in the [U.S.] Army.  He was a specialist.  And then, and my husband [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine], who I didn't know at that time, was in the Army also.  And the other thing was that my, I had cousins.  I had a first, two first cousins, my Aunt Maggie's [Margaret Sallee Barnes] son who became one of the first black officers.  He was an ensign.  You know, that big picture on the cover of Life magazine and the book, 'The Golden Thirteen: [Recollections of the First Black Naval Officers,' Paul Stillwell],' Samuel [E.] Barnes, my first cousin, was one of those.  His sister was in the Army also.  She retired as a major in the Army.  And my sister, [HistoryMaker] Regina [Williams] was in the Army Nurse Corps.  She, they had a special program about the time she was graduating from nursing school [Mount Carmel School of Nursing; Mount Carmel College of Nursing, Columbus, Ohio], and so, when, after she worked for a year there, she came to Ohio State and found about a nursing program.  She was the first black nurse in Ohio and the second in the country.  While she was on campus, she was a noncommissioned officer already, and then she went in as a first lieutenant in the Army Nurse Corps.  So, those were some of the memories about that time in wartime, the '40s [1940s].  I would say we've had some, I had one cousin who was in the [U.S.] Air Force.  So we served this country in the [U.S.] military and we also, both men and women.
Speaker 1: And you, in reading through some of the histories of the African American involvement in America's wars, there appeared to be widespread support from the Revolutionary [War] period up until the present, for the defense of the country, but at the same time there's this other struggle among some blacks who are insisting on better treatment within the military.  Were you conscious of any of that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the '40s [1940s] and beyond?
Speaker 2: Yes, because like when my brother went in, they didn't know what to do with him.  When he got off the train in Louisiana.  And it wasn't until he got to Europe that he actually did things.  He did reconnaissance.  And--
Speaker 1: And this is because of the level of his education or--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: My husband also was in Army intelligence [Military Intelligence Corps], but he was in a segregated unit.  And he'll tell you, maybe when you talk with him about that.  But I know that my cousin Margaret [Ellen Barnes Jones] and her nickname was Mabs, she protested what they were doing with the WACs [Women's Army Corps], the women in the Army.  And in England, I think in Scotland, some place in England I believe, she got the women away from the ordinary duties to get to be in charge of the mail.  And they went into these warehouses where stacks of mail that had not been delivered, you know.  And was able to get recognition for the women who were in her unit.
Speaker 1: And this is correspondence from family and friends to the men who were actually in battles?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so they helped deliver that?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in the 1940s, when I think about the work of A. Philip Randolph who's--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --been trying to get more jobs for blacks in the defense industry and threatening a march on Washington [D.C.] and telling President [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt, "You better do right by black Americans (laughter) or we're coming to your front door (laughter)."  At least, I think, it was a hundred thousand strong he threatened to bring to the nation's capital.  But it's a period, when I look at it as a student of history and someone who teaches history, a period of tremendous change.  And certainly as a young woman, you know, coming on the heels of that, as a college student but also a period of change in your personal life.
Story_ID: 238956
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about your coming of age on that campus of OSU [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] and then how you met your husband [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine]--
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you--
Speaker 1: --and that chapter in your life?
Speaker 2: --one of the things I was very conscious of, we loved the history of Paul Robeson.  And I knew about him, and he came through, he was going to be in Columbus [Ohio] and he was not allowed on the campus at Ohio State.  But my little protest was to go downtown to the Memorial Hall [Columbus, Ohio] or wherever it was he was to speak, because I couldn't imagine for such an outstanding person to be in the same city and not see him.  So I did go to see him, and even though he was banded from the campus.  And he sang and talked and, you know, it was just one of my highlights at Ohio State.  I enjoyed Ohio State.  I know some people thought there was a lot of prejudice, but I actually, I was so interested to get an education that, you know, really whatever it took.  And I found that I enjoyed the classes.  I enjoyed the expansion in my thinking, all the experiences that I had.  I did, I was given a list of colored people that I could live with because it was very new for colored to be in the dormitories.  And I lived in the city, and then I found out about a co-op house.
Speaker 1: So were you prohibited from living in the campus dorms or just encouraged to go somewhere else?
Speaker 2: Well, I was given a list of houses (laughter), a few people had got in the dorms, and later like my sister, my youngest sister [Angela Marlene Sallee Blount] lived in the dorm.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --but, you know, it was, really close, you know, it seems unbelievable but those were the realities and so I didn't question it.  I took it that the dorms were filled and I got a place in the city.  And then later I found that there was an interracial group that was right in the fraternity rows, on the streets where the fraternity houses were.  And Pinedale [Co-Op, Columbus, Ohio] was the, for women and Rochdale [House, Columbus, Ohio] on the other side of the campus for men.  I lived at Pinedale and my husband lived at Rochdale (laughter).  So, and it was a very, very interesting situation because it was a corporation and whoever was in college at the time, ran the house.  We had a house mother, and there were students from all over, and they were all races, and so we enjoyed that.  That was more the type of living that I had been accustomed to, and so I did enjoy that.  In 1953 at, I graduated in '51 [1951], but my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] said, first of all I had to graduate and then I had to wait for him to graduate (laughter).  He got his Ph.D. in 1953.  So I, we got married in June, and he got his diploma in August.
Speaker 1: And this is Dr. Albert--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Antoine.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You met him at Ohio State?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: During the war [World War II, WWII] he was stationed there.  He was in [U.S.] Army intelligence [Military Intelligence Corps] and they had sent some men to study engineering, and so he had been on the campus.  And when he went back to New York [New York] after the war, he came back for graduate work.
Story_ID: 238957
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, we were talking just a minute ago about your years at [The] Ohio State [University, (OSU), Columbus, Ohio] and then your eventual graduation from the university.  But I just wondered about Paul Robeson's visit to that community, that Columbus [Ohio] community, and, and why that would have been troubling--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to the OSU administration (laughter) at that point in our history?
Speaker 2: Well, it was in 19, about 1950.  So, I guess, there was some tension and maybe some kinds of socialist leanings that Paul Robeson had at that time.
Speaker 1: And well, why were you drawn to him?  Did you have those interests in socialism or--
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: --radical thinking?
Speaker 2: No, I was a Republican (laughter).  I had been raised as a Republican.  And also we actually had discussions at home about communism and, and that kind of thing, and it was, no.  I was interested in him as an intellectual.  He was this tremendously talented athlete and professional, a lawyer, and a graduate of Rutgers [College; Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey], and he had such a fabulous history.  And as I said, any African American that we learned about, my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] held up to us as examples.  And his, he had--and he was a singer.  I was in music.  I wanted to hear him sing.  I wanted to hear him speak.  I wanted to hear him talk about the things that meant so much to him and why.  And he did talk about the workers and his affinity, and wanting to be helpful to the workers.  And I also thought about my family.  They had been workers.  I once saw a--there's a doll in this house right now of a washwoman.  And I remember a story about my Aunt Maggie [Margaret Sallee Barnes], who as a teenager tried to organize the washwomen in Kentucky (laughter).  So I mean, and as my dad [Charles Sallee] had been in the AFL very, very briefly before, you know, that discrimination.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's the American Federation of Labor [American Federation of Labor-Congress of Industrial Organizations (AFL-CIO)]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  But then, I mean and he should have been in it, you know, but they had--so there was discrimination in labor as well as other aspects of, of life in America.  But--
Speaker 1: I don't understand.  The AFL was the craft union?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So the elite?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Skilled artisans?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and he was that.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, it was really interesting because we, I think I was fortunate to get a very balanced view.  I mean we admired Booker T. Washington, and we admired W.E.B. Du Bois.  You see it, because you were an intellectual, did not mean that you were not a worker, and because you were a worker didn't mean that you couldn't be an intellectual.  And so I had great respect for people in whatever area they excelled in.  And so I wanted to see Paul Robeson, and so I just, I was, as a Republican, as a conservative person, here I did get on the bus and go downtown in Columbus away from the campus to hear him.  And so, you know, interestingly enough, when they did a theater piece here at Great Lakes Theater Festival [Great Lakes Theater, Cleveland, Ohio], and I was in a meeting and I mentioned the fact that I had gone to see Paul Robeson.  And so I ended up doing a pre-theater talk about that, and some many, many years later.
Story_ID: 238958
Speaker 1: It's interesting that you tell that story about your experiences as a young Republican (laughter) in Columbus [Ohio] when so much has been made about the black exodus from the Republican Party in the 1930s.  So millions of people bidding farewell to the party of [President Abraham] Lincoln.  Obviously, not everyone in the Sallee family (laughter)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --took that radical step.  But this is interesting, I wanted to stay again with this same period, The Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] years, in making that transition from college to the post collegiate world.  Because not only did you meet [Paul] Robeson on that campus or in that community in Columbus but you said you met [HistoryMaker] Dr. Albert Antoine, who became your husband.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, can you talk a little more about how you, how he proposed and how you came to be a couple and then the head of this household that would eventually include four children?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said I lived at Pinedale [Co-Op, Columbus, Ohio] which was, we had a house.  And there were us, undergraduate and graduate students there.  And he was at Rochdale [House, Columbus, Ohio] which also had, I think they were mostly graduate students.  And the men had to come over in the evening and help us prepare dinner and wash the dishes and, you know, that kind of thing.  When our houses needed painting, they would come help us paint our house.  We would go help them paint theirs.  So really, I got to know him not like a boyfriend just going out on dates, you know.  So it, was you got to know a person, their philosophy of life, and their value system, in a way that you don't when you're just dating.  And so I just decided that I think this is a person I would like to marry (laughter).  I--
Speaker 1: Oh, you decided?
Speaker 2: I think I did (laughter).  Oh, excuse me.  But yes, I think that he decided too.  But I think that, you know, I used to sort of plan out my life when I was in high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio].  I would put down what were the priorities in my life and, you know, I'd every now and then I'd have to change them.  And so one of my priorities was while I was at college, I would meet someone that would make a good husband.  And so there he was, he had been already in the [U.S.] Army.  He had finished high school when he was, I think, sixteen and had gone to City College of New York [New York, New York].  He was, he's a New Yorker.  And left before he graduated in 1944 to the Army.  Was in Army intelligence [Military Intelligence Corps].  Came to Ohio State.  Had actually lived in the dorms which later became the women's dorm, at Baker Hall.  And then when he came back for graduate school, he came to Ohio State.  And he first came for a master's [degree] but then his advisor suggested he might as well go on and get his Ph.D. in chemistry, which he did.  And I thought, well I think that we actually met about in 1949.  And so I was about a sophomore.  And so I graduated, and then I came back and I went home for a year and worked using that typing that I had in high school at a government place, Erie Ordnance [Depot; Erie Proving Ground, Ottawa County, Ohio] which was at, near Port Clinton, Ohio.  And then I came back because he was still in school and I wanted to be sure that I could keep an eye on him (laughter).  That, so in 1952 I came back to school, did some graduate work in music education.  And then in '53 [1953], we decided to get married, and he was getting his degree in August so that satisfied my mother [Cornell Collier Sallee].  And so that was Ohio State.  And, of course, by that time my two sisters were there too.  Both [HistoryMaker] Regina [Williams] and [Angela] Marlene [Sallee Blount].  They happened to both marry people from Ohio State also.
Speaker 1: So you married in 1953?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 238959
Speaker 1: A Dr. [James P.] Brawley from Clark College [Clark Atlanta University] in Atlanta [Georgia] came, and he was looking for a professor of chemistry.  And my husband [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine] wanted to do research.  And I said, "Oh, but let's go," so.  I had never been south.  And I'd always heard about the South and I, and in college [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] I thought it would be really interesting too.  So I don't know whether I convinced him or what but we did go for one year to Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: And did you say that was at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: No, at Clark [College, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 2: Oh, Clark Atlanta?
Speaker 1: It is now Clark Atlanta.  At that time it was, they were separate.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But this is a historically black institution?
Speaker 1: A historically black institution.  And you see, I had wanted to go to one from high school [Sandusky High School, Sandusky, Ohio] and had never gone and so that was a great opportunity, and we did enjoy that very much.  He liked it so much he said, "I know, if I don't leave now, I'll be here forever."  So in 1953, in 1954 we did leave and I went to graduate school at Columbia [University] in New York [New York] and stayed with his family, and he came to Ohio.  First of all, invited by a company in Cleveland [Ohio] who had really advertised for a Ph.D. chemist, but they never asked for a picture in all of the correspondence.  So when he got there, they were shocked.  And they didn't have a job.  But a Jewish friend of his who had been, they had been roommates at Ohio State, said, "Come out, why don't you put in an application at NACA [National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics]," which was the forerunner of NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] at Lewis Research Center [John H. Glenn Research Center at Lewis Field, Cleveland, Ohio].  And so he did and was hired there.  And so he was one of the first Ph.D. of African American descent there.  And so I came to visit on my break for two weeks and I found out that in 1954, if you can imagine, friends told me, "Don't get your master's [degree] in music education, because there are black women with master's degrees in music education and they get regular classrooms," because it's difficult to get in the special areas in the school.  So they said, but they really do need elementary teachers.  And they had a program at Western Reserve [University, Cleveland, Ohio] which is now Case Western Reserve University [Cleveland, Ohio]. So I left Columbia and enrolled at Western Reserve.  Got a master's in elementary education and so started teaching here.  So in 1954 was when we came to Cleveland, the great Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].  So there were educational problems across the country.  And even though Cleveland [Municipal School District; Cleveland Metropolitan School District, Cleveland, Ohio] was not a officially segregated system, in many ways it was in fact a de facto segregated system.
Story_ID: 238960
Speaker 1: And I think when we usually talk about segregation, there are two kinds that are discussed, de facto where there's segregation, in fact, even if the laws don't require it, maybe the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there's a commitment to neighborhood schooling.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then the housing market is segregated, so all of the children of one race will be steered to one school.  And then there's that de jure segregation and that's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --supported in the laws.  But I think it's interesting that you're having these experiences in '54 [1954], where your Ph.D. husband [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine], brilliant scientist is rejected on sight because he is African American with this French sounding name (laughter).
Speaker 2: And the fact of, that he had graduated from City College of New York [New York, New York], which at that time they called the poor man's Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And then was in [U.S.] Army intelligence [Military Intelligence Corps] and stationed at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], and then went on to get a Ph.D. from Ohio State.  And so it's with that background they, just didn't imagine he was black.  Same thing happened to my sister [HistoryMaker Regina Williams] when she had graduated from Mount Carmel [School of Nursing; Mount Carmel College of Nursing, Columbus, Ohio], as I said she was in the first class that graduated any colored.  And then she got her degree in, at Ohio State in nursing education.  Then she was a first lieutenant in the Army Nurse Corps.  She taught corpsmen, and all.  And when she applied for a job as a teacher instructor in nursing, when she appeared, they were shocked because they didn't expect to see a black person.  So we have had those experiences.
Speaker 1: And you say that Cleveland [Ohio] had de facto segregation in the schools even though there was no Jim Crow system officially?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, that's what, I think it was ruled that by Judge [Frank J.] Battisti that that was so.  And they had to go through this process, which for better or for worse.  I personally always felt the only thing that needs to be done was desegregation as opposed to integration.
Speaker 1: And there's a difference?
Speaker 2: There's a difference.
Speaker 1: What's the difference as you see it?
Speaker 2: As I see it, desegregation is where there are no laws that require or limit you in your pursuit of freedom and happiness.  But integration is what you do on a voluntary basis with friends and so forth.  So it never bothered me that, of the question of integration.  I was always in integrated settings from the time I was born all through school and even at Ohio State and the co-ops and all.  But that was because we wanted to.  And if it had been segregated and I had been told that I couldn't go to a school or I couldn't take a class that would be, you know, real de jure segregation.  But what I would like, would be all laws forbidding and limiting people erased.  And because we had that history though, of slavery and Jim Crow laws by which I guess from Reconstruction until 1954 were still on the books, which I really came late in understanding all of that.  Then, of course, they had to do away with them.  And a lot of emphasis was put on integration as the goal rather than desegregation.
Story_ID: 238961
Speaker 1: In Cleveland [Ohio] then, which is where you're making your permanent home now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: As of the mid-1950s, you said we have de facto segregation--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when you're a young teacher in the Cleveland schools [Cleveland Municipal School District; Cleveland Metropolitan School District]?
Speaker 2: Yes, because most of the schools that a lot of the black teachers were in, were predominantly populated by African American students, and I would say even more so today.  I did, when I was assigned, it was interesting, in 1955, all of my students were white.  I was at Boulevard Elementary School [Cleveland Heights, Ohio] in Cleveland which was on Kinsman Road.  And I don't know how I happened to be assigned to that school but I was.  I had five classes before I ever had a black student.  I don't actually think I did have any.  I had students who came in, who came to me, white students and one little girl said, oh, you know, she said, "My mother told me we were coming to a nice school across from a big park and no colored."  And she told me this.  And I said, oh, really (laughter).  And so, and I had another student who came, and he seemed a little concerned but then after a while, all his pictures, he started making people brown.  So I thought, well, he has accepted me.  And but 99 percent of the students were just, seemed to have no prejudice at all.  And, in fact, one summer I went visiting (unclear) gardens, and by that time I'd had two children from this one family and the father said, "Oh you're [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine."  He said, "My children just love you."  He said, "I didn't know colored and white could get along like that."  And that just came out.  And it was clearly an honest reaction and he was surprised.  I don't know, I don't think he knew I was colored.  His children hadn't told him and his wife (laughter).  And interestingly enough, his son was in the audience at Great Lakes Theater Festival [Great Lakes Theater, Cleveland, Ohio] when I did that introduction on Paul Robeson.  And he came up to me and asked me, "Did you teach in Cleveland schools?"  And I said, he said, "You're the only teacher I remember."  And he was married, he introduced me to his wife, you know.  So I think there are a lot of valuable things that happen when we have a desegregated and an integrated community.
Speaker 1: So, how long did you teach in Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Well, I started in 1955.  I did have to take time out.  I had four children after I started teaching.  And I ended my education career.  I left Cleveland in 1979 but then I went to Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] as an administrator, and I retired from my public education work in 1985, so from 1955 to 1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, you were balancing the marriage and motherhood and the teaching?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then--
Speaker 1: Did you get maternity leave in there anywhere (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, when I, at the time I first started you had to leave after the fourth month.  You weren't supposed to continue teaching and I did always leave like by the fifth month.
Speaker 1: So that was official school board policy?
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: That--
Speaker 2: But it, well, I've known other teachers who taught and delivered the next week (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: You know.  In fact, even my sister [HistoryMaker Regina Williams] when she was, but that was in nursing school--
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: --she taught at, she was in Columbus [Ohio] teaching at a hospital school of nursing [Grant Hospital School of Nursing, Columbus, Ohio].  She left the school and went to the university hospital and delivered her first child.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, that is possible.
Story_ID: 238962
Speaker 1: All right, so you're in, in and out of the Cleveland [Ohio] schools from 1955 to 1979?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you were there when Cleveland had its experiences with the desegregation lawsuit--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --filed by the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you, you tell me about your feelings at the time about--
Speaker 2: Well, I felt that there was much ado about nothing in the respect that they could have solved it all by redrawing the boundaries.  Because I, at one time after I had gone back after a maternity leave, I was at Hazeldell Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio].  And the children would come there, a group of children came there every day, lined up, waited for a bus, and they took them to an area where there was a school, predominantly white, where there were extra classrooms and they were in these separate classrooms and then they came back to the school and went home.  Now, why could they not have just redistricted?  And to me that would have been, you know, an appropriate thing to do and we didn't have any segregation laws as, but they just came up with that plan, and to me that was de facto.  And I think that was why it was, you know, determined to be that because there were schools that had space, and those black students could have been assigned there on a regular basis.  But in at least one case where I was, they came into, extra children, came into the building, had to be bused out and then bused back, and I thought that was very inappropriate and the classes were crowded.  The teacher in kindergarten had one hundred students, fifty in the morning and a different fifty in the afternoon.  So the kinds of problems that we have today, really go back quite a while.  And so while, and the parents of the children in school now are the ones who went through those experiences.  Their parents and grandparents, because unfortunately many of the, I would say the generations are very, very close, and almost children having children.  And so I think that, as far as the, I really am not perhaps the right person to make any determination on it.  I have some private ideas.
Speaker 1: Oh, well, it's your story, so.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, whatever part of that you wanna express today is fine.  But I just wondered because I'm thinking now, since this is the fiftieth anniversary year of Brown [v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --there are a lot of people in northeast Ohio who are reexamining this whole idea of desegregation, and especially the Cleveland case, Reed v. Rhodes [1978], because in that case the schools were found to be guilty of over two hundred intentional acts of segregation.  Like the busing of white children and out of majority black schools and increasing the racial isolation--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: --among the students.  And so, and that's the thing that's unconstitutional in the wake of the Brown decision in 1954.  You cannot deliberately segregate students by race, even if there's no official Jim Crow policy, those little policies, (laughter) local level--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --make a difference.
Speaker 2: Well, those were the things that I really was saying that I had private thoughts on.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: Because I thought that was wrong.  And by the same token, the black students that were bused out of black areas into white schools but were kept segregated in those schools.  They were not integrated into the classes.  And so unfortunately, a wonderful school system, you know, which I understood, before the '50s [1950s], people paid, from the suburbs, paid tuition to come to Cleveland public schools.  And wonderful curriculum.  And so there were losses, and primarily because of the prejudices that overtook reason.
Story_ID: 238963
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, you said you taught in Cleveland [Ohio] until 1979?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this is the same era approximately that desegregation and busing for desegregation is getting started.  But what were you doing at that point in time in the Cleveland school system [Cleveland Municipal School District; Cleveland Metropolitan School District]?
Speaker 2: I had retrained for secondary guidance and counseling, and so I was a guidance counselor and a senior counselor at the adult education center, and for about ten years.  And so it was a very unique school.  It housed young women from sixteen years of age up.  And all manner of adults, some who had not completed an education who had come from the South, others who had dropped out, and so they could come back and finish high school.  It was a daytime high school for adults.  And it was, as I say, a wonderful unique school.  We had at one time about 1500 students.  It was housed where they now house the Cleveland School of the Arts [Cleveland, Ohio].  And--
Speaker 1: And it's on the University Center?
Speaker 2: In the University--
Speaker 1: [University] Circle [Cleveland, Ohio] area.
Speaker 2: Circle area, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, in 1978 there was a strike.  And we, when we left that building, we never got back because they closed the adults, that day time high school.  And so it was really unfortunate, as I say because it was one of few high schools for adults in the country.
Speaker 1: And it's toward the end of the 1970s again?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: And how many years had you been teaching in that program?  You said you retrained--
Speaker 2: I retrained in guidance and counseling.
Speaker 1: As a counselor?
Speaker 2: And I had gone from elementary teaching because the kids, my students were now about the ages of my own children.  So I decided I was giving everything at school and I needed to work with a different age group.  So I went back to university, essentially got another masters of a certification in guidance and counseling.  And then did that for about ten years in Cleveland before the strike.  And after the strike, I was assigned as a reading specialist in one elementary.  And then the second semester I was invited to come back and take guidance and counseling, which I did.  But at the end of that semester, which was the June of 1979, I left Cleveland and was hired by Shaker Heights City School [District] and became the director of their alternative high school program.  And then a few years later, a regular assistant principal of the high school [Shaker Heights High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're working now in Shaker Heights [Ohio] public schools, are you also residing at that point in time in the community of Shaker Heights?
Speaker 2: We had been residing for, since 1970--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in Shaker.
Story_ID: 238964
Speaker 1: You keep saying we, and I know the we includes [HistoryMaker] Dr. Albert Antoine--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but can you tell me how the family has grown over the years?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1958 we had our first child, it was a daughter, Janice Marie [Antoine Lumpkin].  And then we had two years later, it was 1960 a son, Albert Sallee [Antoine].  And two years after that another son, Edward Sallee Antoine.  And then four years later, our youngest, Lawrence Sallee Antoine.
Speaker 1: So three sons and a daughter?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, all three of them were very fine students.  I was really very concerned about education as I had been getting this master's [degree] in elementary.  And I had been reading, oh, just so many things about the problems of African American students, and I had been volunteering at Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] and so I saw a notice about Hawken School [Gates Mills, Ohio] for boys, and I investigated that.  So Albert started Hawken in kindergarten, and there was another young African American student and they were the first two that ever started from kindergarten at Hawken.  And so I wanted them to get, the boys to get a good basic foundation.  My philosophy at that time was that if they got, by the time they got to fourth grade, if they could teach themselves virtually.  So our daughter we left in public school until junior high, because what I saw with junior high students, female students, not achieving to their potential.  So we had her enrolled at Laurel School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] for girls, and she stayed there for four years, came back to Shaker [Heights High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio] in the eleventh grade.  And all of our children graduated from Shaker.  The boys came back when Albert was in sixth grade, Edward was in fourth, or third, he had just finished third, and Edward, Lawrence was just about to enter kindergarten.  So the three boys came back and started Shaker Heights [Ohio] public schools together.  And we left Janice at Laurel until the eleventh grade.
Speaker 1: But can you tell me what it was about the, the curriculum at Hawken first and then at Laurel, that sort of set them apart from some of the other public schools that were in this area?  Why you chose them over the system?
Speaker 2: I actually felt that Hawken gave boys more freedom and more discipline.  And I, those were things that I thought were critical and central for boys.  And I, because I really don't think public schools, as we run them, are really that friendly to boys.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I wanted the boys to have that greater freedom and discipline that they would have at the boys' school.  For our daughter, I think there's so much emphasis on dating and boy-girl kind of, they're just at that age at junior high, where they, the girls are often distracted from their studies.  And so in a girls' school, that gave Janice an opportunity to really continue to concentrate on her coursework.
Speaker 1: So you said eventually after, once they got that foundation in the private schools here and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and Hawken is in Gates Mills, Ohio but within commuting distance of--
Speaker 2: Well, Lyndhurst [Ohio] for the elementary.
Speaker 1: Oh, Lyndhurst, that's right for the lower school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so they're coming home at night (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: You know they're not staying in the--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --like a boarding situation?
Speaker 2: No, none of them--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --were in a boarding situation--
Story_ID: 238965
Speaker 1: --Once they get that foundation for the boys in elementary and for Janice [Antoine Lumpkin] in middle school, they're gonna come back to Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Shaker Heights [Ohio] has a very renowned educational system.  And, but there were some concerns of black parents.  And I felt, I couldn't, since I was working, if I was at home all the time, I might have made a different decision, but because I was working, I was a little conflicted.  My mother [Cornell Collier Sallee] didn't work while we were in school.  And so I was a little conflicted about working with the children being young.  So I thought I really had to be very careful about their educational setting.  And so that is what I thought about.  And one of the sayings my father [Charles Sallee] would say at times, it had to do with, it was almost like it was a sacrilege to say it, but he would say if there was something that had to be done, he would go to hell rather than (laughter) than have this happen.
Speaker 1: Mm-hm.
Speaker 2: And for the first time I understood what he meant because that's the way I felt about my boys.  I was reading so much about African American black boys who were not succeeding and I'd say, "I'd go to hell first," you know, before I let that happen with my kids.  And so (laughter) it was just--I didn't, I never felt that intensity of, of feeling about--I was so angry, I guess I was angry about what I was reading, about what was happening.  And I remember once when I was a counselor at the adult center looking at the materials over my desk, and there was zero point, you know, whatever, 0.5, 0.6 percent of African American engineers.  I said, you know, this is ridiculous.  Now I'm not saying that is the reason but all four of our children earned degrees in engineering.  So I wanted them to really, you know, they had the ability so why not use it.  And I, it sort of helped prove to me that all these statistics that they banter around in the public just aren't as legitimate as I think they should be.  Maybe they are legitimate, but it--with proper education African Americans students can succeed in any curriculum.
Speaker 1: So what have your children studied at the postsecondary level?
Speaker 2: Janice did her undergraduate work at, she graduated with a degree in chemical engineering from MIT, Massachusetts Institute of Technology [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and she did a master's and Ph.D. at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Albert [Sallee Antoine] graduated with a degree in civil engineering and economics from Carnegie Mellon University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, and then he tested for his professional engineering exams so he can put a P.E. [Professional Engineer] after his name.  Edward [Sallee Antoine] graduated in mechanical engineering from Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey].  And Lawrence [Sallee Antoine] graduated in electrical engineering from Cornell University [Ithaca, New York].  He later received an M.B.A. from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and also completed and passed a CPA [Certified Public Accountant].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it seems (laughter) they learned the lessons that you said you were trying to teach.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or at least found something within themselves, whatever would drive them to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, it was within them, because basically we didn't do a lot of demanding that they do a lot of studying at home.  They pretty much studied on their own.  They may ask a question or something every now and then but it was not, their learning was in school.  I know a white friend of mine asked why I would go to the expense of sending Janice to a private school at the time when she was at Laurel School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] for girls.  And I said "Well, we have to prepare our girls to be able to be independent," because, I think, and that goes back to the history of slavery and the concern of how women were mistreated.  And even as I growing up, a lot of them, the women, in Sandusky [Ohio] worked two homes.  They, they, they were maids and they did housework.  And so I remember our first financial advisor, and he's saying, "Well now you'll do this for the boys and two years for the girl."  And I said, "What?  No, four years."
Story_ID: 238966
Speaker 1: I think that that really bothered me but it also made me understand the difference in really the social and economic, and really the value systems between middle class whites and middle class blacks because I don't think we would ever consider that our daughters receive less education than our sons.
Speaker 2: Where was Laurel School located?
Speaker 1: It was Shaker Heights [Ohio].  And--
Speaker 2: So it's in the same community where you're working in the public schools?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And I'm sure you know that Shaker Heights had a really excellent reputation.
Speaker 1: It did but, you know I felt that the education of my children was my responsibility, and early on I could some little issues.  They were always resolved favorably but they were issues, and I wanted to guard against them.  And I can give you some examples.
Speaker 2: That's fine.  Sure if you wanna share.
Speaker 1: Well, in elementary school, for example, one teacher who was very fine but I found that he was not giving the enriching part to the students, and I asked him why and he says, "Oh, well, people complain about too much homework."  And I said well, you know, "At this age in fifth grade, you know, that's appropriate for the students," and I said, "and I want you to give Janice [Antoine Lumpkin] everything, if you don't give it to another child."  I said, "Because that is why she's here."  And so he sort of laughed and he said, "Oh, you sound like my mother."  And I said "Well, I consider that a compliment," I said, "because I'm sure your mother wanted the best for you and that's what I want."  And another thing even earlier in third grade, the, a principal had said to me, I had questioned something and she said well, you know, "Janice is just an average child."  And I said, "Well, you know, Mrs. Gricola [ph.], she may be an average child but I want her to have everything this school offers," and I said, "and besides you and I both know what tests test."  And in other words, she was going by some test, and I knew my child.  And so I reminded her, she was an educator and she knew the flaws in testing as well as I did.  And so that, so then, later, I delighted and I guess sometimes I feel that maybe I was too prideful, but I would, when I would see the administrator that I asked to come to the school because of a situation and I would say, "You know, my average child just graduated from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] (laughter) in chemical engineering, or my average child just got her master's, or my average child just got her Ph.D.," you know.  Which, you know, they, you have to know your own child.  And no matter what system you're in, whether it's a public school or a private school, whether it is in the inner city of Cleveland [Ohio] or in a rich suburb like Shaker Heights is, you can have excellent teachers in all those places and you can have poor teachers in all those places.  So you have to keep abreast of what's happening and monitor your own children.
Story_ID: 238967
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, do you have grandchildren?
Speaker 2: We have five granddaughters.  Our daughter had four daughters while she was getting these advanced degrees, and while she was a professor at the University of Maryland [Baltimore] at the Baltimore County [Baltimore, Maryland] campus.  She was the first black and the first female in the chemistry department there.  We are saddened because she, unfortunately, after her last child, had an aneurysm in the brain and died that next day.  So that was in 1997.  So it's been six years, but she had a wonderful, made wonderful contributions to her church.  She was a church leader.  Also to the university, to women's, organizing young women in, for math and science, and just her cutting edge research.
Speaker 1: And what's her name again in, in case people wanna read about some of the work that she did?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's Janice Antoine Lumpkin.  And she was at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County campus until 1997.  She taught master's and Ph.D. students.  I mean, her last student got a Ph.D. just the summer before she died.  And she also mentored a young African American undergraduate, who I found is receiving her Ph.D. in May of this year from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  So I think that her legacy is carried on in many ways.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how about those daughters, four daughters?
Speaker 2: Well, her four daughters, Nicole is now nineteen and in college.  Next child is Jessica who is in tenth grade, just got a four point (laughter) and is preparing for college.  They, both Nicole and Jessica were in gifted and talented in the Maryland public schools.  And then next Jordan, who is now eight.  And Olivia who was two weeks old when her mother died, but is now six.  And both of them are excellent students.  So we've been really very fortunate.  Their father, Carl James Lumpkin, has done a wonderful job in raising the children.  He's worked very hard.  He's not remarried yet.  And with children from two weeks to thirteen years at the time, he did really a fantastic job.  And so basically we're really very happy with them.  And our son, our oldest son, Albert [Sallee Antoine], married Evelyn Kelley and their daughter is Kelly Marie Antoine, who is about five now.  And I just had a call this week that she goes to the Columbus School for Girls [Columbus, Ohio], and one of her friends moved with her family to Washington, D.C., her father has a position with the [President George Walker] Bush administration, and she invited Kelly to come visit.  And so her parents took her, and part of the visit was to meet President Bush's helicopter.  And she was on the White House [Washington, D.C.] lawn and I was told that the president shook hands with her and she announced to him that she was Kelly Marie Antoine from Ohio.  And he said, "My, what a pretty little girl you are."  And she answered, "Yes, I am," (laughter), "I know," (laughter).  So the, I don't know, the confidence seemed to have been passed out.  Like Jordan was here, our eight-year-old, a couple years ago she was, when she was in sixth going into second grade, and her other grandmother had come to visit and I had given her a book to read, the oh, it's about the tree, 'The Giving Tree,' [Shel Silverstein] and she, I was shocked she read it with such expression and so fluently.  And I said, you know, to her other grandmother, you know, Janice, I mean, Jordan can really read.  And she asked, so then she said, "Jordan, do you really read?"  And Jordan said, "You better believe it," (laughter).  So she has a little confidence too.  But I'm really very proud of the, elementary program [Long Reach Church of God Christian Academy; Celebration Christian Academy, Columbia, Maryland] there at the [Long Reach] Church of God [Celebration Church, Columbia, Maryland] that my daughter helped establish.  They have preschool to grade five, and when they leave and go to public school, they are at or above these students in that school.  So they are getting an excellent foundation at the Christian school.
Story_ID: 238968
Speaker 1: You talked a lot about some of the institutions and organizations that have really been important in shaping your experiences, as a child and as a young student in college, and then as a wife and a mother, but I wanted to ask in addition to the church and the school and your family, if there were other organizations, other institutions, that also played an important role in sort of shaping your view of the world, after you left the teaching and administrative positions and decided that you were gonna concentrate on some other issues?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I went back to the arts.  In fact, my last year as an assistant principal at Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio], there were a couple of English teachers who sang in the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus.  I don't know how they found out that I had any music background because I wasn't doing music, and so they said, "Why don't you audition for the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus?"  So I finally agreed but on the day I really hadn't planned to go, and they mentioned it.  So I quick went up and I got out one of the, a songbook that I had studied in high school, actually.  And there was a little French, a French, I started to say a folk song but it was an art song actually.  And so I reviewed that and took my audition, and did a few other things and I was accepted.  So I started singing in Blossom [Festival Chorus, Cleveland, Ohio] actually about the time I retired.  And then I went into the Cleveland Orchestra in the fall of 1954 [sic.], no, when did I retire?  1985.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm still thinking of Brown v. Board [of Education of Topeka, 1954] (laughter).  But I went into the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus in 1985.  And in '86 [1986] we had our first European tour.  So I had an opportunity to sing in England and in Belgium.  And then three years later we went back and we had an extended tour that included Amsterdam [the Netherlands] and West Germany and Luxembourg.  But after that first experience when I came back in '86 [1986], then people began to realize that I had this undergraduate and some graduate work in music, and that I had sung at [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] in the select choir, Symphonic Choir, as well as the university chorus.  And I had sung with the women's group in Cleveland [Ohio].  And I was asked about being the administrator at the Cleveland Music School Settlement [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio] branch, so I took that on.  I did that for about nine years, almost ten years, while I was also singing with the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus.  So I went from Shaker into the chorus, and as director of the Music School Settlement.  I had about twenty vocal and instrumental teachers, and then I added dance and drama.  Well before I retired from that then I became aware of a playwright.  And so some friends and I founded the Adrienne Kennedy Society of Great Lakes Theater Festival [Great Lakes Theater, Cleveland, Ohio].  And we were a support group for them, and also enjoyed classic theater and we enjoyed the outreach that they did in Cleveland public schools [Cleveland Municipal School District; Cleveland Metropolitan School District].  And so from that then the next thing, that was in 1990.  In 1993 we founded the Creative Writing Workshop Projects [Cleveland, Ohio].  And that was again being supportive of Adrienne Kennedy, who received a lot of [Lila] Wallace Reader's Digest Writers' Awards.  So we went to New York [New York] and one of the things she had asked me to do was to do a proposal for a project in a Cleveland public school.  So we had been volunteering in Cleveland schools, and so then we started and organized a mentoring program at Lafayette Contemporary [Educational] Academy [Cleveland, Ohio].  And we worked in elementary and middle schools for three years with the support of grants from Lila Wallace.
Story_ID: 238969
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, you just started to tell me about CWWP, Creative Writing Workshop Projects [Cleveland, Ohio] the outgrowth of the initial Adrienne Kennedy support group [Adrienne Kennedy Society].  And you keep saying we, we have been active during these things, but can you tell me about some of the other people who are working with you on that initiative, and what kinds of things you've been able to do in working with the schools?
Speaker 2: We, the Creative Writing Workshop Projects, is a non-profit arts organization, and it's a charitable and educational organization that is a 501(c)(3).  We collaborate with a number of institutions and agencies and artists in the city [Cleveland, Ohio].  And we are really pleased because we're not an organization that had a large amount of funding, so it was really important that we collaborate with people.  And so it is important to share with you these various organizations: The Cleveland Music School Settlement [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio], the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio], the Cleveland Municipal School District [Cleveland Metropolitan School District], Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio], Cleveland Art Theatre [Cleveland Heights, Ohio], and individual artists of various disciplines.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Mrs. Antoine, you were mentioning some of the partnerships that Creative Writing Workshop Projects developed over the years with area organizations but you said all of that came from this initial suggestion made by Adrienne Kennedy that you pursue funding to support outreach to the schools.
Speaker 2: And to support her requirement to do a community project, that was part of her grant stipulation.  She got a large grant over three years from Lila Wallace.  And although she lived in New York [New York], she really loved Cleveland [Ohio].  She was raised in Cleveland.  She had great respect for Cleveland public schools at the time she was coming through.  And she had attended and graduated from The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio].  And actually was there at, when I was there.  I probably was about two years ahead of her.  And so I was very pleased to be of support for her literary work.  And so, so we actually did a project at her elementary school, Lafayette Contemporary [Educational] Academy [Cleveland, Ohio].  And we started with the young children there with storytellers, and we, once we got funds, we were able to bring in people for different projects.  We took them on field trips to the theater, to the rain forest.  We brought Karamu Theatre [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio] for the young people into the school.  And then, of course, Adrienne Kennedy herself came from New York to have some workshops with the children.  So it was a wonderful, delightful experience.  Then we extended it to the middle schools.  And we did, in addition to the creative writing and poetry clubs that we had with the elementary children, we introduced playwriting, improvisation, and all with the middle school students.  And did what I think was a rather unique thing by partnering with the Cleveland School of the Arts [Cleveland, Ohio], and the drama teacher came with his double period class.  We provided transportation for them, and they as peer mentors worked with some middle school students in developing plays, improvising and then writing a play and also in performing a play.
Story_ID: 238970
Speaker 1: So from there around that time the money from Lila Wallace was running out, and I started writing proposals [for Creative Writing Workshop Projects, Cleveland, Ohio].  I was not a proposal writer but I found, you know, they say necessity is the mother of invention and so that's what we had to do.  And I was fortunate to have funders from the United Black Fund of Greater Cleveland [Cleveland, Ohio] and from other funders, the Episcopal Community Fund [Funds of The Episcopal Community], and we've had some from my church which is the Plymouth Church of Shaker Heights [Shaker Heights, Ohio], a congregational church with the UCC.  And so--
Speaker 2: And UCC is?
Speaker 1: United Church of Christ.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so all, we've had churches where we've had programs for students and who, in churches they have enabled us to do like all day workshops and for our Cleveland School of the Arts [Cleveland, Ohio] students at the Mount Zion Congregational Church [Cleveland, Ohio].  We had the Episcopal Church of the Transfiguration [Cleveland, Ohio] where we did Saturday morning classes with middle school students for about eight weeks, and what we call life lessons where they would have projects where they would know more about themselves.  They would write autobiographies and then about their families and then about African American heritage.  We think being grounded in that gives us stability and for the students other education for their experiences in the schools, and then, of course, the educational components we try to keep within the standards of the school as well.
Story_ID: 238971
Speaker 1: All of this again is coming out of your desire to promote the works of Adrienne Kennedy.  And my first encounter with her as a writer, was through reading 'People Who Led to My Plays' [Adrienne Kennedy].  But I was wondering if you could mention some of the other works, some of the other plays especially that she's known for in case people want to seek out some of her work in the library.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, 'People Who Led to My Plays' was her biography, autobiography, which was done in a very unique way, and which is accessible to young people too, which is why we like to use that.  Her other plays have, I can think in 1995, '96 [1996] she was the sole playwright in residence for Signature Theatre Company in New York [New York].  I was privileged to go to about five openings, and one of the major works that she did there was 'Sleep Deprivation Chamber' [Adrienne Kennedy and Adam Kennedy].  It was actually a true story about her son who had been actually abused by police officers and in the--actually in the driveway of his father's home in an upscale Virginia community.  And I recently saw that play at The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] in 1953 I guess it was.  Which is--
Speaker 1: Or 2003?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, 2003--
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: --because it was the fiftieth anniversary of her graduation--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and she was awarded an honorary doctorate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I, other plays that she has done have been oh, this one, that she's had a couple Obie Awards [Off-Broadway Theater Awards] and--
Speaker 1: Did she write '[The] Ohio State Murders'?
Speaker 2: She wrote, not only wrote 'Ohio State Murders,' that was a commission from Great Lakes Theater Festival [Great Lakes Theater, Cleveland, Ohio].  And that is why we, and at the time at which we began to be supportive of her and her works.  It starred [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee and it was a very fine presentation here in Cleveland [Ohio] at the Ohio Theatre.
Story_ID: 238972
Speaker 1: Again, I know there are other women and men working with you in Creative Writing Workshop Projects [Cleveland, Ohio] but I'm just a little interested in their backgrounds and what brought them to this love of literary works and present it in dramatic fashion on stage.
Speaker 2: Well, we have a variety of memberships.  Some are professionals, some are professional educators and those were the first people that came to be supportive.  Several were retired educators who were interested in literature, who also had arts backgrounds.  For example, I had a music background, the co-founder Louise Kent-Hope [HistoryMaker Louise Hope], was a former kindergarten teacher, but she also had a master's [degree] in music.  And when I became the director at the Cleveland Music School Settlement Branch [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio], she was one of my piano teachers.  There were others who I had, I met during the time I was at Music School Settlement.  We needed friends, and Dr. Eugene [A.] White became the president of our friends group, and it enabled us to do projects that brought in people of excellence, African American artists.  And we presented each year, and but we could not have done it without the extra money that the friends did.  So with Dr. White there had been a relationship in our concerned parents with the Shaker Heights [Ohio] schools and then as president of the friends of the Cleveland Music School Settlement Branch, and now he is chair, he is our chairman of the board of trustees for Creative Writing Workshop Projects.  He is a retired physician, a radiologist, and also a lover of music.  At Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] he sang with the jubilee choir [Fisk Jubilee Singers].  And so we have these persons who you might say are renaissance persons, who have certain specialties, but they also have a very great interest in participation in the arts.  The other people involved at this time are Dolores P. Eaton, who is a wonderful volunteer and also is our secretary.  She is a retired educator who taught for over thirty years in Washington, D.C. schools and at the university where she helped train teachers.  So she is with our organization.  We have some members like Margaret Ford-Taylor, who is a former director of Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio], and who is now a professor at Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio] and the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio] teaching theater.  And she is on our board.  She is also a founder of Cleveland Art Theatre [Cleveland Heights, Ohio].  And we collaborate with Cleveland Art Theatre.  And, we commissioned Margaret to research and write plays and direct them.  And then we collaborate with agencies and institutions around town for these performers to perform these pieces.  One of the first ones that we commissioned was on Langston Hughes, where we worked with Cleveland State University and Dr. Regennia Williams on the Langston Hughes Project.  And so our play that included all professional actors was very well received and the director from Tri-C Community College Jazz Fest, Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio] Jazz Fest, invited us to do plays for over two thousand children.  So then we have been invited by, this year, by the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio] to do our play on Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954], our civil rights piece, which we thought was an appropriate celebration.  And we will have speakers who will speak on the celebration and critique Brown v. Board after fifty years.  And they will be Dr. Wornie Reed, who is a very distinguished sociologist and professor of urban studies at Cleveland State University.  And the Reverend Dr. Marvin [A.] McMickle, who is a pastor of Antioch Baptist Church [Cleveland, Ohio], and who has written a number of books, and who is, had also been the president of the school board in Shaker Heights.  So we include our efforts to teach history through the arts.
Story_ID: 238973
Speaker 1: Interesting now for me to think back on some of those things that you said about arts in your home in Sandusky [Ohio], and in the 1930s when you're a young child, your mother's [Cornell Collier Sallee] love of music and singing and then the government stepping in with the WPA [Works Progress Administration] program.  With the grant writing that you're required to do now as an arts administrator [for Creative Writing Workshop Projects, Cleveland, Ohio] in trying to offer all of these services at a rate that's affordable if not free--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for students.  Are you finding that there is support, government support, community support--
Speaker 2: We've been very--
Speaker 1: --for what you're doing?
Speaker 2: We've been very fortunate.  We have had funding, some funding from the Ohio Arts Council, one fund from the literary panel, and some from the minority panel for various projects that we have had.  We have also had funding from The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] through Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio], from the Gund Foundation, The George Gund Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio].  And so, the Women's Community Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio] because we had a project that we called our CWWP Girls to Women, where we worked with adolescent girls with successful female role models.  And we brought the artists in of the visiting young woman who is studying arts as symphonic management and we take them to the school.  Every visitor I take to the schools to meet the children and young people, and tell them what the practicalities are in their field and the horizons, because sometimes they only think performance.  But here's a young woman from Texas studying to be a symphony administrator, and so there are other jobs that they can do that are related to their art.  And at one conference I met a young woman from Manchester, England, an African, I started to say American but an African British person who was a performance poet, a writer, and she was touring in the United States.  She was a Winston Churchill [Memorial Trust] fellow.  I said, "What about coming to Ohio?"  And she did.  And we developed a residency at the Cleveland School of the Arts [Cleveland, Ohio] for the young women.  And so that was another opportunity to expand their horizons, for them to see people from not only another part of this country, but another part of the world.  And then significantly people from the West African diaspora.  She happened to have been the child of an Irish mother and a Nigerian father.  And she's a writer and poet, and did a wonderful job with our students.  So we invite as many, and we employ with the amount of funds that we have, most of the monies that we have go to employ local artists.  I am, we have a consultant now, a technical assistant, to teach us how to get money for operations.  Because as long as I have been writing the proposals, I have been writing them for programs, and so there's very little for administration.  And we've maintained our stability from 1990 and with the Adrienne Kennedy Society in 1993 with Creative Writing Workshop Projects because I have essentially been a volunteer executive director.  And so, and that is part of my volunteer work.  And if you would like to know some of the others that are very important to me, for forty years we were associated with the Cleveland International Program [CIP].  And hosting adult professionals in our home and from the [Caribbean] Islands, from Europe, from Asia, and from Africa.  So we've had a lot of interesting conversations with people from around the world and, you know, they all seem so similar to me.  They all have the same really basic needs and desires that we have.  And so there's that common thread and it really makes you know that we are all of one blood, and that there ought to be more peace and cooperation in this world.  But we bring that to the children because when they're here, I took one man from Senegal to an elementary school, and, of course, the children were quite surprised to learn that they speak French (laughter).  And so there's a lot of expansion of ideas and what our Creative [Writing] Workshop Projects really are to get the young people to be critical in their thinking, open, and we wanna bring the diversity that they are going to be dealing with for the rest of their lives, and so that they really learn how to adequately address issues in ways that can be, well diplomatic at times, confronting at times, but always from a basis of knowledge and respect.
Story_ID: 238974
Speaker 1: So with this decade now of keeping Creative Writing Workshop Projects [Cleveland, Ohio] afloat and identifying funding and presenting successful programs, are you optimistic about the future of the organization and the support in the community for the kind of work that you do?
Speaker 2: Well, I really am very optimistic, and that's why I requested the technical assistance.  Last year we had someone come in and we did a strategic plan.  And so we reviewed our history and our, updated our mission statements and our organizational structure.  We're working on this year.  And then this technical assistant is working with us on marketing and fundraising and public relations.  And I feel that this is the necessary foundation that has to be laid so I can retire again (laughter).
Speaker 1: And start a fifth career, perhaps?
Speaker 2: Well, perhaps.
Speaker 1: All right.  You know, we didn't, I don't believe we identified Adrienne Kennedy as an African American writer, but I wanna say for the record that she is.
Speaker 2: Yes, she is.
Speaker 1: And obviously you too are an African American woman, but I wondered is there a focus on the African American experience in the activities of Creative Writing Workshop Projects?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is.  And that's a very, very intentional goal.  Because what we find currently that the students, and even other people in the community, are not as sufficiently aware of the strengths and contributions of African Americans to this country and to their own communities and to the broader community.  And so we want them to be knowledgeable, we want them to appreciate, and be proud of who they are, and of their heritage, and it makes a good basis then to be totally involved with other people, because you have to respect yourself first before you can respect others.
Story_ID: 238975
Speaker 1: So it seems then that this focus on the arts, this commonality (laughter) then with you and Adrienne Kennedy and your concern about Cleveland [Ohio] students in the public schools, that somehow you've also succeeded in taking that to the international community and not just through the Cleveland International Program [CIP], but I heard you mention something earlier about going to Italy with the choir (laughter) so can you tell us something about-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now this is a different choir.
Speaker 1: Different choir.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me about this choir and what kind of music you're performing?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Of course, as you would know, with the Cleveland Orchestra Chorus we did the classical masses and all the other types of music that you would do with an orchestra.  This is the Heritage Chorale [of Cleveland] and I've just been a member of this for a couple years.  We specialize in spirituals and African American heritage music.  And our first experience overseas was in 2002.  And we participated in the Vienna, Austria [Vienna International] Advent [Singing] Festival, and so we had a wonderful time there and sang in some of the most beautiful cathedrals and at the city hall in Vienna with other choirs from around the world, from Italy and Germany and the Ukraine.  And so that was a wonderful experience.  And now we're preparing to, for another European tour.  We're going to Italy, and I believe we are scheduled to sing at the Vatican [Vatican City].  So looking forward to that.  We're going to Rome [Italy] and to Florence [Italy] and Venice [Italy].
Speaker 1: And when is this scheduled to take place?
Speaker 2: June, we're leaving June 12th of 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it's really, I think that what one of our children or actually more than one has said, "You have to keep active."  You have to keep thinking, you have to keep, I think it also goes back to that biblical thing doesn't it?  Where you use your talents.  And so that's what we're trying to do.
Story_ID: 238976
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Mrs. [June Sallee] Antoine, are there any final remarks that you'd like to make at this point about your work and making history here on America's north coast before we turn our attention to some of the photographs that will illustrate some of the various activities you've been involved in?  Anything you'd like to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I just would like to say that I have been privileged to work with a great diversity of organizations as a volunteer in Cleveland [Ohio].  With the various theaters, with the two major black theaters, the East Cleveland Theater [Cleveland, Ohio] and Karamu Theatre [Karamu House, Cleveland, Ohio].  Also with the Great Lakes Theater Festival [Great Lakes Theater, Cleveland, Ohio] that first commissioned Adrienne [Kennedy] and caused us to start being supportive of their classic theater.  And then the Cleveland Play House [Cleveland, Ohio] which is one of the first in the nation of that type. So I have really broadened my exposure in the arts for music and visual art, to be inclusive of art of theatre. And so I'm really pleased with that.  I'm pleased with--that we're able to give some employment to artists, because there are still difficulties for many African American artists.  And so locally those people who choose to stay in Cleveland, and want to have full-time year 'round work, they often have off seasons and times when they can be in a mentoring relationship with students and young people in Cleveland.  And we're just pleased to be able to facilitate that.
Story_ID: 238977
Speaker 1: We're looking at a photograph that is at the Cuyahoga Community College [Cleveland, Ohio] metropolitan campus, when Creative Writing Workshop Projects [Cleveland, Ohio] presented a play, 'Sweet Flypaper, a Langston Hughes Scrapbook' ['The Sweet Flypaper of Life'].  Here I am introducing the person who did the research and compiled and wrote the play.  She is director, Margaret Ford-Taylor, the former director of Karamu House [Cleveland, Ohio], and currently a theater professor at Cleveland State University [Cleveland, Ohio] and the University of Akron [Akron, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Ready.
Speaker 1: I would say at that performance we performed for over two thousand middle school Cleveland Municipal School District [Cleveland Metropolitan School District] students and they thoroughly enjoyed it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Of my husband and I.  And it was in one of the Cleveland Municipal Schools after we had been engaged in a five week Bittersweet and Arts Academy Project [ph.], a summer project.  And my husband, Dr. Albert C. Antoine [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine], has been a consummate volunteer and partner on our, all the efforts that we have made for, of the Adrienne Kennedy Society and Creative Writing Workshop Projects.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: I was--
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: I was, in here, I was interviewed as the young audiences of greater Cleveland [Ohio] were preparing for their presentation, at which time I was honored as the Arts Educator Champion of the Year, and that was in 2002.
Speaker 2: A group of young men that had auditioned for the Interlochen [Center for the Arts] international summer arts camp.  I'm a member of the Shaker Heights [Ohio] Interest Group, ShareHolders in Growth.  And we have been auditioning talented young people, primarily minority students, for the experience at Interlochen, anywhere from four to eight weeks.  These young men, on the left is Jerry Lang II, and he was a piano student.  He wants to be a concert pianist and he's excellent.  And the young man in the middle is an organ student, and he has, it's a very important job that he is preparing for because we lack the fine organists, and many churches lack fine organists.  And when I was director of the Music School Settlement [sic. The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio], I would often get calls for musicians for churches.  The young man on the right is a cellist and his name was Ismar Gomes, and he's a Hispanic student.  And he also enjoyed a summer program at Interlochen.
Speaker 1: I think I'm introducing the actors from Cleveland Art Theatre [Cleveland Heights, Ohio] who were performing for the Langston Hughes drama.  They are also, they have performed for our W.E.B. Du Bois drama on 'The Souls of Black Folk' last year when the one hundredth anniversary of the 'The Souls of Black Folk' was celebrated.  This year they will be working with us on a civil rights movement drama, with special attention to the Brown v. Board of Education [of Topeka, 1954].  So almost a resident company that we can call on.  And all professional actors and directed by Margaret Ford-Taylor.
Speaker 2: Actual present, award presentation from Young Audiences of Greater Cleveland [Center for Arts-Inspired Learning].  Young Audiences is a national arts support group.  And in Cleveland they have a annual awards ceremony, and I was selected in 2002 as the Arts Education Champion of the Year.  And this, besides a five hundred dollar cash award, I was given an opportunity to have any of their artists perform.  And so I chose to give that to my church group, ArtsPlymouth [Plymouth Church of Shaker Heights, Shaker Heights, Ohio], and to give to the elementary school in Cleveland that we are supporting with reading materials and also with arts programs, and that is the Buckeye-Woodland Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio].  So they did provide arts program for Buckeye-Woodland.
Speaker 1: Turn it the right way.
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And we're ready.
Speaker 2: Here you see my mother and father, Mrs. Cornell Collier Sallee and Charles Louis Sallee, Sr.  They were both born in Kentucky.  My dad was born in Harrodsburg, Kentucky in 1886.  My mother was born in Frankfort, Kentucky in 1894.  Here they are up in 1959 after being married for fifty years, and they continued until my dad passed in 1967.  And so it was over, it was about sixty year marriage.  And my mother passed some years later, about, I think, it was 1979, 1980.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my grandfather, my paternal grandfather, my father's father.  And I think this was a picture taken at a fair.  And I had it, I received this from a cousin who, my aunt had, and when she passed she gave it to me.  And his name was James Sallee, and he was born, I don't know where he was born, but I did check the 1880 U.S. Census, and I'm certain I found him, and he was, his age was, birth was estimated in 1852.  And I know he was a farmer but I also think he worked on trains because I did hear that he had traveled at some time later in life.  I don't have a picture of his wife, my grandmother [Rebecca Sallee], but she was a nurse and a midwife and I'm told that she rode sidesaddle.  And when the doctors would give up on patients they'd call her.  So that there's a strong heritage.
Speaker 1: Picture of my great-grandmother, my dad's grandmother, the mother of his father.  And I don't, actually I got this picture after my dad had passed.  And, and I, no, no that's not true.  I got this picture because he was still living but when he saw the picture, he just said grandma.  But he didn't, and I did not think to ask what her name was.  So I do not know what her name is.  And all I know is that he said that it was his father's mother.
Story_ID: 238978
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my wedding and my husband [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine] there, and to the left on the top is my husband's brother, Lawrence Antoine, who was a public school principal in New York.  And next a friend of his at [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] who was an English teacher.  And next in the center there right behind my husband is my oldest brother, Charles Sallee [Jr.], visual artist.  And then it was behind me is my youngest sister's [Angela Marlene Sallee Blount] ex-husband, Dr. Wilbur Blount.  And a dear friend from Columbus, Ohio.  On the lower level is a friend of from Ohio State University.  And next to her is my oldest sister, Rebecca [Sallee Stanton], who is now about eighty-five years old.  Next to her was my maid of honor, Regina, who is now [HistoryMaker] Dr. Regina Williams and a nurse educator.  And the little boy was the ring bearer, and he was the son of our soloist. And on the right my younger sister, Marlene, who was a social worker, a juvenile and federal probation officer, and early on she was a guide at the United Nations, and at the time when Dag Hammarskjold was the attorney general.  Next to her is my sister-in-law, Carol Antoine.  And this all took place in Sandusky, Ohio, above us you can see some of the ornamental plaster work that my dad did, and in the center it says God is love and that was a gift of our family to our church.  The ceremony took place in, on June 14, 1953 in Sandusky, Ohio at Second Baptist Church on Decatur Street.
Speaker 2: My master's degree from Case Western Reserve University [Cleveland, Ohio] in 1956.  At that time, it was simply Western Reserve University.  This was in elementary education, and I had just come from New York [New York] from Columbia University where I had starting to prepare for a master's in music education, but I understood the prospects for employment in 1954 were limited.  So the prospects for elementary teaching were greater, so I prepared for that since my husband had accepted a job in Cleveland [Ohio] in 1954.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of our daughter Janice Marie [Antoine Lumpkin].  And she is the young lady who grew up to be a biochemical engineer, graduating from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and getting her master's and Ph.D. from the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  This is our younger son, Lawrence [Sallee Antoine], who grew up to be an electrical engineer graduating from Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and receiving a master's, an M.B.A. from UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] in Los Angeles, California, and also a CPA [Certified Public Accountant].  And he is now vice president of, he had been for mergers and acquisitions with Platinum Equity Holdings [Beverly Hills, California].  And he's currently still employed there.  This is our middle son Edward.  And Edward Sallee Antoine was a graduate of Princeton University [Princeton, New Jersey].  He was in high school, he was a National Merit Scholar, and continued his studies at Princeton, and has been a software writer for financial institutions in New York City [New York, New York], the last of which was Morgan Stanley.  He also teaches preparation for SATs and graduate record exams [GRE] and that type of thing.  And I think he loves teaching.  And he is, currently lives in Brooklyn, New York [New York].  This is our oldest son, Albert Sallee Antoine, and he graduated from Carnegie Mellon University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] in civil engineering.  He also studied and to be a professional engineer.  He is employed now in Columbus, Ohio with the Ohio Department of Transportation.  He is the only married son.  And he is the father of a little girl.  I do wanna go back to our daughter who also married, and she married Carl James Lumpkin, and they had four daughters.  And she had a sudden aneurysm in the brain in October of 1997.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken in 1976.  It was the year that our daughter had just graduated from high school [Shaker Heights High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio].  So that meant that our son there in the middle was a tenth grader, and that was Albert, and Edward was an eighth grader.  And little Lawrence down there beside me.  Let's see four years from that would be a fourth grader.  So, and there I am and with my husband and very proud of our little family.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: This is Albert with his wife, Evelyn Kelley Antoine.  And she, as I said, Albert is a civil engineer with the Ohio Department of Transportation and Evelyn is a graphic artist.  And she also is now pretty much a full-time mother.  And they have a daughter Kelly Marie Antoine.  And they are a good couple and they've been married since 1980, I think '82 [1982].  This is daughter, Kelly Marie Antoine.  She is now about five years old.  She was a little younger in this picture.  But our most recent communication was that she just met President [George Walker] Bush and announced to him that she was a resident of Ohio (laughter).  Kelly goes to the Columbus School for Girls [Columbus, Ohio] and her little, one of her little classmates moved to Washington [D.C.] because her father got a position with the Bush administration, and so the family was invited to Washington to visit and to be there when the president came in from a visit and landed on the lawn on his helicopter.
Speaker 1: Maybe I, could have proceeded with the one when she got her degree from MIT.  This is a picture of our daughter Janice Marie Antoine as she received her bachelor's diploma from MIT.  And this was the beginning of her career as a professor of chemical engineering.
Story_ID: 238979
Speaker 1: After graduating from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Janice [Antoine Lumpkin] received a fellowship to go for her doctorate.  And two years into that she married Carl James Lumpkin.  And then two years after that, Nicole [Lumpkin] was born, you see her, she's the older child.  And then while she was getting her Ph.D., Jessica Lumpkin was born.  And so those are the two oldest granddaughters.  Nicole is now nineteen, in college, and Jessica is a tenth grader in Columbia, Maryland.  Carl by an airline in [Washington] Dulles [International] Airport in Washington, D.C. and has been a wonderful father taking care of the four daughters.  At the time of our daughter's death, the baby was two weeks old, and a two-year-old, and the, Jessica was then nine, and Nicole was thirteen.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All righty.
Speaker 1: This is a recent picture of our granddaughter, Jordan Gabrielle Lumpkin, and Jordan is eight years old and she attends the Christian academy [Long Reach Church of God Christian Academy; Celebration Christian Academy, Columbia, Maryland] that our daughter helped to found at their church, at the Long Reach Church of God [Celebration Church] in Columbia, Maryland.  And Jordan is an excellent student and a great reader.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a recent picture of our young--Janice's youngest daughter, Olivia, and Olivia Naomi Lumpkin.  And she is now six years old and a very serious student.  And a very lovely, bright young lady.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was pleased to greet our congressman, [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes, who had come to one of the music excellence program at the Cleveland Music School Settlement [The Music Settlement, Cleveland, Ohio] at St. Henry's Catholic Church [St. Henry Parish; Holy Spirit Catholic Church, Cleveland, Ohio].  And, of course, Congressman Stokes served Ohio for thirty years.  He is now in retirement with his papers at the Western Reserve Historical Society [Cleveland, Ohio].  And he was, it was a real honor to have him in our audience that day.
Speaker 2: Okay.  (Unclear) stabilize.
Speaker 1: This is a recent picture of myself and my husband [HistoryMaker Albert Antoine] that was taken for our church book.  And our church is the Plymouth Church of Shaker Heights [Shaker Heights, Ohio].  We are a Congregational church that is now part of the United Church of Christ.  And we have had a very, we've been members there for over, about forty years.  And at the time that we came to Plymouth, we had seen an article in the paper that said that Plymouth was integrated, but when we got there, we found there was one black couple.  And so we were really the first family with children, and we were well received and we enjoyed our fellowship at Plymouth Church these forty years.
Speaker 2: Picture of Adrienne Kennedy, Adrienne Hawkins Kennedy.  Adrienne, I believe, was born in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] but she grew up in Cleveland [Ohio] and attended all of the, elementary schools, Lafayette Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio], and then finished at Glenville High School [Cleveland, Ohio].  And then on to The Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio] where she received her bachelor's degree in 1953.  And recently in the summer of 2003, was honored with an honorary doctorate for her literary accomplishments.  And I was very pleased to be there the day before, at which time she was presented, and I had a discussion on her work.  Prior to that, the month before, I had gone to a symposium where various theater people from other universities were there to discuss the significance of her literary work, and there were some very significant works that related to race.  And she has taken some very controversial and interesting positions but the unique thing about her work is that it is not the general linear type of writing.  It is very thought provoking.  And I attended five openings in New York [New York] at the Signature Theatre Company where she was one of the few who have been honored playwrights in residence for an entire year, where only her plays were performed.  And so it would be very interesting to look at her catalog of works, and not only at her original works, but there are works about her works.  She teaches, she currently teaches part-time at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Here I am as the cofounder of the Adrienne Kennedy Society, and this was in our program book when we were honoring Adrienne.  And next to me is [Julia] Carlyne Wormley.  She is the daughter of the co-founder Louise Kent-Hope [HistoryMaker Louise Hope].  Carlyne is a fashion designer.  She's a member of Creative Writing Workshop Projects [Cleveland, Ohio], a graduate of Parsons [School of Design, The New School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this is--
Speaker 1: Here is Mrs. Louise Kent-Hope.  She was an elementary, actually a kindergarten specialist.  And she also had a master's degree in music.  So after she retired from teaching, she taught piano at the Music School Settlement. And this is a very unique, and encouraging, and I would say empowering individual, who has given a great deal, not only in teaching children, she was a scholar, a [Martha Holden] Jennings [Foundation] scholar, when she taught.  And she also continued to mentor young people in our society and in Creative Writing Workshop Projects.  And we followed students, for example, over from middle school through their college.  And so we really salute her.  She is now eighty-nine years old and is still president emeritus of Creative Writing Workshop Projects.
Speaker 2: Louis Stokes for the work that we had been doing in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Here we see our three sons, Albert [Sallee Antoine], who is the oldest and now Edward [Sallee Antoine], the middle son, and Lawrence [Sallee Antoine], our youngest son.  And they are all are a real delight, and recently afforded their parents their fiftieth wedding anniversary gift of a seven-day cruise to Alaska.  And so we're really proud of them and the work that they are doing now.
