Story_ID: 665721
Speaker 1: All right my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Billye Suber Aaron [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron], B-I-L-L-Y-E, S-U-B-E-R, A-A-R-O-N.
Speaker 1: And ma'am what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: October 16, 1936.  I was born in a little rural area out from Palestine, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay and--okay.  All right and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm retired.  Was a teacher and a fundraiser before retiring.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is what?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 1, 19--2016 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In my home here in Atlanta, Georgia.
Story_ID: 665722
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: No.  I have no favorite food.  I have favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What are some of them just as, I'm curious?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, growing up in a rural community I loved vegetables, fruits and vegetables for that matter.  But I particularly am fond of the various greens like collard greens, turnip greens, mustard greens, cabbage.  I love corn, sweet potatoes.  They would come at the top of my list of favorite foods.
Speaker 1: Okay do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: The fall.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, a favorite again I have many favorites but I, I love the Bahamas and the Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Okay and the last question is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite, well maybe help me do unto others as I would have them do unto me.  That I think of in many instances when I'm dealing with people.
Speaker 1: That sounds like a timeless one to me.  So, thank you.
Story_ID: 665723
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Nathan C. Suber] side.  We'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Annie Mae Smith [Annie Mae Smith Suber], A-N-N-I-E, M-A-E, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: Okay and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on March 2nd, oh my goodness what year?  I can't recall it right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay but she was born here in--
Speaker 2: In and around the community where I was born up at what we call Neches, Texas, N-E-C-H-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's a strange--is that an Indian [Native American] word or is it?
Speaker 2: I would think it probably comes from the Indian language.  My great-grandmother was an Indian on my mother's side but I cannot tell you what tribe that she belonged to.  I only remember her slightly because she passed when I was quite young.  And regrettably during my era, we didn't talk a lot about where you came from or who brought you here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Neches reminds me of a town Natchez in Mississippi. The words sound alike (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.  But it's not we don't--it's not spelled that way and we don't pronounce it that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So, so your grandmother who had the Indian background was on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you're not sure what--okay.
Speaker 2: I don't--I remember talking to my uncle, my great uncle, my grandmother's brother [Isiah Holloway] rather and inquiring and somewhere along the line he mentioned Cherokee but he wasn't sure.  So I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So well tell us about what your mother's family was doing and what they, what occupation did they have and?
Speaker 2: My mother's family farmed but they moved to Texas as did my grandparents [Hattie Goree Suber and Calvin Suber] on my father's side.  But they moved to an area outside of Neches between Neches, Texas, and Jacksonville, Texas, and they farmed and my grandmother Lizzie Smith [Lizzie Holloway Smith], Elizabeth Smith, but everybody called her Lizzie, her, her husband passed and oil was discovered on her property and her, her sibling's property because her, her parents lived there too.  They were Holloways.  So they farmed and lived off of oil wells for a period of time and after that of course, they--the oil wells went dry as they claimed but they sprung up in other areas of the community.
Speaker 1: Is it--do you suspect that the oil was siphoned some sort of way to another location?
Speaker 2: That's what we suspect.  We don't know for certain but Humble Oil well [Humble Oil and Refining Company; Exxon Company, U.S.A.] was the company that was pumping oil.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) they're similar to Tiger [Tiger Oil Company, Houston, Texas] right, Humble Oil Company--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a big, really popular in the '70s [1970s].  Humble Oil Company, okay.  Well did your mother now did she, she must have had I guess an opportunity to go to school and you know--
Speaker 2: She went, during that time colleges were really secondary schools in Texas.  My mother went to Butler College [Tyler, Texas] which was in essence a high school for two years and she met and married my handsome daddy and that was the end of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you say it like that, in those days correct me if I'm wrong, I think the aspirations that was taught young ladies is to find a man.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, get educated but in the process find an educated man too.
Speaker 2: Well it's kind of interesting.  She met my dad through his sister who had married my grandmother's brother.  So we laugh about it often.  She, my, my grandmother, my aunt Hattie [Hattie Suber Holloway] had two girls and we always knew that anybody Dessie [ph.] was related to we were related to because of--because my daddy came up to Neches, Texas, to visit then his sister Hattie and met Hattie's niece by marriage.
Story_ID: 665724
Speaker 1: Give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Nathan Suber [Nathan C. Suber]: N-A-T-H-A-N, S-U-B-E-R.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know I know this but regrettably I can't pull it up at the moment.
Speaker 1: Well that's all right.  Well the place though--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --wasn't he from South Carolina you were saying?
Speaker 2: His parents moved to Texas from South Carolina.  He was not born in South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 2: He was born in Texas.  My grandmother, his mother, was Hattie Suber, Hattie Goree was her maiden name.  Hattie Goree Suber and she married a Suber [Calvin Suber] in Newberry, South Carolina, and they moved to Texas with their oldest daughter, oldest two children I believe.  Aunt Hattie [Hattie Suber Holloway] who was named for her mom was I think she told me she was about twelve when they moved to Palestine, Texas, where her mother and father [Nathan Goree] had preceded them because they had moved there with another--a brother, my grandmother's brother and so the Gorees had established themselves to some extent in--out from Palestine as well.
Speaker 1: Palestine that's like--
Speaker 2: That was the head coun- I guess it was Anderson County [Texas] but it was the largest--
Speaker 1: Like the county seat of--
Speaker 2: --yeah the county seat for Anderson County but the city was called Palestine or some few people referred to it as Palestine but most of us called it were taught to pronounce it Palestine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's where the Gorees had moved previous to my grandmother and her family moving to Palestine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How do you spell their names?  The Gorees, how do--
Speaker 2: G-O-R-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So your dad was at Butler College [Tyler, Texas] too?
Speaker 2: No.  My dad didn't go to college.  My dad went as far as the little school out in the country went and they cut off at seventh grade.  So he went only to the seventh grade.
Story_ID: 665725
Speaker 1: So is there a story about how your parents [Annie Mae Smith Suber and Nathan C. Suber] met?
Speaker 2: Yeah they met up while he was visiting his sister [Hattie Suber Holloway]--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay that's whe- yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) who had married my uncle Isiah [Isiah Holloway] my grandmother's brother and all of that group were more Indian-ish [Native American] shall I say because their mother [Aaron's maternal grandmother, Lizzie Holloway Smith] was an Indian so Uncle Isiah and uncle we called him Good [ph.].  Often the names I have no idea how they came about but Uncle Good and Uncle Isiah looked very much like Indian men.  Now the girls were not as, as yellow shall I say as the brothers were because their dad [Peter Holloway] was a very dark man and the girls took on more of the father's complexion than the boys did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.  I was asking about is there a story was there an actual story about how their eyes met or he invited her to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's the story, he went to visit his sister and he met my mom who's the daughter of his--this gets to be (laughter)--who was Aunt Hattie's sister-in-law (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh I understand that part. Yeah, I understand that part, I just wondered if it was more--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah okay.
Speaker 1: --more of a story.
Story_ID: 665726
Speaker 1: Parents [Annie Mae Smith Suber and Nathan C. Suber] get married and now do you have siblings?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. How--
Speaker 2: There were eight of us.  I lost my older brother back in March as a matter of fact.  My mother was born the 2nd of March and Nathan [Nathan Suber] passed on the 8th--I mean on the 5th or 6th of March but he was the oldest in our family.
Speaker 1: All right who was--can you give us the rest of them in order?
Speaker 2: Yes my sister Artie who lives now in San Francisco [California] or out from San Francisco.  She lives in Foster City [California].  I have a sister named Delphine [Delphenia Suber] who lives in Houston [Texas] and is going through Alzheimer's now.  I have--I'm fourth in line, then following me I have a brother named Noland Suber, Noland Edward Suber.  Noland lives in San Jose, California.  Hattie [Hattie Suber (ph.)] next lives here Atlanta [Georgia] after living for a number of years in Africa.  But she's here in Atlanta now.  I have a sister named Sarah who, Sarah Lou Ella Suber McDaniel [Sarah Suber McDaniel] and if I get this go back and give you all the names, my oldest sister is Artie Mae Suber [Artie Mae Suber Neal], was Roach.  She and Mack Roach [Mack Roach, Jr.] divorced and she remarried a Bennett.  She has one--she had four boys--
Speaker 1: This Max Roach the jazz drummer?
Speaker 2: Not that Max Roach, no.
Speaker 1: Oh a different one okay.
Speaker 2: No she, she has five boys.  The last--the youngest boy is a Bennett, Anthony Bennett by her second husband.  She married--I mean Hillary Bennett passed and she married a Neal and he passed some time ago so she lives alone in San Francisco now--I mean in Foster City now.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And Sarah, Sarah lost her husband about two, three years ago now maybe.  He was Edward McDaniel so she was a McDaniel.  She has four children and my baby sister is Ocie Bell Suber Swead [Ocie Suber Swead].  She lives in Houston, and they have one daughter.
Story_ID: 665727
Speaker 1: All right now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their looks, their dispositions, their senses of humor, their interests, talents--who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my mom [Annie Mae Smith Suber].  My mom was into education and she taught me to recite poetry, a poem, they were little poems of whatever kind and I always remember the one that probably every child or every little girl probably has been taught and that's, "I'm my mother's darling don't you think I'm sweet.  I have roses on my shoulder and slippers on my feet." I remember reciting that any number of times in little programs or whatever kind so my mom had six girls and two boys so obviously she had to spend a great deal of time with her daughters and of course with the boys because we came from a farming community so my dad [Nathan C. Suber] farmed and in the winter he would go to Galveston, Texas, to work on the dock.  I think it's called a dock in Galveston and we lived off of canned goods and what have you that we grew from our garden for the most part.
Story_ID: 665728
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up [in Texas]?
Speaker 2: Pinto beans in the pot that I love still (laughter), greens--you're talking about foods I'm assuming, did you say (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No it could be anything. Sights and sounds and smells.
Speaker 2: Sights, sounds and--
Speaker 1: What did it look like where you grew up or what it sound like, what did it smell like over there when you think about home?
Speaker 2: Well really cooking, the odor of food being cooked, being boiled or being--well we didn't do any grilling at that time as I recall but we did a lot of baking and boiling and we did, we killed hogs and my grandmother had cows and we'd kill a cow and a hog so you, you get and we had chickens.  We had, we had what most people had as far as farming is concerned and that's how we got over.  We--I remember vaguely when I first had a slice of quote/unquote light bread we called it but loaf bread that you buy now, we did--but my mother [Annie Mae Smith Suber] baked the breads so we didn't have--didn't get much of the sliced bread until oh I was probably I don't wanna say I was in high school but I mean I don't think it was that long but we didn't buy loaf bread and take it home.  We--my mother baked biscuits and cooked and baked cakes and what have you but we didn't eat that quote, unquote light bread.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: So you got the usual fragrances of, of, of the smell of food being cooked and we lived right across the road, across the field if you will from a small church that we attended so the noises of a piano and all of us had to go to Sunday school and sing in the choir or do whatever was asked of us so those were the kinds of sounds and sights, wagons passing by with people sitting in the wagons.
Story_ID: 665729
Speaker 1: My dad [Nathan C. Suber] and my, my grandmother [Hattie Goree Suber] had a few dollars.  I don't remember precisely but I remember she lost, she lost her money 'cause she bought it was around three hundred acres of land that she bought when they moved from South Carolina but her husband [Calvin Suber] was killed a few years after they got to Texas carrying a load of wood to extend the house that they were building, that they were living in and the story goes that my uncle, my daddy's brother was left holding the reins and my grandfather got out of the wagon and told my uncle not--you know, to hold the reins steady now don't, don't have the horses or whatever move but something frightened the horses and the land--
Speaker 2: The load of lumber?
Speaker 1: The, the load fell back on my grandfather and he was killed.  So that left my grandmother as the head of the house so to speak because they were--these boys were young at the time.  The older children that she had were girls and she took over the farming I suppose at that time.
Speaker 2: That's a big job for a woman to take over (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes but she had peach orchards, she was very resourceful because I, I remember she always had chickens and eggs and cows and hogs and we, we didn't go hungry but we didn't have a lot of resources that we certainly could have used.
Speaker 2: You may be short on cash but you had enough food?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  But my grandmother lost her money in the, in the what do you call it?
Speaker 2: In the oil well?
Speaker 1: In, '20 [1920], in '20 [1920] something no in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh the stock market crash. The Depression [Great Depression].
Speaker 1: During the Depression.  That's when she lost the money that she had but she had bought she didn't have a mortgage so to speak on the land that we lived on and we stayed on her land.  But she had nearly three hundred acres of land in East Texas where we grew up.
Speaker 2: Okay when I think of East Texas and I mean this is--correct me if I'm wrong, I thinking like it's dry, maybe land as flat that pretty much--
Speaker 1: It was fairly flat but you had some hills, red clay and pine trees and but you also had a lot of hickory trees like we used to gather hickory nuts in the, in the fall and black walnut.  My grandmother had three or four big black walnut trees on her property and I guess that's how we--only one or two pecan trees as I recall, but I grew up loving pecans and black walnuts and that kind of thing 'cause they--those were the things that we ate.
Story_ID: 665730
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?  What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: I started school in a little, a little--it wasn't--little--it was a little more than a one room schoolhouse but it was called Mound Prairie--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --elementary school [Mound Prairie Institute, Anderson County, Texas] but shortly but in the like the fourth or fifth grade I guess they closed that school and bussed us up to Neches, Texas, to a school called Clemons High School [Neches, Texas] and I think Clemons High was named for Mr. Clemons who was a principal and an educator in that community.
Speaker 1: Okay now did you, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I loved school.
Speaker 1: Okay I thought so I just thought I'd ask.  Okay.  And now you had a--you remember Professor Obie Phillips [Obie L. Phillips, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Obie Phillips was my principal--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I saw Mrs. Phillips [Sadie Perpener Phillips] just back in the spring who's still living and was looking just like Mrs. Phillips looked when I was growing up.  Mrs. Phillips and Mr. Phillips sort of--well Mrs. Phillips taught music and English and everything almost, many courses and Mr. Phillips taught math and drove the bus and was the principal of our little school.  They had about seven or eight kids too and as a matter of fact one of Mrs. Phillips' son is Johnny Phillips, General Johnny Phillips [John F. Phillips] who we--I stay in touch with the whole family, with most of the family even today because we--Obie Phillips' father [Frank Phillips] married my aunt Ella [Ella Goree] many years after.  All of his children were grown, pretty much grown up.  Two or three might have been in high school but Mr. Phillips' father was my uncle by marriage for a short time before he passed.
Speaker 1: Okay so all right so in, so you came out of--well when you were--did you have--I know you liked English, you were an English major in college [Texas College, Tyler, Texas]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so did you enjoy poetry and writing and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Loved reciting it.  Few poems I can remember even today, not all of them, but I competed within the Interscholastic League [University Interscholastic League] we called it and we had the locals, the regional and then the state and Mr. Burleigh [Harry T. Burleigh] who taught at Texas I mean at Clemons High School coached me and I won the junior declaiming contest at Prairie View College [Prairie View State Normal and Industrial College; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] then, Prairie View A&M College [sic.] I think it was called--
Speaker 1: Right, right. That's what they called it, yeah.
Speaker 2: --competing against kids--black kids all over the State of Texas would gather at Prairie View because that was the only college that we had at the time.  A little later in maybe around '48 [1948], '47 [1947] or '48 [1948] Texas Southern [Texas State University for Negroes; Texas Southern University] in Houston [Texas] opened but prior to that you either went to Wiley College, Butler College [Tyler, Texas], Bishop College [Marshall, Texas] in Texas or I think I've named them all the schools that were founded by church organizations for the most part.
Speaker 1: Yeah Wiley--
Speaker 2: Wiley was in Marshall [Texas] it still is.
Speaker 1: Wiley is the one that celebrated the movie--
Speaker 2: Yeah The Debat- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'The Great Debaters.'
Speaker 2: Right, right.  And but Butler College closed many, many years ago and Bishop College closed quite some years ago as well.  But you still have--oh Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College] in Waco, Texas, was but I think I understand--I believe that Paul Quinn may have moved now to Dallas [Texas] on the campus that Bishop had before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah I think that's what--yeah I think that's exactly right, I think that's right.
Story_ID: 665731
Speaker 1: Were there many activities that you could participate in when you were in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Well yeah you did--that was about all you (laughter) you had but I, I was never athletic so I never participated in any sport but my, my older siblings played basketball and my brother played a little baseball in high school.  But I sang in the choir and I debated and I declaimed, junior declaiming and senior declaiming we called it during the time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I was at Clemons High School [Neches, Texas].  When I transferred to Lincoln High School, I did basically the same thing except that my horizon was broadened a bit because I was in a city school, high school as opposed to the little country school that I had attended so--
Speaker 1: So Lincoln was in--
Speaker 2: Lincoln was in Dallas, Texas, um-hm.
Speaker 1: In Dallas, okay.  All right.  So you went there your junior and senior year?
Speaker 2: My senior year.
Speaker 1: Senior year okay.  Now did Clemons go all the way through the senior year?
Speaker 2: Yes, it did.  But I, I moved to Dallas with an aunt so that's how I happened to go to school there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was your aunt a teacher or anything at this point?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I just wondered.  So was Lincoln--well how was Lincoln different from?
Speaker 2: Oh very different.  You had at Clemons High School we might have had all of two hundred fifty or three hundred students maybe.  I'm not sure we had that many.  Lincoln High School was a big school and with far more resources of course and it was--we had a choir called the Harry T. Burleigh Choir named for mister, the musician Harry T. Burleigh and I sang in that choir and we were invited to appear on a program, a local television program in Dallas called I think it was called 'Look Who's Here' or something.  Every Saturday morning they would showcase a school.
Speaker 1: This was a local--
Speaker 2: This was a local school in Dallas--on a Dallas television station.
Speaker 1: Television in the--
Speaker 2: In Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: On Saturday mornings you could tune in and watch Booker T. Washington [Booker T. Washington High School; Booker T. Washington High School for the Performing and Visual Arts, Dallas, Texas] or--.  They only had two high schools in Dallas then, Booker T. Washington and Lincoln High School.  A little later they opened--well after the [U.S.] Supreme Court decision of '54 [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] which was the very year that I graduated from school they opened up one or two other schools that and I don't remember all of that of course but other schools were opened wherein, where there were large black populations you know of kids, so.
Story_ID: 665732
Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite teacher at Lincoln [Lincoln High School, Dallas, Texas]?  Or did it, did--
Speaker 2: Yes, Mrs., Mrs. Bailey was one who was the music teacher.  Mrs. Maurine Bailey [Maurine F. Bailey] who had graduated from Bishop College [Marshall, Texas], by the way, was one and, and I'm gonna have a hard time now remembering their names.  I remember their faces so well but I'm having a hard time remembering their names.  But I liked, I really liked all of my teachers.  I didn't have--I probably had a favorite but I, I really was very pleased with all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But Mrs. Bailey in particular she spent maybe a little more time with me and then she gave me the assignment of writing the script when we were presented on 'Look Who's Here' on the TV program in Dallas [Texas].  I did the--I wrote the script that we had, that Mr. oh gosh what was his name?  Helped me with and I can't call his, terrible, I can't call his name right now, but he helped me with it.  He proofed it and sort of determined that I could say this that or the other and couldn't say the other but I was recognized by Mr. Marshall, T.D. Marshall who was our president [sic. principal] at Lincoln at baccalaureate for having done a magnificent job and I thought wow this doesn't get any better than this I thought at the time.  But that was what really gave me the idea that maybe I could dream of becoming a TV personality.
Speaker 1: Now what station was this in Dallas again?
Speaker 2: I think it was WRLD [sic. KRLD-TV; KDFW-TV, Dallas, Texas].  I don't know why that--I'm, I'm not sure.  I can't be sure--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --of the station but (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) get as close to it and you gave us the name of the program.  So you started thinking--
Speaker 2: It was just a little program that they would let schools, they would showcase the various schools in the city on a Saturday and when our time came when they invited us to be on the program, that was when Mrs. Bailey called me in to tell me that she wanted me to help do the script and to do the, to emcee the program so you can only imagine having come out of Palestine, Texas, out in the country where we didn't even have lights or running water at the time.  We got that a day or so (laughter) after I left but to be in Dallas and to have this opportunity was just grand, grand for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So there weren't any other black people on TV then right that you--?
Speaker 2: Oh no you didn't have any news people or any--they didn't go that far.  No they just let us come on.
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954] is the early days of TV I guess maybe I don't even know. I guess TV been around since the mid-'40s [1940s] or something?
Speaker 2: The first time I saw, let me be sure here.  I'm not, I'm not sure.  The first time I remember seeing a black lady on a TV program and it was obviously a short you know either thirty minute, I think it was in '67 [1967] I was on my way to Canada to--
Speaker 1: On a half hour program, you mean.
Speaker 2: Yeah and I saw her. She, she was the host of a show and she was obviously black, very, very attractive.  She could have been an Indian [Native American] for that matter I don't know but--
Speaker 1: On TV in the Dallas area or where?
Speaker 2: No, no this was in New York [New York].  I never saw a black lady in Dallas until many years after I got old and gray and I went back to Dallas but this I was on my way to the, what was it, the World's Fair [1967 International and Universal Exposition (Expo 67)] and I think it was in '67 [1967] in Montreal, Canada, it seems.  I might be off, but that's when I--no it had to been earlier than '67 [1967] because I started 'Today in Georgia,' started on 'Today in Georgia' in Atlanta [Georgia] in '68 [1968] so apparently this was much earlier because this lady when I saw her I, I oh yeah I'm gonna do this and, and but I can't tell you whether it was, it was, it had to have been in the early '60s [1960s].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, we won't belabor that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So but this gives you an idea maybe you could, you know, because you've written a script, you've been a host--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --already, and you haven't come out of high school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I can do it.  I can do it.  I know I can do it.
Speaker 1: So ye- sounds like to me you already did it; you did, you did it in high school but you didn't have a job doing it (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665733
Speaker 1: So any rate, so high school graduation in '54 [1954], and was there anything special about graduation?  Did you, were you valedictorian or did you--
Speaker 2: I was not.  I was in the top ten but I was not valedictorian but the, the thing special was to have your principal say, "Ms. Billye Suber [HistoryMake Billye Aaron] you know who just did a fantastic job on the TV the other day presenting Lincoln High School [Dallas, Texas] Harry T. Burleigh Choir."  Is he talking about me?  So when, when you are told to stand and I, here again my mother [Annie Mae Smith Suber] by this time was living in Houston [Texas] with the three younger siblings because well because of circumstances there was nothing to do.  We weren't farmers.  None of the girls were able to, you know, manipulate that and my oldest brother had gone to the [U.S. military] service.  My daddy [Nathan C. Suber] had passed--well he passed when I was twelve so he'd been--in '48 [1948] or '49 [1949] I believe it was, so you know your life is just moving ahead and you don't know why or where you're headed but somehow or another things start falling into place.
Speaker 1: Let's see.  Anybody else in your--?  They have some names down here that came out of your school but I don't know if they came out the same time?  [HistoryMaker] Mollie Belt, [HistoryMaker] Norma Adams-Wade or [HistoryMaker] Charles Willie--
Speaker 2: Charles Willie, Charles Willie went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] I believe.  Was it Charles Willie?  Out of Lincoln High School or where?
Speaker 1: Yeah out of Lincoln.
Speaker 2: Okay that was--he had a sister in my class, Mary Willie [Mary Gauthier], who was very talented in piano because she sometimes would play for Mrs. Bailey [Maurine F. Bailey] when Mrs. Bailey was directing.  Charles, let me see Charles V. Willie, Charles Vert Willie, graduated from Morehouse and is a professor--retired professor of Syracuse University [sic. Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] I believe because when I came here, when I came to Atlanta [Georgia] after getting out of Texas College [Tyler, Texas] a number of young men had come to Morehouse and maybe young ladies to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], I didn't know--I didn't get to know a lot of things at Lincoln High School because I was only there for a year and if I didn't have a class with a student.  I often didn't know who you know who, who the youngsters were in the class of '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 665734
Speaker 1: Tell me this. How did you come to go to Ty- was it Texas College in Tyler, Texas?
Speaker 2: Texas College?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  Did, did one of your teachers recommend the college?
Speaker 2: Yes, I didn't know where I was going or if I was going or if I could get there for that matter.  But and again I can--I can't call his name but he graduated from Texas College and then we had was it somebody I can't remember this man's name but he told my aunt Reba [ph.], he talked with I think Mrs. Bailey [Maurine F. Bailey] was a part of this and Texas College was recruiting students who could sing, who could do whatever and I was listed among them.  Because my, my whole desire at the time was to go to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  I wanted to go to Fisk University.  I wanted to go Fisk University--
Speaker 1: Is that because of the Jubilee Singers [Fisk Jubilee Singers] or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) but I didn't have the means to go to Fisk University.  I didn't even have the means to go to Texas College but I got a scholarship.
Speaker 1: What was Fisk your choice of the Jubilee Singers?
Speaker 2: I had, I had other teachers that went to Fisk that taught at Lincoln [Lincoln High School, Dallas, Texas].  As a matter of fact my interest in whatever school usually was determined by what I heard from a teacher and Texas College was just a hundred and oh a little better than a hundred miles, maybe one hundred thirty miles from Tyler. I mean from Dallas [Texas].  So I could--it made sense if you tried to make, figure out the numbers and what have you that that would have--if you were going to college you'd have to go somewhere in Texas and somewhere that you, where you could get on a cheap bus fare, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah Texas College, C.M.E. school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Christian Methodist Episcopal church.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay so how did you like Texas College?
Speaker 2: Oh I grew to like it.  I wasn't particularly fond of it when I got there.  See I grew up Baptist and it does make a difference the difference in the, the ritual and the, the way you worship but I didn't, I didn't have, I wasn't a dyed in the wool anything. I was just a churchgoing kid whose parents [Annie Mae Smith Suber and Nathan C. Suber] said, "On Sunday mornings you ought a be at church," you know wherever it is.  But yeah, I grew to like Texas College.  As a matter of fact some of my fondest days I spent there.
Speaker 1: Okay now any particular teachers there that were like mentors to you?
Speaker 2: Texas College?
Speaker 1: Yea.
Speaker 2: Yea.  Dr. Lula Mae Whitehead Ward [ph.] was my drama teacher and I loved her and I loved drama or dramatics and being in plays and you name it.  And Mrs. Wright [ph.] who was the wife of Coach Wright [ph.].  We had two or three Wrights who were coaches at Texas College and oh gosh several, oh Earline Christopher [ph.] who taught me education and there, there were a number of them but you have to remember it's been a hundred years (laughter) since I had the experience of being at their feet, so.  But I remember them well really I just have a hard time sometimes recalling their name.
Story_ID: 665735
Speaker 1: Okay so this is 19--you started in '54 [1954]. You're there from '54 [1954] to '58 [1958] and as you're there the country is starting to get involved in the Civil Rights Movement on a level. National news being made by the desegregation efforts in Little Rock [Arkansas] and in Montgomery [Alabama].  Were you taking notice of these things when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Well see I came here in '58 [1958] right out of Texas College [Tyler, Texas] and I came here fortunately because Dr. Hancock [Allen Hancock] who was then dean called me in to--
Speaker 1: By here we're talking about Atlanta [Georgia] right?
Speaker 2: --in Texas, in Texas.
Speaker 1: Oh Texas.
Speaker 2: In Texas College.  I came here to Atlanta because of Dean Hancock.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Dean Hancock called me in to tell me about an opportunity that Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] was offering to students graduating from college from undergraduate school to work as an assistant at one of the schools in the AU Center [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I was assigned to Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] as a teachers' aide and I enrolled in Atlanta University to study English and reading under Dr. Lynette Gain Sanes [sic. Lynette Saine Gaines].  Lynette Gaines before she married a Saine but anyway she was Dr. Lynette Gaines--Saine, Saine over the reading department here in Atlanta at Atlanta University and those of us who were graduating from various schools including Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] let's see Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  We had a young man from Morehouse that was in that program as well.  So we worked under professors who taught at the various schools that I mentioned and that's how I managed to get through Atlanta University plus my, my forty-two dollars a month and I didn't know how I was going to, to get anywhere.  I was packed up and really ready to head to San Francisco State College [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] where my sister [Artie Mae Suber Neal] lived and was in school too working on her master's [degree] I believe because she had graduated from Wiley College [Marshall, Texas] before marrying and heading to California. Any way so you just sort of put two and two together and try to get where you need to get.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So did you know Dr. Thomas Jarrett [Thomas D. Jarrett] there--okay?
Speaker 2: Yes he was my professor.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: I loved him.  He was my 18th century literature professor and Dr. Tic--we called him Tic Tillman [Nathaniel P. Tillman], taught English and what else but anyway yes I knew Dr. Thomas Jarrett well and liked him a lot.  Loved him and so was Dr. Tic Tillman, a major professor at Atlanta University.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. N.P. Tillman I guess?  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Lynette Saine these are, these are the people.
Story_ID: 665736
Speaker 1: Now in, in '59 [1959] you were married for the first time. This is your first husband--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Reverend Dr. Samuel W. Williams [Samuel Woodrow Williams]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who was a mentor to Dr. King, right?
Speaker 2: To who?
Speaker 1: Dr. King.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a matter of fact I have a picture over there.  I don't know if you noticed it, when I was just married a few months, with Dr. King, Mr. Merrill [Charles E. Merrill, Jr.].  My husband was--my first husband was on the far end so you might not have noticed it but I did.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so you were twenty-three at the time and was he much older than you?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, he was.
Speaker 1: Now he's a very distinguished member of the community there in Atlanta [Georgia] so he was a--had gone--
Speaker 2: He was a professor of philoso- religion and philosophy at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and he pastored the Friendship Baptist Church, which is the oldest black church, Baptist black church in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's the oldest--
Speaker 2: Friendship is.  Um-hm.  Founded right at the end of the slavery more or less in '60 [1860] I believe it was in '62 [1862], '63 [1863] somewhere along there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So but now he's like, like a part of the intellectual culture of Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, like with let's see, he taught Dr. King--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he would have been like friends of Benjamin Mays and all the, you know, the whole group.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We were married in Dr. Mays' home and Dr.--Benjamin and Sadie G, Sadie Gray Mays [Sadie Mays] lived on campus.  That house has since been torn down but.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is, you're a young person and this is a big experience--you know this big really heady intellectual experience here in Atlanta you're right in the center of the whole intellectual universe of, of black folks in this country in some ways.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Other than Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] this is one of the centers, you know, where everybody is.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, so how did you meet and how did you--
Speaker 2: I was in the library Trevor Arnett Library [Atlanta, Georgia] studying and I left the library.  I mean the, can't call it right now.  But if you go into Trevor Arnett Library you have one side and the other side where you have all of the, help me here, the books and anyway I left there to go and he was standing in the hallway with Mr. Bennett [William W. Bennett] who was the librarian; so Mr. Bennett called me over to meet his pastor and (gesture)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know the rest of it.
Story_ID: 665737
Speaker 1: So after you get married, now he was one of the founders of SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --too, I guess it was around the same time.  Shortly after you got married you went to--you go to California to UC Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], right? Is that true?
Speaker 2: I spent a few hours there.  I had been--I had spent a few hours at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] when my sis- before I left, before I graduated from Texas College [Tyler, Texas] and I spent a few hours at Berkeley (laughter).
Speaker 1: You didn't finish.  You went there to go to school--
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: UC Berkeley to--
Speaker 2: Oh just to--
Speaker 1: --pursue some more graduate courses?
Speaker 2: Yeah I took some graduate courses there.
Speaker 1: You already had a master's [degree] from Atlanta U--
Speaker 2: From Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] yes.
Speaker 1: So but you come back to Atlanta [Georgia]--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you start to--
Speaker 2: Yeah I came back here.
Speaker 1: --teach, teach school first in the public school system [Atlanta Public Schools]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Well they wouldn't hire me.  I applied and the principal had suggested that I report during the planning process then I got called a few days before school was to start and Mr. Letson [John Letson] who was then the superintendent had informed Mr. Currington [ph.] who was the principal that he could not hire me because of my husband's militancy or whatever in the community so that went away.  So Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] and Mrs., not Mrs., Dr. Mays but Mrs. Mays [Sadie Mays] drove--went with my first husband [Samuel Woodrow Williams] to drive me up to Orangeburg, South Carolina, so I taught for a year at South Carolina State College [South Carolina State University] in Orangeburg, South Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay so that was in the, in the late '50s [1950s] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah that was about, that was '61 [1961] or '2 [1962].  Sixty-one [1961] or '2 [1962] because when I graduated I went to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] and taught a year at Spelman.  Dr. Manley [Albert E. Manley] was president then.  I left and then it was always somebody leaving because I had just gotten out of college, out of Atlanta University, and Margaret Young [Margaret Buckner Young], Whitney Young's wife, was teaching education at Spelman at the time.  Whitney got the position with the Urban League [National Urban League] as head of the Urban League because he had been over the social, School of Social Work [Atlanta University School of Social Work; Whitney M. Young Jr. School of Social Work, Atlanta, Georgia] so when Margaret left, Dr. Manley asked me if I would take her position, interim position then when they hired a person who, Ph.D. of course from somewhere, Dr. Mays asked me to come to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] because oh what is her name?  She was going away, this lady was going away to work on her Ph.D. and she had been in the reading department.  And I'm seeing her but I can't call her name right now.  I should be.  She was a member of my church [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] for years but anyway that left me looking for a job so I thought I had it at Price High School [Luther Judson Price High School, Atlanta, Georgia] I believe it was and then was told that I couldn't so that's when Dr. Mays called up Dr. Turner [Benner C. Turner] at Orange- at South Carolina State College and they were looking for someone to teach in the English reading department and Dr. and Mrs. Mays knew the Turners well, so they sent me up to South Carolina--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --where I worked for a year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I know we--
Story_ID: 665738
Speaker 1: We interviewed Gloria Blackwell Rackley [sic. HistoryMaker Gloria Rackley Blackwell] who was like part of the--she was a teacher there that was part of the Orangeburg [South Carolina] movement and I know they were starting up I guess by the time you got there they were already--
Speaker 2: Well no they hadn't started the you know the civil--you're talking about oh wait a minute--
Speaker 1: Orangeburg yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah well that just really got out of hand a little later. I had long since been gone when you mean when they had the disturbance and the kids--
Speaker 1: No, no, well there was agitation going on before long before the massacre what they call the Orangeburg massacre there was agitation--
Speaker 2: But it wasn't when I got there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It happened a little later because you see the, the student movement here started around what was it '61 [1961], '2 [1962] or something like that.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: And I was back here when SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and all of that group really started.
Speaker 1: Here it was add somebody if you think I don't have them all but Roslyn Pope, Lonnie King [Lonnie C. King, Jr.] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah Roslyn Pope is a member of our church [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] still.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, [HistoryMaker] Frank Smith--
Speaker 2: I know Julian, knew Julian real well yeah, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And Frank Smith, yeah.  So the Atlanta movement.  I think it's--
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact when was it '50 [1950] what was it, what year?  I graduated in '58 [1950], Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] and I drove down to Montgomery [Alabama].  It was a few, few months after the bombing of Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] home but they--Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] and Dr. and Martin's father, Dr. King [sic. Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.], had been trying to get Martin to leave Montgomery and come to Atlanta [Georgia] because of the danger.  Their home had been bombed once or twice even I think before Samuel and I went down and they asked Samuel to go down.  Well Martin invited him to come down and speak at Dexter Avenue [Dexter Avenue Baptist Church; Dexter Avenue King Memorial Baptist Church, Montgomery, Alabama] and they got together and conspired I called it to get Samuel to use his influence if he had any to get Martin to come back, move his family here because of the danger of the bombings and all that were going on and we spent a night with Martin and Coretta [Coretta Scott King] in the church home that had been bombed and I wasn't at all keen on but you, you didn't stay in hotels of course then because this was the tail end of the bus boycott and what have you so we did go and I guess it was a year or so later Martin did move back here--moved Coretta and his family here from Montgomery.
Story_ID: 665739
Speaker 1: Okay so Orangeburg [South Carolina], so you spent, what, about a year in Orangeburg or did you--?
Speaker 2: Just a year.
Speaker 1: A year okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you commute back, you'd come back and forth [to Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Worse commute ever.  Don't ever--that was before we had the two, you know, the highway widening I had to go on bus often.  Sometimes Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] would drive me back but that meant he had to drive back alone on Sunday evening and when you get to the bus station, it was closed.  If you got a bus out you didn't get there 'til late at night and it was always a matter of trying to find somebody that would meet you at the bus stop because otherwise you'd be standing out there by yourself hoping and cabs didn't run up and down--
Speaker 1: Now are these the days--were the, was the bus station segregated then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I thought it was, I just wanted to make it clear to everybody (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it would be closed.  I mean it wasn't a matter of being segregated or whatever, it was just a matter of your not being able to wait anywhere while you try to get somebody to come pick you up you, so.
Story_ID: 665740
Speaker 1: All right.  So but you come back here in about a year and this is when the Atlanta [Georgia] movement is really in full stride--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and there's a, there's a new civil rights museum downtown now that documents a lot of this but from what I understand--
Speaker 2: What new civil rights museum with documents?
Speaker 1: Here in Atlanta.  There's the new Atlanta civil rights museum--
Speaker 2: You talking about the Civil and Human Rights [Center for Civil and Human Rights]?
Speaker 1: Is that what it is (laughter)?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's there.
Speaker 1: Okay I struck a nerve.  All right well I know in the museum they suggest that certain core white leadership in the city really wanted integration anyway and so Ivan Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Really wanted it?
Speaker 1: Well that's what they--that's what the suggestion is that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --they didn't--I mean they thought the best way to do it was the easy way or something not to--they didn't want a lot of trouble in the city I guess so they were, but--
Speaker 2: They were--it wasn't a Birmingham [Alabama] or Montgomery [Alabama] or--if, if you had to be in the South, Atlanta was probably the best place to be given the people you had to work with.  Mayor Hartsfield [William B. Hartsfield] is famous even now for having said Atlanta is a city too busy to hate.  And, and you didn't--and because I think because you had these schools here that where you had a lot of educated folk.  You know a group of kids took over the board.  Some--when, when Dr.--Atlanta University, Clement, Dr. Clement [Rufus Early Clement] was president of Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] at the time.  Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] was president of Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], Dr. Manley [Albert E. Manley] was president of Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Dr.--I can see him can't call his name was president at Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Dr. Richardson [Harry V. Richardson] had recently because ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] is the younger of the--youngest of the schools in the center, had recently taken over as president of ITC but the three, three of the schools always had--Morehouse and Spelman were tied together in terms generally their board meetings and usually you had some people who were on both boards so they've had a close connection since they were founded I guess since they got together over in that center, not since they were founded.  Spelman was not--I mean Spelman was founded in the basement of our church, Friendship Church [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  Morehouse came out of Augusta, Georgia, and started and held some classes at Friendship.  Atlanta University was founded in the boxcar that, that we had that Friendship had had services in.  So you had a, a tie as far as Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] was concerned and there you had people who had been able to communicate to some degree with the powers that be in the community so things were different but I don't know about this who wanted integration.  Now I, I, I just think that's completely off center but anyway.
Speaker 1: They, they were some sort of a benign leadership (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they were able to, to help steer the sole process through without a lot of ranting and raving and tearing down of the city.
Story_ID: 665741
Speaker 1: So you were around through all of this process and who--I guess, now you were friends with Coretta Scott King right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And the--were you friends with the rest of the King family?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  We were, we were friendly.  You know there--sometimes we didn't see eye to eye.  See Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] is a different kind of person.  He didn't kowtow to anybody and if he didn't agree with what you were doing or what you were saying, he didn't mind letting you know and he often, he and Martin often kind of didn't agree so you know that sometimes created a little gap there because I, I as I recall Coretta was really at odds with us when Martin was killed.  She had been most unhappy about something that had transpired and I don't know I won't even go into all that but yeah we were, we were friendly.
Speaker 1: Did she and Dr. King agree on his political strategy pretty much or--?
Speaker 2: Say this again?
Speaker 1: Did Coretta Scott King agree with Dr. King's political strategy most of the time?
Speaker 2: Oh no, I can't answer that.  I didn't--I was not in their quote, unquote inner, inner circle but you know we, we had dinner with them on occasions and they had dinner at our house on one or two occasions but.
Speaker 1: Can you remember what specifically your then husband would have disagreed with Dr. King about?  I mean was it a strategic thing or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Often strategy.
Speaker 1: Strategy.
Speaker 2: And the--I, I don't think he agreed with the--well he had not come around to nonviolence and, and they often discussed this.  I have--I'm aware of some of the discussions that they had regarding that and I remember very well Samuel saying on one occasion, "Well if the Klu Klux Klan [sic. Ku Klux Klan, KKK] burns a cross in my yard, I'm gonna make him kneel at it."  And, and you know and then Martin come around, "Oh come on now brother, now, well you know."  So they were arguing about this nonviolence as a strategy.  Samuel didn't go with but many of the preachers who did were just anxious and happy to be in Martin's presence so they were very much unlike him in that most of them just and some of them really felt that they could become nonviolent people--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and you had to commit to nonviolence according to Martin he wanted, don't, don't go out marching if you can't take it and, and I think in some instances some, few said that's not my cup of tea.  I'm not going out there because if somebody does something to me, I'm gonna fight back.  So that, and that was kind of Samuel's make up.  He, he didn't believe in getting slapped and not hitting back.
Speaker 1: Yeah it's interesting there's a quote from [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond I think Julian Bond as a student took your former husband's class--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and it was being co-taught by him and Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who was his, who taught--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --well, you know, was his student at one time.  It's interesting he said it was an interesting class.  He said he didn't pay as much attention as he should have (laughter) but he, he remembers the class.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Samuel brought him here--when we went to Montgomery [Alabama] part of the deal was, from Dr. Mays' [Benjamin Mays] side, he would take, he would teach a course or two at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and on Dr. King's side, he would become his assistant pastor, you know, at Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's how the group got together on that.
Story_ID: 665742
Speaker 1: Tell me if I'm going too fast, but when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated in 1968 you were--visited the King home immediately, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what was your experience?
Speaker 2: Well, when I--I've remarried now when, you know, you know when this, when Martin was killed.  Martin was killed in '68 [1968].  No I take that back I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Yeah you were still married to Dr. Williams [Samuel Woodrow Williams] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm forgetting (laughter), Samuel and I are married.  I was on my way to choir rehearsal.  Samuel was on his way to the temple.  He was supposed to been speaking to a group of Jewish people at the temple that evening.  We stopped in the dining room, I mean the breakfast room off from the dining--off from the garage to hear 'Huntley-Brinkley' ['The Huntley-Brinkley Report'] and it was then and there that we heard about Martin's being shot.
Speaker 1: It was on 'NBC Nightly News.' On the nightly news, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.  Um-hm.  So instead of going on out to the Harrisons' [ph.] home for choir rehearsal, he suggested that I follow him, let's make a stop at Coretta's [Coretta Scott King] home and see if there is anything you can do.  So we did.  I was in my car, he in his car.  We got to Coretta's house and one, there were two cars in Coretta--in Coretta's yard.  One was Mrs.--what is her, her husband taught art at Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  A police car was there at the front of the garage door, garage.  Her home was built sort of you could go in the garage here but you had to go up steps to get to the house and we went up and, and, and I've called this lady's name many times and I can't call it now, but she came to the door with the kids.  So we went in--
Speaker 1: Is this [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton? Not her (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Half of what you hear about that--excuse me won't go there.  She called--she invited us in.  Coretta came and invited us back.  She was packing to go to Memphis [Tennessee] and she--we went back.  The policeman sat on the sofa in the living room by himself.  The kids were--she--this lady was preparing food for Yoki [Yolanda King].  Bernice [HistoryMaker Bernice Albertine King] was in a chair.  But the other three were running around.  Yoki being the oldest of the three and Marty [Martin Luther King III] and, and Dexter [Dexter King] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Dexter, yeah.
Story_ID: 665743
Speaker 1: So anyway, Coretta [Coretta Scott King] was preparing to get the, get a flight to Memphis [Tennessee] and she invited us back, as I said.  We talked.  She said that Mayor Allen [Ivan Allen, Jr.] was on his way to pick her up and that he had called to get the--see if he could get the plane delayed because otherwise she would never make the flight.  It was a rainy, nasty kind of night, drizzly night and she--well we stayed back there with her while she packed.  Maybe, maybe ten minutes.  It may not have been that long.  When we were told that the mayor was there.  So we went out.  Mayor Allen came to me to ask if I would mind--if I knew the city.  Of course I know the city.  Said, "Would you mind riding with Louise [Louise Allen] to the airport [Atlanta Municipal Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] because she doesn't know the city," and the police cars they would be going as fast as they could go so of course I agreed.  So I left my car there.  I got in the car with Mrs. Allen who drove and we followed to a degree the police car.  Of course they lost us and we about fifteen or so minutes maybe twenty minutes later, we got to the airport and when we got to the airport we found I mean we were told at the desk what am I saying?  You know what I'm trying to say where the people were to put, to check in on the flight, we were told that they were in a bathroom.  I can't remember whether it was a male bathroom or a female bathroom but when we got, when we opened the door to go into the bathroom and they were standing there in a huddle obviously crying because it was Coretta, Dora McDonald [Dora E. McDonald] who had gotten, who had arrived, Christine [HistoryMaker Christine King Farris], the mayor and, and I believe a policeman was in there but I'm not 100 percent sure.  I might have that wrong.  But anyway they were standing there in a huddle and Mayor Allen looked up at us and did kind of you know message, he didn't make it was the message that we got and surely enough he [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had passed.  So he asked Coretta after a while what she wanted to do.  Because they had held the plane and she said, "Well I'll go back home and see about my children."  So that was that.  And we went back.  I went back again and with Ms.--she went in the police car, I followed with Mrs. Allen in her car and I stayed for a while and I went on home too.  But people had begun to arrive at her house so I don't, I don't know who they were.  And I can't even tell you how many there were, but--there weren't many but they were there to, you know, to do whatever I guess they could do.
Story_ID: 665744
Speaker 1: Now so the--I suppose you were at the funeral and everything and the, all the, all the rest of--the funeral was broadcast live--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all over the nation and it was raining like you say. It was a very sad occasion for every- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well it wasn't raining on--when the funeral was broadcast.  The day of the funeral was a beautiful day, a sunny day.  It was just this was a Thursday night that I'm--that, that he was shot and on Friday, it was--what station was it?  CBS station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] or whatever, 5, I think it was CBS then.  Anyway they had the local show was all about that and maybe I don't remember what they had or didn't have in the way of a national show at the time.
Speaker 1: Yeah I just remember seeing coverage.  Maybe it wasn't on the day of the funeral but associated with the assassination, of the street scene (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was it talk, was it talk?
Speaker 1: --with all the umbrellas--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --out front of Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and rain coming down and--
Speaker 2: That might have been that Friday morning.  I, I can't remember what the weather was like on Friday morning really but they did have Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] was on the show with somebody and somebody and what I remember vividly, oh Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] and, and on that show the question was asked--was made or the reference was made to Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] involvement from his days at Morehouse and they had claimed that he--, "Oh Martin had been a leader from early on," which was not the case and they said too that Martin was prej- this somebody said I guess it might have been Andy, it might have been somebody else that Martin was president of his class and Samuel said, "No, he wasn't.  He was not president of his class.  He was not that into whatever, you know, leadership at that time.  As a matter of fact I was just so proud of the fact that he blossomed after he left Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia]," is this comment that Samuel made but the comments he made didn't fit well, didn't suit well with Coretta [Coretta Scott King] and company and the family.  So there was, that was the continuing kind of well not a continuing maybe that was the first time that I realized that that was a real kind of split--
Speaker 1: Well I think that--
Speaker 2: --because they did not like hearing anything that didn't give Martin credit for building the City of Atlanta [Georgia] or doing whatever it was that everybody seemingly wanted to make him out to be larger than life which at that time he really was not.  So I don't know where I'm going.
Speaker 1: Yeah but that's--we've interviewed a lot of people who knew Dr. King well and there's a certain amount I mean of discussion about the spinning of his life after he's gone. I think [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee has a poem called 'Now That He's Conveniently Dead' [sic. 'Now That He is Safely Dead,' Carl Wendell Hines, Jr.] you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --we can say that he was just dreaming and a whole lot of things--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --are not necessarily, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah there was a lot that really was not the case.  But when, when he meant--when Samuel said that it, it created some animosity between him and the King family because A.D. [Alfred Daniel Williams King] even called him that night of the funeral and wanted to--and told him that he, "We're gonna sue you."
Story_ID: 665745
Speaker 1: But I mean, all the, all the mythologizing aside, how did you, how did you what is your assessment of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.]?  'Cause you, you know, you're somebody that was close to him and knew him and could see that aspect of him that other people may not see--
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: You've seen him unguarded.
Speaker 2: I, I liked him a lot.  I, I thought he was a very, very talented young man.  I, I mean I had no, I was in awe of him like most people.  I loved his sermons, his--that I read.  I never, I never heard him give a sermon at his church.  I never--I went to my church [Friendship Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: But that's interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't go to Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --most people were drawn to his oratory, you know. He was such a tremendous orator (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm his oratory was, was outstanding.  He was an outstanding orator.  He really was I thought and I said to him and I thought it and I was so pleased when it did happen when he wrote the 'Letter from Birmingham Jail.'  We talked and I said, "I know I'm gonna be assigning that letter to my students because it's going to be in the literature," and we, we, "Oh you really think it's that good?"  Yeah I thought it was wonderful.  So I knew him but I didn't see that much of him.  He was gone all the time.  Even if he had been in Atlanta [Georgia] I probably wouldn't have seen that much of him because I worked and he, he was teaching a course at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and I would run into him from time to time with Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] because I had to go across the campus to get where I was going and only just by sheer luck on occasions I ran into the two of them walking across the campus and talking about whatever.  But I didn't, I didn't, I didn't know him, know him, you know, except through and from what I heard from my husband, then-husband.
Speaker 1: And he knew him quite well so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He knew him every well.
Story_ID: 665746
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was your husband good friends with Samuel Holmes Borders [sic.] too?
Speaker 2: They were friendly but not overly so.  You see you had all this competition in Atlanta [Georgia].  Every minister thought his church was the church.  William Holmes Borders thought his church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Williams Holmes, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --now the, the, the really the split, well you're talking about the difference.  That was between Ebenezer [Ebenezer Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] and, and Wheat Street [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  Now you didn't have much love lost between Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and William Holmes Borders but anyway.
Speaker 1: Well Daddy King [Reverend Martin Luther King, Sr.] I heard didn't, and Borders didn't get along.
Speaker 2: Well they didn't.  Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] was a little younger and I don't know, he and Reverend Borders did okay but there was always that competition.  Dr. Borders wanted to be the king of Atlanta and some say that Samuel wanted to be the king of (laughter).  I, I, didn't see that part but some said they didn't want Martin.  They had some kind of agreement that Martin would keep his business out of Atlanta you know his marching and his whatever, but they would take care of Atlanta.  Reverend Borders would take care of the Atlanta city ends and whatever civil rights stuff was going on in Atlanta.  I don't know, I didn't I mean that's just what I'm saying I often heard but beyond that I can't say.  I don't know.
Story_ID: 665747
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I just had a question, boy it just flew out of my mind.  But the--in terms of the activities here in Atlanta [Georgia] then I mean they did reach a conclusion at some point I mean in terms of the hardcore civil rights stuff but I'm thinking like--
Speaker 2: Well see the--
Speaker 1: Go ahead go ahead.
Speaker 2: --see the--I was when I was, I was in school [Atlanta University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] here when the bus deseg- when I first got here in '58 [1958] in the fall of '58 [1958] see the signs was still on the buses here, colored to the rear, and but they were also being, you know, what's the word I want?  Called into question about the segregation of the buses.  There were meetings and problems and people trying to come up with strategies to desegregate the bus.  Well Dr. Borders [William Holmes Borders] and some of his peers I guess or people from his church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] maybe, often demonstrate--were demonstrating.  Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] and a young man that was a student of his at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] filed a lawsuit.  I can't think of this young man's name either right now but anyway they filed a lawsuit.  Well what ended up desegregating the buses was the lawsuit that Samuel and the student filed.  And there was always this feeling you came in and you know stole our thunder so to speak or we were gonna get this job done but we were gonna do it a different way.  So you had some little tension or feeling of whatever because they were responsible for the, the, the judge ordered that the buses be desegregated.  I don't remember if that was Judge Tuggle [ph.] or which judge that was but I remember they desegregated the buses.  They were also working on Georgia State College [Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia] which was then a secretarial college down there on whatever that, Courtland [Street] I guess it was.  They, they were, there were two or three young ladies from the Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] who were secretaries who were trying to with Samuel and somebody I can't--I can't remember the name.  They were going with them Don Hollowell [Donald L. Hollowell] and somebody to try to get the school desegregated.  Well again they went to court but then before that they had, they required that you have to have to get in you had to have a stu- you had to have a former student or something which mean a former I mean a white person that had attended or had that was recommending you or something and there was a white many and I can't remember all of this.  I don't know why I'm bringing this up so let's just scrap it and go on.
Speaker 1: To go to Georgia--the former--what George State was before you had to be recommended by a white person?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see, see that was what was keeping black folk out because you didn't have--but they found--Samuel was a good friend of some gentleman that lived out in the country here.  He had been a--he had graduated from one of the Georgia schools and it was through this person and some others now that these two young ladies got--I think they were admitted I can't remember, honestly cannot remember all of that.   But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, but at least it gives a clue.
Speaker 2: --that was sort of how huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah it gives a clue to whoever is watching this what they ought to look for.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But you're saying it's more complicated--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it was--
Speaker 1: --the whole desegregation of Atlanta was a lot more complicated than people think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Far more complicated because you would--they were trying to tackle all of these things you know the school and then they were complaining.  They even First Baptist [First Baptist Church Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia], you know, black folk would go sit in at First Baptist and all these Christians would kick 'em out and so you just had you had the whole--a lot of things were going on in Atlanta but not to the degree that you had it, you know where you had the race riots more or less race riots in--.
Speaker 1: Riots, yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The rioting, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 665748
Speaker 1: Progressive National Baptist Convention [Progressive National Baptist Convention, Inc.], Samuel Williams [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] was a--Dr. Samuel Williams was a part of that with Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --[HistoryMaker] Reverend Gardner Taylor, others (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gardner Taylor yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah. And they were--
Speaker 2: And Sam--no I started to say I don't believe he was in Progressive.  I think oh god, Kilgore, I think Kilgore was in that Progressive Baptist.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.  But I know the Progressive wing was the they were the progressives were the ones who believed in agitation for rights--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and that God was on our side and there's was a Jesus of the disinherited, all that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: So did you know the name Thomas Kilgore [Thomas Kilgore, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: I heard the name I just can't place it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Cause I believed Thomas Kilgore was in that I wonder if Thomas--I know he pastored in California, but I'm not sure he was there during this particular time.  He was from North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I believe Thomas was.
Story_ID: 665749
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me get you to--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --WSB [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia]. Now this is--now how did your--in '68 [1968], this is the same year Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated he was assassinated in April--
Speaker 2: April of '84 [1984]--
Speaker 1: --this when you begin your television--
Speaker 2: I mean April 4th.
Speaker 1: April 4, 1968--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and but you begin your TV career this same year in July I guess right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --on 'Today in Georgia.'  How did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well see we--I told you I had been, I don't know, I had dreamed of doing, of getting into television from my senior year [at Lincoln High School, Dallas, Texas] after Mrs. Bailey [Maurine F. Bailey] had me write this little script and I appeared on 'Look Who's Here' or what it's called.  It may not even have been 'Look Who's Here' that might have been the show in Tyler [Texas] that I--but wherever I had dreams of going into television so I was here, Samuel [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] was president of the NAACP [NAACP Atlanta Branch, Atlanta, Georgia], Clarence Coleman [Clarence D. Coleman] was over the Atlanta Urban League [Southern Regional Office of the National Urban League; Urban League of Greater Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia].  Cecil Alexander was very active in (unclear) and whatever Jewish program so I got the idea that if I could pull together some people across the spectrum who might have some influence maybe and, and, and, and the guy that was over the news that was, he was an anchor, Moore, last name, anyway I got the idea that I wanted to have them together for dinner at my home.  I didn't know this anchor at WSB but I was always impressed with his ability to be to sound a little fairer.  He didn't always take the position the negative side of our, you know, whatever in, in the city so--
Speaker 1: This is a white--
Speaker 2: --Ray Moore, Ray Moore, that was his name.
Speaker 1: Now he's a white anchor on television?
Speaker 2: Yeah he was the anchor and I started trying to write a little reason or, or purpose for Atlanta [Georgia] needing to have black folk on television.  I didn't know how to get it to anybody so that was--so I talked to Samuel about it and he thought it was a great idea and I--you know we had all of these outstanding people coming to Atlanta that were on various programs in Atlanta University Center [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] and particularly very outstanding black people and I thought it was ashamed that we couldn't have or we didn't see any of them on television on the shows, any show, we just had 'Today in Georgia' really.  Ruth Kent hosted that show on every week day morning so anyhow I decided, once I decided to try to get them over for dinner and I presented my proposal, they thought it was a great idea, they said.  So now the thing is how do you get to the TV station personnel that can make this happen.  So Ray committed to helping me get to the general manager at the TV station and he did.  So I went to, I set up, set up an appointment and I went and I sat with him.  Gave, told him my idea and they said, "Um-hm well what we're thinking about doing now is bringing on a young man in the news department," and that was Low Jacks [ph.].  I believe his name was Low Jacks, yeah Low Jacks so they did but that helped to give me a little bounce because Low had--did have, he had a great voice and he would read you know stories on the air so he went on before I did but they agreed to have me, to add me to their roster and that I could have this little show.  Well somebody else heard about this and she [HistoryMaker Xernona Clayton] got involved and tried to--and told them that this is what she'd always wanted to do so she wanted this opportunity.  Well Ray, Ray Moore gave me, told me this.  So Ray said, "Well we have committed to Billye Williams [HistoryMaker Billye Aaron] and I don't know you know they're not gonna hire two people."  "Well I'll go to the other station."  And she did.  She went to another station [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] so she started lining up people to help support her candidacy for her own show and she did.  So she got who was the editor whose article appeared on the side of the paper every morning?  Oh gosh, very fine person.  His wife's name was Mary [ph.], Mary, Mary oh--
Speaker 1: Somebody from the Atlanta here, I can't--
Speaker 2: From the Atlanta, no he was an editor with the Atlanta Journal-Constitution (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The Constitution. Okay.  I don't know.  I wish I was here or I, maybe I should have read deeper, but I don't know.
Speaker 2: Anyway I'm so, oh.
Story_ID: 665750
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was, he was well liked.  He really was well--a white guy; well, well liked in the Atlanta [Georgia] community because he came around and then he would you know he wrote articles that were meaningful for us and just sort of you saw him sort of become this special person.  Anyway he helped her [HistoryMaker Xernona Clayton] and some other folks.  So she went to another to Channel 5 [WAGA-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] and she got her own show ['Variations'; 'The Xernona Clayton Show'].  So then it became a race between WSB [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] and Channel 5.  I can't call it's--but who's gonna be, who's going on first?  So WSB jump hoops and they brought me on and I had talked to Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] about coming on the show.  Well they had, they weren't too excited.  This was long before I actually started.
Speaker 2: You got the show?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay this was when he was still alive?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah so, so they weren't too keen about it but they didn't say no and, and they--I don't know if they would have done it anyway but your other, your friend that you mentioned did start, she got the show so she started her show after I had made an appearance but she was the first African American woman to have her show on local television.  I was on television first but I was added to--they decided without even letting me know, you know, ahead of time so to speak that they were not going to give me a show but they would add me to the existing 'Today in Georgia' (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So you were on the Ruth Kent show.
Speaker 1: --and they said that was better for me because I would be on the program every day Monday through Friday even if I did just go in and give the FYI for your information and that was pretty much all that I had to do on some days so it was it was exciting in that it was an opportunity.  I did get a chance to meet a lot of people, a lot of African American stars who would be on the show.  A lot of others.  I even interviewed Jane Fonda many, many years ago but mainly because they didn't want to have her on.  They agonized over having Jane on because Jane had been in you know the what in Vietnam--
Speaker 2: In the North Vietnam, right.
Speaker 1: --and oh boy they talked about her like she was something out of a rat hole or whatever so.  Anyway that was pretty much.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So the show starts who were some of your early guests or your best shows?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte, black Al Freeman, Jr., Pearl Bailey, Sidney Poitier.
Speaker 2: Now were they mostly guests at the Atlanta U complex [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia] coming through--
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) or were they here doing shows?
Speaker 1: No see I was there for six years now and I'm not giving you early, early people the early ones were Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] and Willie Mays (laughter) 'cause they were--WSB carried the games and they were anxious to have the outstanding athletes on so athletes could get on even before you know some others could get on the show.  So that's they had me interviewing [HistoryMaker] Ernie Banks and Willie Mays.  Of course they would usually call in somebody from sport to be a part of it but the first few interviews I did I was sitting there by myself and I didn't know a thing about the (laughter) about baseball or whatever.  So that's when Henry offered to help me formulate some questions (laughter) but anyway it worked out.  It all turned out okay.
Story_ID: 665751
Speaker 1: During now, at some point between '68 [1968] and '71 [1971] Dr. Williams [Aaron's first husband, Samuel Woodrow Williams] passed, right?
Speaker 2: Samuel passed in '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay yeah '70 [1970].
Speaker 2: But it was not until '71 [1971] that I met Henry [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] and, and started you know interviewing the--yeah he--I started on WSB [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] in what was it late in July of '68 [1968] because Martin [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had passed in April of '68 [1968] right?  Yeah I started in July but Samuel passed in '70 [1970] in October (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What happened? Was he sick?
Speaker 2: --October 10, 1970.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Was he sick or--?
Speaker 2: Well, he, he went in because he was having severe pain in his stomach and they discovered that he had a kidney problem.  His death was very unexpected.  He just had a pulmonary embolism the day before he was supposed to been coming home.  So but he, he had not been quote, unquote sick.  It was one of these things where you go in for surgery but the patient--the surgery was successful they said but the patient died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1970?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy [1970].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: October 10, 1970 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.
Story_ID: 665752
Speaker 1: All right so you met [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron in '71 [1971]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but it took a few years for you all to, you know, get to know each other (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just met him in '71 [1971] when, when they assigned me to interview him so it was really '72 [1972] before, '72 [1972] before I really before I got to know him.  I had interviewed him and he helped me get some of the baseball players on the show ['Today in Georgia'].
Speaker 1: There's a story here that the first time you scheduled him for an interview, he fell asleep, he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He didn't show up.  He overslept.  Didn't make it to the station [WSB-TV, Atlanta, Georgia] (laughter).  I was so embarrassed.  I have never been more embarrassed because we had been promoting him and saying, "Yes we gonna have Hank Aaron on the show tomorrow," da, da, da and no Hank Aaron showed up so we had to do something about that one (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So by 1973 you all are married?
Speaker 2: We got married in November 1973, November 12, 1973.
Speaker 1: All right and then now this is a period of his life where he's going through an extreme amount of stress.  Correct me if I'm wrong but from what I've read and what I just heard from him there's a lot of pressure on him because he was approaching the home run record of Babe Ruth--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and rather than you know a lot of people wanna see him break it but there were, there were like--
Speaker 2: More didn't wanna see him break it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) ten times more wanted to break his neck if he--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --came close to it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So they were like sending threatening letters and calling him and everything.  You know he had to have like police protection--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and so I was asking him about the junct- the juxtaposition of your marriage in the midst of all that and I asked him like how you helped him you know so he said yeah you were a big help to him.  He finally had somebody to talk to in the midst of all this lonely you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --business.
Speaker 2: If well my first husband [Samuel Woodrow Williams] was still living when I heard about one of his divorce and that was in that must have been around '69 [1969] or something I think.  'Cause Samuel passed in '70 [1970].  It had to be in '69 [1969] when he had been doing sports casting a little and I remember someone mentioned about the sad something and then they mentioned that he and his wife [Barbara Lucas] were divorcing and they had four kids.  So that was a part of the sports news I guess it was--and later of course when I met him, he was going through not only four kids that he had separated from because they stayed with their mother and he had moved into an apartment, but he had all of these racist things that were climbing--that were thrown at him as well.  So he was having a very, very difficult time.  He had a daughter that was a senior in college--I mean not college, in high school at that time.  He just had a lot, a lot on him.  I don't know I tried to be helpful.  I don't know much of what we did was communicate on the phone because he was away a lot and when he was home he tried to spend time with his kids who were in school but he would take them to school I understand and it was just a lot of stress and strain on him but he was remarkable in his being able to survive that and to function.  I wondered how he could go to the stadium days and play so well but he always said that, "When I get--when I put on that uniform, I try to pull off or throw off everything else that would stand between me and that ball."  So, that's what he was able to do.
Story_ID: 665753
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he broke the record in 1974.  Now that's ab- you'd been married almost a year I guess at that point.  What was it like for you?  I mean did you, when he broke the record were you relieved or were there more threats or what happened?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I followed the--
Speaker 1: When he broke the home run record--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I mean was there more pressure on you or less.  Did you feel relieved or did you--
Speaker 2: Oh well I don't know if there was much more because after you get all so many threats and you have a bit of fear of movement and wondering but then, then it, it kind it sort of quieted down I would have to say.  After nothing happened leading, you know, up to the point that he hit the run, the homerun, I felt a little bitter and I felt a little more secure with the young man that was his bodyguard really, Calvin [Calvin Wardlaw], his name, so it all sort of dissipated if you will.
Speaker 1: So he had to have Calvin around with him most of the time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  All the time that year.
Speaker 1: That's interesting, okay.
Speaker 2: He went to spring training with him.  He went--wherever Henry went, he went, Calvin went usually and--.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how did it, how did the name [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron affect your career?  Was there any affect I mean did the people respond to you differently or?
Speaker 2: Well it only affected my career in that it slowed it down.  I, I had hopes of moving upward.  I didn't have that opportunity because once we got married I had--and I had a child.  I had, I have one daughter [Diedra Cecile Aaron Haydel] so it, it meant that I couldn't take that job I was sort of offered, halfway offered.  I wasn't up in Rhode Island.  Some- somebody was on TV and had been on our show ['Today in Georgia'] and I'm thinking well now this is the step up.  I didn't know where Rhode Island, where Rhode Island was to be honest but I could see--I knew if I were going to stay in television, I needed to try to move up but I resigned myself to the fact that I was married to Hank Aaron and I would satisfy myself in whatever way.  When he was traded back to Milwaukee [Milwaukee Brewers] they--the WTMJ-TV [Milwaukee, Wisconsin] manager offered me a little show so I had my own show ['Billye'] for every Saturday, a weekly show every Saturday evening.  Sometimes I was, I've forgotten the word even now but when sports game when the game, when the game would last too long and bounce so to speak, I, I--sometimes my show didn't get, didn't hit the air but it was, it was always a challenge but always interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So now did you--I could imagine at this time the time that he hit the--set the record, that there were a lot of social invitations to one thing or another.  Did you was it almost like a job going to all the events to celebrate the homeruns?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Henry isn't that social a person.  So a lot of, a lot of invitations quite honestly went unanswered or turned down, if you will.
Story_ID: 665754
Speaker 1: But I was always involved in the community pri- long time before I met him [Aaron's second husband, HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], so I had a life outside of baseball.  I was very active with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and I run the board of the NAACP Legal Defense and Education Fund [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] and that was one of the most exciting and informative positions that I've ever had because there you had even former attorney generals serving on the board and attorneys of real note who served on the board and young men and young women who were in law who were very active civil rights attorneys who were building their careers.  So I always enjoyed, enjoyed that immensely and we met every four months in New York City [New York, New York] and I loved going to New York. Sometimes we'd have retreats in somewhere in Virginia.  I forgotten now the name but it was a very, very active and supportive board and they took on some of you know Thurgood Marshall founded that aspect of the NAACP, of that organization and they took on some of the country's most worthy of, you know--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --yeah, of, of took on cases civil rights cases of all sorts and even today they are still very, very much involved in a number of the civil rights cases that are still hanging on.
Story_ID: 665755
Speaker 1: Yeah how is Milwaukee [Wisconsin] different than Atlanta [Georgia]?  Did you--I know it has to be a difference between the two of them?
Speaker 2: You know it wasn't bad, but just two I was only there two seasons really; and I liked Milwaukee, but I, I never really got into the community.  I was never involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] there so I didn't really know the degree of the racism.  I'll just put it as it is that existed there.  I didn't realize it was what it was.  I was on the fringe in baseball and they loved Henry Aaron [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron], they treated him with great respect and admiration and that was about the degree.  I did get to know a few ladies who were--[HistoryMaker] Vel Phillips was one outstanding person in Milwaukee.  She got to be very, got, and she today is a good friend of mine.  Vel and some of The Links [The Links, Incorporated] I got to know well but beyond that--
Speaker 1: Yeah, we interviewed her and she is a wonderful person.
Speaker 2: She is a marvelous I mean and so bright and so even today she still can come up with some humdingers even though she is slipping you know she is up, she must be ninety something now.
Speaker 1: She is.  And what's interesting her picture was in a museum and we were there to interview someone else and we had just interviewed her the year before and some kids came in.  The kids said, "Stop, that's Vel Phillips," and they all got and gathered around the picture.  And I said well did she pay them outdoors to do this or something?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But she is really well known and respected by everybody in Milwaukee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No she is remarkable.  She is.
Speaker 1: Everybody.  These, just kids from the hood--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --came in and they all knew who she was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  She is a remarkable lady.
Speaker 1: Okay so, so you did know her.  And that's--she's a key person there in that community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, of Milwaukee.  So you were there in '75 [1975], '76 [1976] I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665756
Speaker 1: And then you came back to Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And he [Aaron's second husband, HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] retire- he was retired by this point right at this point? And he--or he was (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I retired. No I started working for UNC- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He.
Speaker 2: Oh he?
Speaker 1: Yeah he retired.
Speaker 2: He retired in '76 [1976] but he came back here--
Speaker 1: Worked for the Braves [Atlanta Braves]--
Speaker 2: --and went to work for the Braves yeah.
Speaker 1: Ted Turner offered him a job?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay so when you came back did you go back to television at all?
Speaker 2: No.  I went to work for the United Negro College Fund in 1980.  They were, they were just starting the 'Lou Rawls Parade of Stars' telethon to raise money for UNCF and I was asked if I would help take that on and I did.  So I stayed there from '80 [1980] to '94 [1994] almost, close to '95 [1995] really but I officially resigned in '94 [1994] but I stayed on with UNCF for almost another year so I left in '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right this is the kind of job once again if you know a lot of people movers and shakers in the community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you can do a lot of good right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And some of your--let's see did Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.] play a role in you getting hired or did?
Speaker 2: Vernon was close to my first husband [Samuel Woodrow Williams] and well he was on the board too when I got to--no he wasn't on the board when I got to LDF [NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Inc.] when I went--he headed Urban League [National Urban League] and he headed UNCF for a few years back some time ago but you, you asked was he what?  What did you ask me about him?
Speaker 1: No I was just asking if he had anything to do with your position at UNCF--
Speaker 2: No, no, no he had left UNCF.  Chris Edley [Christopher Edley, Sr.] was over UNCF when I started and when Chris left, Bill Gray [HistoryMaker William H. Gray, III] took his position, Bill Gray from Con- who had been in [U.S.] Congress.  Bill Gray passed a few years ago.  But he, he was head of UNCF at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And correct me if I'm wrong here, but I think Vernon Jordan as president [sic. executive director] of UNCF pushed the concept of raising more money in the community rather than wanting a big, you know, donors in the white community that, that--
Speaker 2: I'm not aware of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When, when--early on the presidents had that respons- wach chap- each local entity had to raise its own money.  Now I think, I think when Vernon came on I believe that might have been when they started really going to corporations and foundations to help raise money because we--they weren't really raising that kind of money.  Dr. Mays [Benjamin Mays] used to head sometimes his own UNCF campaign and he of course he was president of Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I'm thinking that the idea of getting the corporate money and foundation money might have started with Vernon but I can't be certain of that.  As I said when I got to UNCF it was Chris Edley who was heading the organization and I know our responsibility was spelled out.  We had to get to the corpor- local corporations and foundations and churches and organizations all of, every entity of the community sort of played a part in raising, helping to get money for UNCF.
Story_ID: 665757
Speaker 1: Okay so, so UNCF [United Negro College Fund] so it wasn't--but you, you hosted, you co-hosted the Atlanta [Georgia] 'Lou Rawls Parade of Stars'--
Speaker 2: Yeah, many times.
Speaker 1: --here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Many times okay, and (unclear) course; and are there any memorable stories from those times that you can tell us or would tell us (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no we, we--they all went well.  We were always fortunate to get celebrities who could help us, you know, raise the profile.  That was the whole thing of trying to raise money on special events.  You, you gotta have somebody that will draw, you know, people to you or who will contribute because of the name and I was fortunate in having access to a lot of celebrities that I otherwise if I had not been [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron's wife, I probably couldn't have gotten to.  But it all work out pretty well given the circumstances.  So I had--I started the Mayor's Masked Ball [UNCF Atlanta Mayor's Masked Ball] and it attracted a lot of people.  We were able to get not just the ball itself but the way we structured it I think had a lot to do with it and we had Lena Horne, we had [HistoryMaker] Marilyn McCoo and [HistoryMaker] Billy Davis, Jr., we had Al Freeman, Jr., we had [HistoryMaker] Diahann Carroll, we had, we had a long list of celebrities and I either would get them for the NAACP Freedom Fund Dinner [Fight for Freedom Fund Dinner], which I often chaired too or UNCF so what we found is that if you're doing something that people think well of and believe in, it was easier, you know, to get them to come and lend you a hand.  So, that--I became pretty good at doing that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 665758
Speaker 1: And it doesn't hurt to be [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron's wife, but you were doing these things before and you know and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --to what extent do you think that it helped him that you were so socially centered in the community you know when he retired and you know--
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to think that it was helpful or that I'd been helpful.  He is better known at least in the community now than, than he was even though he participated in some things. He, for example, became very active with oh gosh what is the blood disease that black folk have?
Speaker 1: Sickle cell [sickle cell disease].
Speaker 2: Sickle cell.  So I helped him with that.  That was even before we were married.  He--they--he bought a what do you call this bus that would go around to various communities and test I think kids for sickle cell and he so he's done a lot of community work that he didn't always seek any publicity for or got credit for and it's always been I think maybe a part of him but I might have helped him bring it out a little more because if you are fairly high profile, the only real value that you can offer the organization that you are serving is to let people know that you are involved in it and then that will make many other people feel that they'd like to be a part of that too, so.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  I think so.
Story_ID: 665759
Speaker 1: Now Chasing the--the Chasing the Dream Foundation that was founded by you and your husband, [HistoryMaker] Hank Aaron, tell us about it?  In fact I asked him about it and he said ask you (laughter).  He said you know everything about it and can explain it a lot better so we're depending on you.
Speaker 2: Well, I, I just had a conversation with him and, and asked him if he would consider doing a foundation that would help youngsters.  I had seen the documentary that Mike Tollin [Michael Tollin] did on him and it was called or is called 'Hank Aaron: Chasing the Dream' and that was what really gave me the idea.  After seeing him in his early days running across the, whatever some kind of patch across from his home with bottle tops and a stick trying to hit a baseball and it just sort of brought home to me how many of us and particularly our kids come up with little or nothing but who somehow make something out of little of nothing.  And I realized as I did when I was growing up, well having the desire to participate in various activities at school but they almost always require that you have some money.  You even had to have money at least to buy clothes or to go to an event to showcase what little talent you might have.  So we came up with the idea why not use the same name that Mike used for the documentary and just turn it into a foundation.  So we call it the Hank Aaron Chasing the Dream Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia] and we started raising money so we could help kids who just needed a hand really who needed in some instances they needed somebody to pay for the piano lessons.  Their parents couldn't pay for piano lessons or they needed somebody to pay for tennis lessons or whatever their interest might be.  So we agreed that we would start this little foundation and try to serve as that middleman to help get the kid to the person that can do the most for them to develop, help them to develop their talent.  So that's it just kind of grew from that and we proudly recognized the talents of a few of our kids who are really, really outstanding now.  We have a young man now who is, well I'll start with Mason.  Mason went from Brown elementary school [Brown Middle School, Atlanta, Georgia] down here a few miles away from us and started taking harp lessons.  There's a lady here who Roselyn Lewis who just has done marvelous things with a lot of our kids because you don't expect kids from the inner city to be playing the harp or the cello or whatever, whatever but she, she gets them involved, specifically the harp is her area of interest and she has started a foundation, but Mason Morton was one of her students and he of course started taking harp.  Then when he got out of high school he went on to he got a scholarship to Michigan [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan].  He followed his, his music teacher from Michigan to Rice University in Houston [Texas], graduated in Houston and we were helping him all along the way.  Not--helping him is the key word here.  We weren't--I don't wanna think want you to think that we were footing the bill because we couldn't possibly, we were not that large an organization or foundation but we were there to help him with those things that he really desperately needed that scholarship money and other funds did not take care of.  Mason--today Mason, he's a member.  I don't know if I--of a group called Serendip [Sons of Serendip] and they were on 'America's Got Talent' and they have cut two or three records now, he and a little group, but he also teaches harp in the public school system in Boston [Boston Public Schools].  So we are so, so proud of him.  Then we have a young man who's working toward his Ph.D. at Juilliard [The Juilliard School] in New York [New York] and he's been, been in our program since he was ten or twelve or something like that so these are just two of the really, really outstanding ones and others some of we just made good, good citizens.  We have a young lady who went to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] who was a Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society] who is--who went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and got her master's degree.  We stay in close touch with her and she is now in some field of healthcare.  I can't remember what precisely but they come home generally at Christmas and we have them over for our big New Year's Eve and they perform for us and we, we just have a wonderful relationship with several of the kids who have had very good high school and college careers and who are now in the broader community and doing well.
Story_ID: 665760
Speaker 1: The foundation is--so you were?
Speaker 2: Well it's changed now considerably.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We got a, a grant from Major League Baseball for $2.5 million to endow what we call 44 Forever so that Boys and Girls Club [Boys and Girls Clubs of America] will be able to fund forty-four kids a year in perpetuity from the Hank Aaron Chasing the Dream Foundation [Atlanta, Georgia].  So we're very, very proud of that.  We have students now.  We, we moved on from the nine to twelve kids that this that 44 Forever group to include two college kids and we endowed the Hank Aaron scholarship in nine UNCF [United Negro College Fund] member institutions and three majority white like in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] we have, we have two students at the University of Wisconsin.  In Madison [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin] we have two, one or two.  I think one graduated from the University of Wisconsin in Milwaukee [University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee] and then we have a young lady now at the Univ- not at the--Mount Mary University which is all girls school, Catholic school, in Milwaukee.  So the others though are at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], Talladega [Talladega College, Talladega, Alabama], Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama], Clark Atlanta [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], Dillard [Dillard University, New Orleans, Louisiana], Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans, Louisiana] and where else?  Texas College [Tyler, Texas].  There're nine of them.  I, I probably left somebody out but we have them at nine and we endow the scholarship--the minimum endowment is a hundred thousand dollars.  But as we get more money we increase that so that at Morehouse now we have three hundred thousand dollars.  So we have and at Fisk we have I believe four hundred thousand.  At Texas College we're up to almost four hun- about four hundred thousand.  So it varies and these schools are selected based upon information that we gather and of course my alma mater is Texas College so of course we're going to include Texas College in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you established at some point maybe even before the foundation that Billye Suber Aaron UNCF scholarship--
Speaker 2: Well UNCF did that.  But what I didn't know at the time was that it was left up to me (laughter) to raise the money for it so this October 16 I will be presenting to UNCF a check for $1 million for the Billye Suber Aaron Legacy Scholarship. It's called UNCF Billye Suber Aaron Legacy Scholarship.  Long name, too little money, but it's the best I can do at the moment.
Speaker 1: And 2015 you donated $3 million to Morehouse School of Nursing [sic.]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  So I have a building coming up in my name.  That was my husband's [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] doing and I will forever be grateful for that.
Speaker 1: This is the Billye Suber Aaron student pavilion (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Billye Su- we're su, we're not zu.  We are Suber, Billye Suber Aaron Pavilion it is, over at the Morehouse School of Medicine [Atlanta, Georgia].  Um-hm.
Story_ID: 665761
Speaker 1: Today, I know he had a car dealership [Hank Aaron BWM; BMW of South Atlanta, Union City, Georgia] for a while, right, from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Huh?
Speaker 1: --your husband [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] had a car dealership for a while?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did--were you involved in that at all?
Speaker 2: Not really.  Not really but we, we founded the fast food business together--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I really wasn't involved in the automobile business.
Speaker 1: How many Popeyes [Popeyes Louisiana Kitchen, Inc.] franchises do you have?
Speaker 2: We have now I think it's about thirty, maybe thirty-one now I think.  Wait a minute.  No, no, no I think I'm--it may be it's thirty-one I think with the two Krispy Kremes [Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc.] that we have.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a way that you identify those so people know they're yours?
Speaker 2: No, we don't.  There are Popeyes all over the city but we have a few of the best ones, the best located ones so we are blessed in that regard but no, nothing identifies a fast food store as our store though often people get to know that, you know, this is our--we have one right near the campus over near the AU Center campus [Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia], but you can go maybe four or five miles in another direction and it may belong to somebody else.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Okay.  Now, so are you basically retired now or are you really just--?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.  I don't get a paycheck from any place but I, I put a lot of time and energy in a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You still have things that you are volunteering to do and?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 665762
Speaker 1: What are some--as we sit here, it's 2016 now and there's so many things going on in the world, it's just before the presidential election, you got people--wars and people being killed over here in the streets.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I often wish we could have a period of rest.  And by that I mean it, it is a constant, constant battle in this country to, to sit back.  You don't have time to sit on your loins, I mean you just don't have any time to try to be an American to be just an individual who can enjoy the fruits of your labor.  There's always labor.  You always have to stay on track because while you're sleeping somebody is out there trying to take you out.  I don't know if I'm making much sense, but one of the things that concerns me greatly right now during this particular period is the lack I guess the lack of knowledge on the part of a lot of our young people (cough) of what's happening in this country.  So many of them seemingly don't understand what's going on and how, how in a number of ways we're being forced backwards instead of being encouraged to move ahead.  I don't wanna get into politics and I refuse to get into politics, but young people don't understand what Hillary Clinton [Hillary Rodham Clinton] has done for this country, a lot of young people, a lot of our young people and that disturbs me.  I don't know where they were when a lot of--well a lot of them weren't born when, when Hillary was out there doing a lot of what she does trying to help young people and she didn't discriminate.  She was trying to help young people, young women and men.  Now but they put a lot of stuff on her because a lot of things have been thrown at her and if you throw enough dirt at anybody some of it's gonna stick and let me get off of this right now because I didn't mean to get on it and I'm not going any further, but I hope the day will come when my grandchildren can just take for granted that they will be treated like a human being, be treated with respect and not have to always think that something is coming after them because of the color of their skin.  We have a long, long way to go before we get to that point and until we get to that point, I just think we all need to pitch in there and work as hard as we can and remember that we do have ages and ages of young people coming on behind us and we have to try to make a place for them and once we've made a place for them, they have to understand that they've got to continue to make a place for those coming after them.  That's just the way the world is.
Story_ID: 665763
Speaker 1: Now tell us about your children?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: And--tell us about your children and grandchildren, your family?
Speaker 2: What about them, what do you (unclear) (laughter)(simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well tell us about-- I don't (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I have one daughter [Diedra Cecile Aaron Haydel].  She teaches Spanish at Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia].  She is also in graduate school at Atlanta University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] working toward her Ph.D. in languages.  I have two grandchildren.  One is a freshmen at the University of Arizona in Tucson [Arizona], a young man.  I have a granddaughter [Emily Haydel] who is in her senior year at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  They are lovely, lovely kids I have to say and I won't cross a finger or a toe or whatever, but I will thank God that they are on the right track.  I just pray that they stay on the right track but they are wonderful kids.  We are very, very proud of them.  Henry [HistoryMaker Hank Aaron] has four kids.  I have one daughter.  So we have five.  His kids are all here.  Lary [Lary Aaron] is a recruiter, not a recruiter.  What am I trying to say in baseball he travels--
Speaker 1: A scout?  Scout.
Speaker 2: --I guess yeah I guess he does recruit.  Hanky [Hank Aaron, Jr.], who is the oldest of the two, teaches and coaches in the Atlanta [Georgia] area.  His oldest daughter Gaile [Gaile Aaron] has a disability so she works part time sometimes but his baby daughter Dorinda [Dorinda Aaron] works for us in our company and she works in the fast food and the Krispy Kreme business [Krispy Kreme Doughnuts, Inc.] so and there are grandchildren too and they are scattered.  He has one, two that teach school in Florida.  Anthony [ph.] teaches and, teaches and coaches in Florida; so they're, they're pretty much scattered.  But we have been pretty fortunate in that the kids are doing okay.
Story_ID: 665764
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't mentioned that you think we ought to talk about before I ask my last two questions?
Speaker 2: I don't (laughter), I can't think of anything.  I don't know of anything.
Speaker 1: All right, well thank you for being so patient and the last two questions are kind of rolled up together and they are like when you look back on everything you've done what do you consider to be your legacy today and then how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I, I love the song that I try in some ways I guess to emulate the song that you hear--it was sung at Martin's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] service, 'If I Can Help Somebody.'  I get great joy out of trying to help somebody.  I feel that I have been solely blessed to be where I am today and I know that God requires that we do unto others as we would have them do unto us, and I feel strongly the biblical admonition that to those who have, or to put it another way, from those who have much is expected.  So I try to share my blessings.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well thank you so very much.
