Story_ID: 28350
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Ketevi Assamagan.  My first name, Ketevi, K-E-T-E-V-I, last name Assamagan, A-S-S-A-M-A-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: And, now you have a middle initial?
Speaker 2: I have a middle initial, A for A-D-I--
Speaker 1: A-G-I--
Speaker 2: --K-L-E.
Speaker 1: --K--, A-G-I-K--
Speaker 2: D, D like David, K-L, A-D-I-K-L-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is March 12, 1963, place of birth is Port-Gentil, Gabon.  Port, P-O-R-T, dash G-E-N-T-I-L.
Speaker 1: And, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I am a research physicist at the Brookhaven National Lab [Brookhaven National Laboratory], working on the Atlas experiment.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April 12, 19--(laughter), April 12, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the physics department at Brookhaven National Lab in Upton, New York.
Story_ID: 28351
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, gray.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Tropical areas, in the Atlantic and Pacific.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No, not really.
Story_ID: 28352
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and then we'll try to put them together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Afiwa Geanne.  Afiwa is A-F-I-W-A.  Geanne is G-E-A-N-N-E.  Her last name is Nouho, N-O-U-H-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in 1938.  We don't know the month and the date.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in Adjaha, A-D-J-A-H-A in the Republic of Benin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the stories about them?
Speaker 2: Well, I only know up to my grandfather and my grandmother because they are from, they are from Benin and I didn't know very much.  And both of them passed away when I was very young, so I didn't really get to know them.  And I didn't actually ask too much questions to my mother to know more detail about their history.
Speaker 1: Now, is your mother from a specific group in Benin that has a name?
Speaker 2: Yes, she's from the Fon people in Benin.
Speaker 1: That's F-O-N.
Speaker 2: Yeah, F-O-N. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell us something about the Fon?  Are they found just in Benin or they--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Fon is a group of people in, they are in the, in, they come from Benin.  They used to have a kingdom called the Dahomey Kingdom.  So when the country of Benin was first formed, its name came directly from that kingdom.  And they were very, it was a very powerful kingdom.  They resisted colonization for a very long time.  They have some of the famous kingdoms that resisted French domination for a very, very long time.
Speaker 1: Now, Fons are in, they're not just in Benin, right?  They're in--aren't they in other countries too?  I mean some are in some of the other countries.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they're a small group that are associated to them in a larger group of languages that stretch to Nigeria or also even part of Togo, but the central, the central group is mostly in the City of Dahomey in Benin.
Speaker 1: Is that the capital, the biggest city is--the capital is Ouidah isn't it, isn't it or is it Ouidah or--
Speaker 2: Ouidah, yes, Ouidah is, yes, Ouidah is on the coastline, and there is a city called Abomey which is really the capital the Fon kingdom.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your--what kind of work did your grandparents do?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side, I really don't know very much at all because my grandfather on my mother's side, I didn't really know him.  The grandmother, my grandmother also, I didn't him--I didn't know her.  All I know of them was that the grandfather, he was a farmer.  And my grandmother was just, you know, small businesses of buying and selling things in local markets.
Speaker 1: Okay, she would be like a market lady, I guess, in, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --which is very important in West Africa.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  They, women hold the traditional economy by all of the things and the trades in the market places like the role that is traditionally reserved, all that's traditionally taken by women until recently, so.
Story_ID: 28353
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho] have any stories about growing up?  Now, did she grow up in a rural area or was she in the--I guess she was if her father was a farmer, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she grew up in a rural area.  The Village of Adjaha [Republic of Benin] remains so, it's really a small village.  The only story I heard my mother tell is that, you know, related to my grandmother when the--there were times when they didn't really have anything to eat.  And she has found a coins of twenty-five cents or West African franc, equivalent of cents on the floor somewhat by chance.  And that allowed them to eat that day.  And she found this coin.  So it was a pretty tough situation when she was growing up.
Speaker 1: Now, she grew up when the country was a colony of France, right, or part of French equatorial--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was, she was, yeah, she was growing up when the West (unclear) and the French colonial rules.
Speaker 1: So she also, now, when was independence in--
Speaker 2: Benin got independence in 1960, just like Togo, but I don't remember exactly the month or the day for Benin.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother have a chance to finish school?
Speaker 2: My mother never went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She could speak French because she just pick it up on the street and hearing people talk.  But she didn't have a formal education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, any other stories about your mother growing up, and did she have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she has one brother and two sisters.  And now also has cousins from her mother's side.
Story_ID: 28354
Speaker 1: You grew up amongst the Fon in [the Republic of] Benin, I mean what's family life like?  I mean do separate families live separately from everybody or do they, or do everybody that's related, like live in a compound or how does it work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, it's a mixture of both.  There is, certainly they are there from extended family.  When I was growing up in Togo, I was with my grandmother and some of my cousins, the sons and daughters of my brothers, sisters and brothers.  So we were all living together with my grandmother.  And some of my cousins came to live with us at my, my father's house.  And I also spent some years at one of my uncles at his house and his children.  And when people get old, they tend to live with their children.  So there's that communal type of living which you will see mostly in the villages and still there today.  In the city you will see, there is a bit different style where it's just really a single family.  There's still a connection.  Most people in the city have links to the villages.  There's hardly, hardly would you find somebody who's really just from a big city, does not have a connection to some of, other areas of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So the family structure is, again, there is a lot of extended family, so people can, are raised by their grandparents, grandmother and grand--yeah, their grandparents and their uncles and aunties.  All those people are very important to, towards our education.
Speaker 1: So, elders are respected and kind of multi-generational--
Speaker 2: Yes, they have a very, very respectable role in the society.  And are very well respected.  People believe that they carry some wisdom having lived through that stage.  And they are very important in the development of the grandchildren when the parents have to go to work or travel and so forth.  The grandparents play the role of keeping the kids entertained and watching them.  And they also carry the, the history of the culture to make sure that they are best--they are transmitted to the younger generation.
Speaker 1: So most of your cultural information is coming actually from your grandparents when you're growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yes, definitely.  It's changing nowadays, but when I was growing up, it was still quite very strong that all the cultural education was transmitted directly by the grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho] get involved in market life too?  Was she a market woman too?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, my mother was doing just like her mother did, buying and selling things in a mar--local markets.  Usually, they are markets like once a week, it's a market in a big town somewhere where everybody converge for the trading.  And then it just rotates around.  Different days of the week, it's another market somewhere else or-- that's what she did.
Speaker 1: Okay, so if I live in one town, market day is on one day of the week, and then it maybe be on another day in another town?
Speaker 2: That's right, yes.
Speaker 1: So a market person would go from--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and just--
Speaker 1: --town to town?
Speaker 2: --rotate around, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what did your mother sell primarily?  What did she specialize in?
Speaker 2: She would sell breads.  Sometimes she'd bake the bread herself.  That's what she sold mostly, and then there were times where she sold second-hand clothes.
Story_ID: 28355
Speaker 1: I'm gonna go to your father's side, and then we'll put 'em together.  So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, his name is Koumou, K-O-U-M-O-U, Alphonse, A-L-P-H-O-N-S-E, Assamagan, A-S-S-A-M-A-G-A-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1935.  Also, he too, we don't know the months and the date.  He was born in Djeta, D-J-E-T-A in Togo.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what can you tell us about the name Assamagan?  What does that--does that have a--I know it's got a specific meaning, (unclear) what does it mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.  Assamagan, the ga, you know, our language means big or great.  So the name Assama, the big brother.  So that's what Assamagan means.  Assama, itself, is the name of the second boy.  So somebody named Assama, you know exactly that himself, the bigger brother who, yeah, one big brother of his mother's side.
Speaker 1: So it's the second boy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the second boy.  So my father's grandfather, his name was Assama, and since he had other half brothers and so forth of the same name to distinguish them, then, you have to put something.  You put Assamagan like the big brother, Assamavee (ph.) or small brother and so forth.  So, then he physically took that name as a last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, am I hearing you correctly if I, I think I'm getting the Fon didn't really have last names like that until like the colonials came in or something?
Speaker 2: That is right, we don't, we only carry only--we used to carry only one name.  You can have a second one as a nickname, and where the nickname could be, you know, associated to your grandfather or your father, what it did as grades, that mark down or mark (unclear) this person is, outstanding.  It could be an event associated to your birth when you get a nickname.
Speaker 1: So in the past, how did people identify families by, I mean did they have any way of designating what a, distinguishing what one family is from another?  Say, if you were, you know, out somewhere, where they didn't know you specifically, how would you're part of this family.  You'd have to start naming everybody or what would you--
Speaker 2: In our case, our name tell everybody how they are connected.  Like Assama being the name of the second boy.  It's only in one generation.  So that evotee (ph.) is one generation like my father and my brother who is my small brother cannot have the same name.  Assama (unclear) is the second boy, but he cannot be named Assama because the generation don't match. So when you get the person's name, it tells you exactly which generation it come from, and then people will ask, you know, who is your grandfather and so forth.  And then they know exactly how everybody is connected.  In our family, there were generally from Ghana.  They came, they left Ghana in 1669 during the slavery time.  So my ancestors actually fled Ghana because they didn't want to be taken as slaves.  So they went toward Togo and they went into the village of Djeta.  So they brought these names from Ghana, but over the years, some of them have changed a little bit.  So that's the structure that we have.  And after three hundred and fifty years, we were able to trace them to Ghana.  We know that they are, where they come in Ghana because one of my grandparents'--father's cousin was traveling in Ghana and then noticed that these people have similar gods and similar names.  And then he digs deeper, and then they told us their story, that there were four brothers that disappear one day, and they didn't know where they were.  But we were the descendants.  They went to Togo, and they were never seen again.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's how we got the connection.
Story_ID: 28356
Speaker 1: Just from the little I've read, I know that in Dahomey [Republic of Benin] at one time became almost like a slave capital in Africa in terms of the King of Dahomey being a really--
Speaker 2: That's, yes.  The King of Dahomey, yes, we talk about it in, they did that. The Ashanti also in Ghana, were also very big in getting involved in the slave trade, yeah.  That is true.
Speaker 1: It's almost like the relationships they had with the Europeans was one of getting firearms and they'd use the firearms to conquer other people, and then sell the captains, the war captains to the--
Speaker 2: That is true.  The, yeah, those things did happen.  They would go around the other area and grab other people who were not directly related to the language and sold those people.  But nobody really knew the extent of the things that happened to those people that were sold.  I mean even in Africa there were people who were slaves in the sense they can work in your house or do some things, but the treatment was completely different.
Speaker 1: Right, it wasn't like--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --what happens over here (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I visited the, the slave castle at Cape Coast in Ghana last year.  It was really, it was difficult to take, but to hear what really happened there and how people went through that experience and even survived to cross the Atlantic was really, it was painful to experience that.  Yeah, it's, yeah, it's unfortunate that some of these kingdoms did participate in it, whether they know the full extent of what is happening or not, that could be debated.
Story_ID: 28357
Speaker 1: Now, your father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan], now, did--now, what did his parents do for a living?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my grandfather was also, was a farmer and my grandmother was also, you know, somebody who sells things in the local markets and buying and selling.  That's what most women did at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's pretty much a usual situation where the male, you know, actually does farm labor, and the woman like sells--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay
Speaker 2: Exactly.  My grandmother was very good at it.  She did make a lot of money out of that business.
Speaker 1: This is your father's mother, I mean--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's my father's mother, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: Donsi, D-O-N-S-I.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what did she specialize in selling?
Speaker 2: She sold all, sort of, all sort of things, you know, jewelry, fruits, clothing, clothes, traditionally-made ornaments and sculptures and--
Speaker 1: And it sounds like she probably had more resources than your other grandmother in terms of being able to buy it 'cause you have to buy these things?
Speaker 2: That's right.  You have to buy these things and she also had a farm, a coconuts farm that was, that's a very big in our area that people can have huge farms of coconuts.  Out of that, we made coconuts, coconut oil, and that's usually what people use in that area of West Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you own a sizable farm of coconuts, you could be rich.
Speaker 1: Okay, people use coconut oil for a--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, coconut oil is just like the equivalent to olive oil or, you know, so that's why people use it all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28358
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] have any stories of growing up that he shared with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, not really from my father, but his father was more the one that we grew up with, hearing him, stories and--
Speaker 1: So your grandfather--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --told the stories.  Now, what was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Kete, just like my name, but it doesn't have the -vi at the end because he was the only in his generation, and there was no need to qualify the name because he doesn't have the big brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the -vi, the V-I at the end of your name--
Speaker 2: It just means the small brother, the smaller one.
Speaker 1: Smaller one, okay.
Speaker 2: Small, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Like junior or something?
Speaker 2: Junior, yeah, exactly, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was Kete and you're Ketevi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Or just--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and what kind of stories did he tell?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, he's--we heard stories that, mostly they are, they are different type of stories.  There are stories that are mainly for educational, so these are to, they are not real.  So they could tell you things like, you know, an elephant and a mouse were friends and they were going somewhere, and this happened, at the end of his story, you get a clear message of, in life, this is how you have to be and blah, blah.
Speaker 1: These are parables to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --to give you, you know, instructional parables--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  So, we heard a lot of those stories and, yeah, and then, you know, we also heard--or at least I heard stories about the things that my father did that he shouldn't have done (laughter).  Actually from the grandmother [Donsi], that she would mostly stress those things, that "I told him to do this, that, and he doesn't do it", and blah, blah, blah.  So my father really didn't say much himself about his own life and so forth.
Story_ID: 28359
Speaker 1: Can you tell us a story about your father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] that your grandfather [Kete Assamagan] or your grandmother [Donsi Assamagan] told you?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was one time when apparently my grandmother and my father's aunt, so this will be the sister of his father, they were fighting over a piece of land, 'cause in our culture your aunt is very strong in your life because it's like your father, your father's side.  So they were fighting about a piece of land, and they had to go to court.  And my, his aunts thought that he was supporting her because, because she believes that she is of the father line.  Therefore, even though she's a woman, she's like his father, so we (unclear) believe that the, that's the idea.  Therefore, she expected that my father was going to, will have no choice but to basically support his aunt to recover this land.  So they went to court, and my father was the older son for his mother and so forth.  So apparently, he was the one who witnessed the transaction and so forth.  And so he testified on behalf of his mother.  And the land went to his mother instead of to his aunt.  And apparently, that created a huge problem in the family.  The aunt was not very happy for a very long time.  And apparently, when my grandmother was dying, and she had said that this land belong to my father and before they divide anything else, because of his action for her to get that piece of land.  But apparently, the other siblings said that they were not there or they didn't witness the mother saying that.  So even the division of the mother's property was a problem.  But the part of this story was that it was an act of courage to have to stand between his aunt and his mother because both of them played a very strong role in his life.  And by the understanding of the culture, his aunt is actually more powerful in his life than his own mother.  And he was brave enough to understand that, you know, his natural link to his mother is more important, that he could not, from all the things he know, and he knew that he could not go against his mother for this judgment.
Speaker 1: Okay, as far as you know, I mean was he telling the truth?  I mean, you know the--was that, was that as important as trying to define which one to support?
Speaker 2: From what I know from my father, I believe that he was telling the truth.  But, you know, given the culture there, the truth can get a bit blur and, and people may refrain from not even telling the truth at all because they're afraid that, what might happen.  So I believe that he was telling the truth from what I know of him, that if he really believed that the land belonged to his aunt, he wouldn't have gone against the aunt.  But in general, some other people might not do that because really, aunt is so powerful, and doing that could bring some spell from her and so forth.  And therefore, your life will be ruined and everything.  They might be afraid to tell the truth.
Story_ID: 28360
Speaker 1: I wanted you to tell a story of, like a parable, if you can remember a parable, kind of summarize one for us.  And are there any parables that have to do with science, I mean--
Speaker 2: Science, no.  I have to really think very hard--
Speaker 1: Well, of logic versus superstition or, I mean or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there are some, there are--well, the one to tell, even about really, about education and wisdom and so forth.  And some share the cross or even have to, the Ghana people or the Ashanti's and even the Benin, they can tell the same story, like we, in that area we believe that the spider carry a great wisdom.  It's an animal that carry a great wisdom.  So there is a parable about a spider.  Apparently, he was very, at some point, he was very unhappy about his state of wisdom in the world.  He just think that, you know, they are not very well collected, organized and he doesn't know how future generations can learn from that.  So he decided that he will collect all knowledge and all wisdom in the world, organize them properly for next generation.  So he took on this (task?) upon himself, and after some time, he did manage to collect everything into a big jar.  And he said the best place to keep it safe is in a tree.  So he started, he tied up this jar in front of himself and started to climb the tree, but the way he tied it up, he couldn't climb very well.  It's just, you know--it's between him and the tree, and it just make his climbing very difficult.  So his son was on the ground watching him struggling to go up.  Then the son told him, "Father, if you really have all the wisdom with you up there, you would have tied the jar on your back."  So things became really difficult for him to get to the branches on the tree, and at some point, he had to let the jar.  It fell, broke and wisdom scattered far and wide.  People came to make their peak.  So the moral of this story is like, it's that's why, you know, a few people have great wisdom, most people have some wisdom, and some people have no wisdom at all 'cause they all have to come and collect from the wisdom that got scattered everywhere when the jar of the great spider broke.
Story_ID: 28361
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] have a chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father went to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went up to sixth grade, and then he, he learned auto mechanics, so he's an auto mechanic by profession.
Speaker 1: Now, this is an important thing to learn in those days, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --this would have been in the '50 [1950s], right, or--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly, yes.  That's when-- with that training, that's when he went to Gabon, and that's when I was born while he was working in Gabon in one of the petrol companies there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay.  Now, is there--so your dad operated as a mechanic for most of his life?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: An auto mechanic, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he--after he came back to Togo from Gabon, he went to another company in Togo which specialize in the mining of phosphate because we have a lot of phosphate in Togo.  So he, then he worked there until his retirement.
Speaker 1: Now, this is for a company--so he kind of maintained the motor pool for this company?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of the big machineries that they use, either to clear the field and so forth, these Caterpillar machines, yeah, so, and some of the four-by-four vehicles and so forth.  He was the part of the unit that maintained all of those vehicles.
Speaker 1: What was the name of this mining company?
Speaker 2: It's call OTP, Office Togolais des Phosphates.
Speaker 1: OTP?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm not gonna ask you to spell the rest of it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm not gonna ask you to spell the rest of it, but it's known as OTP?
Speaker 2: Yeah, OTP's.  I mean it's the government company for the mining of phosphate in Togo.
Story_ID: 28362
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Afiwa Geanne Nouho and Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] met or how they got together and became man and wife?
Speaker 2: Actually, I really don't know, but the only story I knew was that when I was still very young, they went and did a church marriage in the church.  They were already married.  Then I was born, and some of my brothers and sisters were already born.  And then after that, they went to the church and did a celebration in the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I knew that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: No, go ahead, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: I, I (unclear).  I knew it because, you know, in our culture, when you do something people, they'll make fun of you by making songs.  So there are some people who just make songs about you may have done.  So they, they made a song about my parents as being the first in the village to have done a white people's wedding by getting married in the church.  That's how they call it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So traditionally, you know, it wasn't done like that.
Speaker 1: So people make a song to--I know, nowadays, I mean in the black community, they have something called signifying where people just talk about you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But they'll make a song about--in those days, it was like they'd make a song about you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they will make, they will make a song, and they will, it will, it will stay there for a while (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they were the first to have a white people's wedding?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean they call it a white wedding or something like that because you do it officially in the Catholic church, and, you know, with the rings and so forth, but traditionally, you know, one family goes to see the other one, and they talk about it and--
Speaker 1: So they already were married according to--
Speaker 2: Well, they'd been married, yes, traditionally--
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--traditions of the Fon.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were already married.
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But they, they just have been--so was it for like a political reason that they have a white church wedding to--or religious reason or--
Speaker 2: I think it was religious, was religious reason for that.
Speaker 1: So they like, had they just joined church or were they--or what?
Speaker 2: I suspect it must have been that because the Catholic church was actually growing in the village, and my parents have just moved back from Gabon.
Speaker 1: So this is when your father got the name Alphonse in the middle?
Speaker 2: No, not, actually, everybody get baptized because the Catholic church was already in the village for a while and at birth they get baptized, the (unclear).  They are given a second name that is from the Catholic church.  So he got that name much earlier, but, of course, people don't go to church every day or they are not really, you know, observing all of the Catholic ritual.  So, but everybody gets the Catholic name.  And then later on, when they came back from Gabon, for some reason they decided that they want to do this ceremony in church.
Story_ID: 28363
Speaker 1: I was just, just thinking that probably the people who made up the song and, I guess the people in the village for the most part, probably saw--and correct me if I'm wrong, they saw Catholicism and the French as being imposed on them at a certain point, and not something that was really a part of what they were doing until, I guess, that presence got stronger and stronger, you know.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: Is that, is that a good assessment?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, that is definitely true.  I think at the beginning, it was like that.  And eventually, even, you know, the Catholic religion actually got accepted as really, in African society and integrated.  Why?  Because it does, it feeds a little bit in the philosophy in the sense that, yes, (another?) extra gods and that can do this, this, this.  People already have a lot of them there so in many cases, if you're gonna find any problem at all to go to church and to keep also the traditional (unclear), stuff like that.
Speaker 1: Now, the Christian god is a jealous god (laughter).
Speaker 2: Exactly (laughter).
Speaker 1: And so the pressure to, (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --not have any other god--
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: --is from the Catholic side, right, not the Fons--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --side?  The Fons side says, hey, just have some more.
Speaker 2: That's right, exactly, yeah.  Yeah, I was, I was a group of people except for I think we have almost close to ten gods.  They are the ones that my forefathers brought from Ghana and some ones that were picked while they were in Togo.
Speaker 1: So you can pick the ones you want?
Speaker 2: Well, no, you have to do a ritual for all of them at the specific time.
Speaker 1: Oh, so all ten?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they have different, different requirements.  One of them, one of the gods that my forefathers brought from Ghana is actually a lady, a goddess, that sits at the center of the village and is a--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Who, which one is that?
Speaker 2: --protector.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Which one is that?
Speaker 2: We call it (Norwenchwa?), it's a woman god.  It's a goddess.  And it's like the protector, where the last line of defense really because at the entrance of the village, in the area there is also one called that.  But that one comes from Nigeria.  We call Ligba, the Juba also have it, not like--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Ligba, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that one is sitting at the entrance.  It's the first one that protects a village.  And when you go to a village in the center, there you have--the goddess is there.  Some people claim that they have seen it, her in Nigeria, during rough times. I haven't seen her in the U.S. yet.  Maybe I have.  I just haven't noticed because this, she has, beyond the village has appeared and held people, some of our people, very far away in very tough times outside (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Does she appear in a vision--I mean, well, how does she appear?
Speaker 2: She, the story I heard was that she normally appears, you know, and not a skinny woman, but full-size lady telling you something that you should or should not do.  And then, you know, in a split second you turn around--that's what, some guys gives you information, has disappeared.  You cannot find him.  And then moment (unclear) that something happened for which, you know, your life is spared or something.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's, so it could come from an unexpected source, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I mean the contact coming from unexpected sources.  Somebody gave you some wisdom, and--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you couldn't find 'em afterwards that--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: They think that was the--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, and then people believe that it must be her, you know.
Story_ID: 28364
Speaker 1: So is there a name for the religion of the people of the Fon?
Speaker 2: No, no, not--you know, there isn't really a name, but see, these gods in our language, we call them Voodoo.  Voodoo really is a word for us, which simply just mean god, right.  But in the English dictionary, Voodoo means that religion, you know, that, you know, (unclear).  A single god is Voodoo for us.  So the whole system, right, of the gods and the then the almighty god, and then the witchcraft and so forth constitutes really the religion, our religion.  So it has the goods and the bad and all of them, the purpose is for to induce goods in the human beings so that it can leave together and peace.  Even the bad one, they have their hope because they are there as the punisher.
Speaker 1: Okay, so a moral guidance running through this Voodoo--
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they could be a good Voodoo and bad Voodoo.  We had, there is one which is to punisher of the bad people.  It's Latonda (ph.), in our language, the god of thunder.  So during that time, you know, all of the bad element in society, they get hit by thunder.  So they will get eliminated--(simultaneous)--as the bad--
Speaker 1: Like Shango in the Yoruba?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and then you have the god, the protector.  So those are for the collective protection and so forth.  Then in addition to that, you have the people who have their own witchcraft for extra protection or for getting more ahead in life or whatever.  But all of those things really, they constitute the religion.  They are really completely inseparable.  You cannot make sense of life in Africa if you don't have all these things, 'cause you can explain somebody's illness today by something that their grandparents or grandmother may have done while they were not even born.  And they are getting the punishment.  And it's fine because somebody in those people's line have to be punished for what they did.  And people can accept that.  That's okay, you know, and they can live with it.  So the, the bad is there so that people can fear it, and therefore, do--be induced to do the good 'cause they don't want--
Speaker 1: To do the right thing.
Speaker 2: Exactly, I mean to do the right thing, exactly.
Story_ID: 28365
Speaker 1: So, any basic difference in what the Catholics think is the right thing to do and what the Fon think is the right thing to do in terms of lying or killing or all those kind of things?
Speaker 2: No, the only difference is that I think in the Catholic religion, you could have this confession and forgiveness and so forth.  You know, but it's not really a structure like that in the African religion where you can go to somebody to confess.  You can always go to somebody to seek more protection.
Speaker 1: So if you do bad things, you'd better protection.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, you can--or you can also do good--actually, it's, right, it's not like there's somebody that you have to tell all of these things, when the person will say, "Okay, go ask forgiveness for it."  But you could in principle, go and do some ceremonies and do this, this and that, and then gods will have mercy on you, and then they might not.  But it's not like, it's only a system where there is somebody where you have to really, you know, confess to and all the--if something starts happening to you, and there is one of those people who can look into your fortune and tell you that will be fine.  You did this, this and this bad thing and so forth and blah, blah, blah, and took care of the problem.  You need this ceremony for this god and things like that.  And then they could, you know.  So it's a bit of a technical difference that--
Speaker 1: And you don't have any jealous gods either that, you know, they're jealous of their--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, yeah.  All of these gods, they can actually, they can live together essentially.  That's (laughter) (unclear).  And the other thing is that we do have the God Almighty as well, right?  But in there, there's a similarity--  we have a similarity of Christianity  in the sense that we believe that we have to pray to the lesser gods, you know.  So like we pray to this goddess and the center of our village.  We do the ceremony to her.  We do the ceremony to the god of thunder and so forth.  And these gods, they take our prayers too.  The Almighty whom we have to hold very, very high.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's like the Saints in Christianity--
Speaker 1: Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  So--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And they don't count the saints as deities.  They--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: They have them in (unclear) their fables there, but they (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we have that.  So we have the God Almighty, and you can call upon the gods if there is (unclear), that God Almighty, there's a problem.  But if you really want to do some ceremony, you have a god that is specific for travel, specific for fertility, specific some particular journey or something, money problem, those are the people you have--the gods that you have to address your specific prayers to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you see a parallel, I mean here in the United States?  I know in New Orleans [Louisiana] and some of the Carolinas and stuff, they, different versions of voodoo practice going.  They call it Voodoo in some places.  And other, you know, and they, they tend to believe in Christianity and Voodoo at the same time.
Speaker 2: Umm.  Yeah, I think it's more or less--it's quite similar.  I think, you know, the Voodoo part basically emerged or came from, from West Africa, and then there's the Christianity from Europe, and that's exactly what we also have in Africa, that, in the (unclear) cities.  It's a mixture of it.  So, I mean Haiti, for example, is a very strong, you know, traditional African belief.  So engrained there--
Speaker 1: Haiti, Cuba.
Speaker 2: Cuba, yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous) Brazil, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 28366
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents personalities, and even your grandparents on some because you spent a lot of time with them, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think my grandfather [Kete Assamagan].  You know, my middle name is actually my grandfather's name that was given to me.  And I think our (eyes?), you know, connected, connected (unclear) more in terms of his character and so forth.  My father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] also has a very powerful (unclear) which has been given.  But, you know, so there you really have to have a nickname, you know, has to define who you are for the rest of your life.  And it has to be something really powerful.
Speaker 1: Now, is this, do the Fon give you a name at birth and then add another name based on your characteristics--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --later on?
Speaker 2: That's how, yeah, that will emerge later on or even during birth, depending on how difficult the birth was or, you know.  And sometimes they will do, try to do the ceremony to see who has, reincarnated a new, and based on that, you can carry the name of that person.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now do you--can you name your brothers and sisters for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Starting with the oldest and put yourself in the order?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I am the first born of my mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho], and then I have a brother and sister that are twins.  They are three years younger than me.  And then after the twins, I have a, one brother and another brother.  Then after that, there are three sisters that came.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's eight (unclear), right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we are eight, from my mother, yeah.
Story_ID: 28367
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I just, yes, the way, what I remember really from Gabon, I don't remember very much.  I was four when we left.  When we went to Togo, I remember, you know, we went--I was like among the last one to go to the colonial school, where the religion was, they will beat you for punishment.  And so you really have corporal punishment.  We did have it in school.  And--
Speaker 1: They don't beat you in African schools, I mean--
Speaker 2: Well, at home as well, yeah, no.  There are no beat, yeah, I did get a little beating at home (laughter), just from my father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan], not my mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho].  But the earliest I remember was that, it was during the break, I think I was playing with some people.  I must have been five or something like that, and the teacher was unhappy with something and start beating everybody up.  And so I--the stick has some sharp edges and so forth, and basically, just peel off my skin on my legs and created a really big wound.  So then I got home, and my father wanted to know who it was.  And I told him that it was the teacher.  He didn't believe me.  So he took me into his car and drove to the teacher, and he asked him.  And the teacher said, yes, that he beat the kids and so forth, but he didn't know that I had gotten hurt.  And my father was like, okay, you know.  But it's a scar that I still carry now.  It's okay (unclear).
Story_ID: 28368
Speaker 1: So you grew up in the Village of--did you grow up in Adjaha [Republic of Benin] or--
Speaker 2: No, I grew in Djeta [Togo], my father's [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] place, yeah.
Speaker 1: Djeta, okay.  So is that customary when your, when your parents get married, the children are raised in their father's village or is that where--or do they just decide where they're gonna live?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, they just decide.  And we were raised in my father's village because my mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho] was already living there.  So that village has become essentially common for both of them.  So she's, I remember she used to go to Adjaha to her father's place and help the father.  Her father was living there at my mother and her sisters and her mother were living in the same village as my father.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did your neighborhood have a name?  Is there a name for your neighborhood or--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, the, well, the village is so small that, yeah, actually--ooh, let me see.  That's, yeah, it does, but to tell you the truth, I forgot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you describe where you grew, what it looked, what did it look like, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the village is by the river, a river, so there is a--one section of Mono River.  So the Mono is a big river at the border of Togo and Benin.  And then it has, a small branch of the river actually goes along the border of Togo and Benin.  So the Village of Djeta is really at the border.  When you cross that river on the other side, you're in Benin.  But as soon as you cross, you also have the Atlantic Ocean there.  So it's like, you have, you have the ocean, and then you have the river.  And then you have one road that goes through the village and goes all the way to the main city in the region.  And you have the houses around.  My father, when he came back from, from Gabon, he came back with some money.  So he was able to buy a car.  So he was the first to buy a Renault, one of the earlier Renault, I think it's actually a four-seater, actually, not even a five-seater.
Speaker 1: Is that Dauphine or the--
Speaker 2: No, the Quat-- 4L.  I think it's a Renault 4L or something.  And, yeah, he was the first to buy a car in the village, so he got some songs on that (laughter).  And then he was able to build a brick house as well.  So it's just by the main road.  There was no electricity in the village at the time.  There was no running water.  You have to work, you know, create a well, and then get water from the well.  Nobody, the village has one or two wells, and everybody converge over there with a bucket to get water.
Story_ID: 28369
Speaker 1: But (unclear) loved cultural stuff.  People would just get together and start playing music and dance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And women would just dress up, and the men would be playing and then, it's just, you know, very different style of music and so forth, drumming, different sort of drums.  And, but nowadays, you don't really see that.  A big part of the culture that's just disappearing fast.
Speaker 2: Really, okay, so you don't have the same kind of spontaneity in terms of culture activities that--
Speaker 1: It has become commercial.  There are people now, a group of people who do that for you if you ask them.  And you have to pay money.  But you don't have spontaneity, the village which just go down on Saturday afternoon for no purpose at all but to just enjoy themself.  Now, it happens when somebody's having a specific celebration or a sad occasion like a funeral and things like that.  And otherwise, now, you have these organized groups who have now encapsulated all of the cultural (unclear) into some sort of economic type of activity.
Speaker 2: Okay, so they play for pay?
Speaker 1: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Where in the old days, they would just on a regular basis play.
Speaker 1: That's right, in the old days, just everybody in the village just get together.  And there are people who are very good in the drumming, in the drum making, and then they would just play.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) and it'd just be drums or would it be other instruments too?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there are some other things, the metallic stuff and then the shacrees (ph.) as well.  But, yeah, there are different, really different type of drums, and then when you combine all of those things with (unclear) you can make some very nice music.
Speaker 2: I know there are people that I've met in the communities here, they're into cultural things here in the United States, they claim to go to Africa and come back as a master drummer and stuff like that--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah, I've seen, seen that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've always been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I've seen those in (unclear)--
Speaker 2: --skeptical that you could become a master drummer in a month or even a year.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is, yeah, that is too--
Speaker 2: So did you have people there who considered themselves like, were considered master drummers?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, there are people who are extremely good.  I, when I went back several years ago for my father's [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] funeral, I was really impressed at the quality of, you know, just ordinary people in the village.  It's just like, it's amazing.  You hear the music, you will want to hear it again and again.
Speaker 2: Is there a particular musician from Benin that you--
Speaker 1: From Benin, there's Angelique Kidjo.
Speaker 2: Kidjo, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  She is from Benin.
Speaker 2: Now, you grew up in Benin or Togo, which--
Speaker 1: I grew up in Togo.
Speaker 2: Togo, okay--
Speaker 1: I grew up in Togo.
Speaker 2: --well, (unclear) grew up in Togo.
Speaker 1: No, in Togo, I don't, there isn't anybody of that standing that-- there were some people, you know, who had some promises and then things didn't work out for some reason after--
Speaker 2: Well, who's the best one, you think, or the one that you are more impressed with, regardless of where they're from?
Speaker 1: There's Bella Bellow.  It's a young girl, female, her name was Bella Bellow.  She died several years ago.  She start quite well, but then she died very suddenly, yeah.  It was quite sad.  The entire country was really saddened for a long time.
Story_ID: 28370
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?  You've already answered some of it, but--
Speaker 2: Some of the--
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: In terms of sounds, have a lot of, I mean, well, because, you know, the chicken, goat and those things are essentially living, physically living together with people.  They are in the house.  And early in the morning, you have the rooster.  So you can hear that all the time.  Then you have the noise of people just waking and it's just this background noise from six o'clock in the morning, that if you are in the village, you will hear.  In terms of the smell is normally the smell of making food that you will hear all the time since the houses, most of the time, they are really connected.  You can actually smell your neighbors' food.  And sometimes, you know, the sewage system is not really very well done in the village.  And that could also create a problem.  Besides really it's just so you can see a lot of agricultural products, you know, coconut trees were in our area, just everywhere along the Atlantic coast, have a lot of coconut trees.  You have all these strange things that nobody really pay attention to sights there in my opinion.  We don't (unclear) stuff and say, wow, look at this, this is beautiful.  Just, life is so busy.  It's like, you know, it's beautiful.  Then what?  We need to do something now, you know.  So, but, you know, I, even when I go back, you know, some of it struck me, it's the green, the vegetation and the variety of all of these plants that you can just see the green, you know, at the distance.  So you don't, during the dry season, still quite green and hefty plants everywhere, you know.  And then you have all of these tropical fruits.  And then, you know, in various seasons you can mangos, oranges, bananas and, you know.  But when you are there, after a while, you don't, you don't smell it anymore (laughter).
Speaker 1: You take it for granted almost.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you just take it for granted, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what about the sea and the river?  Is there a lot of fishing?
Speaker 2: Yes, there's a, organized group of fishermen for the sea and on the river, you have people with small canoes, and they will place various nets and then go back and check.  And depending on the season, you have people with those fishing rods in the river.  Yeah, there's--so it's a lot of fish.  The food is based on a lot of vegetables and fish and a small quantity of meat.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a favorite kind of fish (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  There is one that I could find here in Queens [New York].  What is that fish called?  I think it's some of a snapper that we can also get there in Togo that we can also find here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the food, did you eat a lot of rice in Togo, growing--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, some, not really a lot.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: There's rice, but you--we have a number of things that are based on corn.  You can make many different things out of corn.  There's like maybe ten different ways of making corn that you can get from there, and then there is the cassava and yam, sweet potato and then, and then rice.  Maybe rice is small nowadays because all of these other things that used to be traditionally grown, but, you know, farmers are disappearing.  Everybody wants to have a city job.  So now, we begin to import more and more rice, but it's, don't really--we didn't really eat a lot of rice.
Speaker 1: And rice is more of an import--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we don't, yeah, at least in our area, we didn't grow rice, grow rice.  And beans also, you know, we eat a lot of beans.  So we can make--
Speaker 1: Are they grown or are they imported too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, those things are, they are locally grown, beans, corn, cassava, yams, sweet potato, and things like that.  They are locally grown.
Story_ID: 28371
Speaker 1: Where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school in the village in Djeta, with this teacher that I mentioned (unclear).  I was in first grade at the time when that incident happened.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It called Premier, it's called Premier de Djeta.  So it's primary school of Djeta.
Speaker 1: What is it (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Primary, it's called Premier in French.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's called Premier.
Speaker 1: They call it Premier, okay.
Speaker 2: It's called Premier Public, so it's a public, essentially government owned.  It's not a private school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was not a Catholic school or--
Speaker 2: No, dad [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] went to only Catholic school, until my father when to--when my father went to his primary school, that's, that school was not yet open in the village.  And he went to a Catholic school in our, that village.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you like school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, it was, it was really good.  You know, the only thing that is regrettable is the corporal punishment 'cause you get terrorized at school, and then you get terrorized as well at home (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, were most of your teachers people from Togo or were they Europeans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the primary school, all my teachers were from Togo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: In primary school, yeah, you know, that-- I don't really-- high school was more, I can remember some people but in primary school, it's getting really vague now.
Speaker 1: So how big was, I mean how big a population's in the school?  Was there like a, did you have like all the, so primary would be like first through third grade or something or--
Speaker 2: Up to sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Up to sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: First through sixth.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think we were probably, the school was, the capacity was maybe about five thousand students.
Speaker 1: Okay, a pretty good sized school.  Was it within walking distance from home?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, it's within fifteen minutes walk, you can get to the school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my father was not that lucky, you know.  When he went to his school in a different village, they walked for hours to get there.
Story_ID: 28372
Speaker 1: Now, it sounds like your father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] is probably a very important person in the village, the first car and a brick house, and, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, yeah, and, you know, he was also educated in terms of being able to read and write and understand some of the legal system and things like that.  So, yeah, but he didn't really spend too much time there because when he was back in the village, after a few years, the money that he brought from Gabon ran out, and he has to find other jobs.  So that's when he became, was hired in this mining company of the town.  But that's no longer in that village, and so he has to move somewhere, to some, to some other place of the country.
Speaker 1: So your father like left, he had to move away from the family to work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went first, but within six months, we all joined him, so yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how old were you when you all had to move too?
Speaker 2: I didn't, you know, so what happened was that when he went, he went to the different part of the country, my mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho] and my brothers and sisters move with him.  But that's the time when I spent, you know, the rest of my primary school in the same village, and I stayed with my grandmother [Donsi Assamagan] and my grandfather [Kete Assamagan].  That's when I really connected with my grandfather because I was left with them to not have to change school.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: I think I was about eight when I stayed with my, yeah.
Story_ID: 28373
Speaker 1: Can you remember when you first became aware of science or when you were aware of it as a primary student?  Did they teach science?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, no, I was aware of science very early at, really at five years old.  I was already exhibiting some interests in science because I, you know, I could handle all of the, you know, the beginning of mathematics that we are being taught.  So, yeah, throughout that primary school, I was very good in all of the science stuff.  We, we learned a lot of things.  We learned geography, history.  The only things that you really didn't learn was things that require some materials, music, drawing and stuff like that.  But it just a piece of paper and pencil.  That was very easy, some books, and was very easy to, to address.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have a laboratory or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, we didn't have any laboratory.
Speaker 1: No laboratory or-- did you have electricity at school?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  The entire village did not have electricity at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so did you have like proper desks and stuff (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Yes, you, but it's like a long bench with different chairs and so forth, and people, a lot of--maybe five or six to a bench, the rows.
Speaker 1: And were supplies like pencils and paper expensive when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: No, there were, not really, no, no.  They were not--I don't believe they were, you know, but I know some people struggled because their parents could not, did not pay the school fees or at some point they didn't have some of the materials.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I would think that (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We used to wear a uniform to go to school because that eliminate stress of the kids that would not be able to change clothes often.  So everybody wear uniform.  So the beginning of the school, it could be, you know, a lot of expense for the parents, depending on how many kids they have in school, had to make the uniform for each of them and then pay the school fees and then pay for all of the school materials, yeah, but then, yeah, that's the way it was organized.  I mean the fee was very, very low because essentially a government school.  So it, basically nothing, but still it could be a problem, a problem for some parents because it was very easy, for example, to get a meal because you have a farm and your neighbor also has a different farm.  You can exchange stuff, and you have material, and you can make a meal and so forth.  But then when somebody tells you to, you know, pay two hundred dollars for school fee for the year, then that, you don't have.  So that becomes a problem.
Story_ID: 28374
Speaker 1: So, what were you like in primary school?  What would people say that you were like, and what do you think you were like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was, actually, I was the youngest of my group in primary school because a lot of them, the way it's done, the system was that you have to pass at the end of the year to be allowed to remain. To go to the next level, you pass an exam.  If you don't pass, you stay there.  So you grow old there, but you are still in the same grade.  And the new kids are joining you there.  So when I started, most of the people that I was with had already failed once or twice, and so they were a bit older than me.  And I had to show them, you know, how to answer some questions or solve some problems and things like that.  But they were also far advanced in some rough games around the village where they would go and play some games in the bush or in the trees and things like that or they would build some sort of a device to throw, like catapult, to kill bird or they will put some stones in there--
Speaker 1: Slings and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, you know, they, it becomes a lot of quality to, a lot of skills to actually make these things, to aim them properly and to kill your animal.  So a lot of, you know, the kids that I was dealing with were extremely skilled.  I, you know, some of them were just not the--just couldn't concentrate on school work, but they have a lot of, you know, they were extremely handy in getting things done and being resourceful.  And I was not like that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, did your father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] make a difference in terms of that, having gone to school himself, did--could you see the advantage of going by looking at what he was doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, actually, my father, yeah, did make a big difference in terms of the, because of the fact that he went to school, and because there were a lot of people that way in the class whose parents were illiterate and could not really help them with anything or motivate them at all.  And so it was, it was a big help that my father actually did have some sort of education at the time.
Speaker 1: You know, when your father left when you were age eight, did you have cousins and other, I mean that had gone to school too?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all, I have cousins of the same age from my father's brothers and sisters.  We were all living with my grandmother [Donsi Assamagan] and my grandfather [Kete Assamagan], all going to school at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you could help each other on things?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, yeah.  And we'd all come home and do homework together and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you do as a student?  If you kept advancing, you must have been a pretty good student?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I was very good in all my--I, from what I remember, I failed my first, the first year of my--I mean the first grade.  I had to redo.  That's when my father told me, but I really have no recollection of that.  He said that I was actually too young to get--I was five when I started, should have started at six.  And so I didn't really, I didn't do well apparently.  But I never failed school after that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were not mature enough probably--
Speaker 2: That's why (unclear) year I was not really, really too good.  I wasn't mature enough to know what I was doing there.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, I assume you liked math and science, but did you have a favorite subject?
Speaker 2: Yeah, natural sciences were the subjects that I liked a lot, so that have to do with all the things we (unclear)-- biology and so forth, were what I was so very much interested in, and I wanted to go into medicine after that by doing biology.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you know any doctors?
Speaker 2: Say it again?
Speaker 1: Did you know any doctors growing up as a kid (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know anybody who was a doctor, no.
Story_ID: 28375
Speaker 1: So, did you go like to middle school or junior high school after the sixth grade?  Is that what--?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yes.
Speaker 1: And is the--what is the, now, you went to school under the French system, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And how is that different from the American system of going to school?  Or do you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, I think, I mean when I came here, I realized that, it's not really difference in the mathematical sciences.  But the difference that I noticed was more that towards high school, we learned more about the rest of the world than people here, you know, learn at school.
Speaker 1: I'm reacting here 'cause I think that's kind of technical--I mean, yeah, it does seem like Americans don't seem to know much about the rest of the world--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --I mean you can't get it from school anyway.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you get some of it, but not--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: --not very much.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we learn a lot in geography and history, but we're not necessarily our own, but every part of the world, we learn something.
Speaker 1: I know the knowledge of Africa is dismal here.  I mean we really don't have any--
Speaker 2: Yeah, which is so, but we learned so much about the U.S. and the economy system, the political system, and geography and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the sixth grade, what was the name of your school or was it seventh grade that you go to another level?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I went into a different, in a different town because in the village, we couldn't have anything beyond the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the next town and where did you go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Aneho [Togo] is the, it's like the capital of the region.  It's called Aneho, A-N-E-H-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's where I went to, I started seventh grade there.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: It's, college, it's called CEG, so I've been trying to remember what it is, exactly stand for.
Speaker 1: The college--
Speaker 2: College D'Enseignement General, so it's the College of General Instruction or something like that.  But we call it college, but it's really still beginning of high school really, so middle school somehow.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, how did you--did you have to be bussed there or go on bus or did you have to (move?) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I went to--I first lived with a cousin of my father.  I spent the first year with, I stayed with a cousin of my father for the first year.  And then after that I live, I live alone.  My father found me a room in a house, and they would give me money every month.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, this is seventh grade.  You're like about twelve years old, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was thirteen when I started this school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Thirteen, okay, thirteen years old.  And you were there, you lived with a cousin for a year.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So when you were fourteen, you were living by yourself?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's something now.  That's, now that would be really scary for a fourteen year old here.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I didn't really have a good experience with my host in the first year, so I explained to my father that I will prefer to live alone, and he didn't believe that it was, it would be fine.  So, yeah, so I left.
Speaker 1: Well, did you live with a family or did you live--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, it was a room in a house, with--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --a bunch of other people around.  So, in Africa, it's really difficult to be alone.  You have to work hard (laughter) to be alone.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you say it's difficult to be alone and trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, yeah, people everywhere.  They won't, even if you want to be alone, they won't leave you alone (laughter).
Story_ID: 28376
Speaker 1: Now, this school [College D'Enseignement General, Aneho, Togo], now, you were--did they have like a laboratory facility and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't have a laboratory facility.  But this school, well, it's like as you--everybody starts to emerge from primary school when you get into this middle school.  There are fewer and fewer of them in Catholic school, a lot of people converging from different villages to go to this school.
Speaker 1: So these are the more academic oriented students then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but there are really no choices anyways.  The problem, no monies when your parents cannot send you there or they don't have anybody you can stay with, and, you know, some people get left behind.  They cannot go to these schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But there are really no other choice that you can--then you, either you go learn something.  But for that, you have to leave our village as well to go if you really want to learn some skills.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So if you cannot do any of those, then you are stuck as a farmer like your father or as a fisherman or selling things.  So there was really no opportunity of learning some skills that is going to earn you a living in the village.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There are stuff, so you could become, I don't know, somebody who heals people when they break their legs.  We have people like that in the village.  But it doesn't really bring you a lot of money.
Speaker 1: They're natural healers and they--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah, they have things like that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear), but they, you know.
Speaker 2: We have the fishermen, we have the people who are making the drums, people who make the canoes and things like that.  Those are skills, but you don't, you know, you don't make those things all the time.
Speaker 1: And as you were saying before, there're some really bright people doing those--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  Yeah, these people really have skills.  I mean I am really very impressed that the hand skills are, the handcrafting of things are just impressive.  I think if they, those things were channeled properly, these people could really be actually useful for the whole country, if they are really used better.  There are really a lot of skills in those villages.  It's amazing what they, what these people just sit and do, you know.
Story_ID: 28377
Speaker 1: So, at this level of school [at College D'Enseignement General, Aneho, Togo], what was the highest mathematics you were able to take?
Speaker 2: At this level, we then, we started, you know, all of the algebra stuff.  We start, we start at that point, and we begin, the beginning of physics also starts.  And we go deeper in the natural sciences.  Still you learn all of the subjects still until you get to high school, but they just get more involved.  And at this point also, there is no, you know, you don't branch yet.  So everybody learn the same subjects at the same level.  Then it's in high school that we begin to separate into different majors.
Speaker 1: Now, when you're, when you're in middle school or elementary school, do you learn about the history of your own country, I mean in--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: --in terms of--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, that we learn a lot about, and then later on, we begin to branch into the region--the history of the region and then, and then, and then the world.
Speaker 1: So in terms of the--I didn't raise this before, but the government of Togo at that time, who was the president of--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The president was Gnassingbe Eyadema, so the president of Togo, Gnassingbe, G-B-A-M-S-I-B-E, Eyadema is A-Y-A-D-E-M-A [sic,].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was a dictator and was president for a very long time.
Speaker 1: Gnassingbe Eyadema.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he was president for a long time--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the president from '67 [1967] to '83 [1983]--'93 [1993] or '94 [1994] [sic, 2005].
Story_ID: 28378
Speaker 1: So were there any special teachers or mentors in this period of time [at College D'Enseignement General, Aneho, Togo]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, my English teacher was very good.  He was a person from Ghana though I wasn't very good in the languages.  But he, this guy was very, very good.
Speaker 1: So you were learning English as a foreign language--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  We were already-- (that?) when we started English as a second language, a second foreign language.
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up, you could already speak Fon, right, Fon, French--
Speaker 2: Yeah, French we could speak fluently.  English was more difficult.  We could read it, but not really (laughter) sure, you know, speak it or could even comprehend, you know, when somebody spoke English.  And--
Speaker 1: And so did you speak like, would you speak in actually Fon or a dialect of Fon or--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, in the region we spoke, in that region, we spoke Mina, Mina is the language.  Mina and Ewe.
Speaker 1: Okay, are they related by languages?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Mina and Ewe have a lot of similarities.
Speaker 1: Ewe, how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: E-W-E.
Speaker 1: E-W-E, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Mina person can understand a great deal of Ewe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We also have, you know, an element of Fons are still somewhat there, but the (unclear) Fons will be distinct from those two.
Speaker 1: So, one, two, three--parts of four languages and you can read English?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's so different from here where everybody just speaks English, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: They may take a foreign language but they really don't (unclear) speak it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you say your English teacher was from Ghana--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: He's important.  Anybody else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, the director of the college was, was very good.  At the time, he didn't teach himself, but, you know, was a very good discipline in the college at the time.
Speaker 1: He's someone you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: What was his name?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) I forgot his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I forgot his name [sigh]
Speaker 1: It's okay.  (Unclear) But he's somebody you looked up to?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, was he from Togo or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was from Togo, yeah.  He was from Togo.
Story_ID: 28379
Speaker 1: So, it's [College D'Enseignement General] like a middle school or junior high school, I guess.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: --in Aneho [Togo].  Where did you go next?
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I went for--so that was for four years, and then, and then after that you pass an exam again, and then you can go to high school for three years.  Then you, yeah, after that you formally get into high school, but I stay in Aneho because the high school was also there in Aneho.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I just moved from one area to another one.  Then I started high school.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of this high school?
Speaker 2: Lycee De Zebevi, So Lycee is a high school in French, L-Y-C-E-E, de Zebevi, Z-E-B-E-V-I.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So this is a, so now is this a--so in high school, do you like focus on just science and math (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that point, the major is science, physics and mathematics.  But you do learn everything else except that the (unclear) on the exams, and also the (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What are the courses taught?
Speaker 2: You take everything.
Speaker 1: I know some of the people we've interviewed in the British system don't even study anything else once they get to a certain point.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: They just do science, and that's all they do.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: But we do all of class, including French as well.  You don't stop any of the subjects until you get to the university.
Speaker 1: Alright, so did you have calculus in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, at that point it becomes, it becomes really very serious, a lot of calculus and algebra and a number of the mathematical methods for physics.
Speaker 1: They actually started taking physics in middle school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's different from here, I think.  I don't think they really teach it in middle school.
Speaker 2: Umm, yeah, physics and chemistry started quite early in (unclear), yeah, middle school.
Speaker 1: Now, did the high school have laboratory facilities?
Speaker 2: I believe that there was but we did not use it.  It looks like it was there at the beginning at some point in the past, and then things broke and were not maintained or replaced and when we got there, they were not usable.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was there electricity in the high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that town had electricity.  Yeah, the school was, the school did have electricity.
Speaker 1: We're talking about passage of time too, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in terms of, did it--how long did it take for electricity, say is electricity in the village you grew up in now?  Is it there--
Speaker 2: Now, it is, yes.
Speaker 1: And what time did it get there?
Speaker 2: Well, just like only five years ago (laughter).  That was long, yeah, took a long time to get there.
Speaker 1: I think people in this country, a lot of people don't remember when, you know, they don't remember a time when there wasn't electricity.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: And it wasn't, you know, it wasn't even here, (unclear) time, a lot of places were electrified in the, during the [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt years, and especially down South, you know.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: So, okay--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's still quite far from our standard because these places, you know, many places in Africa still no electricity.
Story_ID: 28380
Speaker 1: So are there any particular teachers or subjects that you remember that you were really fascinated by or impressed with?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I had professor from the U.S. who was a part of the Peace Corp.  And he was teaching us mathematics at the time.  He was good.  So he came through the Peace Corp.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a woman?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Blain Lewis came.  I always remember his name.
Speaker 1: Blain?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Blain Lewis.  Lewis.
Speaker 1: Lewis.
Speaker 2: Not Ludis, Lewis, L-E-W-I-S.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Lewis.
Speaker 2: Lewis, okay.  Okay.  But I don't remember which one is his last name, and which one is his first name.  Whether it's Lewis Blain or Blain Lewis, I don't remember exactly.  But I did try to find him.  I eventually trace him to Thailand.  He's now living in Thailand.  But he came to Togo, was at the time not much older than us and was in the Peace Corp.
Speaker 1: Well, a good teacher, so that's good to know that, you know, the Peace Corp did some good.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, the--yeah, they did a lot of good.  I think in that high school, we had three people from the U.S. that, that were Peace Corp volunteer at the time.
Story_ID: 28381
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, were there, did you have any clubs and activities in high school above, you know, beyond academics?
Speaker 2: No, basically, just play football at the end of the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What people here call soccer?
Speaker 2: Soccer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Football everywhere else.  Okay, so were you a good athlete, and then--
Speaker 2: Un-un.  I wasn't a very good football player (laughter), no.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any other talents that, you know, besides being a good student?  I know you were an excellent student, but what--
Speaker 2: No, I really did not do very well in other stuff, you know, all of the handy stuff, I didn't excel at them, but I, you know, I believe that I was born left handed, but in our culture a left hand is not the hand you use for most things.  You cannot shake people's hand with your left hand.  And in school, you cannot write with your left hand.  And you cannot give somebody food with your left hand, you know.  Left hand is considered the hand that you use when you go to the toilet.  And therefore, you cannot use it to serve anything.  So people who are naturally left handed have a tough time in our society.  So--
Speaker 1: So you had to try to learn to write with your--
Speaker 2: Yes, now, I cannot write with my left hand.  I only write with my right hand because I was beaten to change as a young kid.
Speaker 1: So if you're left handed person that--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who writes with his right hand because he--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I remember in school the first time I, I don't even remember which teacher it was, but he told me if he sees me again, you know, writing with my left hand, that I'm gonna get serious punishment.  I never wrote with my left hand again since then.  So I, you know, I sort of feel, felt like if I have been left the way I was naturally born, I should be good at handy stuff, but I got somehow messed up by being forced to change to use my right hand when it was not naturally what I was born with, you know.
Speaker 1: I've heard about that in Muslim society.  I didn't know it was true, you know, in other societies too where the left hand is not used, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  I'm not sure, I don't know when off the top of my head, but I know in our area, you have to be careful with the left hand.  People become very offended.
Speaker 1: I know in, even in American society and English society, they discourage people from using the left hand, you know, kids when they're coming up.  I've heard stories of kids that grew up down South, and you know, even in the North, that were discouraged from using their left hand--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --if they were naturally left handed.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's not good.
Speaker 1: And, most of the world, of course, is set up for right handed people even in countries where it's not necessarily wrong to use the left hand.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so.
Speaker 2: But I was really shocked when I came here, and I saw people, you know, writing with their left hand.  I was like, wow, I cannot believe it.  And for us, you know, that's a no-no.
Speaker 1: So does it--did that experience like give you, you know, like an advantage in some ways here, having, being able to use both hands or can you use both hands?
Speaker 2: Well, now, I mean I--there's stuff, there are things that I cannot do with my right because, although they tried to suppress it, it wasn't effective.  I could still, I'm still more at ease using my left hand for a number of things, like if I need to throw something or I need to carry something and things like that, I--it becomes natural for me without thinking about it to just use my left hand.  So in the end, I ended up mixing both of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Except in school, I had to be careful to make sure that I was using only my right hand and also at home, when you are addressing people or serving people, you have to use your right hand.
Story_ID: 28382
Speaker 1: Now, did you have like a student government in school or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, not until university.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And up through high school, we don't have anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so it's not a--high school is not as social there as it is here in terms of--
Speaker 2: You just get to there and do, and solve problems together, you know, do exercises together, prepare for exams together, but social stuff, we didn't really do very much.
Speaker 1: And when you were growing up, did you have stuff like the Boy Scouts or recreation centers to go to and that sort of thing?  Did you have that--
Speaker 2: No, there was the, the Boy Scouts, there was--one could get into that, but it was like a different organization.  You have to get yourself involved.  But the school itself did not have any extra activities or, you know, after school or--we take a class.  That's the gym class.  It's also a part of the requirements, but it's a teacher that will show you how to exercise properly and things like that, but for recreation, there wasn't really very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we just invented games for ourselves.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, like when you graduated from high school, is that like a--is that a real important event, you know, in--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because at the time, there was only one university in the country, and it cannot absorb all of the people in high school in the entire country.  So the selection is very tough at that exam.  So they have stern--30 percent who get through.  So passing the, the university entrance exam is really a serious business.
Speaker 1: What year was it that you graduated from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-nine [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And high school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, 1982, yeah, no, I'm sorry, 1982.
Speaker 1: Oh, '82 [1982], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], and so you took the exam in '82 [1982]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how did you do?  Did you pass the first time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know I passed, but I know a lot of people who were very good and better than me who never passed because of the pressure, just taking an exam because it's such a serious event, defining what you are going to do in your future because a lot of people got stopped there.  They couldn't--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you have like some mentor or tutor or somebody that helped you, you know, pass?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, not really.  I mean I knew that, you know, my father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] didn't go past high school.  And, you know, there was really no option for me to fail.  That's why I just, I think that that, you know, there were some rich kids that have some options.  They failed many times, and the parents would send them to France or to some other countries and so forth, but, you know, I didn't have that option.  So it became very clear to me that if I really need to go forward, then I had to pass that exam.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right, but you passed the exam in 1982?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, okay, so you would have been, what eighteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was eighteen or nineteen, yeah.  That's just about the--yeah.
Story_ID: 28383
Speaker 1: I was asking during the break, are the people essentially the same in Togo and [Republic of] Benin?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, essentially the same group of people.
Speaker 1: And you were saying that Ghana too?
Speaker 2: Ghana as well.  Togo and Ghana as well.  Along the border, there is--speak the same language.
Speaker 1: So these are Akan, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Akan, the Ewe, you can find a large group of Ewe people in Ghana, and also in Togo.
Speaker 1: So you say people make Kente cloths and--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  And the culture is extremely similar.  It's just that historically, the people from Ghana, they were under British rule so they end up speaking English whereas Togo is in French.  So that introduced some differences in official administration and thing like that.  The cultural, a lot of the cultural, traditional culture before the European arrival and so forth are really exactly the same.
Speaker 1: So the University of Benin, that's where you go to school.  That's actually in Togo, you say?
Speaker 2: Yes, University--yeah, and we call Universite du Benin.  But it's University of Togo actually.
Speaker 1: And where is it?  Is that in--
Speaker 2: It's in Lome, capital city, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had to make a move again, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had to move, make a move again.  Yeah, that was very difficult for my father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] because when I started there, I didn't have a scholarship.  So he have to pay for the school fees and those fees, I assure you, were becoming more and more expensive as you go deeper in your education.
Speaker 1: Now, are the--you didn't have a--is the fact, the reason you didn't have a scholarship, the fact that they just didn't have enough scholarships to--
Speaker 2: No, not really.  It's just--
Speaker 1: Or did you have to score a certain level to get one?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It's just that my father really didn't have the right connection in the government.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had to have the right connections to get a scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you really have to--you have to be a, in the last year of the university, I got a scholarship, and I don't really understand how I ended up getting.  I really never worked for it.  I just--people just heard my name announced on the radio that I had received a scholarship for that year.  But my father was really on the edge.  He couldn't really--'cause my education alone was becoming, was taking 50 percent of his salary every month whereas he's got a wife and seven other kids to take care of.  So it was really very difficult.  So it was some sort of miracle that I got the scholarship that year because I don't think he was going to be able to cope for my family.
Story_ID: 28384
Speaker 1: So generally, in Togo, and when you were growing up--I know we hear a lot, people that travel and come back to the United States, they talk about like, in West Africa, so many people you have to pay off to get something done, you know, that you have to, you know--it's like being, you know, just as many places here were known for, you know, in Chicago, to be a police officer you had to pay an alderman like three hundred dollars to get on the list and that sort of thing.  So it's not like it's just in Africa, but is, was Togo the kind of place where you had to really know somebody to get something done or you had to pay somebody off that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, no, it was, it was definitely like that.  You need to have the right connections or you need to pay the proper bribes to get, to get something done.  It was unfortunate because there were a lot of people that were extremely good that didn't really get the scholarships.  And there were people that were not so good and went sent all over the world.
Speaker 1: And so you're saying it's to the detriment of the talent pool in the country that--
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe so.  I believe if there was really a serious effort from the government to really pick the best, you know, that would have been much, much better for the country.  There were some people already, where the parents were already very wealthy and could afford to send them.  But still, they took the government scholarship anyways.  So, you know, and yeah, you know.  I mean I was not really the best on the entrance exam for the university.  I, I didn't do very well in physics on that exam for some reason.  And when my grades came up, my geography also was not where I thought it should.  I should really have excelled in everything.  But physics being, carrying a very heavy weight because of my major, I didn't do very well.  So in the end, I didn't really end up in the top ten.  I don't, really don't know.  I went back and write the problem again, and so forth, and I realized that I completely misunderstood the whole thing.  So but that really should not have not have affected me getting a scholarship for the university because of all the (unclear) the performance for the past three years and things like that and seeing as well, who are the other people did get the scholarship.  There was no reason why some of us--but it wasn't just me.  There were some other people who I believe should have gotten a scholarship, but they didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was, did you have to work when you went to the University of Benin?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't work.  I, my father was giving me some money, and I, yeah, I rented a room somewhere.  I also stayed with my uncles.  So some of my uncles were in Lome at the time, so I spent some time with them as well.  I mean they also helped.  One of my uncle paid for my, paid for my room for the first year.  So they, you know, I have two uncles there that are brothers of my father.  They also helped.
Story_ID: 28385
Speaker 1: Was the university work [at the University of Benin, Lome, Togo] tougher than, or about right where you thought it should be in terms of--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, the university was really, it was good.  It was tough because there you're now competing with people from the rest of the country.  In principle, it should be the best from the rest of the country.  But I think it was in the end because some people, after that university entrance exam, there were some people go directly to France through this international scholarship, to Germany and so forth.  And then some people end up in the country.  And my class, you know, I think it was very good.  We were very good students, that class.  We were, about eight of ten just doing physics and math.  You know, but, you know, people, for example, there are a lot of people who try to do medicine.  So those areas have a large number of crowds and so forth, but just serious physics and math, there were really just a few people, not really about eight and--yeah, eight to ten.
Speaker 1: So did--now, who was your mentor in college in terms of physics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a French professor, and he was very good.  And I think he really give us a very good foundation in terms of all of the mathematical backgrounds that I needed for physics.  We didn't, at that point, we had some laboratory experiments and things like that.  But they were not really, you know, in depth, you know.  But, you know, the formal structure of mathematics, we got it from this guy.  I think he was really, he was good at teaching and conveying the material very well.  So for the three years we had him for (fundamental?) mathematics, and it was very good.
Speaker 1: Now, who--did you, were you aware of any African physicists or any black physicists when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, at the universities there were already some professors that were also in physics in that department.  The chairman of the department was a physicist.  And he really was instrumental in me coming to the U.S. later on.  But he was the head of the department, and then there was also the head of the Science Institute who was also a physicist.
Speaker 1: Can you give us their names and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Professor, well, Professor Kekeh, so it's K-E-K-E-H.  Kossi is his first name, K-O-double-S-I.  He passed away a long time ago.  But this guy was really very, very good.  So he was extremely helpful for me to go out, to get out of Togo.  And then also Professor Gninvi, so it's G-N-I-N-V-I.  He actually had an experiment going on.  He was working solar energy at the time.  So he actually had the Navy out there in the university where he was doing some tests.
Story_ID: 28386
Speaker 1: What were the facilities like at the University of Benin [Lome, Togo]?  Did they have a pretty good physics lab, you think?
Speaker 2: No, the labs were--we had some physics lab, but they were, you know, the--we didn't have some of the leaders if you went and things like that.  But we did have some lab and we did some pretty good experiments there.  We got, you know, we're getting some material from France and so forth.  And, but, yeah, we could do some physics experimenting those labs.  Also, we also have, the chemistry lab also was quite good.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know many of the African American scientists that studied in the South, you know, in high school, and at some of the black colleges, talk about the lack of facilities there.  And a lot of what they had, they learned by, you know, they memorized how to do things, but they didn't have a lot of experience in actually doing 'em because they didn't have the laboratory facilities until they got to, to graduate school.  Is that--
Speaker 2: That is exactly the, that is exactly true for us as well.  (Once in a while?) things to have be, just be memorized, and you have a picture in the book, but we don't have the equipment itself, and--
Speaker 1: And that's harder for you to learn, is what people say too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, that is, I definitely agree is quite tough because you can only--like some of the equipment when, when they discovered them, you don't, you cannot imagine what it is.  It's like, what is this?  And an exam, for example, some kids used to take these things down directly from the French system, and you start reading the questions, and you realize that you don't know what this equipment is or what these things they're talking about.  But you, but then you have to solve this problem.
Speaker 1: They can memorize the name of it, but they don't what it really is 'cause you've never used it.
Speaker 2: You don't know what it is.  Yeah.  You haven't seen it before, you haven't worked with it, and sometimes it's not in your vocabulary at that moment (laughter).  Right, yeah.  Yeah, but at least, you know, we did get some solid foundation in the theoretical aspect, I think that(unclear).  That was extremely good, and I think we, our theoretical foundation was as good as anywhere else in the world because when I came here for graduate school, and I had to deal with the Chinese and people from India and all in the same class, why, you know.  That's when I realized that my education in fundamental mathematics was no less and far from, you know, anybody else in this world because I was just astute, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's really like you mentioned, the instrumentation and that we really didn't have.
Story_ID: 28387
Speaker 1: So, you graduated from the University of Benin [Lome, Togo], and now were you involved in any other activities at the University of Benin or--
Speaker 2: No, in the university there was, yeah, I got involved in the, some churches actually.
Speaker 1: Churches?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the sense that, yeah, I mean some of the, I got involved in the Baptist church when I was there.  So a number of church activities and there weren't really much of any other things.  There were different football clubs, and then, you know, some people have some exotic activities like tennis club and things like that which, too many of us were just like, that's very strange, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: You considered that exotic activity, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's what it was to me (laughter), but I mean for most of us, people who play tennis are more like (unclear) tell you what to do and so forth.  Otherwise, you play soccer barefoot, you know.
Story_ID: 28388
Speaker 1: You graduated from University of Benin [Lome, Togo] in, was that '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-five [1985].
Speaker 1: Eighty-five [1985]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '85 [1985], yeah, that was--
Speaker 1: Now, what was your plan?  Did you have, you mentioned, was it Professor Kossi or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Kossi Kekeh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he, yeah, Kekeh, yeah.  So did he advise you about college--graduate school?
Speaker 2: Well, he ultimately did.  What happened was that when I finished--I finished at the top of my class for, in the university for each year.  And I was expecting that I will be given a scholarship and then I would go to France.  And then that didn't happen.
Speaker 1: So you were the top student in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in, at the university for all the years, I was the top student, you know, (unclear) but there were eight, eight of ten, right, in the fundamental sciences.  But the, you know, everybody else came from some other parts of the country.  So you really have the, you know, the best of each of the regions in the country.  But when I finished, I was expecting that I would get a scholarship, and that it will be straightforward, that I will be called by the government to report somewhere, blah, blah, blah and to the procedure to leave the country.  Nothing happened.  And then I went to this Professor Kossi Kekeh's house one time and told him that I've been waiting and nothing is happening.  So, you know, he said that he would look into it and then, but I didn't really have any hope because I realized that the people have left, I mean that scholarships were already given, people already left the country.  And normally what happen is that we take the final exam in June, and if you fail in June, you have the opportunity to repeat in September.  And you can pass in September on the second round.  And some of my colleagues who failed June and passed in September was given scholarship, and they also disappeared.  So I was still hanging around.  Then I realized that, you know, my, the hope is becoming completely dashed.  So I went to this guy, and then, so he told me to go to the minister of technical education whom he knew and that he may have something for me.  So I went to see the minister, but that minister was also the dean of the Protestant college or high school, not college.  So he basically told me, well, I need to teach for him for two years, and then he will find me a scholarship.  So I ended up teaching in the high school for two years to get a scholarship to come to the U.S.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you taught physics then, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In Lome?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was in Lome.  It's call College Protestant du Lome, but (unclear) in French the college is actually, is more like a high school.  So.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did this--do you think this experience was, fortified you in terms of your knowledge or was it like a waste of time or what?
Speaker 2: Not really.  It was actually, in retrospect, it was good.  I am still in contact with some of the people who were my student, who are now, some in the U.S. and Canada and in France.  So I think, you know, it's a waste of time in terms of my own personal development, in terms of career and so forth because apart from then I have not really wasted any time in my education.  I was really, for my age, where I should be.  And then I would have to waste two years.  Well, I was teaching people that are not much younger than me.  And, you know, when I walk in, they thought I was a part of there, was a student, you know.  And all of the professors there were more, you know, established people with families, a lot of experience and so forth.  So I was just like, you know, this young guy, who (laughter), you know, nobody really know, you know, where I should fit because I didn't fit with the other professors, and the students thought that I should fit with them, but I was not a student.  So it was a little bit strange though.  In that respect, it was really a waste of time.  So I shouldn't be sitting there.  I shouldn't have been sitting there.  I should have been given a scholarship to continue.
Speaker 1: But you did, you were able to inspire some students and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, I think I did, you know.  Many I've, a few of them that are in Canada now.  They are doing very, very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And some of them that I've been in touch with for many years, so I think I probably would not have come to the U.S. if I had gotten the scholarship.  I would have most likely gone to France.
Story_ID: 28389
Speaker 1: So do you think that it was better to come to the U.S. than go to France or--
Speaker 2: I think for me personally it is, it is better, you know.  Because Togo is a French-speaking country, most of the students, when we want to think about going outside the country for higher education, we automatically think of France, you know.  So when this minister of education said the U.S., I was like, wow, the U.S.  It's like for us at the time, it's just, it's like bigger than France, even unreachable.  So when he said the U.S., I was like, wow.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But then the price I had to pay was just two years, so, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, had you been outside of Togo?
Speaker 2: No, no, I only went to Benin.  I didn't go anywhere beyond that.  But it was good, you know.  I think, in the end, I think it was better that I came to the U.S.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had the scholarship to, this is Ball, Ball State, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ball State University.
Speaker 1: In Muncie, Indiana.
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: So this is, well, how did you--did you fly over to the U.S.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--you know, I got, it was this special scholarship.  It wasn't really-- it was a scholarship by the African American Institutes, which was administering this African program for the U.S. Agency for International Development [USAID].  So they gave this scholarship for two years and so forth of school to come and improve their education and then go back.  So there was a condition to go back after two years under this scholarship.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is from USAID.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Then, you know, your country will pay for your trip here.  So the government of Togo paid for my ticket to come.
Speaker 1: So you're to go back after you got your masters degree (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  That was--because, you know, the scholarship was basically for people who were actually in the workforce there.  And then you get the scholarship to improve your training, and you go back to your work.  So your country also pledges that when you come back, they will give you a job.  And the U.S., the pledge from the U.S. is that they will pay for your school fees while you are here.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did they fly you into New York or someplace first or did they fly--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and then you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: To New York, I went to New York.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: And then somebody met me at the airport and then I stay in a hotel in Manhattan [New York], and then I arrive, I think I arrive on a Saturday.  And I would stay there until Monday, and then I went to the African American Institute office.  At the time, it used to be on Lexington Avenue somewhere, and then they give me the tickets to go to Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, did they give you some kind of orientation there in New York or did they just let--give you a ticket?
Speaker 2: No, you didn't really get very much.  But they have somebody meeting you, somebody met me in Muncie, in Muncie, Indiana, and they have organized a host family system there.  So I was introduced to an American family to be in contact with and so forth.  So I think it was quite well done.  They, the only thing was that the person who met me at the airport in New York City [New York] at the time, I couldn't really understand his English at all.  I just, you know, I had learned tons of English, but I really couldn't understand the American accent--
Speaker 1: American English was--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was hard to--
Speaker 2: Yes, I just couldn't--so he put me on the bus and told me where to get off and so forth.  And, but I didn't get lost, and I managed to get to the hotel.  And so it was, I think it was, it was fine.  And then somebody met me on the other side and so everything was fine.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how long did it take for your ear to get adjusted to Indiana English, you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think it was a few months before I started comprehending properly (laughter).  But, you know, actually, I went to--before I went to Indiana for my masters, I was in an intensive speaking, English-speaking class in Illinois, Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they specialize in, you know, they have a department specializing in, you know, spoken English for foreign student.  So there were a lot of students from all over the world there.  Their purpose is to improve their English before they start to, in their universities.  So I was there for three months, and then they declared that I was fine.  And then I went to Muncie.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so that's, so there was some kind of orientation there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Story_ID: 28390
Speaker 1: So, Ball State University [Muncie, Indiana], so were there any special teachers at Ball State that, you know, were particularly helpful to you in terms of understanding?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, the whole, the whole physics department was fine because they had a lot of international students at Ball State, a lot of African students, I noticed from different African countries were at Ball State.  And we even had cultural activities and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So the department of physics was extremely, you know, extremely helpful, I think.  And I had taken some courses in the department of computer, computer science.  And there was one professor there who was really also extremely very helpful, you know, because I would solve my problems in a different way.  In the French system, when we start doing some of the mathematical reductions, we do it in the reverse way whereas, the Americans sort of like doing it, doing it going up.  So I would be doing it in a different order, but with different answer, and he was very fascinated by this.  So, and I did very well in his class.  He was really, you know, I don't know, he sort of appreciated my studies quite, very well.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have any computer experience at the University of Benin [Lome, Togo]?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I didn't have any computer experience at all.  So that was the first time, so we will have the lecture in class, and then he gives the homework and all of the exercises that we have to do in the computer room.  And then find out our program and submit it.
Speaker 1: This must have been really exciting, I would guess, just, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it was quite, it was quite good, and, 'cause it was (unclear) essentially or so mathematics because most of the time it's all of the mathematical methods that you have to program and how to do it efficiently and so forth.  And, yeah, no, that was very good.  And--
Speaker 1: Well, Ball State, I take it, had all the equipment you needed to do whatever you needed to do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --in physics.  Now, what particular aspect of physics did you focus on at Ball State?
Speaker 2: I wanted to do solar energy research.  At the time, I was interested in, you know, using photovoltaic solar cell in Africa, so--as a source of electricity.  So I had gone into theoretical condensement of physics.  That's what I did in Ball State.  So we're trying to understand how best to make solar cells more efficient in converting solar energy into electricity.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your thesis was 'The Understanding and Improvement of Photovoltaic Solar Cells,' right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And as a practical application for cheaper electricity in Africa.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so who was your advisor?
Speaker 2: My advisor was, whew, (laughter) I have--it's not on top of my head right now.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember who your department head was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the department head was, yeah, you know, some German name, you know, that's also escaping me right now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I have them somewhere though.
Story_ID: 28391
Speaker 1: But you had, you had good, you know, good advice and good, you know, so you--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --did, was there a time when you felt like you, you know, were struggling or anything, over any aspect of it?
Speaker 2: No, not in the physics department.  I think my computing, 'cause the second level of the computing, I had a different professor.  And there, I struggled a little bit.  And, you know, the problems were much tougher and so forth, and we have to group to solve them.  I was in a group with two other students.  But they were very good, and we had to solve the problem together and, but there, there was to be--you know, I struggled a little bit.  And in the physics department, all of the courses I took there, there was no problem at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you got your masters degree in 1989.  And, now, were there any, I mean were there many--were there any other African students in your department or any black American students?
Speaker 2: Not in, let's see, not as a graduate student in the department, but there were quite a lot at Ball State which also, you know, they also participated in the cultural activity that we organized because every year we have this African cultural stuff where we all dress in African clothes, and then make African food and so forth.  And the people in the community will come, and there will be some discussion and so forth.
Speaker 1: So your interaction with the African American community was--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  But in the physics department itself, as undergraduate there were a lot of people who came in.  And there were also some African American students.  But for the graduate school, there was--in the physics department, I didn't see any.
Speaker 1: Did they have a black cultural center at Ball State?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they did.  And the, then there was the African Student Association as well, and were extremely very well organized in those two years.  We did a lot of things and the community responded very well.  And, yeah, I was also involved in the church there.
Speaker 1: Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yes, (laughter).  So (laughter).
Speaker 1: What was the name of your church there?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, you know, it was at the university.
Speaker 1: That was a Baptist church or--
Speaker 2: No, no, no, it was actually, it was on the university.  There were, yeah, no, it was one that was right on the university itself.
Story_ID: 28392
Speaker 1: When you got your [master's degree at Ball State University, Muncie, Indiana]--now, were you obligated then to go back to Togo and--
Speaker 2: Umm--
Speaker 1: --after you graduated?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you go back?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't go back.  I, what I did was that I applied to graduate school myself.  And I got into the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia] with, you know, tuition waiver and the fees, and I also got an assistantship.  So then I--
Speaker 1: I mean now does this make, create any problems with USAID [United States Agency for International Development]?
Speaker 2: No, because, at that point, they just basically waived the requirement until I finished my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't remove it.
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't know if there's anything they can do to punish you or make you go--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  No, they didn't force me to go back then.  They just say, okay, fine.  I can continue my studies, but I would have to fulfill that requirement when my studies are over.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you graduate with top honors at Ball State?
Speaker 2: Ball State.  No, I mean I got a certificate which basically thanked me for getting all "A's" in all my courses.  That's basically--in the physics department.  But in the computer science department, I, you know, I didn't get all "A's" there because one of the course, like I said, was, you know, quite difficult for me.  But the dean sent me a certificate saying, you know, for the physics department, that they appreciate my effort.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, 1989, when you started the University of Virginia, this is the age when personal computers were starting to come out, you know, in the, I guess in the mid-'80s [1980s], they started making personal computers [PCs].  Apple had a little, the Macintosh, and PCs started--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and those sort of things.  So you got here at the right time, I guess when computer science was starting to be a little easier, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Yeah, that is, that is true.  When I started at the University of Virginia, we already were starting to have email and so forth, and were starting to write programs to analyze data and for drawings and things like that.
Story_ID: 28393
Speaker 1: The University of Virginia, 1989, this is in Charlottesville, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's in Charlottesville, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did you focus on there in terms of your Ph.D. work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, when I got there, I decided that I want to change to nuclear physics, experimental nuclear physics.  I mean you have to, for the graduate program, you have to take the general courses for two years while you are a teaching assistant.  And then you pass the Ph.D. qualifying exam, and then you start working with a professor who will guide you through your Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, it says here that you passed the Ph.D. qualifying exam with distinction in 1990.
Speaker 2: Umm, yeah.  That, yeah, I took that exam, you know, with a bunch of other people from India and China and so forth and Islamic students.  They were very, you know, they were extremely good.  Chinese students were really, really--their mathematical backgrounds just unmatched really, in the world, you know.  So it was also really a time where have, being in a mix of all of these good students from all over the world was extremely a boost because it sort of forced you to, you know, to excel.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in study groups with some of the other international students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we would get together in the evening, you know, departments, you know, the graduate student have offices and everybody knows where, who that person is.  So in the evening, we will solve problems together.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, all right.  Now, you started at the University of Virginia--now, were you finished with your coursework by 1993?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, yeah, I had finished all the coursework, and then I started working on, toward my doctorate on the experiment at that point.
Speaker 1: All right, so I guess part of your work was working with ATLAS [particle physics experiment at the Large Hadron Collider] or was it with, or what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I, no, I was still working--I was working on the, you know, pion-detecting experiment.  So it was, a detector, very small, you know, ATLAS is like twenty-four meters and so forth, diameter.  And this was like a meter in diameter.  So a crystal detector, and it was not at CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research].  It was at the Paul Scherrer Institute in--it's also in Switzerland, but it's near Zurich.  That's where my professor had his experiment.  So that's what I worked on.  I only started working on the, on ATLAS when I went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].
Story_ID: 28394
Speaker 1: Tell us what your Ph.D. dissertation was about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, it was about measuring the fraction of the time where the, you know, an elementary particle that we call the pion decays in a particular way.  So where, which is like one part, in 108.  That's, you know, how rare it is, this decay.  But we wanted to find that and measure that particular rate precisely.  One part in 108 is what the theories tell us.  We wanted to measure it.  And if we do that with very good precision, we should be able to extract some theoretical predictions which will help us understand what we call the standard model.  So--
Speaker 1: So the standard model, explain what that is for people who are watching this.  Well, what is the standard model in physics?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the standard model is basically of particle, fundamental particle physics.  It's basically a collection of our understanding of how fundamental particle work and what are the forces that governs their inaction with matter, you know, as we know in the universe.  So--
Speaker 1: Is this like a theory of matter, like the basic theory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is--yes, it's a collection of theories that fits together to create a picture of nature for us, for the standard, for the fundamental particles.
Speaker 1: And the, but there's still a lot of questions involved in the standard, but it's not just--it's not a fixed standard or is there a lot of questions within that being answered all the time or people are trying to work on, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's, we have realized that it is theory that has been proven against experiment.  So we believe that our understanding is on the right track.  But there are lot of things that we still don't understand so it's clear that a standard model, although it has been very successful, cannot be the complete view of nature.  There are a lot of things that we still don't understand and that nowadays in particle physics, we call them "beyond the standard model".  So these are things that, new things that we should find to clarify our understanding for it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were studying, what they call the p-meson (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the pion, yeah, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Pion meson--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's the pi-meson, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it has a particular decay.  If you measure that precisely, it will tell us a lot of information about the standard.  For example, why do we have three type of neutrinos?  Why hasn't nature made four type, you know?  And so if you measure these things, perimeter precisely, it will tell us whether there's room for the fourth one.  So that's what we were studying in this experiment.
Speaker 1: And by decay of a particle, we're talking, I mean we're talking about a period where the particle exists and then it fades out of existence or some--or what is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  A lot of these particles, they are unstable.  So it's like radioactive decay, if you will.  So they have what we call a mean lifetime.  So if you have ten thousand of them sitting there at one time, and you came back two years later, by then they would have all decay away or a fraction of them would have decay.  So, and many of these particles, they exist very briefly.  So they are created, and then they begin to disappear by disintegrating.  So the energy has to be conserved, yeah.  So in physics, we hold true the fundamental understanding that energy is not lost.  It's always conserved.  So the particle is created with some energy, and then disintegrate into other particles, and the energy that is used to create it, is still one that is used to create the new particle into which it has disintegrated.  So when you do energy balance, you have to check out.  But a lot of these particles that we see, they don't live very long.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what did you find out, in your research on the pion?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so what we did was, when we measured this rate, we improved the precision quite a lot over previous measurement.  It wasn't, we were not a first to measure this way.  And, but because the previous measurement didn't have a good precision, there was a lot of room for uncertainty.  You couldn't tap because the measurement has a lot of errors, I mean not errors, but uncertainty as we call it.  So we redesigned the experiment in order to reduce those uncertainties so that our measurement will be precise.  The more precise it is, you know, you will be in a better position to say, "Okay, we know this parameter to this precision.  Therefore, there is not much room for speculation or for other things."  So we are able to improve the precision on the measurement by quite a huge factor.  And it was 4 percent, the previous measurement.  We got it to, we got it down to point--half a percent, to half a percent.  So that was almost a factor of eight improvement in the precision, so, which was very good because it eliminated a lot of speculations about the existence of this more than three type of neutrinos and things like that.  So it means that our measurement says that the standard model assumption, if you will, of neutrinos is more or less, you know, more and more correct.  In fact, we don't--if there is any provability of a fourth generation of these neutrinos, it's very, very small.  And that's what our, you know--whereas the previous measurement could not say that more effectively.
Story_ID: 28395
Speaker 1: After you finished your Ph.D. work, is that when you started working with ATLAS at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't really, yes.  That's when I started.  I went to Hampton when I finished my Ph.D.  When I was finishing, I had visited Jefferson Lab, and I met Professor Keith Baker was there.  And I knew he was at Hampton--
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1995, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  Then I had to applied to a postdoc position there, and then I started working with him.  He was already at Jefferson Lab [Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, Virginia] as a bridge professor between Jefferson Lab and Hampton University.  And he had spearheaded the construction of one, a part of the spectrometer there.  So I started working with him at Jefferson Lab.  And then he told me about his interest to get involved in ATLAS [particle physics experiment at the Large Hadron Collider].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's how it all started.
Speaker 1: Now, I was asking you, there's so many people that were Hampton that we've interviewed that worked with the Jefferson accelerator at J-Lab, and we were trying to figure out what the relationship was.  And my speculation then as that Demetrius Venable kind of like put this team together--
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: Is this pretty much true?
Speaker 2: Yes, I believe that was the case.  When I started there, the group which was called the NuHEP Group at Hampton University--
Speaker 1: Called the what?
Speaker 2: NuHEP, high energy--Nuclear High Energy Physics.  They had gotten some grants from the NSF [National Science Foundation] and DOE [Department of Energy], I believe, and the program was a very good program.  And it was, you know, started by the people who were there before I came.  And Warren Buck was the head of the department and so they have had the, you know, the--already negotiated this partnership with Jefferson Lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Warren, and Venable and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  And--
Speaker 1: --Warren Buck and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Calvin Lowe, I guess.
Speaker 2: Exactly, Calvin Lowe was there, and Doris Temple as well was one of those people (unclear) was there at the time.
Speaker 1: Paul Gay, was he on the staff then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Paul Gay, yes, Paul Gay was there.  I started maybe--yeah, Paul Gay probably started maybe six months before I got there.  We almost started at the same time.
Speaker 1: And, of course, Keith Baker.  Now, who is Rolf Ent?  Is he part of--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Rolf Ent is the staff at Jefferson Lab.  He also had an adjunct position at Hampton University.  So he tutored a lot of students at Hampton, and so I was working with him as well at Jefferson Lab.
Story_ID: 28396
Speaker 1: But it was Keith Baker who told you--Oliver Keith Baker that told you about his interest in working with ATLAS [particle physics experiment at the Large Hadron Collider]?
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.  He was the one who introduced me to ATLAS, and it was through Keith that I went to Geneva [Switzerland] to start on ATLAS.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you go to Geneva?
Speaker 2: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998].
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, before we get you there, what did you learn at Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and at J-Lab [Thomas Jefferson National Accelerator Facility, Newport News, Virginia], you know, about, you know, particle physics, before you went to Geneva?
Speaker 2: Oh, what did I learn about the--
Speaker 1: Or what were you doing, you know, at Hampton before you went to Geneva?  You were just--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no, I, when I started, I worked, first I work at Jefferson Lab on how to measure precisely the position of one of the spectrometers which is used to measure the direction or the momentum of charged particles.  So you have to place them at a particular angle that you have calculated and so forth, where you want to do your measurement.  And the question in physics' measurement all the time, how well do you know your settings or if you say that is at 10 degrees, you know, is it 10 degree, plus or minus 1 degrees or plus or minus half a degree?  That's very important for us to know.  Or is it really 10 degrees or is it 9 degree, you know, because that would change your answer completely.  So I was working on how to position the spectrometer precisely where you want to put it and to know what is the uncertainty associated into the angular position of the spectrometer because it's the perimeter that you use directly in the analysis.
Speaker 1: So you have to refine your knowledge of a spectrometer, before you use it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and also, and then when people doing experiments say that we want the spectrometer at 20 degrees, they don't want to learn later on that there was a mistake.  It was actually at 19.5 degrees, you know.  Like, it's like a half degree, but in physics experiment, it could be a huge difference.  So they want to make sure that there's no mistaking put in there where they want to put it and also, they know what is the uncertainty that it's not gonna be 20 degree with zero uncertainty that it's not possible.  But they want to know, you know, within half a degree or 0.2 degree that you have placed it correctly.  So I work on that.  Then I also work on some of the experiments.  Jefferson Lab was starting, at the time, with their first experiment, commissioning of their, the accelerator there.  So with Keith, we got involved in some of the early experiments at Jefferson Lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were the students at Hampton working on any of the ATLAS experiments in those days?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, actually, no.  Even Keith was not really working on the ATLAS experiment.  He was studying to build up the momentum to get involved as a collaborator on the experiment and then carve himself a piece of the ATLAS that he wants to work on.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: So we were all essentially working at Jefferson Lab.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, so Warren Buck, was he in charge of the--he was in charge of J-Lab, I mean the Hampton J-Lab--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  He was the, I think he was the head of the physics department there at the time and also I believe the head of the NuHEP program, Nuclear High Energy Physics program.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, okay, so that, okay.  Yeah, Buck, it says here was the founding director and principal investigator of the, of NuHEP Research Center at--for Excellence at Hampton, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: So in '98 [1998], so you got a research scientist fellowship to work with the ATLAS project at CERN?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where did this fellowship--this comes from the, this comes from the federal government or what?
Speaker 2: No, this came from, it came from Keith Baker's grants for, on ATLAS.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, so I, you know, National Science Foundation or DOE [Department of Energy] had gone-- I don't remember  exactly which one of the sources provided the funding.
Speaker 1: Okay, the Department--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But it's from definitely the U.S. government, not the European side.
Story_ID: 28397
Speaker 1: So you were stationed at CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research] to work on the prospects for discovering the Higgs boson--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us what is the Higgs boson?  What is a boson, first, and what is the Higgs boson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, a boson, you know, we have in general two classes of particles that we call fermions and bosons.  Fermions are basically particles that, matter particles or like, you know, an electron and so forth.  They, it's the way they actually spit, you know.  Some of these particles, when they are in motion, so they have some sort of natural, their own internal rotation.  And it's the way they do that rotation that we call them fermions.  And bosons are in general, particles that we believe are force carriers like they transmit the force.  Like when you have two charges together and they are either attracting or repelling each other, basic force that is transmitted.  And that force is transmitted through a particle which we call the photon, and the boson.  So the Higgs untie in a completely different way and, well, before I get to the Higgs, the boson can also have different things.  So there are some particles that do not spin at all.  You could say that they have spin zero.  And then, they are some other particles that have, you know, have a faster way of spinning among themselves, just, you know, in their motion.  So the Higgs is a boson by the way it spins.  So it's different from the fermions, and well, actually, it doesn't spin at all (laughter).  So it has a spin zero. But it's a boson in that respect, and it has been postulated because, you know, the standard model as a theory, what happened was that nobody knew how to explain the different masses of this elementary particle.  The theory was extremely beautiful and extremely elegant.  But it remained like just a pure mathematics because you couldn't, in that theory, explain how these different particles have their different masses.  It's like everything was just massless, and we know that doesn't describe nature.  So there has to be a mechanism which somehow explain the different particles' mass.  So that's where the Higgs boson came in.  So the person who invented the mechanism, who--at least the name, Higgs come from Professor Peter Higgs, a theoretical physics.  He was instrumental in getting this way of explaining for this elementary particle get the mass into the theory so that the theory will become realistic, become physics, not just mathematics.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: So it was Peter Higgs, and then they made, they made, they named, I mean, he was-- there are other people who participated, but ultimately, his name stuck.
Speaker 1: His name stuck.  So this was coined in 1964--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 28398
Speaker 1: So the Higgs particle is associated with what we call the Higgs field, and we believe that the different particles have their mass through the way they interact with this field.  So it is a bit like, you know, if one were to explain it, it is like, you know, if you have a large number of people in a room, you know, very big room.  People are there, and President Obama [President Barack Obama] walks in, then we'll all be interested to go toward him, hear what he has to say and shake his hands, and there will be crowd of people around him.  Then as he walks, then he'll have this crowd hanging around.  And there could be so many people around him that it will be difficult for him to walk through this room.  So that's the interaction, so you can imagine President Obama being the Higgs boson and we being the particle who wants to get some mass.  And the way we interact with the Higgs boson define how heavy we are.  Therefore, moving through that mass becomes difficult.  The heavier you are, the slower you're going to go.  Yeah.  So that interaction now defines, that's basically the picture of the Higgs boson.  But, you know, I don't know.  If it is some John Doe from somewhere that nobody knows, he walks into the room, nobody will pay attention.  He will just sail through, you will say that he has zero mass.  His interaction with the field generate no mass at all.  So that's the idea.  So, you know, the way you attract matter toward him, toward itself define the mass of the particles.  That's why some are heavier, some are lighter, some have mass in between.  So that's really the concept, how the Higgs, the Higgs boson, what it does to produce mass for the other particles.  And it does produce mass for itself as well because the Higgs particle also is not, it's heavy.  It's not--it doesn't have zero mass.  And the way we understand that is that, you know, if you also have a room with this large number of people, they are sitting there and somebody came to the door and reached for something, and then some rumor is going around, say, "Ah, yeah, President Obama is about to come.  But he's not coming, he's about to come."  So we, here we start talking and say, "Hey, you know, President Obama is coming," and blah, blah, blah.  And people over there are wondering, what are these people getting together, talking about.  So that whisper is just the field itself.  So nobody go, he's coming.  It's just the field itself congregating itself and will define the Higgs mass because the Higgs is the field that the other particles are interacting with and where they interact to field to find the mass.  And the way the field interacts with itself will define the Higgs mass.  So by injecting the rumor into the room, you can see that maybe that rumor will grow and more and more people will be joining in, "What are you talking about?"  "Ah, yeah, you know, President Obama is coming."  "Hey, you know, the president is coming?"  "Oh, yeah, no, let me see," and then he, "Tell me more."  And before you know it, there're, lots of more people are there trying to hear this story.  So then you can see that the Higgs mass will get heavier because it draw from its own field, you know, itself, interaction that is heavy by the number of people who are interested in this rumor, you know.  So that's how we explain it.
Story_ID: 28399
Speaker 1: Sir, can you explain to us how the accelerator works?  And how the accelerator say, at CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research, Geneva, Switzerland] can detect a particle like the Higgs [boson]?  I know Ron Mickens [Ronald E. Mickens], one of the people we interviewed described the accelerator as being like a microscope in some ways, but I know it doesn't do, doesn't have a--it doesn't use lenses, but how does it work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, firstly, accelerator is, it's a machine really to accelerate particles to a very, very high speed, so basically gives them extremely high energy.  So you can have linear accelerator where it's just all of the machines that are needed to accelerate the particle and just put like in a line.  And when you start from the beginning to the end, at the end the particle gets very, very high velocity at that point and therefore, extremely high energy where you can use them in the ring where you can accelerate a particle, the ring many times, and the more turns they go through, you keep them to higher, higher velocity, and then they accumulate it (unclear) energy mean in return.
Speaker 1: Now, I read some place that a straight-line accelerator was more for electrons or something than--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, they have been, that is true, and because you know when you put the electrons in the ring, they also lose energy that's, you know, we call synchrotron energy, as they go around.  So they have been, linear accelerators have been designed for example at SLAC [National Accelerator Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, California], where the accelerator that's run linear and you don't have to deal with the loss of energy synchrotron energy when the first to radiate as they are going through the--
Speaker 1: So the what's at SLAC, is at Stanford-- to measure the accelerator--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --that's a--
Speaker 2: That's right, yeah.
Speaker 1: --as a straight line--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's a straight line, yeah.  And, but CERN, at CERN before the LHC [Large Hadron Collider], there was the electron-positron isolator which also did go into, you know, the circle, circular orbit.  So, if you can correct for the energy loss to the synchrotron position and maintain the orbits of the particles, then you can, you can still have a, this electron going in the ring.  So that's what happened, but the LHC's a proton, proton accelerator.  So, you can do that, yeah, so, but those are basic, build on basic concept, right.  So in elementary physics, you learn, for example that if you take a charged particle and you put it in an electric field, then there will be a force on it that we call the Lorentz force.  That's the concept.  It's really a busy, you know, and then we learn from Newton's Law that as soon as you have a force on a particle, that thing is a--it has to move, F = ma, where "a" is the accelerator.  So that's the busy concept.  Also in mathematic--in magnetic field, if you--we also learn in elementary physics that if you put a charge in a magnetic field, it will also pick up a force, you know, which is also the Lorentz force.  So in the magnetic field, the charge is supposed to bend and start rotating.  So those things are not like, you know, rocket science.  They are built on fundamental physics that you can--and we already learn in high school.  So those are the two forces that are going to accelerate the particle for you.  So then you have to worry about not losing energy.  So the particle, you want to accelerate them in a vacuum, but if it is in air, then the resistance of the air or some medium, then they will force to slow down.  So you want to make it in a vacuum.  And then you want them to gain energy, you know, as they got to session by session so that when they are in an electric field, by the end of that section, they have accumulate energy.  The next session give them more energy, but it's not just one electron.  It has to be a bunch of them.  So this is a beam now.  So you have to now worry that the beam must not be defocused if it, you know.  They are going, flying all over the place.  It's not gonna be a beam focus--a good beam to work with.  So we have used some of them at magnet, as we call quadruple, that, you know, work like lens, focusing on the, the focus in a beam, so they can collect all of them together.  And that also we already learned in elementary E and N why the quadruple "E" and what the quadruple (field?) is.  So we know exactly how it can focus and do focusing.
Story_ID: 28400
Speaker 1: And then so, like we says, if you want a ring, then when the particle is going straight, at point some point you have to bend it around the ring.  And to use that to bend it, we know that in a magnetic field, it probably go, actually, it goes on a circle, circular and so.  So when you combine the electric field, the magnetic field, the quadruple in very well studied structure, think of a beam that will be going around.  To have some fun, you have to extract that beam to do an experiment.  That means your target needs to be somewhere.
Speaker 2: So this is, is this like a laser beam (unclear) or--
Speaker 1: Well, a laser beam is more like photon and so forth, right, and as we said before, the photons, they are boson and so forth, and it's very well collimated.  But we are talking now a beam of particles, charged particles, electron beam, proton beam, yeah, which are not necessarily going on a straight line, but you want to give them energy, you know, in every turn and then use them in an experiment.
Speaker 2: Now, this is an important question, I probably shouldn't ask, but the, so what do they use, do you use a particle of hydrogen or what?  What two, I mean--I mean as a--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you could, I mean originally, you could take, at the beginning, you can take an electron gun.  You shoot it into some material.  And a bunch of particle will come out.  So you have to then extract the one that you want.  Let's say, it could be muon, proton, and so forth.  You want, if some magnet and separate on and so forth.  You collect all of the protons.   In the LHC accelerator, you will see, for example, that there is pre-acceleration region until they actually injected into the main ring.  That is twenty-seven kilometers in circumference.  So you, you generate the protons originally, you know, either by shooting some electron gun into a target and so forth.  You collect all of these things, and then you accelerate them a little bit, and then ultimately, you send them into the main accelerator.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And the principle is just all of these electromagnetic, and, you know, optics.  So it's really an optics, that, the beam itself because it's like the optic for the photon, which is laser stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But then you have a beam.  Now, you have to have a target, and the beam has to do something in the target.  And that target is what is our detector, like, for example, the ATLAS.  At the LHC, then you have one beam going this way that would have been going this way.  And we bring them into collision at the center of the ATLAS detector.  And what happened in that collision, that is interesting for us, that some interesting physics information or understanding will emerge by sifting through that debris and then trying to understand whether that is something that we have not yet learned or something about nature that we can learn.  The point is that you know, there is, we have the cosmic rays.  So this is a particle coming from outer space, and they are going through our body all the time.  And, but we cannot use them as a detector because we don't know their images precisely.  They go into different directions and so forth.  So that's why we have to do it in the laboratory by building ourself the accelerator so that we can control the imaging and we can control when they collide, how many of them collide per second because all of that information is necessary for us to calculate, you know, the collision rate and so forth.  So then in the debris, the detector will have a bunch of things--
Speaker 2: So, what you're doing is then--let me just sum--so you're smashing atoms together at a high speed, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah, and in this particular case, it will be the--yeah--
Speaker 2: And then when they smash, there are other particles that they might be made of are released or there's energy released in the case of other particles.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you see the fundamental thing is the, Einstein's equation, E = mc2.  So energy is mass.  Therefore, it's the creation of a new particle.  So that's the reason why you have the protons going around and around, picking up energy, high, you know, very, very high energy.
Story_ID: 28401
Speaker 1: So when they collide, that energy has to go somewhere.  Much of it goes into the creation of new particle through E = mc2.  Energy gets transformed into mass and then you have new particles that are created.  And then we detect all of these particles and then we see whether any of them has some sort of abnormal feature that we don't already expect.  That will be a new discovery for us.  So that's basically--so it's these fundamental, electromagnetism of the accelerator, electric field, magnetic field, quadripole, dipole that we already learned in elementary physics.  It's just the engineering of putting it together so that it works well for you.  And then the detector as well is based on, you know, fundamental physics.  So it's nothing really that's out of the ordinary in doing it.  It's just the cleverness of designing it the way you want it to respond.  And then you analyze whatever comes out of the collision and you see whether you see something new that you do not expect.  Most of the time, we see things that we already know as, these are electrons, this is a pion.  Okay, this is how it goes and so forth, and then occasionally, once in a while, you say, "Ah-ha, that's something we have not seen before."  And we (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So you analyze the result with a spectrometer, is that true?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we--you take, we do, we look on line first, but we also have to do a lot of offline analysis where we take a bunch of data and then a lot of professors, postdocs and Ph.D. student spend months, years trying to analyze that data to the best possible of technology and come up with some results.
Speaker 2: Okay, with--and what I understand is like a microscope, the bigger the lens, the smaller you can see, right?
Speaker 1: Umm.
Speaker 2: And in this case, the bigger the accelerator, the smaller the particle is being created or you can see because of the collision being--
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, it is basically that if you make the accelerator bigger, then you can actually have more energy in the collision.  When you are in the end, for as--it's how much energy you put into the collision is gonna determine what you are going to create.  Actually, energy because that's all you have.  It's--when those particles collide, what they are bringing in is the energy of the mass.  So how heavy the weight.  With that mass, we call it energy to Einstein's E = mc2.  So "m" is the mass.  So that's the mass energy.  And then there is the velocity, and we also already learned in classical mechanics very early that velocity is kinetic energy, 1/2mv2.  "M" is the mass, and  "v2" is the velocity of the particle.  So that's kinetic energy.  So when those things are colliding, what they bring into the collision is that kinetic energy which is energy in motion, and the mass energy to MC2.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when you have that, you can create all of new phenomena that exist there in nature.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, I also, if I understand the (unclear), the accelerator at CERN is like how many times bigger than the biggest one we have here?
Speaker 1: The biggest one?
Speaker 2: Accelerator at CERN is like--
Speaker 1: Yes, the, well, the design is, you know, what we call in the center of mass, fourteen TV and the one that we have Fermi Lab [National Accelerator Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois] which is, was the biggest accelerator up to now.  It was like two TV so it was like a factor of seven in terms of image, yeah.
Speaker 2: So seven times more powerful than the one (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --that's here.  Okay.
Speaker 1: In the energy, but there is another parameter that we call the luminosity which is the actual amount of protons, of particles that you can collide and how often the collisions are coming in.  That's also important.
Story_ID: 28402
Speaker 1: From what I understand, and correct me if I'm wrong, that you worked on the muon spectrometer?
Speaker 2: Yes, for the detector or the ATLAS detector.
Speaker 1: Yes, and you made a significant contribution to that from what I understand?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked on the muon spectrometer for many years.  I work on this one particular detector in the spectrometer that we call cathode strip chamber.  And it's a gas detector with some wires in the middle of the gas, and it has a--and they act like anodes, and then we also have a cathode, and we call it cathode strip because what you do is that the cathode is a plate is but the plate is segmented.  So that detector allows you to measure the position and the direction of the particle, when the each particle goes through the gas, you ionize some of the gas molecules and atoms and so forth.  And then by applying the high voltage between the anode and the cathode, then you will collect all of the ionization charges, and it'll give you an electric signal.  And after that, electrical signal will tell you directly where the gas has gone, where the particle has gone through in the gas.  So, in fact, those are some of those chambers that we have [gesturing].  So I work on that, and then I work on a lot of the muon spectrometer software for the reconstruction for many years, all the way from how to take the data and how to organize the raw data and how to get the data offline and how to do the reconstruction and then how to present the data for people who are doing analysis.  So I, so I spend a lot of years, you know, in the (muon spectrometer?) time, and contributed in all of this aspect.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you were working on the muon spectrometer, were you here in the United States or at--
Speaker 2: Yes, I was already here at Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you--now, when did you come to Brookhaven?
Speaker 2: I came to Brookhaven in 2001.
Speaker 1: So, you started working on the muon spectrometer--
Speaker 2: Yes, I--because Brookhaven is in collaboration, is collaborating with the muon spectrometer and also in the calorimeter.  When is started at Brookhaven, I was advised to work on the muon spectrometer.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, Brookhaven is the home of the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: This is like--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So twenty-five miles of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of accelerator, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--yeah, their purpose is to collide heavy ions.  So, but I have not directly been involved with it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm sorry it's not--how many miles is this in circumference, the one here?  And--
Speaker 2: Say it again?
Speaker 1: Brookhaven, about how many miles in circumference is--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: For the ring (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think I was wrong when I said twenty-five.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, twenty-five is probably, no, I don't think it's twenty-five--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: It's not that much.  It's--(unclear) (simultaneous)--it's two and a half miles--
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably.  I don't remember the exact number, but it-twenty-seven is for CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research], but this is one is much less than that.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right.
Story_ID: 28403
Speaker 1: Now, in 2003, you were the convener of the Higgs boson working group here at, in Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York] or was this the whole working group?
Speaker 2: Oh, in 2003--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --I was, yeah, I was at Brookhaven, and I was basically mostly working on the Higgs at the time.  And before that the group has been mostly working on supersymmetry and so forth.  So I started working on the charge Higgs when I got here.  And, yeah, then--I mean I was working on that before when I, when I went to CERN [European Organization for Nuclear Research] in 1998.  And then when I came here I continued that interest.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were also the ATLAS Muon Spectrometer Event Data Model Coordinator, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was for that, for a short while.  That was when I was in the software, I was working on the software and, for the muon spectrometer, in particular, and the event data model at the time was, you know, there was a huge discussion on how to package the G-time, deliver that to the people who do analysis in the way that people can do analysis across the world, you know.  And so it was a (unclear) the software, series of (unclear).  In the end, it was very successful.  So for the muon spectrometer, I did that for a while.  Right, I was working on, you know, from the framework which is for the ATLAS, we had discussion on how to do the model for the event data and so forth and how that translated into different part of the detector including spectrometer.
Speaker 1: Okay, in 2004, you were the coordinator of the ATLAS Physics Analysis Tools, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And now what, explain what that is?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, you know, there's a serious need of having common tools to do analysis because the collaboration, ATLAS collaboration, for example, is very large, three thousand people.  People have to share the data and so forth, and they need to be able to share common tools.  When we say tools to do analysis, these computer programmings that are well encapsulated and packaged so that, you know, they do specific type of tasks and people can share.  And we don't have to duplicate that at first by writing those programs over and over again and making various sort of mistakes.  So, and also people can share analysis code.  So if you and I start working on something together, and I say, "Okay, look, you know, I have done some of these things before.  I have this and this of code."  I can just pass it to you and you should be able to integrate it in your analysis framework without too much of a hassle.  And you'll also be able to understand how I have done my analysis.  Transparency is very important for us in this business.  We have to be able to understand how you get that result and other people have to be able to reproduce it.  So, so there was a need of providing this framework where we will have common tools.  We will be able to share common software tools for doing analysis and in a much more organized way.  So I was called by the ATLAS management to lead that effort in 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was in that position for three years until 2007.
Speaker 1: How many groups did you have to coordinate or were different groups around the world that you had to coordinate?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was, it was extremely large because as a part of this effort, I also organized tutorials to teach a lot of the Atlas members, especially new students and graduate students who want to know how to use the tools (unclear).  Software tools are valuable.  I had organized it, all tutorial for these people, and I served myself as a helpline for many people who have questions who contact me, and I'll say, "Here is what, how you do this."  Or I will answer questions on email for many people.  So it was really, anybody from the collaboration from all over the world that would contact me for questions, and, but they also--the core of people who were working on these sort of things and providing the service was not really very large.  But we were able to service like three thousand people from many countries spread around the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there are countries in Africa working on this?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had, we have Morocco, which was the first African country admitted as the member of the ATLAS Collaboration in 2001.  Then in 2008, South Africa was admitted as well.  So both Morocco and South Africa are the two African countries in the ATLAS experiment.
Story_ID: 28404
Speaker 1: What did you do after, after that?  What was your role and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, then when I moved from that position, I became a pile-up coordinator.  Pile-up [coughing] is also a serious concept for us.  What it is is that, you know we said that we bring these protons to collide in the center of the detector.  But the collision rate is extremely high.  So a pair of photons will collide and boost that, processing that information and our electronics is not fast enough.  Before we finish processing it, another pair of photons will collide and that information will add or superimpose on top of the one we were already processing.  And that's a problem.  Since we have a bunch of protons, so it's a bunch.  It's not just a single proton colliding.  We take two bunches, and we bring them together.  When those two bunches meet, then there could be, you know, a few pair of individual protons from the two bunches that are colliding.  So that's the sort of problem for us.  We are only interested in one proton from here and one proton from here to collide.  But it doesn't work that way.  Since you have two big bunches, there could be more collision.  They are also going to superimpose into the detector.  So those are the things we call pile-up.  More collision per crossing and more and more collision coming in while you are reading the data from a previous collision.  How do you just untangle that, you know?  So that's what we call pile-up, and we had to develop tools to deal with that, and especially, when the collision rate is very high, this pile-up increases.  And it can become what we call a serious noise.  So your physics become blurred because more energy is being dumped before you can actually process the one, finish processing the one you were processing.  So that's not good.  So I got involved in that for a year to develop the tools that would allow us to deal with this pile-up problem when we start taking data.
Story_ID: 28405
Speaker 1: So 2008, you are, you're appointed the ATLAS Higgs Working Group Convener.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, what is--how did your role change then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that now is fully analysis.  So in the ATLAS Collaboration, we have different working groups, and it's a large group of people dedicated to particular aspects of searching for a new phenomena, doing analysis and stuff like that.  So there is a group that we call the Higgs Working Group.  It has upwards about five hundred people who are actively interested in doing analysis for the search of this Higgs boson.  So they appoint a convener of the group to organize the analysis, to pre-approve the analysis and to make suggestions to new people which areas are not covered and so forth and then to present a report to the management.  So it's a high-profile position because it's physics position.  And it's for two years.  We rotate.  I mean you cannot sit there indefinitely because there are other people who as well, need some visibility.  So the way it works is that there will be somebody there, and every year somebody is being replaced, but everybody is there for two years.  So, you know, when you come in, there is already somebody there for one year.  You, so that, it's designed such that there will be continuity.  So that a new person who comes in, starts working with the one old convener who was there the year before.  A year later, you have gained the experience.  The old convener who have finished the two years and being replaced by a new person.  And so it just goes like that.  So in 2008, I was appointed for that role for two years.  That was when the LHC [Large Hadron Collider] would have started collecting data, but a few weeks later--well, it wasn't even a few weeks into my year term, when the, there was a big problem with the accelerator, and it was shut down for like a year and a half.  So when I was there, it was like during the last six months of my term.  That's when we started having data again.
Speaker 1: (That's?) disappointing--
Speaker 2: Otherwise, we, might have discovered the Higgs during my term, and we should have.  It didn't really take two years to get it.
Speaker 1: So it was like a mechanic, some mechanical problem with the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was, yeah, there was a huge energy freeze into the--I mean, the vacuum seal and so forth sort of broke, and, you know, some of the helium that's there to cool the magnets down, start getting out and, and there was a huge explosion that displaced some of the, some of the magnets.  And then it put the entire accelerator out of commission for a long time.  And they have to replace some of these interconnector (unclear) where the problems tie in.  So it was like a year to a year and a half to fix this.
Speaker 1: Now, there was, now, this is, you know, fluffy talk here, but there was a discussion, you know, in the media around that time of the accelerator created a black hole.  Did you remember that discussion?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, but--
Speaker 1: What is the merit of that kind of discussion?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I mean these people who are just, you know, creating problems that are really not there because it's true that we will create what we call a mini-black hole.  But they don't stay there for too long.  They evaporate what, to what we call a Hawking evaporation or something.  So they stay there-- it's something that is just like a particle or something, you know.  It can get created for you, a blink of an eye, and it disappeared.  And it's extremely small.  We are not talking about the giant black hole, that is in the center of the Milky Way, and which can swallow everything if you get closer than the horizon or something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a fear that people were, they're gonna create a black hole that's gonna suck up the rest of the earth and the rest of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  It was the sensation but--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But, you know, it's not really enough energy to create something like that from what we have in this accelerator, you know.
Story_ID: 28406
Speaker 1: Now, in, now in 2011, the ATLAS project released the first combination of Higgs research results--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and certain results.  Do you remember what happened?  What were the results?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so what happened was that, you know, when we started, there was this understanding that ATLAS and CMS--CMS is our competitor experiment, we were thinking that we're going to have merge ATLAS and CMS as a result to get (unclear), a first in the Higgs search.  So a group of us were appointed to start negotiation, a negotiation with the CMS counterpart, to talk, to agree on the terms of presenting our results so that we can understand what they have, they can understand what we have and we have the proper framework of merging them in a scientific way.
Speaker 1: Now, what does CMS stand for?
Speaker 2: Compact Muon Solenoid.  It's also an experiment just like ATLAS, and it's also on the accelerator ring, but somewhere else, to get basically the same collision rate that we get.  And the purpose is that if we claim to have discovered something, there's some other experiment that can cross check us.  And vice versa.  So, so we were asked to discuss with CMS and agree on the terms and the framework of merging the data from those two experiments for better sensitivity.  So that's what we call the combination.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were in France then, right?  On that, France U.S. Scientific Collaboration--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --fellowship?  Or grant rather.
Speaker 2: Yes, I was, at the French lab called Saclay [Nuclear Research Centre, Saclay, France], in 2011 through U.S.-France international collaboration, where the French paid for some of my stay there.  I maintained my position at Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York] and so forth.  I was still part of Brookhaven, but I was just in France to work with the French scientists.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, by this time are you a United States citizen?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I became a citizen in 2006.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, and were you married by this time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was married in 1995.
Speaker 1: Okay all right.  Now, did you meet your wife at--
Speaker 2: At the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: University of Virginia, alright.  Is she a scientist as well or--
Speaker 2: No, she did a lot of work in philosophy and anthropology.
Story_ID: 28407
Speaker 1: Okay, so the 2012, you're a visiting professor at the University of Johannesburg [Johannesburg, South Africa], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that experience.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the University of Johannesburg is also a member of the ATLAS Collaboration.  And, and in 2008, before I became a Higgs convener, I had volunteered to go to South Africa to teach.  So I teach, I taught in, at the University of Cape Town [Cape Town, South Africa].  I taught astro-particle physics to astronomers who were in the, what they call the honors level.  So this is after the bachelor degree.  Then, so I had developed an interest to go to, to go to South Africa.  Earlier, in 2007, I visited South Africa.  They invited me for the South African Institute of Physics annual meeting.  And I met Professor Simon Cornell there.  Then I had worked a lot to get South Africa involved in ATLAS.  So there were, went--from 2008 to 2010, they were affiliated with ATLAS to Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York].  I really worked to try to get them involved and in 2010, they were officially involved in Atlas.  And then they invited me to spend a year there.  So after my time in France, then I went to Johannesburg [South Africa].
Speaker 1: Okay, can you explain the significance of Dr. Simon Cornell?
Speaker 2: Yes, Simon Cornell is the leader of the South African ATLAS Group.  He's very much interested in capacity building, education and outreach.  He has worked with some U.S. scientists before in the context of South Africa for education, and he's the one who led the effort to get (unclear) came to ATLAS, the South African site.  And so since 2008, we started a collaboration.  So he has been very instrumental in trying to get South Africans students involved in science and mathematics.
Story_ID: 28408
Speaker 1: It was that year that it was announced that the Higgs boson had been discovered, basically.  Tell us how that discovery was made and what the significance of that is.  I mean were people sure or--
Speaker 2: Say again, please?
Speaker 1: I mean how sure was the scientific community in 2012?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, but it was, in the end it was very sure.  There were some false alarm along the way.  It didn't just come like that, but, you know, that's the reason why we have the two experiment, ATLAS and CMS [Compact Muon Solenoid], and they should confirm each other, and so from 2010 when the accelerator came back together, we started accumulating energy, I mean accumulating data.  In 2010, we didn't really have very much, and then in 2011, we picked up a little bit.  And every time we kept checking and so forth, and the way you check is that, you know, in detectors, we said before when the collisions happened a lot of things will be produced but they are usually things that we already know.  We call them noise or background.  And to have a discovery, we have to see if fluctuation have both the background that is very large enough to give us a confidence that this is not just a background fluctuating, (right?).  So the background could be doing like this.  And you can take it, each of--any of those peak--if you are not careful, you will think that that's a new particle there, but it's just the fluctuation of the noise.  So we need to see a fluctuation like this, while the noise is like that.  Then we can say, "Ah, there's something there."  So, but sometimes, you need to accumulate enough data, yeah, because you know, you know the statistics how it works.  You take one person, they are here, two people, they are here.  Three persons, they are here.  But when you get to a hundred persons, people, maybe nine, 80 percent of them are now here.  You begin to define the bump.  If you take three, you don't know where the bump is because you don't have enough, what do you call it?  You don't have enough statistics or you don't have enough data.
Speaker 1: The sample's not large enough.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the sample is not large enough to tell you anything meaningful, yeah.  So when we get to 2012, we begin to have sample large enough to tell us that, in that particular region, there is something that we cannot eliminate.  And it's not the background.  It's, it's fluctuating more than what, where the noise level should be.  And then there was this public announcement, at that time, the ATLAS didn't know what CMS has.  And, in the public announcement, we learn that they are also seeing fluctuations large enough, the same, in the same region.  So that gave us the confidence that we are not fooling ourselves, that there's really a discovery, although we still don't know yet exactly what is the nature of it.  We believe it's the Higgs particle, but it's not completely conclusive yet.
Speaker 1: Okay, when do the decay patterns, how do they factor into this detector?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, the Higgs boson is also one of those particles that do not live very long.  It doesn't stay around.  It gets created, and then boom, it disappears.  But it disappears by decaying.  So it will disintegrate into other particles.  So it's that disintegration that you have to study, and from what we know of nature, there are particular ways that it should disintegrate.  And those are the things that we look in, the detector and to say that is a Higgs boson, you have to reconstruct, we say that reconstruction.  So it's like, you know, you come into the room.  You see a lot of this equipment, but you see nobody.  You don't see us doing these things.  And then you say, "Okay, okay, there must have been two people here.  Maybe somebody was operating it with good friend, and somebody--it normally has to be three people there.  And somebody was being interviewed.  But I was here yesterday, I didn't see this, so it must have been today or earlier this morning."  And so that's what we call reconstruction, you know.  The situation happened, what you have is the after effects.  That's what we call actually the detector.
Story_ID: 28409
Speaker 1: Now, we want to like reconstruct what really happened because the Higgs boson doesn't exist in the, that sample that we have.  It has decayed already.  It's the stuff that it has decayed into, those are the things we collect.  And we have to match them together and then say that, "Okay, ah, this particular pattern is not of the noise in the detector," or what we call the background.  And it looks more like what we expect for it to be, the Higgs boson to look like.  So that's basically how the data is analyzed.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, this year, I guess it was--I know there have been several confirmations of the Higgs boson (laughter), in the media, but where do things stand today?  There was recently one last month where CNN [Cable News Network] declared that the Higgs boson has been discovered.  They even had a segment of the David Letterman Show where they had a guy, you know, imitating Peter Higgs, doing a comedy routine about it, you know, so--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --so now it's in the public domain.  Now, people are discussing it, but where do things stand now?  Are we sure that there is a Higgs-Boson?
Speaker 1: Well, our statement is that the particle that was discovered last year is looking more and more like the Higgs boson which was predicted.  But it's not completely, 100 percent conclusive yet.  So we still call it a Higgs-like particle.  We have not officially declared that this is the Higgs boson that we were expecting, although more analysis is going on, and the evidence is suggesting that it's looking like the Higgs particle that you'd expect.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's, and if this is true, then what does this mean?  What does it really mean?  What does it solve?
Speaker 1: You know, that is really a big question because we were expecting other things to show up, supersymmetry, which we haven't found yet.  And there is now doubt whether it exist at all.  Finding only one Higgs boson although is a landmark achievement.  It really, it leaves us like where exactly we should, where is the direction?  Just like you're asking, because the standard model already require one Higgs boson, and we knew that, even if we find a Higgs boson, the standard model is not perfect.  So we are expecting things that we couldn't predict before or more of the Higgs particles, new phenomena to show up which will really make the field exciting.  So now, we have to look toward, you know, the next phase, when the accelerator comes back in about a year and a half time.  The energy will be almost double, and at that time, you know, hopefully, maybe we don't have enough energy right now, but we haven't collected enough data to see some of that new phenomena.  So we hope that the next round could generate enough energy and enough data so that we can see things that we have not yet seen which will make the field really exciting, because, if only one Higgs, that's fine.  We have proven that we understand how elementary particle acquired the mass.  So mathematically, it's really quite a brilliant achievement of humankind, that we can understand nature at that level.  But it leaves still our understanding whether limited, we need to see other things at the LHC [Large Hadron Collider], things that even theories have not predicted to push us to what, you know, new understanding of nature.  Otherwise, we are really at a loss at this point if we don't see anything else.
Story_ID: 28410
Speaker 1: So did I understand you correctly that the LHC [Large Hadron Collider] is down right now?
Speaker 2: Yes, the LHC shut down for, to prepare for higher energy.  So all of the interconnect and the things that cause the explosion in 2008, which shut down the accelerator for a year to a year and a half, those things are being fixed and replaced so that the accelerator can go to much higher energy without any problem.
Speaker 1: When the accelerator is run, is there a certain amount of, I mean how many, how long does it run and how many collisions, you know, does it cause that you, you know, that you can (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, normally, the accelerator will shut down, like end of October, beginning of November, and then you pick up again like in March.  And that shut-down is necessary in Europe because it uses, the accelerator uses a lot of electricity, and in the winter if the demand of electricity around an area, it's just we cannot maintain both of them.  And so when we ran from March to November, you know, like I mentioned before the collision, we had determined what is the amount of the data that you are collecting.  And there is one parameter which you call the luminosity, or, essentially, the collision rate.  Yeah, so the luminosity is the number of collisions per unit area, per unit's time, and the higher it is, it means that you are having a lot of, you know, you are likely to have a lot more collisions.  But at the center, you have this problem of pile-up that I mentioned before.  Then you have more and more collisions piling up--piling up at the same time.  And then you have problems just untangling the one that you are really interested in from the rest.  So in 2010, when we started, these parameters we call luminosity was not very high enough.  So it did not accumulate much of any data.  In 2011, it picked up, yeah. It went all the way to about five, you know.  The unit that we use is inverse femtobarn (ph.), but if, you know, the femto, inverse femtobarn will be like 1015.  So just imagine 1015 of, you know, those collisions per unit time, per unit unique area.  It's a lot of things that are coming, you know.  I, the design of the LHC is like every twenty-five nanoseconds.  A nanosecond is 10-9.  It's, you know, second, 10-9.  It's even faster than a blink of an eye that these things are colliding.  So, it's very large, it's very large.  So in 2011, we got about five, and in 2012, we went all the way to twenty.  So it has increased by a factor of four, from 2011 to 2012.  So the amount of data is going, it's just, you know, it's growing extremely fast.
Story_ID: 28411
Speaker 1: And there is a question of how do we maintain all of this data over time and, you know, the resources and how do they get shared and when you start processing them as a student and so forth on a large amount of data, how long would it take you to do it.  But, computers are also getting much faster, and stories elements are also getting, you know, much more efficient and cheaper.  So, for example, one which we imagine it, if you take a CD-ROM, I think it holds about five hundred megabytes of data on a CD-ROM.  So, then if you take, you know, if you, if you have a rack where you are piling up the CD-ROMs and you want to just hold the LHC data on CD-ROM for one year, and you ask yourself how many, how many CDs you're going to have to hold it and you said just start piling them up.  It would go to thirty thousand feet.  Yeah, that's where normally an airplane will be going at a cruising altitude.  That's, you know, that's the key.  I'm just gonna take a CD-ROM and see whether she (unclear) the CD-ROM.  I will do that for you, yet and I start just--.  It's large.
Speaker 2: A lot of information and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so that is what we are dealing with.  But in that amount of data, not very many are gonna give us the Higgs boson.  So, sifting through that many, as well, is a problem.  But that is what we have recorded, you know.  That is not what was colliding before.  But when this thing was colliding, we have to make a decision very fast, "Oh, yeah, no, this collision is not good enough.  It's not interesting.  Oh, yeah, this is interesting, record it." 'Cause the collision rate is so fast.  And it's coming very, very, very, very quickly.  We cannot possibly record everything that is coming, colliding into the detector.  It's impossible--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But you've got a sample of what's--
Speaker 1: That's right.  You, you know, you have to get a small sample of it, of interesting ones and write them out.  So we write in ATLAS, we write like two hundred of those events, but when they collide, we call them events.  Two hundred of those collisions or events per second, that's what we try to tape.  And that's the one I'm talking about, that will pile up that high after you have written in down.  But two hundred out of these millions that are colliding every second.  So you need something to tell you, also a signal that will tell you very quickly.  It will process online that information and say, "Oh, no, this is not--disregard, disregard, disregard."
Speaker 2: So is that what they're working on now, trying to develop a way to signal that--
Speaker 1: Yes, that signal, we can, we call it the Trigger.  So it's something which tell us which events or which collision is likely to carry useful information and that we should record.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And it's very important stuff, the Trigger.
Story_ID: 28412
Speaker 1: Can you talk about the objectives of the ATLAS Physics project?  I know that, I mean I've--I was reading a poster in the room when I came in.  And the first objective was, it was to discover the unknown, unknown information (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it's, the program is really to be sensitive to phenomena in physics, phenomena in nature that we don't know yet or we're not familiar with.  And progress in physics have been made that way, you know.  More than a hundred years ago, people did not know the electron.  They didn't know x-rays.  They just were doing various experiments.  These things show up and they have to study them, but when they saw them, then it really got interest and they studied further.  And nowadays, electrons are used in all of the, our electronics things, as we call it, come from the understanding from what electron was, which people did not sit down and design.  So that was the unknown at that point.  That's what also we want to find out.  If there's something out there that we could be sensitive to, we want to know about it because ultimately, it could benefit society.  Today, the electron, all of our electronic stuff are based on our understanding of, you know, what the electron is and how to use it and so forth, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, and now what about dark matter?  What is ATLAS trying to do with dark matter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we also want to discover what is the nature of dark matter.  It is believed that our visible universe is not the full--doesn't carry the full mass of the universe as we know it.  In other words, if you, you know, sit down and say, "Okay, I want to compute all of the masses that are in the universe," put them together and start adding them up, you know.  Now, which you could do.  There are the stars, all of the planet, the galaxies, we can do that.  So that's our visible universe, things that we can see with the naked eye or we see from our telescope and so forth.  When you do that, you come out to be like 4 percent of what is out there in the universe, 4, 4 percent.  That means 96 percent is something else.  Then, you know, matter as we know it, take the stars, galaxy, so forth.  You add them up together.  It's a very small fraction of our universe.  Then, you know, people have studies how stars rotate in galaxies and how galaxies rotate, you know, around each other and things like that.  And they have seen some deviation from Newton's Law.  Newton's Law tell us exactly how these things should rotate.  And from that deviation, you can infer that there is a large amount of matter in the universe that we are not directly sensitive to, which is called dark matter.  It effects the rotation of some of these galaxies, some of these stars and galaxies and so forth.  We cannot see it, but we know that these things are not obeying the laws of physics as we know it unless you assume that it's a large mass that is affecting them.  So that is some dark matter, and that's like 23 percent of the universe.  And then the rest is what we call dark energy.  The rest, you know, if you take the 4 percent, 23 percent, you subtract out of the 100 percent, what is left is what we call dark energy.  But it's even more bizarre than what we understand. Like, you know, we know, for example, galaxies are drifting away from each other.  And the further they are, the further they are, the faster they are drifting away.  And we don't know what this new force, or what is pushing them apart, but we know from Newton's Law, if you have two large bodies, they should be attracting each other.  And so there is something bigger than gravity pulling this stuff apart.  And that's what is dark energy.  But at the LHC [Large Hadron Collider, with the Atlas detector we believe that we could be sensitive to detect a candidate of dark matter.  The dark matter would be particle just like the Higgs boson or the proton or something.  And we could be sensitive to it, and, and so that's one of the objective, to see whether dark matter is a particle of that could show up in the LHC experiment.
Story_ID: 28413
Speaker 1: And what about antimatter?
Speaker 2: Yeah, antimatter is the, the issue there is that our universe as we know it has more matter than antimatter.  But it should,  otherwise, we would not exist.  If you take matter and antimatter matter together, they fuse in a sense.  We call them, they annihilate into light.  So if the universe had equal matter and antimatter, close by, we would not exist because, you know, stars and things like that would not have formed.  And life as we know it on earth would never have existed.  Somehow in the evolution of the human race, antimatter has somehow disappeared.  We do have a small fraction of it, but there's nothing telling us that it shouldn't, this shouldn't have been created equal, matter and antimatter.  So what happened, such that the universe became what it is where we have more matter than antimatter so that we can be here to talk about it, all right.  So we want to understand that asymmetry, we call it asymmetry, the difference between, you know, the overwhelming amount of matter versus the tiny fraction of antimatter.  We call it asymmetry.  We want to understand at the LHC [Large Hadron Collider].  What can it tell us about the evolution of our universe and it's, how it was created in the early stage.  And we could have some (hints?), but, that type of question was why the LHC.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, we talked about the Higgs.  Now, you're part of the Omega team here in Brookhaven National Labs [Brookhaven National Laboratories, Upton, New York] and named over the Omega particles that were found in the '60s [1960s], right?  Or quarks--(unclear), is that correct?
Speaker 2: Oh it's, it's not a, it's made of the quarks, but it's not the Omega particle itself, is not one of the six quarks.  It's named for one of the, you know, the strange quarks.  But it was important to find these particles to improve our understanding of, you know, the quark model of the particles.  So essentially, quite a landmark achievement to find the Omega particle.  And, but our interests right now is really to understand the particle that we discovered last year at the LHC, so the Higgs particle, and you know, but all that new phenomena that exists, that people discovered at the LHC, the dark matter, the matter/antimatter asymmetry, there are supersymmetry and things like that or other things that we haven't talked about, which could revolutionize our field.  And those are the things that we would like to see in the coming years.
Story_ID: 28414
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point in your career, is there any major thing that you would do differently, if you could change it?
Speaker 2: Not, yeah.  No, I think, you know, (laughter) I would have liked to pay more attention, you know, in college and graduate school to some of the things that were taught because what I have seen is that, those are the fundamentals of the education.  Everything else gets build upon that.  It's amazing that most of the things that we use in our everyday research are based conservation of energy, conservation of momentum, and a few fundamental laws of physics, you know, electromagnetism and things like that, they take us extremely a long way, and so if the basic mathematical tools, they are the foundation of--the complicators want to think that one might encounter later on.  So understanding those fundamental concepts are extremely, very extremely important when there's a gap then you are really at a disadvantage, because ultimately, I see that at least in our field now you have to compete with people around the world.  And one has to very prepared in their education.  So if you waste the opportunity, not paying attention, then it will become a serious gap.  So I think if I had to do it all again, I would realize I think a, all of this concept that we are being taught in class are very important, and you should really pay attention and make sure and master them at that time instead of having to relearn them later on.
Story_ID: 28415
Speaker 1: Now did you participate--there's been a couple of conferences in Ghana, I think, of African physicists.  Have you participated in those?
Speaker 2: Yes, I recently got involved with a group of people to try to establish a school of fundamental physics in Africa.  And we organized the first one in 2010 in South Africa, and 2012, we organized the second one in Ghana.  And in 2014, we will have a third one in Senegal.  So we were able to secure funding from various sources up to about U.S. two hundred thousand dollars to bring fifty to seventy African students to this school for three to three and a half weeks during the summer.  And so it was very well received, but, you know, yeah, we are essentially five people organizing this effort.  It's, it's not the main, our main research work or our main line of work is really doing it on the, in the spare time.  So each of us in the organizing committee has to be committed to try to do the best so that the school will be a success.  So right now for Senegal, we are beginning to prepare fundraising to go after all of the government and private agencies that donate some money.  So we need, again, about two thousand--I mean U.S. two hundred thousand dollars for the school in Senegal.  So we just about started the fund-raising campaign.  So this has been very good for African students.  In regard to the first school, we got sixty-five students from all over Africa.
Speaker 1: Now, are these high school students or college students?
Speaker 2: No, no, these are college students.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we've been following some of them, and recently we were able to place one of them at Fermilab [Fermi National Laboratory, Batavia, Illinois] to do a Ph.D. there.  And then in Ghana, we had fifty students.  We have a network of these students and where we give them information about higher education around the world, and we support them in their pursuit of higher education.  So it doesn't end with the school.  So we are very much in contact with all of the students, and so we, we hope that we will be able to get the financial support to keep this effort going every two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now are working with--is Dr. Paul Gay involved in this?  I mean--
Speaker 2: Paul will be involved in our organization for the school in Senegal.
Speaker 1: And what about Dr. [Diola] Bagayoko, down in Southern Illinois, I mean Southern--I mean Southern University, in Baton Rouge [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: No, he has not been directly involved.
Speaker 1: Now, he's a physicist too, I know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, you know, we are certainly, right now, open to anybody who can, you know, help with the school organization or help with fundraising and so forth, which will be extremely fine.  But Paul will be involved in, when we organize all these things in Senegal.  He has been doing quite a lot of things, has some nice project for Africa as well, which was very nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know Senegal has one university in Africa that's named for a physicist--
Speaker 2: Umm.
Speaker 1: --Cheikh Anta Diop [University, Dakar, Senegal].
Speaker 2: Cheikh Anta Diop, that's where we're going to have the school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, if you--are you doing, are you involved in any other mentoring efforts in the United States?
Speaker 2: Since I got back to South Africa, I have not really been much of anything, but I had, I have expressed interests to mentor students also to help me with Ph.--my research.  So, so I'm currently interested in having the students or, from third year, fourth year, some background in physics and mathematics, and computing.  So I had actually informed some of the people at Brookhaven [National Laboratory, Upton, New York] here who are in the process of looking for students like that, but don't really have anybody yet.  So that will be actually nice.  So.  And I might, I might sponsor some students in the summer because this year, I'm not going again for the summer.
Speaker 1: Are there any other black physicists here at Brookhaven?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is, there's, yeah, there are at least-- I know there's one person at the collider accelerator department.  And in the physics department, I don't know of anybody except me, but at Brookhaven, in the other departments, there are a few other people.  Yeah, that's--I think there are, I probably know at least three other people there, but they are not in the physics department.
Speaker 1: Okay, and we still need to get, produce some more physicists.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do, definitely, yes.
Story_ID: 28416
Speaker 1: Once again, if you look back on everything you've done to this point, what would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: You know, I would like to, you know, this African School of Fundamental Physics, I really would like it to become something that would really make a difference because it's a way of, you know, giving back and helping, you know, some of the students, you know, to get through.  I think my path had some difficulties, especially to get out of Africa was not as easy for me.  And like many students, I almost did not, you know, I almost didn't get out.  And I think that the students have the potential, should willingly give him the opportunity to excel.  So I'm hoping that this African school will grow into something that could be self-sustaining and well organized and that we could have, you know, funding associates that could trust our work and we can trust in their support and we can deliver, you know, capacity building in the continent--in the continent of Africa.  So that is what I would like to leave behind.  I think in terms of the research, I believe that I've done, you know, quite, quite a lot and so forth, and that, you know, to channel students through research into their Ph.D. and so forth is kind of what you get, that many of them.  Through this school where we tell the student is that, you know, they don't have to expect that they're going to stay in physics.  But it's the networking and it's an education that they get. That is why we are going to college (everywhere?), because we have a lot of people who have done physics, and they are now very successful in another field.  And partly because they got very good ground already in physics and mathematics.  And they were able to apply this knowledge in other fields (unclear) and they (unclear) excel.  Our field is not big enough of absorb everything else that is good.  So people have to expect to go other places, but to get very good education here in this field and people have succeeded in finance and people have succeeded in education.  People have succeeded in other fields of research.  They went to physics and mathematics first as a foundation, in engineering and--so I hope what I could say or I would like to leave behind is the successful school of Africa that will have credentials that would be accredited to, by some universities.  So we can actually, we'll be able to even offer a student some sort of a degree that some of universities can recognize which will be, which will underscore the quality of the things that are being taught in the African school.  And the students also will know that they can use it for something.  And in that school, we are also touching upon the applications.  So it's not just fundamental physics, but it's a fundamental physics and applications.  And we believe that the applications are very important.  So, we are looking at all of the applications of fundamental physics that students could be interested in.  So the third week of the school is dedicated to all of the applications.  We've got all of the medical applications, application in light sources and in, you know, electronics and in computing.  And so if we can sort of establish that and make it really sort of like international, draw students from all over the place, I think maybe then I will feel that, you know, I have successfully shared some of my experience with the generations to come.
Story_ID: 28417
Speaker 1: Did your parents see you get your Ph.D. and everything?  Did they live to see that?
Speaker 2: Say it again, please?
Speaker 1: Did your parents see you get your Ph.D., and--
Speaker 2: No, they didn't.  I only sent them the (laughter)--
Speaker 1: I mean did they think, I mean what did they think of it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my father [Koumou Alphonse Assamagan] thought that a doctorate is really a medical doctor, so he struggled for many years to understand what type of doctor I am supposed to be (laughter).  So he doesn't really comprehend any of it.  My mother [Afiwa Geanne Nouho] as well.  But they understood that I have gone to a lot of schools for many years, so (laughter).  And, yeah, I mean I sent my father a copy of my degree from the University of Virginia [Charlottesville, Virginia].  He was very happy about it, that finally, I will work and I won't keep going to school (laughter).
Speaker 1: Have you been able to help other family members come over and go to school or--
Speaker 2: I have a sister here in the U.S.  But she came on her own.  I didn't--it wasn't directly through my help, and I have some nephews over there that I am helping now, much younger to try to get them to school.
Speaker 1: Now, do you go back very often to Togo?
Speaker 2: Really not so often.  I was there last year, well, in 2011 when I was in Ghana preparing for the African school, and I was able to go to Togo. Two thousand twelve [2012], I was back in Ghana, but I didn't manage to go to Togo.  So it's not really as often as I would like, but I'm hoping that in 2014, I will go to Senegal.  I will be able to go to Togo.
Speaker 1: Now, well, tell us about your family.  Now, you're still married, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You have children?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A very young one, two and a half years old right now.
Speaker 1: Is it a boy or a girl?
Speaker 2: A girl, yeah.  Yeah, I was asked whether we, you know, you guys should come to my house, but that would not have worked.  She will end up being the person that you are interviewing.
Story_ID: 28418
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, no, I hope the education I think is extremely, it's really extremely important, and, you know, I, I mean I have seen myself in this field in many times, where there aren't really a lot of, you know, black people, African American in the field, and so forth.  And like through Keith [Dr. O. Keith Baker], I was able to actually find some direction ultimately.  And I hope that, you know, as a community, we can really create an incentive for, for the African American community to really get into the fundamental sciences.  It's a tricky business, you know, that at the end, you have to have a job as well, that we can--I think with the proper education and outreach, they should be able to strike the balance where they can get more and more of the students in these type of fundamental fields where they can also use their talent.  So, it's the same hope that I also have for Africa, actually, that I would like to see really more of that, you know.  It will be nice, you know, when I go to Geneva [Switzerland], we have on the ATLAS experiment, we have one thousand Ph.D. students.  You know, it would be nice to have a good fraction of those people who are African American, black, Africans from everywhere who are also, you know, getting, learning from all of these high-class, extremely knowledgeable people around the world.  It's really a direct transfer of knowledge to the younger people where I think, we don't have enough of that.  And it's really a challenge of how to increase that, and I hope we should be able to.  I'm not completely sure how, but I think all the black, African American professionals really have this question, "How do we do it?"  If you hear everybody's story, for me at least, what I've heard, a remarkable story of people who have achieved great things by themselves or by some stroke of luck.  Most of the time, they were just the were the only black face here and there, who have given up by the dozens and they succeeded.  But it cannot go like that continuously for each generation to come.  There have to be a way where, there's more that can feel comfortable and say, "Okay, I can do this," and that sort of people, yeah, and so forth.  And that's the challenge, at least that's my hope.
Story_ID: 28419
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, I would like to be remembered as someone who, you know, did not give up in my studies, and I faced a lot of adversities, and but I think I was able to overcome them, and also that I was able to give back to the community in terms of, my, you know, being a mentor and, and getting involved in outreach program where, you know, younger students can see my path as some example, but, hopefully, it's an easier path for them than mine.
