Story_ID: 120730
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Marcellus Winston Alexander, Jr.  That's M-A-R-C-E-L-L-U-S, Winston, W-I-N-S-T-O-N, Alexander, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, and I spell junior, J-R period.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth, 10-3-51 [December 3, 1951], Austin, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I have two titles here.  I'm Executive Vice President of Television for the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB], and I'm also president of the NAB Education Foundation.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: So I have two jobs in essence, two day jobs if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is December 2nd, 2013 (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the offices of the National Association of Broadcaster, 1771 N Street, NW, downtown Washington, D.C.
Story_ID: 120731
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food?  Yes, being from Texas, that would be barbeque as a category.  And not just any barbeque, but Texas barbeque.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color would be purple.  It's actually a color that's been with me for a lot of years, and now, being in a fraternity that has that as color, it's even more nice.
Speaker 1: All right, I can guess which one that is.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Right.
Speaker 1: And there's purple sage in Texas too, isn't it?
Speaker 2: That is correct, that is correct.
Speaker 1: Right, so it's consistent.  So, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: That would be spring, you know.  It's kind of a new beginning, buds sprouting out on plants, but spring clearly would be it.
Speaker 1: Okay, favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Ooh, almost anywhere there is water and peaceful, just a peaceful environment.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, a couple of them.  And the first one  provide--needs a little context.  You know, all of us get very busy.  We have a lot on our plates, whether it's personal or professional.  And one of my favorite sayings or questions is, how do you eat an elephant?  And the answer is, one bite at a time.  When you can look at the mountain of things on your plate and categorize and take them step-by-step or bite-by-bite, that's been advice that I've passed on to my children, and it's worked for me as well.  The other favorite phrase, and it's actually a definition.  My definition of leadership is, leadership is having an irrational sense of hope and optimism and a plan to back it up.  And that says a lot about how I like to run and how people how work with me operate.  Optimistic, glass is half full, but you gotta have more than just hope.  You have to have a plan as well.  And that's the combination of things.
Story_ID: 120732
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Juanita Rosa Smith, is her maiden name, W--I'm sorry, J-U-A-N-I-T-A, R-O-S-A, Smith, S-M-I-T-H.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Ooh, that would be on (laughter) materials that I have for you.  I don't have that, those dates committed.
Speaker 1: Okay, a quick glance here--
Speaker 2: It's not on that one.  It's on another document you have.
Speaker 1: Oh, all right, so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's on the questionnaire.
Speaker 1: Was it in the 1920s?
Speaker 2: I believe that's correct.
Speaker 1: Probably--
Speaker 2: She's about--she's eighty-six.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: She's eighty-six years old, and, fortunate to have both she and my dad [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] still living with us.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about 1927, I think.  That's it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And, well, and where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Jennings, Louisiana, and moved to Austin, Texas during her high school years and, Larry, I don't know much--how deep you wanted to go or how you--you just want me to answer the question or you want me to do--
Speaker 1: Well, no, just--I just want to know where, and the next question is really, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Okay, I got it.
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your mother's ancestors and, you know, what are the stories about what they were doing?
Speaker 2: Sure, well, as I said, she moved to Austin, Texas in her high school years.  And my history of the family tree in terms of her side of the family is not as extensive as it is on my father's side.  We're still developing some of that back story on her side of the family, but have a much deeper past history on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Well, we'll get to your father's side, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but can you tell us anything about your mother's ancestors in terms of what kind of work they were doing?   Were they farmers or were they working in town or what--you know, are there any stories about the end of the Civil War or any stories about, you know, some of the struggles afterwards?
Speaker 2: Sure, well, her father was a plumber.  He was also very, very active in church.  He was a deacon in church, very involved there, very hard worker.  And later on in life, he went to work for a gas company, again, doing plumbing type of work.  But they'd be considered by today's standards, a middle-class family, hard workers, God-fearing, good folks.
Story_ID: 120733
Speaker 1: Now, what was, what can you tell us about your mother's [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] mother, your grandmother [Irene Smith]?
Speaker 2: My grandmother was a hou--homemaker.  She was traditional in that role in terms of supporting my grandfather [Oliver Smith].  And, again, church-going, God-fearing, very supportive of the family as they raised their family.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a Spanish influence in, on your mother's [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] side of the family with a Juanita Rosa, you know?
Speaker 2: No, not to my knowledge.  That's just a name that she got, but no Spanish influence that I'm aware of.
Speaker 1: So they just liked the name, basically?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: On--Irene Smith.  That's her name.  That's my mom's mom.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Irene.
Speaker 1: And your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Oliver Junius Smith was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay, the exotic Junius comes (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, that is correct.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: We were discussing this before.  So people don't think I'm just being disrespectful here, but we were discussing it before that the name Junius in reference to something that Richard Pryor said a long time ago, and I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's, exactly, and, you know, as we were talking, I grew up my entire life thinking his middle name was Julius.  And it was only in preparation for this interview that the fact was made known that it is actually Junius.  And, yeah, Richard Pryor had that famous line, you know, what kind of name is that for a negro, as it were.  So that's a part of that recollection for me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So at a certain point then--so is your mother's family basically, you know, fairly well off going all the way back as far as you know or is there any kind of a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they weren't rich by any stretch, but they were, they did well.  They--my understanding is they invited sometimes the teachers from the schools to the house and talked about the work of the school and how the kids were doing.  They hosted some things as they were growing up.  So they were not rich, but they were middle class, you know, by today's type of standards, if you will.
Speaker 1: Okay, they, he had a profession, you know, as a plumber which is a--
Speaker 2: Right, he was making decent money.  They had a house, and, again, they felt good enough about it as did the people they invited over, to come over and be entertained--to entertain and be entertained.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120734
Speaker 1: So at a certain juncture, you say when your mother [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] was around thirteen, the family moved to--
Speaker 2: Some time in her high school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --while she was in high school, they moved to Austin, Texas.  And she--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So in the early 1940s, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: I believe that's correct, yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And it was, as she was going to Huston Tillotson College in Austin, Texas, that she met my father [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.].  As the story goes, she was at a soda shop with two of her sisters.  And my dad came in and bought all three of them sodas.  He was a big spender, at least in that context, and the soda shop was followed by movies and then they dated, and the rest, as they say, is history.
Story_ID: 120735
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story as to how your mother's [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] family, you know, or why they moved to Austin [Texas]?  Did they have relatives there already or--
Speaker 2: There was the opportunity.  There was a perceived opportunity to moving to Austin that caused them to move.  And they did not have other relatives in the area, but they struck out and thought that that would be a good thing to do, and that's what they did.
Speaker 1: Was there like a, something special for plumbing contractors or--
Speaker 2: I think later on, he got the job with, I believe it was Southern Gas Company or something to that effect.  And we can confirm that, but that's what, was a part of what was the draw to Austin, Texas.
Story_ID: 120736
Speaker 1: Okay, all right. So your mother [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] went to Huston-Tillotson [University, Austin, Texas].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did she finish?
Speaker 2: She did not initially finish there.  She has subsequently, much, much later in life gotten her bachelor's degree as well as her master's degree--degrees from St. Ed's University [St. Edward's University] in Austin, Texas.  And that was a point of pride for her and the entire family because when I say much later in life, I'm gonna, I'm guessing that this was probably maybe ten years ago that she got her master's degree.
Speaker 1: She was about seventy-six?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was, yeah, maybe it was ten or fifteen years ago.  So she had a career.  She was a Child Development, Inc. employee, Head Start.  She managed a couple of those types of schools, enjoyed working with kids and always had, as an objective, to finish and get her degree.  And that was something that she felt very important about and certainly instilled that in all of us as we were growing up as well.
Story_ID: 120737
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna go to your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Can--your father's name is the same as yours, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  And I'm able to track that back four generations to great, great, great grandparents, Daniel and Emeline Alexander.  They had children, and on one side of their family was the name Marcellus, they'd given to one of their sons.  And on the other side of the family, on my--on Daniel's side was a person who had the name Winston in his name.  So my grandfather gave Marcellus Winston to my dad as his name.  He then named me Marcellus Winston, Jr., and I have since passed that name on to my son, Marcellus Winston III.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so now, what is the--your father's family, from what you were telling me before we started has a long history in Texas, going back to 1823.
Speaker 2: Yes. They were, they were landowners, seventy-three acres of property that, much of which is still in the family.  They ultimately had a dairy farm that they sold milk to Superior Dairies which then was merged with Borden's or somebody else.  But they sold milk to Superior Dairies as a part, as the business.  And I'm one of eight children, and I am convinced that a part of their strategy was to get all of the labor in-house and we could work the farm, between my family and my grandfather and make this work.  And it did, quite frankly, it did.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so are there any stories from the early part of the century 'cause your great, great grandparents came, Daniel Alexander and Emeline came around the time that Texas was settled by, you know, the white Americans, when it was still part of Spain.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or Mexico.
Speaker 2: Well, Daniel was, in fact, a slave.  And that's a part of our history that we understand and certainly respect.  Over the years, he was able to have his children not be slaves.  And, you know, that has unfolded as it has.  But a lot, obviously, went on in those years.  And I can remember, you know, going to the movies and having to go to the colored section, and I can remember the water fountains and all those things that are a part of our history certainly are memories that I have that are not at the forefront, but they certainly are at the back of my mind and my consciousness as I go through work and go through day-to-day.
Story_ID: 120738
Speaker 1: If you grew up in a segregated Austin [Texas], your father [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] certainly grew up in a segregated, you know, community in Texas as well, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response, nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: So, I mean to the extent that he was actually in a town, you know, to do that, 'cause they--did he--was he raised on a farm?
Speaker 2: He was raised on a farm.  The seventy-three acres is where my grandfather [Milton Alexander] and grandmother [Velma McNeil-Alexander] lived, and my dad and mom's home was also on the homestead part of that property.  And we milked cows.  I actually, there--you asked about stories.  A lot of stories.  Milking cows, and we milked about forty-five cows per day, and cows have to be milked twice a day.  And you haven't lived until you've been awakened at four o'clock in the morning before school to go and milk the cows.  And we had machines, but you haven't lived until one of the cows who has been out into the pasture has cockleburrs or stickers in their tail.  And they swish those tails, and when you get hit upside the head, (laughter) there's nothing more jarring at 4:30 in the morning than that.  And I kid with my father, I said one of the reasons that I was motivated to go to college was that slap by the cow with stickers in his, in her tail.  But one of the things that we certainly did learn through the farm is that you have to work hard, and when you work hard, there are results.  You know, you sell the milk.  There's a profit.  Take care of the cows.  All of that was there, but it began with hard work, and the work ethic that my dad instilled in us through the farm serves me very well today.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask about, more about that later, but so your father, he grew up on a farm.  And was he going to Huston-Tillotson [University, Austin, Texas] when he met your mother [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander]?
Speaker 2: He was not--oh, actually, let me take that back.  I think he was initially, but his primary, he was the primary member of their immediate family who worked the farm.  My dad has brothers and sisters, but they were helpers on the farm, but not as involved as he was.  He was the primary guy who was doing that.  And that was the arrangement that was made, and, again, it worked out at the--in the end.
Story_ID: 120739
Speaker 1: Okay, and, once again, you mother--your parents [Marcellus Alexander, Sr. and Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] met in a soda shop?
Speaker 2: Soda shop.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And dated, and, yes, and they are, by the way, I should say this.  They are awesome.  They are awesome as parents.  They are awesome as a team.  They have sixty-five years of marriage now between them.  He's ninety-six.  She's eighty-five.  We kid him about robbing the cradle.  But they are an awesome team and awesome parents, instilling all kinds of great, strong values from work ethic to fear of God and all of the things that we need, we needed as family to grow.
Story_ID: 120740
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't ask you, but your father [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] was born about 1917?
Speaker 2: 1917, correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: And he was born in--what's the name of the place he was born?
Speaker 2: Well, Creedmoor, Texas is what that part of the town, part of Austin's [Texas] suburb, if I could call it that.  It has now--the city limits have moved out so it's now Austin.  The property is now in Austin.  But at the time, Creedmoor was the, where he was born.
Speaker 1: All right, so did he have any stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, he had tons of them.  I mean, you know, from--again, just working, making sure that the cows were fed.  Most of it was farm related, his stories.  And he was a guy, you know, who sun-up to sundown, worked, he was always a great provider.  He was there when he needed to be.  My mom and he, I mentioned, they're an awesome team whether they had to play good cop, bad cop, they got it done.  They were very involved in our growing up.  And, again, when I look at my brothers and sisters, we all are blessed and very pleased with the upbringing that we all got, thanks to our mom [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] and dad.
Story_ID: 120741
Speaker 1: Okay, well, when you consider their personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, how they walk, talk, what they look like, what do you think that you got from each?
Speaker 2: Well, clearly, from my dad [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.], focus and a strong work ethic, you know.  There was nothing that you couldn't accomplish through hard work, was kind of the message that we got there.  When you worked hard, you were gonna see the benefits of that.  From my mom [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander]'s side, she brought a little more compassion to the equation, certainly emphasized the importance of treating people with respect, as you want to be treated.  Certainly, the role of the church, she brought that to the forefront.  So the combination of the two of them, and, again, support from both sides is what helped us do what we've done as a family.
Story_ID: 120742
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you name your brothers and sisters from, I guess, the oldest to the youngest, and insert yourself in the lineup, of course?
Speaker 2: Sure, oldest sister is Jennifer, Jennifer Williams.  She, unfortunately, we lost to cancer just a little over three years ago.  She was sixty--[clearing throat] excuse me--when she died.  I am the next in line, second and oldest son.  Below me is a brother, Gerald.  Below him is another brother, Mark.  Below him is a sister, Carmen.  Below Carmen is Rosalind, the historian.  And below Rosalyn is Lamont.  And then the baby of the family, Winell is the baby of the family.  And I mentioned the one-two punch of our historians.  Her husband, Doug, Doug Herron, is a key part of the photography and getting the images that trace our history and our family's history.  So between Ros [Rosalind Alexander], my sister, and Doug, my brother-in-law, they are the historians that have tracked the family and done a great job, in my view, of pulling the information together.
Story_ID: 120743
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest childhood memory.  Several of them.  One of the more memorable ones has to do with the sensory, the smell.  My mother [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] made the best rolls in life, and, you know, when we got old enough and got married and moved out, and we said, "Mom, can you share that recipe?"  "Ehh, it's just a pinch of this, a pinch of that".  These rolls, when she would make them--and she made them often, filled the house with just a great aroma.  I mean it just was amazing.  And that's one of the most vivid memories that I have of growing up there.
Speaker 1: Now, are these the yeast dinner rolls?
Speaker 2: These are homemade from scratch.  Whatever was in them, roll them, knead them, you know, they were just big and fluffy and amazingly tasty.
Speaker 1: But they weren't biscuits though?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  These are rolls.  They are dinner, yes, dinner rolls.  And she put, you know, butter.  I know it's not, it wasn't, probably wasn't good then and it certainly isn't good now.  But they certainly did taste good and smell very good.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 120744
Speaker 1: Let's see, so we always ask this question, you know, what did your--now, you grew up on the farm?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were out in rural, what's it called?
Speaker 2: Rural, Creedmoor [Texas].
Speaker 1: Creedmoor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Twice a day, milking the cows, making sure that they got fed, then getting to school and doing what we had to do to make sure our grades were good.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was Creedmoor an African American area or is it sort of just--
Speaker 2: It was just a rural area.  There were African Americans who lived in that area, but there were white Americans as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so when you came, by the time you came along, the dairy farm was established, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And had your grandfather [Milton Alexander] established it?
Speaker 2: Grandfather had established it, and, you know, as I mentioned, I'm convinced that part of the large family was, let's work this, let's make sure we have the labor force (laughter) to do this, to do this.  And from as early as I can remember, whether it's four years old or--probably four is probably it, we had chores.  We had to feed this or feed that or help clean up this.  And then as we got bigger, milk the cows and help dad [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] doing the cows, milking the cows.  That became a part of our responsibilities.
Story_ID: 120745
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, how rural was Creedmoor [Texas]?  Did you have like, you know, plumbing?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, so, yeah, we had running water.  We had electricity.  We were just outside, I think it probably--when the farm was first established, maybe about eight to ten miles outside of Austin, Texas.  So, yes, we had, we had that. Now, the school that we attended, and this was in, again, segregated time--in Creedmoor, there was a two-room school.  That two rooms accounted for, one room was grades one through six, and the second room was grade seven through twelfth, two teachers.  I can remember their names.  Mrs. Edmondson handled the first part of that, and Ms. Overton, the second part of the school.  And they took the time--obviously, there wasn't a lot of, there wasn't a big class.  So our, class-to-teacher ratio was good.  But they spent the time with us to make sure that we understood, learned and grew.  And that two-room building actually still exists.  A family has bought it and turned it into a house, house, last time I went by there.  But a lot of memories from that.  And that school did not have bathroom plumbing, okay.  It did have electricity.  It did have running water, but they didn't have bathroom plumbing.  So I remember what that was like.
Speaker 1: So this is a school near Creedmoor or in Creedmoor?
Speaker 2: In Creedmoor.
Speaker 1: In Creedmoor.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was called--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Pilot Knob School.  And--
Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting name.  Is there a story behind that name?
Speaker 2: Well, Pilot Knob was that community also.  I mean it had several areas to it, and Pilot Knob was one part of that, that rural area.
Speaker 1: Any story about how it got the name, Pilot Knob?
Speaker 2: I'd have to do a little more homework on that, but nothing comes to mind, relative to that.  Now, there was an dormant volcano that was a part of that community.
Speaker 1: A dormant volcano in Texas.  Really?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  At least, that was the story.  So I'll have to go back and double check that.  But dormant volcano, and I believe it might have been called Pilot Knob or something.  But I'll have to do a little more homework on that one.
Speaker 1: That's interesting.  Well, you know, anybody watching this wants to follow up, it certainly has a good lead to follow.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Pilot Knob, Texas.  Okay, so, now, this is, these are the days of segregation, right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: And so your school was all black, right?
Speaker 2: That is correct.  That is correct.  And then as things evolved in the education front, still segregated, Lamar School was a school that was better resourced.  It was better intended, and this school was in Del Valle, Texas, not far from Creedmoor, but Del Valle, Texas.  And those of us who attended Pilot Knob moved to Lamar.
Speaker 1: So you would do how many grades at Pilot Knob, before you moved to--
Speaker 2: About three, third grade at Pilot Knob, and then moved to Lamar in grade four.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be grades four through--
Speaker 2: Through seven, actually--I'm sorry, four through sixth.  And then when I was going to the seventh grade, Del Valle High School was integrated, middle school and high school was integrated.  And it was a big decision to make whether I would stay at Lamar or move to Del Valle Junior High.  And after talking it over with my folks, I was one of three African American students who decided to move to Del Valle because they had better resources.  They had books, they had all the things that someone who wants to get educated needed access to.  And so it was me, plus two young girls, both of whom were, had parents who were part of Bergstrom Air Force Base, which was out there in Del Valle also.  So they were [U.S.] Army kids who'd move around, and they also helped to integrate that school that year.  That was my seventh grade year at Del Valle.
Story_ID: 120407
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I'm just concerned by the name Pilot Knob, and I was wondering if it's any geographic feature there? A mountain or something?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's a hill, I mean it's--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And is that where the volcano is supposed to be?
Speaker 1: Correct.  And there are these big, black rocks that are allegedly, again, lava rock that have, from way, way, way back, spewed out and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's that.
Speaker 2: Okay, out of Texas--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Out of Texas-(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) things.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 120408
Speaker 1: Okay, so all right.  So Del Valle Middle School [Del Valle, Texas].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Now, at this stage, let me ask you about--and you discussed it on some level, but what were some of the sights, sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Other than the rolls, other than the, my mom's [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] rolls?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: There are whole lot of smells on a farm, most of which probably we don't wanna get into here (laughter).  You know, the milk, we, you know, we'd milk the cows and then pour it into this big vat.  And there was a freshness about this milk 'cause it was before it got pasteurized because that's what Superior Dairies would do.  So that's a smell that's pretty vivid as well.  Once it was chilled in this big vat, before the Superior Dairies' truck came, it was like, yeah, this is good.  And we drank lots of milk.  I guess if there is whole milk, this would have been whole, plus.  But that's one of the smells that I recall as well from growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so nobody in your family is lactose intolerant or anything?
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) no.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause that plagues a lot of African Americans and East Indians--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --too.  They just can't--
Speaker 2: We were very fortunate in that regard, not to have, not to be able to have everyone consume the product that we were delivering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120409
Speaker 1: What were you like growing up?  What were you interested in?
Speaker 2: I actually, growing up, wanted to be a [U.S.] Navy pilot.  And the reason I wanted to be a Navy pilot was, I thought it'd be cool to be able to fly.  But I also had a cousin whose dad was in the [U.S.] Air Force.  And through going to Bergstrom Air Force Base [Austin, Texas], looking at the planes, we knew that that was something that would be exciting to do.  And becoming a pilot was one of my early aspirations.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you actually go out to Bergstrom and watch the planes?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  And, you know, they, for a period of time, lived on the base--this is a cousin.  And certainly, when they weren't living there, they would go to the commissary and we'd do things on the base.  But, yeah, that was a very early--I can remember model airplanes that we had.  And I could, you know, being top gun, before 'Top Gun' obviously came out.
Speaker 1: Now, the Blue Angels were out though.
Speaker 2: Blue Angels were out, and that was a very popular--and still is, obviously, very popular show.  And it's gotten a little bit of, obviously, concern around it because of the, some of the accidents that have happened over the years.  But that was an early aspiration.
Story_ID: 120410
Speaker 1: So did you like school?
Speaker 2: I liked school.  It was--I liked the social part.  I also liked the-- some of the classes.  I was always--excuse me, I was always better at writing and creative things that I would have been in history or even math.  And what's ironic is that one of my father's [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] strengths, absolute strengths, was math.  And I think I passed on some of that gene, but we have kids who've picked it up and a daughter who is very good at math and calculus and, you know, and economics and that type of thing.  But, yeah, I enjoyed school, enjoyed going, enjoyed the friendships and also enjoyed getting away from the cows that were hitting me on the side of the head with their tails.  So all of that was very good.
Story_ID: 120411
Speaker 1: Being the oldest son and the namesake of your father [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] and working on the farm and having a lot of farm work to do, did you get a chance to participate in things like the Boy Scouts or Little League or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually, was in the Boy Scouts, played basketball, did not play football.  Our parents thought that was a little too, you know, head trauma and all that, which, you know, that's, in hindsight, probably a very, very smart decision, especially given what's going on now in the NFL [National Football League].  But I did have a chance to do extracurricular, but it required me to be organized because work was always first.  You had to take care of your work, and once you did that, then you can do whatever you need to do.  And work was first, the farm, and then your homework, and then, now, do what you need to do.
Story_ID: 120412
Speaker 1: How old were you when you really started working on the--I mean doing real work on the farm?
Speaker 2: Well, real work would be milking the cows at four o'clock in the morning, and so that would have been high school, you know, freshman, sophomore years.  Clearly, I was strong enough to do that.  We were bailing hay.  We were doing lots of different things that, you know, the work that's required on a farm.  And all the time, I'm thinking, you know, is this--do I want to continue in the tradition of my grandfather [Milton Alexander] and father [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.] and be a farmer?  And the clear answer for me was, no.  Fortunately, I have brothers who thought, yeah, this could be something that we could continue and they did, in fact, for a period of time.
Speaker 1: I was gonna say that it sounds like that you had clearly decided, how am I gonna get out of doing this rather than--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --if I wanna do it or not?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a very clear strategy.  Let me go to college and find a different path.
Speaker 1: So did your, did both parents [Marcellus Alexander, Sr. and Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] push you to go to college?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or push education in the home?
Speaker 2: Yes, education was pushed in the home.  My oldest sister [Jennifer Alexander-Williams] went to the school that I went to.  She was a very good academic student.  She went down and made all A's.  It's a tough act to follow, when I was not quite as strong an academic student at that time.  But I followed her.  She ended up getting married before she graduated, and they moved to--he was in the service, Carl [Williams].  And I then follow her.  And I was, I'd say maybe a typical kind of student.  First year you go, I got all this freedom.  Yes, I'll take care of the school work in a little while.  And it became a very stark reality to me, delivered by my parents, that if the grades didn't pick up, that they were not interested, not at all interested in paying tuition or helping out (laughter) to pay tuition for partying.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we're way ahead of ourselves right now--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --but, you know, not too far, but sort of ahead.  But so, we'll kind of go back to grade school.  But I get that point.  Now, they're, yeah, 'cause they had another plan for you.  If it didn't work out, you'd be helping on the farm.
Speaker 2: That would be correct.
Story_ID: 120413
Speaker 1: All right, so, okay, so, during the period of time that you were in grade school, did you have any special talents or anything?  Could you draw, sing or--you mentioned basketball.
Speaker 2: Yeah, grade school, again, writing was always easy.  I read, read well; not so good of an artist, but, you know, got along with my fellow students, and, you know, all that worked out pretty well.
Speaker 1: Did you manifest any leadership abilities when you were young?
Speaker 2: I think so.  When I--you know, when you look back at it now, of course, who was the team leaders when you got this team together, and who raised their hand?  I mean, yeah, I did a fair amount of that, and probably when I force myself to think back that far, yes.  I did show some leadership skills.  I think that would be shown in the grades that I was making back then, and managed to, thanks again, to good direction, guidance from home, stay out of trouble, where a lot of my friends were not that lucky.
Story_ID: 120414
Speaker 1: Okay, this year, 2013, people have been reflecting on 1963, which was the year where you were, I guess eleven or so--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --growing up when you had these live news coverage--this live news coverage on television for the first time of these big, major events like the March on Washington [1963] and the [John F.] Kennedy assassination [1963] and, you know, other events, the Birmingham [16th Street Baptist Church Bombing, 1963], you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --news that expanded from fifteen minutes to a half hour for the first time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, you know, did you watch television growing up?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And, you know, you can really see the world unfolding right in front of you.  And it was an eye-opening experience.  We also had an opportunity back then, and I can remember this like it was yesterday, there were precious few images of African Americans in the entertainment programming.  And whenever there was one of us who happened to be on the air, I can remember running through the house, "There's a black person on, there's a black person on!".  And we'd all come and see who that was.  And maybe it was Flip Wilson this time or [HM] Diahann Carroll or somebody like that, but that was--that made an impression on me that clearly there was not enough--we were not seeing ourselves enough in that, in that venue.  And at the time, I didn't know what I would do about it or didn't think that much about it.  But I knew that there was some--there was a void there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about the radios.  Was there any such thing as black radio when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: There was actually (laughter), a radio station that came out of Taylor, Texas, which was a further away suburb from Austin [Texas].  And it was about--well, the guy's name was Tony Vaughn.  Amazing how I can remember some things and not others.  But his name was Tony Vaughn.  He was the on-air talent.  And he had about three or four hours a day that he programmed R&B and black music.  And it was a very faint signal most of the time, you could barely get it, but it was either that or listening to other music that you really didn't care about.  So that was, again, an early influence on, on, you know, what's available and how little, really truly is available in terms of the music that we wanted to hear.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, some of us developed a like for, nothing wrong with the Beatles, but if that's what you hear, you kind of like it.  But you knew that your preference was for R&B and some of the other black music that was out there.
Speaker 1: Now, was your source for R&B the record store in the area or--
Speaker 2: Later on, I mean we were--there were certainly records, but at our house, it was first radio.  And then when we got to have extra dollars to buy records, we could do that which was--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause when you were growing up, Motown, you know, just--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --starting up, and, of course, the Memphis [Tennessee] sound, other, you know, black music was starting to hit the airwaves for the first time--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in top forty [American Top Forty] sense--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --some of the artists.
Speaker 2: I can remember the Atlantic record label, Stax, and some of the other labels like that, as we got old enough to buy records, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have a popular--did you have a favorite radio show or--well, television show rather, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Television show back then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 2: Well, what was it?  [HM] Diahann Carroll's show.  What was that called?
Speaker 1: 'Julia'.
Speaker 2: 'Julia.'  Yeah, that was fun.  And not any others that--we had the local shows, 'Uncle Jay' was the kids.  So you saw your friends on the birthdays and that kind of thing.  But we didn't have a lot, you know, that was really that appealing to us.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how many stations could you get out there in--
Speaker 2: Radio or TV [television]?
Speaker 1: Well, TV, I guess.
Speaker 2: TV, it seems like maybe two or three, as I recall it back in those days.  And one of them was very fuzzy 'cause this was pre-cable.  And so signals were not as robust as they were then and delivery via cable was not an option back then.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 120415
Speaker 1: So, now, what was integration like?  You went to Del Valle--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --High School [Del Valle, Texas]?
Speaker 2: It was different.  Fortunately, I didn't have any incidents.  There was always the sort of question, you know, is that person looking at me because they don't know me or are they looking at me because I'm black?  But we had no problems at that particular school.  And I give credit there to the teachers and the administrators for, you know, keeping--if there was anybody who was thinking something, they certainly didn't--I didn't see it.  And--
Speaker 1: So, no name calling in school--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I didn't experience any of that.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (simultaneous)--none of that?
Speaker 2: No, and the three of us, the two young girls and I certainly bonded, and we would see each other and nod.  And we knew that if this goes well, if there's no problems, we're gonna have some company that looks like us very soon, like the next year.  But a lot of people were leery about taking the--being the first.  And so--
Speaker 1: You were the first male?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: And the only one?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, and two females?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And as I said, I think maybe it was a bit of naivete, certainly a lot of encouragement from my parents [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander and Marcellus Alexander, Sr.], but we did not experience any problems, and got good teachers.  The teachers seemed to be fair, and, you know, if I needed some help in something or wanted something, you know, they were there for me just as they were for everybody else.  So it was a good experience, generally, in the integration of that particular school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you--did you play basketball right away?
Speaker 2: Play basketball in high school, so that was seventh grade.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you started the integration in middle school, right--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --that's what you're saying, okay.
Speaker 2: --seventh grade, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.  Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And then high school, I did play basketball and--
Speaker 1: So, by the time eighth grade rolled around, were there a significant number of black students in the school?
Speaker 2: They were coming at that point.  It wasn't significant, but it was more than three, and I think probably maybe it was fifteen or twenty.  And then it, you know, the full integration came.  There was no big incidents, no big problems.  So people felt comfortable and came on in.
Speaker 1: Were African Americans a full part of school life in those days or were you sort of marginalized or--
Speaker 2: No, my recollection is that we were, you know, we certainly got together as friends and kind of hung together.  But we weren't marginalized.  We were certainly representing ourselves well in the classroom as well as on the, you know, in sports.  I didn't play football, but I was the statistician for the football team.  So got into that a little bit.  But, yeah, we were, that was a good experience as it relates to some of the other stories that are out there on integration.
Story_ID: 120416
Speaker 1: Now, did--up to this point, and up to high school, did you have any particular teachers who were mentors to you or role models?
Speaker 2: I had a math teacher, actually, Mrs. George.  This is just amazing that I can remember some of these names.  And she would make sure at the end of the class, you okay?  Anything I can help you with?  And, again, I didn't feel like she was just picking me out because she would also have that same conversation with one of my white student, fellow students.  So whether that was all sort of set up that I be comfortable or she's--that's just who she was.  She made it a point that I was comfortable.  There was also an English teacher who encouraged me in terms of writing, Mrs. Vansant--wow, this is pretty remarkable that I can, again, remember these names.  And she would encourage the writing and made me feel like, hey, this is actually good.  And I--'cause I wouldn't know if you didn't tell me that kind of thing.  So good experience.  Mentors, I wouldn't say that.  I would just say they were teachers who looked out and were helpful in the process of learning.
Story_ID: 120417
Speaker 1: Now, in high school [at Del Valle High School, Delle Valley, Texas], now, did you run for class office or anything pr--?
Speaker 2: Did not do that and, in fact, I just had a flashback of one of the violent things that happened at the school.  And I don't know that it had anything to do with race, but we were traveling--we traveled to Copperas Cove [Texas], a school that we competed with in basketball.  And I'm not sure, 'cause I don't recall whether they had black students at Copperas Cove or not, but as we were leaving the game on the bus--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did you win the game?
Speaker 2: We won the game, we won the game.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to set up the--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --motivation for maybe, the--
Speaker 2: Correct.  And then all of a sudden there were rocks that were being thrown into the windows and breaking windows and that kind of thing.  And, again, whites and black students on the bus, and we won the game.  It was probably, was probably the, you know, the motivation for the rock throwing.  But I never felt like it was because we had black athletes on the bus.  There was nothing that would have indicated that.
Speaker 1: Was anyone injured?
Speaker 2: Nothing serious.  Some people got, you know, had some glass that, some cuts, but nothing serious, thankfully.
Story_ID: 120418
Speaker 1: So what were your grades like in high school [at Del Valle High School in Del Valle, Texas]?
Speaker 2: In high school, I did well. I was B's, you know, A's and B's.  And whenever I got to the B-minus or C, you know, my parents were the motivation.  You know, you gotta step it up, wanna go to college, spend the time on that.  And, but, I was a good student.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so, all right, did you get, what kind of counseling did you get around college in high school?
Speaker 2: Not much, and, in fact, that's probably something that in hindsight--and it wasn't just me, from my understanding.  We just didn't have a good counselor at the school.  I kind of knew that I would probably be going to Southwest Texas [Southwest Texas State University, now Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas], which is where my oldest sister went.  She was the first in our family to go to school.  And I'd seen the campus, and I knew that that was a school that was thirty miles from home, so close enough if I wanted to come back for something.  But we didn't get--and I can't recall whether I didn't seek it, but they certainly didn't come to me and say, let's talk about options for colleges.  We kind of did that with, in our family and on our own.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you were a senior in what?
Speaker 2: '69 [1969].  I graduated in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what were your aspirations as a senior?
Speaker 2: Go to college so I could probably get on a different path than the farm; wasn't sure what major, what I wanted to major in.  I was totally undecided, but I did know I wanted to go to school.  My sister had done, as I said, all A's.  So the bar had been set high, and it was primarily--I knew that to do anything that I wanted to be able to do, a college education was gonna a part of that.  That had been instilled in us by our parents.  You know, you gotta do this, and got accepted at that school and had worked--one of the things that, and this goes back to the work ethic, knew that I would need to work to pay my way to college because that was how we operated.  My parents were there if I needed them financially, but the expectation was, outside of the farm, here's what you can do.  You can work.  In fact, my--a couple of jobs leading into college, I worked at the [U.S] Post Office, saved some money and did that kind of thing.  But work to go to school was a part of the equation.
Story_ID: 120419
Speaker 1: Okay, was there anything special about graduation from high school [Del Valle High School, Del Valle, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Not particularly.  I mean we did the, we did the after party.  I guess, if there was one thing that was, I wouldn't call it special.  I'd call it memorable, my parents [Marcellus Alexander, Sr. and Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander]--I'm still living at home, of course.  And they said, you know, go out and have a good time but be home by, I think it might have been, I don't know one o'clock.  And I had a car, and, you know, typical graduation, you go, yeah, I'm sure they'll be okay.  And so at maybe 2:30 when I'm going to the back of the house to try to make sure that I get in quietly, you know, the rest of the story.  My mom and dad are there, like so, you know, what's this?  Do you see what time it is?  And so, grounding was one thing that people called it, but back then there were other things that happened to you when you didn't obey.  So that part was memorable, and you learn, you learn, you learn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was, and I felt like it was justifiable punishment, if you will, because the rules were clear.  You know, I had a car, be responsible.  They don't wanna worry about, you know, something happening.  So I got that intellectually, but fun took over, and just stayed out a little longer.
Speaker 1: Okay, was this a common story amongst your peers for that particular night?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.  This is what people do, right.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Story_ID: 120420
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't ask you about church at all.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: But before we get you to college and away from all supervision, tell us about church (laughter).  Did you, was there a family church?  Was it important to go to church?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  In fact, to this day, Ebenezer Baptist Church is where most of the church years were spent.  And we were participating in all kinds of programs there.  What was that?  The BYP--Baptist Training--there was an acronym that came with it.  But very active in church, and, again, something that was encouraged primarily by my mom [Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander], but support, certainly, by dad [Marcellus Alexander, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, did you--so you went to, were you part of the youth activities at church?
Speaker 2: Some of the youth activities and, you know, more it was a place and a time where you, again, gave thanks, and you understood that even hard work, even with hard work, you need some additional support.  And there're gonna be days and times when that support is needed, and you have to sort of make investments, if you will, into that faith and into that religion to be able to pull you through some of those difficult times.  And that was ingrained in us.  That was a part of our life at that point.
Story_ID: 120421
Speaker 1: Now, were you given any kind of athletic scholarship in school?
Speaker 2: No, was not.  I was okay basketball player, and, in fact, one of the stories that kind of shaped that, I can remember watching on television an interview with an African American athlete.  And here's a guy who was extraordinary on the field, but when it came to the interview, he couldn't put two sentences together.  And for me, it clicked that at high school, on my basketball team, when it was six weeks report card time, and the coach comes into the locker room, and he says, so how are the grades this year, this six weeks?  How are your grades?  And somebody raises their hand and they go, coach, the biology teacher actually wants me to come to class.  And people laugh.  And then somebody else says, yeah, and I, you know, I missed that math test.  I need some help in math, and so everybody, a lot of people had stories.  And the result was report cards came out and people got B's.  And I made the connection between athletes who are doing well on the field who are getting carried academically, and the result is this interview with a guy who can't put sentences together.  So I didn't seek and wouldn't have wanted a sports scholarship or an athletic scholarship because I saw that connection.  Now, certainly everybody didn't take that path.  But I saw that as an available path, and that wasn't what I wanted to do.  I wanted to go to school to learn.  I wanted to go to school so that I could actually be something and do some things that I wanted to do.
Story_ID: 120422
Speaker 1: --school you enrolled in was Southwest Texas State which is now Texas State University [San Marcos, Texas]?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us something about Southwest Texas State, about, you know, who was it founded for, and the who the--just something about it?
Speaker 2: Sure, it was originally a teachers college.  In fact, the original name was Southwest Texas State Teachers College when that was the focus.  That then evolved to Southwest Texas State College, and then Southwest Texas State University which is when I went there.  The year that I went the enrollment was somewhere around, I believe, 24,000 students.  It was a campus that a number of folks went home on the weekends because Austin was thirty miles away, San Antonio was about forty or fifty miles away.  And so students bailed out on the weekends in large part.  The African American population of the school was probably in my first year, there might have been fifty or sixty African American students, total in the population.
Speaker 1: That is really a small percentage.
Speaker 2: That is a very small percentage.
Speaker 1: Very small.
Story_ID: 120423
Speaker 1: And so what we did is we formed an organization and did things together.  The organization that we formed was Umoja, called Umoja, which is Swahili for "togetherness."  And we would do social activities.  We'd get together and do all kinds of things.  We also--
Speaker 2: Now, wait a minute now.  I have to stop here for a second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On this Swahili.  It's spelled U-M-O-J-A.
Speaker 1: --J-A, UMOHJA.
Speaker 2: And you all pronounced that Oo-mo-ha--
Speaker 1: Umoja.
Speaker 2: Umoja.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that could have been the Texas dialect for it (laughter).
Speaker 2: I think it was maybe some confusion with Spanish 'cause it's Umoja in Kiswahili.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, it's interesting now, you know, how things translate down the line.
Speaker 1: Sure, right.
Speaker 2: And Umoja, I, that's, you know, 'cause I--when you said--
Speaker 1: Umoja.
Speaker 2: --that, at first I thought it was an h in it, and then you spelled it.  I said, that's Umoja.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Which means unity.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in Kiswahili.
Story_ID: 120424
Speaker 1: And so, yeah, we would, as a group, get together and do things.  We also formed a choir.  Name of the choir was Soul Searchers, and we had a couple of music majors among us.  And we would practice and then on Sundays, we would visit local churches and perform.  And again, it was a way to get together.  Also a way to show in the community that we understand the importance of the church and they always liked to have us come.  And we liked to be there and so, in addition to studies, choir rehearsal from time to time and performances periodically.  But we found ways to get together and stay together and grow together.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's really a tiny percentage of black students, but it probably made the unity even more important.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 2: Now, now, okay--
Speaker 1: And it's grown.  I don't have today's figures, but that number has grown, but I would still think, as a percentage of the entire population, it's probably still rather small.
Story_ID: 120425
Speaker 1: Now, this is the school that [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson [LBJ] graduated from.
Speaker 2: Yes, LBJ went to school there.  In fact, my wife, Linda, was a part of the dramatic group--I'm trying to think of the name of this group.  But, again, it was a group that put on the play, 'Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry], and they actually performed it for Lyndon Johnson at his ranch.  And he was, you know, obviously, LBJ, being a former president, big name, obviously on campus, LBJ Drive.  Some of the desks had LBJ slept here carved in them for fun.  But, yes, that was his school, and it, he helped put it on the map beyond what it did on its own.
Speaker 1: Okay, LBJ had such a strong record on civil rights, and--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --it's interesting that only fifty students were at the school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know he can't control that but, you know.
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.  But, again, he--that grew and a lot of things, as you know, word of mouth starts to spread if you have a school that is a good school, that's welcoming.  There were no incidents.  And I'm trying to think back over the years.  There might have been an occasional, somebody write something out, but nothing that raised to the level of some of the problems that exists today in some of the schools that are, that you hear about.  So there was not a racial problem there.  It was generally welcoming.  I was honored one year as a Gaillardian which was kind of a popularity contest among students, dorm beaus and that type of thing so--
Story_ID: 120426
Speaker 1: We were a part of the--we were a part of the overall campus and formed the first black fraternity, founded, I should say, the first black fraternity at Southwest Texas State [University, now Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas].  And that was--
Speaker 2: What was it?
Speaker 1: That was Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And one of the interesting things about that was to be, to have an organization, you had a faculty sponsor.  And so, as you looked at the faculty across the university, a couple of things were obvious.  One, there was no African American or people of color professors.  So we went to Dr. Poole, who was a history professor and said, here's what we'd like to do.  We really want to bring Omega Psi Phi to the campus.  There was no other black fraternity or sorority on campus.  And we need a sponsor, and he very gladly supported us in that way.  And we founded the chapter, and today, all the other frats and sororities are there as well.  But, again, showing that they were, as a campus, and as an administration, welcoming to important aspects of black life was reflected in their actions.
Story_ID: 120427
Speaker 1: Was part of the strategy or the mission of the school [Southwest Texas State University, now Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas] to provide education for poorer Texans?  I know that's, you know, in Ohio, some of the schools actually--that's their mission to provide affordable education--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --in a, 'cause we mentioned LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson] going there, and he grew up very, very poor.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And I know the proximity of the University of Texas [Austin, Texas] is, you know, what ten, fifteen miles away or something from there?
Speaker 2: University of Texas?
Speaker 1: Yeah, from--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, about thirty, thirty-five miles, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's close to it--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --very close.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So I just wondered how, you know, if schools have these unstated, you know, missions--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I don't think the general student body knows it exactly, but there's a, you know, there's Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] and then there's Wright State in Ohio [University, Dayton, Ohio] and other, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and, you know, there's UCLA [University of California,Los Angeles] but there's a California State University of Los Angeles, too--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, as you say, it wasn't something that was pronounced and it wasn't something that we were aware of.  Tuition, when I look back was very affordable, you know.  It's a state school.  But I'm not sure if that was one of the, their kind of quiet missions or not.  But the population did grow, African American and Hispanic population reflecting the growth of that population obviously, has grown.  And the percentages are much healthier today, but I still think it is predominantly a white school.  But, again, and again, I'll say this.  In addition to the Gaillardian recognition and all that, I was also honored to deliver the graduation speech at--I'll have to figure out the year of that one, but this was after I'd graduated and after I'd established myself in broadcasting that they asked me to come back and deliver the commencement speech, which was, for me, an amazing honor, to recall having gone to school there and some of the classes where it was touch and go from time to time.  And now, I'm being asked to come back to deliver the commencement.  It was just very special, very special.  And following that, I was honored as a distinguished alum from the school, an honor that was bestowed first to [President] Lyndon [B.] Johnson and lots of other people between him and us now, but, again, they seem to understand and embrace the black culture, performance and it's a good school.  They still get some of my dollars at the end of the day.
Story_ID: 120428
Speaker 1: Did, now, did you exhibit any leadership at Southwest Texas [State University, now Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas]?
Speaker 2: I believe so.  Yeah, I mean, so I was the basileus of the Omega Psi Phi [Fraternity] chapter.  We founded it, very involved in the Umoja organization.  We, in our fraternity did social things, of course, but we also did service-oriented things that kept us busy.  But beyond that, I mean I didn't run for student government or any of that, just didn't have the desire to do that.  But other forms of leadership, yes.
Story_ID: 120429
Speaker 1: Were there any particular mentors there [Southwest Texas State University, now Texas State University in San Marcos, Texas]?  I take it that Dr. Poole was some sort of a mentor?
Speaker 2: He was a guy who understood what we wanted to do, and he was a very good resource.  He would walk through and get help us navigate through the bureaucracy and was just very helpful.  He was history.  I was communications, speech and journalism, actually.  So there was not a lot of mentoring on that front, but in the end, it all worked out for the organization, what we wanted to do.
Story_ID: 120430
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, how did you decide to major in communications?
Speaker 2: Interesting question.  First couple of years, I really was undecided, so you're taking the basic courses.  And then I had this thought, you know.  I had been a reluctant speaker in most situations.  That was not something that I looked forward to.  And so I thought, why don't I just take that one head on.  And so I decided, I'm gonna major in speech.  I looked at the classes and said, you know, I can do this.  I'm gonna force myself to do this because one of the things that I knew, and it was reinforced by my mother, to be successful, you need to be able to communicate well, and that is both orally as well as written communication.  And the writing skills were there from early on.  Those were good, but speaking was something that I felt like I needed to work on and decided to major in it.  And probably one of the best decisions that I've made because, again, that communication helps in persuasion.  It helps whatever you're trying to do in business and in life.  So that's how I got there.
Story_ID: 120431
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were you involved at all with the radio station, I guess, KTSW?
Speaker 2: No, was not.  I was doing other things and not really involved with radio.  And toward the end of my, you know, senior year, the 100 percent focus was, what do I need to do to graduate on time and let me do this, right?  At that point, my sister had not graduated.  I mentioned she had gone and gotten married.  I'm now the potential first member of my family to get a college degree.  And it was like a laser.  I knew exactly what I had to do, and I wasn't gonna get sidetracked by anything else.  And it was, let's figure out--make the grades.  Let's get this done, and be out.
Story_ID: 120432
Speaker 1: Now, did you write for the Pedagogue?
Speaker 2: Did some of that, and for the, just the classes had you writing for, there was a newspaper.  The Pedagogue was the yearbook.  But the, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The Normal Star, is that it?
Speaker 2: --yes, yes, did some articles for that.
Speaker 1: That's the Normal Star.
Speaker 2: Is it the Normal Star.  It was something star.
Speaker 1: Is it Normal Star or the University Star?
Speaker 2: University Star.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: University Star.
Speaker 1: All right, I had two of them down here.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I also did, got into photography, and did some photography along the way.  And that was interesting, some of the classes that came with journalism, obviously.  That was fun and interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you see yourself becoming a print journalist at this point?
Speaker 2: No, and actually, I was, when I graduated, it was kind of like one thing that I did do, was I got my teaching certificate because I knew that, you know, there was, there's always gonna be a need for teachers, for good teachers.  And it was kind of an insurance policy.  I knew that it wasn't my first choice because when I had done my student teaching as a part of the curriculum, there was something that felt very confining about, you know, lesson plans and x number of classes every day and grading the papers.  There was something that was a little bit stifling about that for me.  But I wanted to make sure that I had a job or had the ability to get a job, and that was my safety net, if you will.  And I have to say I have nothing but respect and admiration for teachers today because they are training our kids.  They are training our future.  They're defining our future through their training, and they are totally undercompensated and most of them do it because they have a genuine desire to help kids grow.  Some do it because they have to make a living, but a majority of them do it--there's a passion there.  And I have a lot of respect for, for that profession.
Story_ID: 120433
Speaker 1: So graduation year was 1973, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I think I mentioned off camera that, was it, Texas Western [University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas] or something won the NCAA [National College Athletic Association Championship] during the time you were in college.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But as a basketball player, did you take special note of that?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: It being a mostly black team.  That's why I raise it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I wasn't on the Southwest Texas [State University, now Texas State University, San Marcos, Texas] team, and it was, it was noticed.  We did have a, obviously, had a mixed team.  But, again, my focus was not so much those things.  It was making sure that I did what I needed to do to graduate.  And that was, as I said, like a laser.  I was close enough to the finish line that nothing was gonna get in the way because I, you know, going into school, the first year and not having any role models, family role models before you, it's a long way to the finish line or it appears to be.  And once I got into year, my junior, and then the senior year, it's like, wait a minute.  There's the finish line.  All I have to do is sprint now (laughter).  Don't let anything change the trajectory, and let's go.  And so that was, that was it.
Story_ID: 120434
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back on your college days, is there any major thing that you would do differently?  I mean would you change-would you focus on one course of study versus another, you know, now that you look back on it?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't think so.  I did, I did the classes that I had ultimately a passion for.  One was, came pretty easily, the writing part of it.  And the other was, I need to be able to be more comfortable in front of people and standing in front of, doing speeches.  And so I had a motivation, a passion for that.  My social life was very healthy.  I met my wife there at Southwest Texas [University, San Marcos, Texas], and so, no, I think, I think I would do it the same.  I would do the same.  I will say that one motivation--and this happened prior to my junior and senior year where I became focused.  This was more like the first semester of freshman year.  There was an aunt who'll go unnamed.  And she knew that my grades weren't what they could have and should have been.  She knew that I wasn't probably applying myself as I should have been.  And she said to me--she and one other relative.  You know, you're not going to make it.  You're not going to get through this because you're just, you're not applying yourself.  And I'm disappointed.  And there was something initially about that, that felt pretty down and depressing.  But then it was, okay, I hear you, and I understand, and now, I'm gonna show you that you're wrong.  I'm gonna show you that you're wrong.  And that helped me to get back on the right track and do ultimately what I did.
Story_ID: 120435
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you graduated in '73 [1973].  Now, what were your prospects immediately after graduation?
Speaker 2: I thought prospects were good, certainly could have been a teacher.  But I went to a--what are those things called?  They were a firm that, not a hiring firm, but a--
Speaker 1: Headhunter or?
Speaker 2: Headhunter firm, yes.  Snelling and Snelling, actually.  And I said, 'cause I'd pushed out resumes and hadn't gotten a lot of responses.  And to make a long story short, the headhunter, after conversations, I end up with a job for the American Heart Association, Dallas chapter, and it was a public relations, slash marketing kind of a job, and a good way to start into a real, you know, into a real field.  And it was through the work of the Heart Association where I moved up and ultimately, went from the Dallas chapter to the national association--American Heart National Center, where I became a consultant on the state public relations programs.  So I would visit various states and look at their public relations plan and make recommendations on how they could strengthen it.  And a couple of things that I recall about that.  One was, I looked extremely young, right out of college.  And I knew that when I walked into the office of an executive director that their first question was, what can this young, black guy tell me?  I've been here twenty years.  What can he possibly tell me about my public relations plan that will be useful?  And the old saying, you don't get a first--you don't get a second chance to make a first impression, caused me to do a couple of things.  One is, preparation for those meetings intensified so that I got to the substance very quickly.  But I also made a couple of physical changes.  I grew a beard, bought some glasses, wanted to look older and a little more mature.  And with the preparation, was able to sit down, and after that first, you know, few minutes of still asking that question, "Here's a young guy, just got out of college.  What can he tell me?" was able to transition into, "Let me tell you what's good about your program, and why I think it can be improved and where."  And was able to gain that respect and made some good friends and even more importantly, made some good recommendations on programs that got stronger.
Story_ID: 120436
Speaker 1: Now, at this point in time, were you thinking about sales at all?
Speaker 2: I was thinking about sales, but I've always felt and one of my philosophies has been, do the best you can with the job that you have and other opportunities will open up.  So with this job that I just described, I go now to Michigan to the annual meeting of the Michigan Heart Association.  Its chapter is probably about 200 people in the audience, and I'm in front of the room explaining what our public relations plan is from the National Center.  In the audience, unbeknownst to me at the time, was the HR [human resources] manager for the ABC group of stations in Detroit [Michigan].  There was a television station that was owned by ABC Radio, AM and FM radio stations that were owned by ABC.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is this WXYZ?
Speaker 2: WXYZ Television, WXYZ AM and WRIF Radio.  After my presentation, the HR manager came up to me, and she said, I really enjoyed your presentation.  And I have a couple of job opportunities I'd like to talk with you about.  And so just some context, I'm based in Dallas [Texas], home of the then American's team, close to home in terms of Austin [Texas], and Detroit was cold and snowy and cold and more cold.  In fact, the joke there was there're three seasons in Detroit, June, July and Winter.  And it wasn't far off from that as I found out.  But I had, with all those thoughts going on, I had the primary tape that was playing in my head from my mother who would say to me on numerous occasions, "Before you pass on an opportunity, at least check it out."  So, long story short, the jobs that she had, there was one that was of appeal.  It was a sales position, a sales trainee position, and I was, I felt like if you train me, I can do pretty much anything.  If you invest the time and energy to train me, I can do anything.  And so decided to move to Detroit, and take the sales trainee job at a WRIF Radio, which is a rock station, and that was the beginning of my broadcast career.
Story_ID: 120437
Speaker 1: So you mean by--what you mean, you mean by rock, you mean the--
Speaker 2: Rock and roll.
Speaker 1: Okay, these are the long-haired, white musicians--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, so everybody--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In those days, it would have been like, in '77 [1977], it would have been who?
Speaker 2: There would have been people like The Who, Bob Seiger, The Cars, people who I would not be listening to on my own, but this was a business decision.  It was a very successful station in Detroit.  And that was the call, and the sales trainee position was about two steps ahead of an intern in terms of status at that station.  So I come in as sales trainee.  And they provide some training.  They have this system that they work, and probably after three or four weeks of doing their system, which is basically cold calling on prospects, and then bringing information that you gather from that cold call back to sales people.  Probably after three or four weeks, I said, okay, I'm ready to start selling.  I'm bored out of my mind.  I need to have some more, I can close this guy.  Let me close the guy.  My sales manager said, "Marcellus, there's a method to the madness.  Be patient.  It's gonna be fine.  We still want you to learn some other things about this and that."  And I almost quit two or three times 'cause it was just more than I could take to come into work and say all I have to do today is make ten cold calls.  And even if the person said, "I'm ready to buy, I want ads on your station", I could not take that order.  I'd have to go back and give the information to a sales person.  So my sales manager gave in after about a week of me saying, you know, I really think I can do this.  Give me a shot.  And I got my first account list which was (laughter), and actually, this is quite memorable, calls a sales meeting together.  And these are all of my colleagues.  And he says, Marcellus is now gonna start selling.  So what I'd like each of you to do, account executives, is to identify accounts on your respective lists that--key words coming up, you don't want.  So here's an account that, you know, the person says, well, it's a good account.  They haven't spent in ten years, but if you develop them, they'll come around.  Here's one who owed us money for the last three years, but, you know, you can collect.  They're gonna have a good quarter.  They're gonna pay us.  That was my list.  And it became apparent very quickly that I was gonna have to do beyond that, and I did.  And one of the sayings of ABC at that time--these were ABC-owned radio stations, their philosophy was, "We reward performance."  And I said, I just wanna be clear.  What you're saying is, if I develop and grow these accounts, plus others, I'll be able to move up.  Absolutely.  And so a quick story, moving up from sales trainee to number one sales list, to local sales manager, national sales manager, general sales manager at that particular station and then vice president and general manager at that station.
Story_ID: 120438
Speaker 1: We need to ask you how did you, you know--they, these people were professionals.  They had a method that they're trying to introduce you to, a systematic, a system of how this should be done.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yet, you rebelled and so, and you were able to succeed.  How?  How were gonna do this?
Speaker 2: Well, I rebelled appropriately, and I also took the best parts of that system.  And it wasn't that the system was wrong.  It was just that, I got it.  Okay, I, you know, one person might need three months to figure out, here's how it works.  But I said, I understand it.  I understand.  I'm going in.  I'm gonna assess the needs of this particular client.  I'm gonna come back to the office and instead of giving it to a sales person to close, I'm going to think through, what's the best proposal and package that I can go back to them with.  I understand the system.  Let me do it as opposed to just handing this off to one of my colleagues.  And one of the challenges that came with the pretty rapid rise--it was about seven years from sales trainee to vice president and general manager, one of the challenges was, you're in the trenches with sales people.  And now, you're their boss.  And initially, there was thought of, well, we know why he got the job because, you know, he's black and so that's why he got it.  I felt that and felt that I had to really show that that was not why I got the job, that it was actually performance.  And in doing so, I knew that I had to bring them along because, as a manager, you're nothing without the entire team.
Story_ID: 120746
Speaker 1: So, all right, so your sales technique--now, you're getting out--now, what are you telling the potential advertisers when you actually get to them?  You said you were packaging, you were doing individualized packages for them.
Speaker 2: Correct, and it all starts with understanding that particular client's business.  So the first meeting was always about what's important to you?  What's your target demographic?  What kind of money do you spend now?  What's your media mix now?  And it required some trust for somebody to get into that kind of information.  And I was able to sort of penetrate that with the potential outcome of having some kind of a way, a package that's gonna help your business.  That was always the bottom line.  And, again, had the success of being able to move up through the ranks, and to keep the team in place that I was gonna need going forward.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask the question they probably asked in the station.  Where did you learn that or how did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I think--
Speaker 1: --what started you to do that?
Speaker 2: I think, again, some of it was the system.  Some of it is just understanding that if I'm going to get a client to buy spots on my station, it's not because I'm selling them at a cheaper rate or any of that kind of thing.  They have to believe that what I'm proposing is gonna help their business.  It's gonna help ring the cash register or get traffic or whatever the things are.  And that was always my focus.  What is the client's need?  It's not magic.  It's not rocket science.  It's just logic, business logic, connecting need with something that we can deliver that need on.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  That's almost like the first principle of community organizing.  You know, you find the self interest of the person--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to get them to buy into, you know, and then what their issues are.  And then you help them resolve--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --you know, so.  It's--
Story_ID: 120747
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  And I think a lot of people could move up as I did, but I was fortunate and very blessed to have two things happen at the same time with those moves.  Number one is that there was a position open, and Number two, I happened to be qualified for it when it was open.  A lot of people in our business would move from one station and go to another for the promotion.  I was very fortunate that all of these happened at the same place.  And one of the things that, you had mentioned the question of mentor. This is one where it came in very critically. There's a gentleman named Ernie Fears, who was at that time, one of the other very few African American general managers, radio general managers in the country.  And we were both working for ABC, and he called me up, and he said, "Marcellus, I've been following your career.  I'm gonna be in Detroit [Michigan].  Would you have lunch with me?"  And I said, "Well, sure.  Absolutely."  And I said that for a couple of reasons.  One is, I really had no aspirations early on to be a general manager, primarily because I couldn't see myself in that corner office.  I didn't know anyone who looked like me who was in that office.  So it was this very distant thing that really wasn't a focus.  I was just, again, focusing on doing the best that I could in the job that I have.  I sit down at lunch with Ernie Fears, and he explains to me what he does as a general manager.  He said, it's not rocket science.  It's understanding clients.  It's understanding and managing people.  It's making sure that people are rewarded.  It's treating people with respect.  It's basic skills like that, and if you do that, you'll be successful.  And it was at that lunch that I said to myself and actually to Ernie, "I can do that.  I can see how I can do that."
Speaker 2: Now, where was Mr. Fears a general manager?
Speaker 1: Washington, D.C., and I was in Detroit [Michigan] in sales.  And this was, this meeting probably was local, I was a local sales manager.  And it was a pretty remarkable--and he said to me further, he said, "I know you can do it, and if I can be of any help, I wanna be there for you."  So we would talk from time to time, and, you know, he would give me some advice.  We'd see each other at meetings and that kind of thing.  And he is, I give him large credit for my success.
Speaker 2: And you met him at the--where did you meet him?
Speaker 1: I met him at the sta--well, he came to Detroit.  I had seen him at meetings because we were working for the same company.  But we actually had--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: An ABC affiliate.
Speaker 1: ABC, yes, the ABC radio station.  He was running a radio station here in Washington, D.C.  I was sales manager in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he became a very good friend and mentor, and, as I said, a lot of responsibility for my success.
Story_ID: 120748
Speaker 1: Okay, so in--by 1982, and I don't wanna go too fast, but by 1982, you're promoted to general sales manager at W--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --at WRIF.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you tell us about that?  Is there a story connected with that?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I mean, again, as I'm moving up, I'm now needing further to help, to, you know, for the help of people who also pitch the jobs.  And that's kind of a delicate thing.  You know, when one of your colleagues pitches it, and they don't get it, and you do, you've gotta be able to manage that and make sure that they feel still wanted, still respected because if they don't, they can either be a drag on the team or they'll go someplace else.  And I was fortunate, again, and able, to be able to keep key players in place.  And that all worked out well because in the role of sales manager, it's very clear.  It's all about results.  You can have twenty-eight different stories, but if the main story is that I didn't make my budgets, you're not going anywhere, especially if you happen to be a person of color.  And one of the other things going back to my parents, they used to tell us often--it's something that I think a lot of folks here, to be successful, you have to be as good if not better than your counterparts.  And you really need to be better than.  And so that requires extra work.  That requires understanding more and working harder and that's what fueled that.
Speaker 1: How many other African Americans were at WRIF [Radio] at that time in 1982?
Speaker 2: And that's when I'm sales manager?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: There probably were five, and that was five out of about forty, a staff of about forty.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So we're still very much so the minority?
Speaker 2: Yes, oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: And were these--what was the highest ranking African American besides you?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was it.  I was the highest ranking.  Is that what you're asking?
Speaker 1: Well, who besides you was, I mean who was next, I guess, in terms of African Americans?
Speaker 2: Oh, next?  Another sales person, a kind of a senior-level sales person, actually, one who I brought in from Chicago [Illinois].  But that would be, that would have been the next person below me, yes.
Speaker 1: And still operating a Rock format--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: --at WRIF?
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Well, was it difficult for you to sell ads to people who wanted to advertise on a Rock station?
Speaker 2: Actually, no.  I mean it, it was (laughter)--because, again, it wasn't my personal choice of music.  But when I'm talking to a client, it's all about how can I get my audience who you want to come into your store and to frequent your business.  So that was the perspective from which I took.  And we happened to have information and research that showed this Rock and Roll audience had a high disposal income.  They were well educated, you know, all those things played into what the needs of the client were.  And so that's how we got past that.  But I was versant in, you know, who the artists are and the song and all of that.  It was a very highly-rated radio station, very successful in terms of ratings, high visibility.  We did a lot of high-profile things, and all those things together made it work.
Story_ID: 120749
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, by 1982, you're promoted again, this time to vice president and general manager.  Now, this is a big, really a big jump.  And this puts you amongst an elite group of African Americans in the radio business.
Speaker 2: Very elite group.  In fact, the joke that we had, both here and then when I was, made television, was we could all get together and have a meeting, all of the African American general managers, and we could do that in a phone booth because there literally were not very many of us.  You could count on two hands, African American general managers in radio and, or, and certainly television at that time.  But we're on the radio part at this moment.
Speaker 1: Okay, so still, so what was--how did your duties change as vice president?
Speaker 2: Well, now, you have the entire operation to oversee.  You've got sales, of course.  You've got programming.  You've got research.  Everything is now a part of your purview and managing people is the most important piece of the success equation and giving them the resources and direction are parts of it as well.  Defining the goal, here are the parameters.  Now, let's go get it.  So the responsibilities changed and became broader.
Story_ID: 120750
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you ever have to fire anybody?
Speaker 2: Oh, of course, of course.
Speaker 1: And how did you approach that?
Speaker 2: Well, that's always the most difficult part of a job in my view, but it's made a little bit easier if you've approached that individual and said, your performance is deficient.  Let's work and see if we can turn this around, and you define it, you know, a plan.  We're gonna check in on these things and let's see how it goes.  And if it doesn't, then we're gonna have to part company.  So that's how that's done.  But the most difficult firing, in my view, is when it's not performance related, when it's restructuring or smart sizing.  And you're talking to a person who has twenty years with the company, and you say to them, "It has nothing to do with your work performance.  We've got technology now that's going to replace the need for this function.  And we're gonna do the best we can with a package, but unfortunately, we're gonna have to part company."  At that moment, you know you're affecting somebody's life who has done nothing wrong.  They performed well.  It's just that their skill set is now outdated, and it's the most difficult part of managing, in my view, when you have that type of termination, not performance related, but just restructuring or technology related.  It's tough.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but for the most part, you use a positive approach, encouraging people--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and rewarding them for good work.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 120751
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty-four [1984], how had the business changed, I guess, from the time that you entered it?
Speaker 2: Oh, competition is fierce.  Everybody's getting better.  There's consolidation that's happening, so small companies are becoming bigger to get scale and the leverage that comes with that, fighting for view--at this point, listeners, fighting for listeners becomes even more critical.  Everybody is up in the game.  The pressure is on.  You still have to deliver your numbers.  All of those things are there.
Story_ID: 120752
Speaker 1: This is like sort of the golden age in Detroit [Michigan], I guess, during this period of time.  There's like--it's not, it wasn't undergoing the decline that it is today.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Coleman Young was the mayor.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I think Detroit was in some trouble, but it was not like it is today.
Speaker 2: Oh, nothing close to like it is now.  I mean today, it's just a whole different set of circumstances and difficult, very, very difficult place to be.
Speaker 1: Yeah, downtown was thriving (unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: [Detroit] Tigers won the World Series.
Speaker 2: Yes, in fact, I, I was looking (laughter) the other day.  I've got a signed Kurt Gibson poster of when he knocked the homerun that was a game winner.  But, yeah, it was a whole different time and space in Detroit at that point, no question about it.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I think you even had Bad Boys Basketball [Detroit Pistons, 1979-1994] going on.
Speaker 2: Yes, we had, it was, yeah.  A lot of positive things happening at that point.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, and there hadn't been the major closures of the plants--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --at that point.  So that was maybe the last gasp of the great Detroit.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Story_ID: 120753
Speaker 1: So were you part of the culture of Detroit [Michigan], pretty much?  Did you see yourself--
Speaker 2: Well, we had ingrained ourselves--one of the things that I have always felt is that as a station operator, you have to be a part of the community.  You can't just play music or in the case of television, you can't just show entertainment.  You have to be a part of the fabric of the community.  And that strategy and that approach really helped with my next step which was looking to acquire WRIF as a part owner.  This is the point in time when the FCC rules, Federal Communications [Commission] rules, allow one owner to own only one AM, one FM and one television station in a market.  And this was also the time that Cap Cities and ABC decided to merge, meaning that with the rules in place, something had to be sold when you looked at what ABC owned and what Cap Cities owned in the Detroit market.  And I remember going into my office and leaning back, putting my feet on the desk and saying, okay, our station had been identified as one that was going to be sold.  WRIF was gonna be sold, and I said, I have two options at this point.  Option 1, wait and see who buys the station, hope they like me and if so, I still have a job.  Option 2, I had about seven years in Detroit at that point, had made some very good banker friends, some business contacts, some folks at city hall and others.  And I said, Option 2 is, I bet I could put a group of investors together and we could buy the station.  It took me about four and a half seconds to realize I only had one good option, and that was the latter.  And we were successful in putting a group of investors together under the banner Silver Star Communications and buying WRIF Radio from ABC Cap Cities.  And this felt to me like a grand slam homerun, touchdown, whatever you--you know, touchdown in overtime, whatever you wanna call it because here was the station that I had come into as a sales trainee, worked hard and with the support of the team, gotten to this point.  And now, we, along with some investors, own the station.  And it was a very, very good day, a very good feeling that this is, this is the beginning of something big.  And almost immediately the questions came because our investor group was largely minority.  The questions were, will they keep the Rock and Roll format or will they go R&B?  Will they go Jazz?  Will do--how are the--and I remember saying to the reporters who were covering the beat at that time, look, it's a successful station.  It's been successful for a number of years.  It's difficult to change formats.  Why would we do that?  We're not looking to do that.  Well, I know, but, you know, you've got dah, dah, dah.  No, we're not looking to do that.  And it wasn't until I made the program director who is, of course, the person responsible for the format and the music selection, I gave the program director stock in our company that those conversations went away because clearly, he's a Rock and Roll program director, and if you're putting--giving him stock and the ability to earn stock, you're not looking to change format.  That was what we did.  And it was a great move, and successful.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the station stayed as it was, but you, as a part of--now, you were the chief operating officer--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --of Silver Star.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And that makes you a part owner.  You're--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Part owner, yeah.
Speaker 1: --part owner too.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So, this is--
Speaker 2: This is pretty good, yeah.  I'm feeling very good, and again in--
Speaker 1: And you're only thirty-five?
Speaker 2: Correct, I think that was about right.  And in terms of, you know, we talk about how few people are general managers of properties, there are even fewer who own equity in the properties.  So very elite group.  Things are going well.  This is good, this is good.
Story_ID: 120754
Speaker 1: Okay, okay. So now, well, so you stayed--so this is in '86 [1986], this happens, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But by 1987, you leave.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what happens in this year?
Speaker 2: So a couple of things happened.  One is, I learned some things about my partners that I didn't know going in.  And one of the first things about business that you learn, you know, this is--hindsight is twenty-twenty, is make sure that your partners are on the same page as you are, that you're on the same page as them, however that works.  I also learned the importance of fifty-one percent in business equations.  So I'll just say there were some challenges there in that space, and simultaneously, I get a call from the head of television for Group W Television, which was the forerunner, or it was actually morphed into CBS.  But it was Group W Television at that point.  And the head of the television group said to me, "We've been watching your career, you're doing a great job.  Have you ever considered television?"  And I said, "Is that the one that has the picture on it?"  And he laughed, and long story short, they were looking for a station manager, the number two job, at one of their five--one of their five stations, television stations.  And they were really focused on three markets, San Francisco [California], Boston [Massachusetts] and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  Those were their bigger markets.  And, again, fast forwarding through the process, I decided that Philadelphia was a great city.  The general manager to whom I would be reporting was a terrific guy.  We had good chemistry and their promise to me was if you do well--again, it's all about results, if you do well, we would look to make you a general manager at one of our properties, somewhere around two to three years from now because you've run business.  You understand media, you've run successfully the radio station.  That would be what we would see.  I said, great.  Went into Philadelphia as the station manager, the number two guy, and Jim Thompson, who was the general manager really did allow me to grow during that period of time.  And then he also went to the Harvard [University] Advanced Business--I think they call it Advanced Business School.  It was a six-month program where the executives from various companies, leave their companies, go to Harvard and get this additional training and then they come back.  During that six months, I was acting general manager of the fourth largest market CBS--or at that time it was an NBC station, in Philadelphia.  An amazing experience, an amazing opportunity to really run the ship, understand and deal with the challenges that are attendant to that kind of an operation, but a very successful stint as acting general manager.  Jim Thompson comes back.  And they make some moves and I'm promoted to general manager at our sister station in Baltimore [Maryland], a dominant station.  They were doing a lot of things right.  It was perfect because I now have a sense of television.  I've been running it successfully in Philadelphia.  Now, I have the top job and a successful, already successful station.
Story_ID: 120755
Speaker 1: Now, was Group W [Television]--I know at one time they produced 'The Mike Douglas Show,' or syndicated that nationally.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Group W had several pieces to it.  There was the owned--there were television stations that made up Group W.  There were radio stations that made up Group W, and they're also a production arm.  And Mike Douglas was one of the productions, correct.
Speaker 1: Right, I think that was the, I guess that was the most successful one, I'm thinking.
Speaker 2: I believe that's correct.
Speaker 1: I don't know how long Mike Douglas [The Mike Douglas Show] lasted.  It seems like he disappeared in the early '80s [1980s] or--
Speaker 2: He left, yeah, he lasted a while, and then, you know, all shows run their course and--
Speaker 1: Was he there when you started?
Speaker 2: He was not there.  He was not there.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I guess he'd run his course by then?
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120756
Speaker 1: Baltimore [Maryland], though, is, you know, so this is the second largest market for Group W, or their second largest station?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So the largest--they had five stations.  The larger markets were San Francisco [California], Boston [Massachusetts], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  The other two markets were Baltimore [Maryland] and Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And the reason I feel it was perfect, having been acting general manager in Philadelphia, I understood the system and all that.  I could have, I think, gone to one of their bigger stations, but the system that they had in place was work at a smaller market and then we'll push you back out as a GM [general manager] at one of the bigger ones.  And I'd become a little more patient than my days in the WRIF sales area.  And as I said, successful station, great market and opportunity that I could show what I could do.
Story_ID: 120757
Speaker 1: Now, was there any difference at all in being a general manager of a television station rather than a radio station?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Prob--there're more similarities than there are differences.  The primary difference is in radio, you're basically dealing with sound, right?  It's all sound.  In television, you've got sound and images.  And news gathering on the radio side, especially at a rock station, was kind of like news wasn't that important.  Whereas, at the television station, it is the image, it is your existence.  So the difference was news and the technology that supported the news versus the radio property.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's what I had a chance to focus on as station manager in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], those differences.
Story_ID: 120758
Speaker 1: Now, as, well, when you come into the television business, cable television has made itself, you know, more than evident by now.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I think it enters in most TV--it starts coming into TV probably in the late '70s [1970s], and then, you know, by the mid-80's [1980s], it's pretty, you know--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --pretty well established in most places, except Chicago [Illinois] (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right (laughter)
Speaker 1: They--it took a million years to get it, but in most places, it was pretty much established.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So what was the relationship to cable television in 1987?
Speaker 2: Well, in those days, it was mutually beneficial because as a station operator, I wanted to make sure that my station was being seen in as wide of a coverage area as possible and as clear as possible.  And cable at that point provided that opportunity.  From their side, from the cable side, they needed the local stations on their lineup because most people wanna know the local news.  They need to know if there's an emergency or weather, all those types of things.  And that's the localism that stations provide.  So mutually beneficial relationship, all good in those years.
Speaker 1: Okay, and people like that local connection--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --even though they're watching a network, the affiliation--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: --makes a difference.
Speaker 2: --that is correct.  That is correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120759
Speaker 1: And so what was the business relationship between cable and--'cause this is gonna play out later on as we discuss this, between the local affiliates--so you were an NBC affiliate in Baltimore [Maryland] at that time?
Speaker 2: In Baltimore, we were ABC.
Speaker 1: You were ABC, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, and so the relationship was one of collaboration.  We were the number one news station in Baltimore, and so over the air and through the cable system, people were seeing that.  And so we were saying, what if we also in your cable news--they had a local cable news, what if we provided inserts where our local talent would do inserts into your cable product through the days.  And all of those things were being worked out, those collaborations were all great because, again, benefit on both sides of the, both sides of the ledger on that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, most of the fears had been worked out, that the broadcast industry had about cable, I guess--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --by this time, by '87 [1987].
Speaker 2: Exactly, and it was, again, it was distribution.  It was distribution that benefited viewers.  There were a lot of folks during that time who thought that why would a consumer pay for something that they already get free?  And that was sort of the prevailing wisdom that they--most people wouldn't.  Well, we know the answer to that question over time.  They do pay.  They do--they have and they do pay.  And it's now sort of taking another cycle back because a lot of people are now cord cutting or as the other saying goes, (unclear).  These are kids who go to college, and you ask them, do you have a TV?  No.  Do you watch local news?  If there's a big news event, yes.  But I get my news on Facebook, and I get, I have other sources that I get, you know, websites from television stations and others that are there.  So certainly a change in terms of where things are today versus back in those years.
Story_ID: 120453
Speaker 1: Okay, Baltimore [Maryland], WJZ-TV, ABC affiliate.  So they included, they broadcast the Orioles [Baltimore Orioles] games too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, they had, they had the really strong local tie.  You know, again, stations can differentiate themselves a number of different ways.  But the best way is to show that you are local, you're part of the fabric, and you do what it takes to maintain that.  And actually, the Orioles had gone away from WJZ--I'm trying to remember the years for this, but through relationship building and others, I was able to bring the Orioles baseball back to WJZ and reestablish that franchise as a part of what made WJZ different and unique in that particular market.
Story_ID: 120454
Speaker 1: Okay, now, one of the things that I read that you will be remembered for is the Sky High Chopper Thirteen, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.  Baltimore [Maryland], Baltimore was market, I think it was market twenty-four, size twenty-four when I was there.  And a major market or a middle-sized market, but the dollars in the market did not necessarily support a chopper 'cause choppers are very expensive.  And we were the number one news station, and we had learned--because they were promoting it on air, one of our competitors was going to introduce a news chopper.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a helicopter, for those who don't understand the--
Speaker 2: Yes, it's a helicopter that enables you to cover news in a different way.  You can get to situations more quickly.  You're up in the air.  It's a lot of--it's a competitive advantage if you have it and your competitor does not.  So, they're on the air saying, one of our competitors, we're gonna have a helicopter to help our news coverage.  And I remember calling corporate and saying, I don't know yet how we're gonna do this, but I cannot sit idly by and allow a competitor to chip into our strength and our dominance in news.  And I remember the phone on the other end, it's kind of like, "Hello, did you--anybody, (laughter) anybody there", 'cause it wasn't a budgeted item.  And the message that I got was, figure out how you might do it, and then come back to us.  We're open, but figure--you have to figure it out.  So we got together as a team and not only figured out how to do it, but also how to build a news chopper because you don't just go to the store and buy a news chopper.  They have to be assembled.  It takes time.  We also figured how to do that in a very stealth manner because we didn't want our competitor to know that we were really looking to preempt their helicopter.  So established some very good contacts and relationships in what I called, Helicopter Village.  These are people who put these choppers together and said to them, "Number one, the competition is promoting that they're gonna be on by "x" date.  Number one, we have to be on before that, okay.  That's number one.  Number two is, we can't let them know that we're looking to do that because they have the resources that they can pick up the pace and do whatever.  So we were able to track the development of their helicopter, knew exactly where it was in the building process.  They were actually gonna have to fly it across country because they were having it assembled somewhere in the West.  And we were able to put it together, and we had another meeting when we got it all lined up and said, "Okay, here's what we know.  The competition's helicopter is almost finished.  It's gonna take them a day and a half or two days to get across country.  Ours is ready now.  We can promote a little bit, tease a little bit, let people know it's coming or we can just go on the air with it.  We had a dominant morning news show at that point, and we said, we're just gonna introduce it tomorrow, it's one of those kind of things.
Speaker 1: On the air?
Speaker 2: On the air--
Speaker 1: Live.
Speaker 2: --live.  Here we go.  Let's, let's roll.
Story_ID: 120455
Speaker 1: And so we did, and it was an amazing morale boost for the team as you might imagine.  It was a shot to the gut of our competition who had to figure out--they knew they couldn't get their own across country yet.  So in order to--and this speaks to the competitiveness of it.  So we launched in the morning.  To their credit, by afternoon, they had what we now call "shaky cam".  They got, they rented a helicopter that got up in the air, and they put a camera on the shoulder so they could say they had aerial shots.  But the marketplace knew, advertisers knew and most importantly, my station team knew, we kicked butt on that.  We were smart in the way we did it.  We got it done and it was a, just a blast doing it.  And that helicopter still flies today, been renovated and obviously, replaced pieces of it and all that.  And that's one of the stories that speaks to teamwork, competitiveness and just never say never.  Let's find a way to make it happen.
Speaker 2: Yeah, helicopters are such a feature of local news nowadays that, I mean, how much did it cost then to put a helicopter in the air (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I'd have to go back and look at that.  But it was, in addition to the cost, we leased it.  Our arrangement was a leased arrangement.  And in addition to the lease, you have to pay for flying time and gas, and I mean there's a lot of stuff that goes with it.  But it's not an inexpensive, it's not an inexpensive operation.  I'd wanna confirm a number before I just threw one out, but it was, for a market the size of Baltimore [Maryland], it was a big commitment.
Speaker 2: So you basically leased this, but you had to outfit it with logos and symbolism and that sort of, you know, that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Correct, and special cameras and all kinds of things that we outfitted it with.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we also had to have a good pilot.  So we found a, he was a retired police pilot who knew the area.  He was, you know, it was just pretty amazing that we got him lined up.  And then we also needed heliports around the city to be able to land.  If there's a news story happening here, we don't have land the helicopter way on the other side of the country--or on the side of the county and then drive in.  So I made some calls to a lot of my CEO friends.  Can we land on top of your building?  This is what we're doing.  Yes, of course, yes, of course.  So, we all set it up.  It all worked very well.
Speaker 2: Okay, a helicopter is something you really have to plan for because you can't just sit it down in the middle or some place.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: You've gotta really--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You've gotta have--
Speaker 2: --you got wires and street, in an urban area.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And some of the buildings in Baltimore did have heliports on top.  And that was the permission that we got from, again, various CEOs and companies that were more than willing to help because we were, we were on a mission.  And we were all, you know--
Story_ID: 120456
Speaker 1: Now I've got a note here that people on the staff at WJZ saw you as accessible, someone they can go see, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And this was not true before. That the average person at the station if they had a gripe or they wanted to share something, they would just go see you.
Speaker 2: Right, and I believe in management by walking around.  You know, you can sit in your office and hope people come with issues, but--or you can go out and just sit down and say, "So what's going on today?  What do I need to know?  What do I need to know?"  And it wasn't a way to go around department heads.  They knew I was doing this.  It was a way to augment the communication.  And it worked very well.  It worked very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it did not facilitate tension between the various department heads of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, because they, you know, there was a trust that if a department head was doing something--which usually was not the case, but if a department head was doing something that they shouldn't do, that I would handle it appropriately, and I wouldn't throw anybody under the bus in my way of getting that fixed.  So it was all about how can we make our station stronger, better, and that was the--how I went about it.
Story_ID: 120457
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 1991, you received the Distinguished Black Marylander Award from Townsend State University [Baltimore, Maryland] and the Humanities Award from the Juvenile Diabetes Association.  So you're recognized for your work in the community during this period.  Is there a highlight for you of this time in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: There were a few highlights.  I mean we did a lot of good things.  I'd say one of the highlights was a school, Northern High School was the name of the school.  This was, how would I say it?  Sort of a typical, inner-city school, stretched resources. It would be considered a troubled high school.  And I remember the principal there who happened to be an African American woman, made national news when she suspended, I believe it was 1,600 students on one day.  And what precipitated that was on this particular day, and it was summertime, so it's hot, the report cards that were supposed to be ready in the morning for the students to take home were not ready.  And so now it's 2:00 o'clock in the afternoon.  School is supposed to get over at about 2:30, and she goes on the P.A. system and says, "Students, I'd like you to go back to your homerooms to pick up your report cards before you go home today."  Not an unusual request by any stretch, but it's hot.  Air conditioning's not working.  This is a troubled school.  That was the reputation.  And so the kids basically started saying, no.  This should have been done this morning.  We're out of here.  And physically began walking to the exits.  The principal at that moment didn't have time to do a conference and what are we gonna do?  She made the statement, "If you walk through those doors, you're gonna be suspended.  You need to go back to your homeroom to get your report cards."  Sixteen hundred students later, CNN, NBC, all the networks are covering this story in Detroit--I'm sorry, in Baltimore [Maryland] about this principal who made the decision to suspend this many students.  I was struck the next day by the radio talk shows [clearing throat]--excuse me, and the coverage.  It was all about should she or should she not have suspended the students?  There was no conversation about what can we do to help.  What are the--this is a school that is kind of like many others.  It's, what can we--what might we do as a community to help?  And it was at that point that I first called in my department heads, and I said, "I know this school.  It's not that far from our station.  What do you think about us trying to get involved in making this a better school?"  Without question, they said we should do what we can do to help.  My next phone call is to the state superintendent of schools, who I had a good relationship with.  And I said, here's what I'm thinking.  I'm thinking of us adopting the school, partnering with Morgan State University [Baltimore, Maryland] who brings the academic piece.  And we're gonna put a plan together to help improve this school.  The super--state superintendent said, "I can't believe that you're calling.  This is amazing.  I didn't know what I was gonna do.  Thank you.  Keep me posted and let me know how I can help."  The next call is to the president of Morgan State University who said, yes.  And we adopted the school, and just skipping very quickly to the results because that's what we all are very proud of, we did some things that encouraged parent participation.  We did some things that encouraged teacher incentives.  And we did some things that had the students feel better about themselves.
Story_ID: 120458
Speaker 1: And without going into all the details, I will say to you that in the first category, parent--parental involvement was obviously a to--is the key to any successful school.  So we were able to get Charles Dutton, the actor, Roc, who's a Baltimorean, plus Dr. Ben Carson [HM Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], world known surgeon from Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland], to an assembly that, where as an incentive, we had gas cards and grocery cards, things that people want.  But we packed the auditorium with parents to hear why they need to get more involved.  And one of the highlights of that evening was a former Northern High School student who had dropped out.  She had hit rock bottom, drugs, everything else, and now has turned her life around.  And when she told her story, we were able to say to the parents, if you don't get involved, this could be your child.  And she actually reinforced that.  So there's some things in the parent-parental.  For the teachers, this is where we had the most fun, picking up the phone, calling some of my business friends, Peter Angelos, the owner of the [Baltimore] Orioles, "Peter, you have a number of games that don't sell out.  Give me some tickets so that we can provide some incentives for teachers to help get the grades better and so forth."  We called theaters in town, got tickets to plays that were not sold out, Ford dealer, one of our good clients.  We said, can you give us a weekend package for a Mustang convertible for a four-day weekend that we can put in this package?  Hotels, all that.  We put a package of incentives for teachers together.  We couldn't get into the money, of course, but these teachers became energized, and, yes, we wanna do some things that help the overall student population here in the school.  And then for the students, there was this new--at that time, new, in a lot of the convenience [clearing throat]--excuse me, in convenience stores, a monitor--video monitors that were up above the checkout counters.  And we would, we asked if they would run the pictures of students who had done well in school.  Here are the honor roll students, here are the kids who've done great.  And that became a source of pride and, in what they were doing.  So that kind of thing was among the good things that we did.  And we looked at, we looked back at the end of a period of time, and attendance had improved.  Scores had improved, and the teachers were now motivated.  It was not the same school that it was prior to that, and, again, our station played a key role in that, making that happen.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're going beyond the role or do you think it's--this is what other entrepreneurs should do in the community, you know, go beyond what they normally would do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, we had, certainly had some debates, primarily from outside.  I was asked to be on several panels outside, journalism panels.  And they were like, did you--do you think you crossed the line because your station now became a part of the story?  And we talked about that.  And I said, you know what?  We can debate the, you know, the merits of that or not, but what we feel is that we were trying to do what's right in the community.  And judge us based on our involvement.  We didn't sacrifice our journalistic standards on this.  We made sure that that was in place, but we also wanted to help and did help the community.  So, that's how that played itself out.
Story_ID: 120459
Speaker 1: While you were there, the affiliation of the station changed from ABC to CBS.  Was that a trying time?
Speaker 2: Extremely (laughter).  I mean imagine being an ABC affiliate for something like forty years, and then you get a call from the affiliate relations persons saying to you--and I remember this Friday night like it was yesterday, Marcellus, we have a great relationship.  We've had a great relationship.  There is a set of circumstances that are now in play that are gonna cause you to lose your ABC affiliation.  Has nothing to do with how you're running the station or any of that, but another group has lined up and wants ABC, and WJZ is gonna be one of the casualties of that.  And my initial reaction was--the guy's name was George.  George, it's Friday, don't, don't play with me now, you know.  It's been a long week.  I've known you for a long time, but don't play with me now.  And he said, I wish I could tell you that I was playing.  This is bigger than me.  It's a deal that was done that's going to impact you.  And this is gonna be effective--I can't remember, you know, the next--you got a few months to figure out what you're do, but it's coming.
Speaker 1: Now, is this time that--there was a time, I think in the '80s [1980s] when or was it '90s [1990s] where--well, there was a time when CBS, which had been number one in the '60s [1960s] with Down and some of the (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Right, we were ABC at that time.  And it was the network to be with at that, at the moment.  And it, you know, network ratings are cyclical, as you know.  But we were at the ABC affiliate--we were the ABC affiliate at that time which was great.  And CBS was at the bottom of the barrel, okay.  So, we--I remember hanging up the phone, calling my boss in New York saying, I'm not sure (laughter), let me think about what our plans might be, but I want you to be aware of this call that I just got.  And we were able to look at the strength of our local station and the other networks that would be possibilities and we all lined behind CBS, which is where our, many of our other stations, our own stations were.  So, that's how that played itself out.
Story_ID: 120460
Speaker 1: I think, wasn't it FOX, FOX became a player in the '80s [1980s]?  Was it '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: It was in the '80s [1980s].  They became a player on a couple of different fronts.  When they got into the NFL, that was probably the biggest play they made, as I recall it.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and was that the--CBS lost its NFL--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is correct, that is correct.
Speaker 1: --programming.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But this is, that felt (word?) like a big fall.
Speaker 2: That was big, that was huge, a huge game changer.  And, you know, NFL was big then.  It wasn't as big as it is now.  But it was big, and it was a great loss for CBS at that point.
Speaker 1: 'Cause CBS built the NFL relationship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, it was a great, yeah, a longstanding relationship, and FOX came in and put more money on the table and whatever else they provided and that's the nature of competition.
Story_ID: 120461
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you had them at their, kind of at their nadir and so how did that--were you able to still maintain your ratings?
Speaker 2: Yeah, actually a couple of things happened.  One is when that occurred where we lost our ABC affiliation, it turns out that there were gonna be other affiliation changes at the same time.  In fact, we were going to be the very first market where all three major affiliates were gonna change.  ABC, CBS and NBC were all going to change.  And I remember calling my colleagues, my competitor colleagues (clearing throat) and saying, you know, we probably are all thinking of this in the same way, and that is, I'm gonna spend x number of millions of dollars to let the viewers of Baltimore [Maryland] know that my network programming is gonna change, but my local news is gonna stay the same.  And you're gonna say the same basic thing, and you're gonna say the same basic thing.  So I said, may I propose a suggestion here?  Rather than us each spending--I think we were projecting $2 million each that we were gonna spend on the transition--rather than us spending $6 million in ads and promotion that basically cancels each other out and creates a lot of noise, and very importantly, no true viewer benefit from all this switching around, what if we collectively decided to donate some money to a charity or donate some money to the public schools or do something that shows that our industry knows we're going to be putting them at some inconvenience.  This is not--however, you wanna spin it, it's not a positive, what's going to happen.  And I knew that it would take all three of us to agree on something like that.  One of my colleagues, or my counterparts said, sounds interesting.  Let's keeping talking.  The other one said, Nah, I don't see it.  I can't, you know, you're a competitor.  I'm a competitor.  No.  And so, it ended up, we each did our thing.  We each spent the money.  It was crazy noise in the market.  And through it all, we did maintain our local dominance, even with the affiliation change.  But it was so complicated because you have, in programming, you have network programming, you have syndicated programming and trying to tell an audience what's the difference between a syndicated show and a network show, forget about it.  And then you have the local news.  So we focused on simple messaging about local news and were able to--thanks to our history in the market, our strong talent in news product, maintain that dominance.
Story_ID: 120462
Speaker 1: So, you were at--you were in Baltimore [Maryland] through, what do we have here?  1999?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Until 1999?
Speaker 2: About nine years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, some of the--I have a note in here about some of the, some of your colleagues at WJZ, Al Sanders--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Jerry Turner.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Vic Carter (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Vic Carter, yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is it anyone else, I mean just tell us something about your colleagues there and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  Well, you can't consider the history of WJZ without mentioning names like Jerry Turner and Al Sanders.  They were the anchors of that station that really just a juggernaut in terms of the ratings that they delivered on those newscasts.  Unfortunately, Jerry Turner died from cancer, and that happened actually before I got to the station.  And then when I got to the station, Al Sanders, who was also a smoker, also succumbed to cancer.  And I can remember talking to Al.  He used to park--I'm sorry, he used to go out to smoke at the exit where my car was.  And I would go out and I'd say, Al, it's your voice.  You know, we had a great relationship.  I said, you know, it's not good, it's cancer--you know, it's not good.  And this was before he was diagnosed.  And he said, I know, I know.  You know, I'm, I just need a little cigarette here and there, and I'll be okay.  But I really appreciate your worrying about me.  He was diagnosed with cancer, I think it was esophageal cancer and went very quickly from that diagnosis to death.  And to this day, beloved, remembered.  There's a plaque in the newsroom that's dedicated, dedicating it to him and his work, great guys, both lost to cancer.  We brought in Vic Carter who was in Atlanta [Georgia], paired him with Denise Saunders.  Again, terrific, terrific talent.  And they've done extremely, extremely well.  It's a lot more competitive today, but they've done well in terms of managing and maintaining that strong news presence.
Story_ID: 120463
Speaker 1: Okay, now, just a word about ratings.  I was given special, a special request to ask you about ratings.  How shows were rated then as opposed to now.  I think you had A. C. Nielsen's for television and Arbitron for radio.
Speaker 2: Correct.  Nielsen is still the primary source for ratings, for measuring ratings, two distinct different types of measurement.  There's the diary method where a viewer is asked to write down for a week's period of time, what you watch, when you watch.  And you only have to think about that for a minute to know that most people probably don't, religiously write down--ah, let's see.  I watched that for ten minutes, I watched that five.  But that's a part of one system.  That's existing in smaller markets.  And then there's the metered system, which is an electronic connection to your set, which is at least on some levels better, but when you consider that you might have the television on in the kitchen, but you're in the back bedroom, and it's measuring as though you're in there.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, there are--another thing you're supposed to do is punch when you into--back into the kitchen and again, I think it's safe to assume that the industry would say, there's a long way to go before we get accurate ratings.  And that's something that our industry continues to push for.  It's something that Nielsen knows they have to get better at.  And Nielsen also knows that today with mobile devices, they've gotta find a way to follow the video and measure it wherever they are.  And to their credit, they've moved to that, they're moving toward that.  They still--not quite there yet, but it's, when you consider that all of the dollars that are placed from advertising agencies are predicated on these ratings, it's a lot at stake.  And so Nielsen needs to continue to work on it.
Story_ID: 120464
Speaker 1: Now, to what extent, you know, I guess, do the ratings really dominate what you do at a local station on that level?
Speaker 2: We have to have ratings.  I mean they are the currency with which you operate.  And while there are always some clients who would say, just give me a bulk number of spots and run them and, you know, don't charge me a lot, a majority of clients today want to have some metrics of performance.  They don't want to just be spending money and not having eyeballs there, and not targeted eyeballs.  So ratings are an extremely important part of the equation of success for a station, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, I would guess the lowest rated, I guess, broadcast time is probably Sunday morning, isn't it, or something like that?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on the station.  But, you know, there are some overnight hours that are, you know, low rated.  Sunday mornings, Sunday morning, those political talk shows typically do very well.  But it just depends on the content that you've got on that's gonna drive those ratings.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do black people play a significant role with Nielsen, in terms of--I mean do they really, you know, survey the black community in terms of what we watch?
Speaker 2: Well, the jury is out on that question.  I would say that African Americans disproportionately watch television, but they are underrepresented in the Nielsen sample.  There are fewer of them represented in the Nielsen sample.  In fact, I can go to a, you know, cocktail reception or a party tomorrow that might be mostly African Americans and none of them--they'll always say to me 'cause they know the business that I'm in, "You know, I don't--not only have they never called me, I don't know anybody that they've ever called."  And we relay that back to the (laughter) Nielsen folks, of course.  So that's an area that clearly needs to be addressed.  And some of it is, you know, as a people, sometimes, we don't want that device in our house.  So some of it may be, it's just more difficult to recruit black households to be a part of the survey sample.  But my answer to that is, well, you just have to ask more people.  You have to represent the actual viewing population with your sample.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's imperfect, but that's what you have to really pay attention to as general manager,--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --is the ratings?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, because, you know, again without it you're going to be swimming upstream when it comes to setting your rates and getting dollars in to support all the other things that you need to do at the station.
Story_ID: 120465
Speaker 1: Okay, and in terms of radio, radio has really changed in terms of the local programming is almost nonexistent now in the black, urban market.
Speaker 2: Well, some, yeah.  I mean it varies again by market.  I think the more successful stations might have a syndicated talent, like a Tom Joyner or a Russ Parr, but inserted in there, they have local talent, local news.  They have local things that they're doing in the communities to try to offset that.  But that localism play, especially when it comes to weather situations or emergencies, there's nothing that can replace that.  And I think viewers understand that.  Certainly, here in Washington [D.C.], members of [U.S.] Congress understand that that's one of the irreplaceable aspects of local radio and television, to be able to communicate what's happening that might be lifesaving as it relates to their families.
Story_ID: 120466
Speaker 1: Now, in 1999, you moved back to KYW-TV in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what happened?
Speaker 2: That was a promotion.  So I had been running the WJZ--again, market size twenty-four, and done a good job there.  And now, market size four was open, and I was promoted back.  And it was terrific because I was going back to a market that I was familiar with.  Many of the team were still there and that's always, you know, you kind of hit the ground running because you know what's going on already.  But, yeah, it was--now, when I left KYW, it was an NBC affiliate.  And when I come back, it's now a CBS affiliate because that was a part of that change that happened, but all good.  We had Leslie Moonves had come on as the president and CEO.  And he was extremely passionate about making sure that CBS recaptured its number one glory spot.  And that certainly is the case today.
Story_ID: 120467
Speaker 1: So, now, all along till this point, what was your, I guess, interaction with the National Association of Broadcasters [NAB].  Were you a member as a television executive--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct, we--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --all through the years?
Speaker 2: Correct.  We were stations, our stations were in membership.  I knew what they did.  It was, you know, the advocacy arm of the industry.  But our focus as general managers was on our local businesses.  And corporate worked more with the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] on the issues that impact the business.  We were asked to make sure that we kept our members of congress up to date on our issues.  So we'd bring 'em into the station or we'd go and visit them and make sure we invited them and kept them informed on what we needed them to know about in terms of our issues.  But the predominant heavy lifting as it relates to advocacy was coming out of CBS corporate at that time.  And local general managers were focused on, "Be everything you can be in your community and make sure your business is running well, profitable" and all of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in 2002, you're named Executive Vice President of Television for the National Association of Broadcasters which is what you're--you're still in that position--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is correct.
Speaker 1: --today--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as well as President of the National Association of Broadcasters Education--
Speaker 2: Foundation.
Speaker 1: --Foundation.
Speaker 2: That came a little bit later, but, yes.  Those are the two titles that I have today.
Speaker 1: Tell us about this transition?
Speaker 2: It was interesting.  I--two things that I recall.  One is on the very first day that I started to work at the NAB was the day that the sniper story broke here in Washington, D.C.  And as a former news director like--I'm sorry, as a former general manager, the very first thing that I did when I got to my office here was reach for the phone to get my news director on the line because that's what my orientation was.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the John Muhammad, Lee Malvo--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the two black snipers.  They were shooting people around the country--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Shooting people around the city--
Speaker 1: --from Washington State all the way to Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: Correct, and nobody knew.  It was just, it was really, it was really difficult times because, you know, people were afraid to go gas up the car.  Then somebody got shot at a Home Depot.  It was just random, what was going on.  So, my very first reaction is to pick up the phone and call my news director, even though I'm here at the NAB (laughter).  And I go, wait a minute.  That's right, I'm not here--I'm not there anymore.  I look out, and instead of watching my four monitors that I had in my old office, I've got one.  And I go, oh, that's right.  I'm now here at the NAB.  It's a different role.  Let me watch and see what's going on.  But that was the first reaction.  It was just like a change, pretty dramatic change because it was a huge, huge news day here versus what typically happens at the NAB.  And then shortly after, and, you know, I think it was maybe a couple, three weeks before they caught him, and caught them, it began to kind of settle in that the role here was very quiet.  The offices are quiet whereas in a newsroom and a television, there's a lot of energy and a lot of things going on.  My first reaction was, "Wow, this feels like I've gone to work for a bank or something."  And that wasn't a positive.
Story_ID: 120468
Speaker 1: Tell us, now, applying for this job, were you recruited or did you apply for it?
Speaker 2: I was recruited.  I got a call [clearing throat] excuse me.  I got a call from the headhunter.  And actually, the very first time I got the call, I said to him, "I am flattered, I, you know, I'm honored that you would call.  But I'm really enjoying what I'm doing here in Philadelphia.  We were sending reporters to Afghanistan and a lot of activity going on.  I said, I really am flattered, but I'm fine.  Thank you very, very much.  Thank you, thank you, really appreciate it."  And then another, maybe another four months or so passed and I get a call from the CEO of the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters], Eddie Fritts.  And Eddie says, in essence, "You've done a great job at local stations.  We need someone with operator experience to come to the NAB to help shape policy for the industry."  And I thought, that sounds pretty good.  Let me think about that.  And I did the, you know, the pluses and the minuses and basically came down with, if I come to the NAB and hate it, the board of directors of the NAB are the station owners and operators who I know.  And based on my reputation, if it's bad here, I can get back into the business.  And I felt confident in that.  And I checked in with a couple of my close friends on that side of it, and they said, oh, absolutely.  The, you know, this is a chance for you to see a different lane of the broadcast business, the entire advocacy lane and I knew I had a safety valve if I needed it to get back into the business.
Speaker 1: Did you have any family considerations in terms of moving or anything?
Speaker 2: No, at this point, all of our kids were either in college.  So there was no high school, you know, moving and all that kind of thing.  We'd worked through that in the last move to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but none of those things were in play.  So it was a pretty smooth conversation and move from that standpoint.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, fast forward again, you're thinking this is like a bank.  You're sitting here (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Well, at that point, there were issues--there're always issues that impact the business.  And that's what the NAB is here for, to advocate on behalf of radio and television stations, as well as our networks.  But at that point in time, the issues were not nearly as game changing as they have evolved to be.  And it was kind of like, I wonder if this is gonna be kind of boring.  You know, this is--didn't sound that exciting at the moment.  But very quickly, the issues began to ratchet up, competition, and it became a, you know, we are fighting for our members on a whole lot of fronts.  And the analogy that I used to use is--and I often use is, we're like the hockey goalie and the net.  Our competition is hitting the puck at us.  We're knocking it down, and also, very importantly, we have to go on offense and show innovation and show what we're gonna do with the spectrum and the resources that we have across the country.  But it is a very, very active game today when compared to what it was when I walked in the door ten or eleven years ago.
Story_ID: 120469
Speaker 1: What are the major issues today?
Speaker 2: There're several.  The keys ones on the television side are maintaining the retransmission consent structure, which is a structure that allows television stations and networks to be compensated by cable and pay TV services for carrying the programs that they do.  And that's an extremely important revenue stream when it comes to local stations and networks being able to provide what viewers want.  Cable has two revenue streams already.  They have advertising revenue and they have subscription revenue.  So they're able to in some cases, outbid broadcasters for, let's say the BCS [Bowl Championship Series] Championship Bowl or some sports programming.  So to be able to provide that, those types of high-profile programs, we have to protect that retransmission consent structure.
Speaker 1: The retransmission consent structure would make it harder for cable operators to take that kind of programming away from--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, no, they have to--the way that it works is, at these negotiations, both parties, cable and broadcast, come to the table with something to lose.  If you're on the broadcast side, you wanna make sure that your station, your network continues to be carried by the pay-TV providers because that's what you need to make your business model work.  You have to have viewers.  And you want as many of them as you can get.  If you're on the cable side of it, you certainly need the good programming that broadcasters are investing in producing.  And whether that's the NFL, the Super Bowl, the Oscars or local news, the cable system wants those channels, wants that programming for its customers because they know if they don't have it, then their customers are gonna go to another pay service to get that.  They, they just have--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, also shows like American Idol, I guess or Homicide and stuff--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --like that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --that's produced by the networks.
Speaker 2: Correct.  So both parties come to the table with something to lose, and in 99 percent of the time, there is an agreement reached without any viewer disruption.  Of late, there's been an effort for, from the cable side, the pay-TV side, to create problems that then they want to go to congress and help to get a fix.  And we've--obviously, are gonna fight that.  So, but that's one of the key issues on the television side.  We also, on the television side have, are looking at a next generation broadcast platform, a new standard from which we would broadcast television and all that goes into that.  There's a lot of conversation around that that has to be discussed and sorted through.  On the radio side, the big issue is the Performance Rights Act.  This is, formerly, it's also called the Performance Tax.  This is, radio stations--or actually, it's record labels wanting to have radio stations pay them when they play records.  And that's not a business model that makes sense for radio.  It's one that the marketplace is working at in a number of different ways, but those would be the top three issues right now for radio and television in our--in our business.
Story_ID: 120470
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you have, in your role, you testify before politicians about these issues--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --representing the many members of the National Association of Broadcasters, which is--are there any television stations and radio stations in the United States that are not members of the National Association of Broadcasters?
Speaker 2: Yes, on the television side, there are only a few who are not.  We have, when it comes to full-powered television stations, somewhere around 80 percent are in NAB membership.  When you look at commercial television stations, that number jumps up to about 85 percent.  And then if you looked at network-affiliated television stations, it's about 90 percent of stations.  So we're very, very strong in terms of membership on the television side.  On the radio side, not quite as strong, reflecting perhaps a little more difficulty economically on the radio side, but some markets have a little better than 50 percent.  Some have a little less than 50 percent, and that's an area that we're obviously working to continue to try to grow.  But generally, we, at the NAB, have a very strong hand to play when we sit down in front of a member of congress or a committee and say, "We're with the NAB.  We represent local radio and television stations, and the networks".  All the networks are in membership with the exception of one, and that happens to be one that's owned by both CBS and Time-Warner, the CW Network.  But all the rest of the networks, including Univision, Telemundo, are all members of the NAB.
Speaker 1: Okay, what would compel a station not to be a member or a radio station not to be a member?
Speaker 2: They would say, can't afford it.  You know, our budgets are tight.  We would, of course, say how can you not afford it 'cause this is your insurance policy.  We represent you, and that's the conversation and the discussion.  But, generally, it's a statement of, things are tight.  We can't afford it.  And that's why they're--the majority are not in membership.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any ideological nonmembers that don't believe in it for some reason or another?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, not really.  I mean you get some who think we should have done this instead of that, but those are little tweaks.  There's no major ideological differences, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, I wouldn't--you know, it's hard to imagine that there would be, but I, but, you know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I don't know, but, okay, so how many employees does the NAB have?
Speaker 2: About 145 full-time employees.  All are based here.  We engage a number of consultants outside of that number, but about 145 full-time employees here.
Speaker 1: Okay, and are they engaged mostly in research or--
Speaker 2: The larger departments are government relations.  That's our lobbying team that calls on members of Congress.  We have a big legal team.  They call on the FCC [Federal Communications Commission].  We have a big conventions team because we put conventions on.  Our big convention in Las Vegas [Nevada], every April is one that we produce and sell the space for and all that.  So that's, again, a big team.  Those are the three larger departments, and then you have television, radio, research, marketing and a number of other functions.  But the bigger departments are those first three that I mentioned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120471
Speaker 1: And so as vice president [of the National Association of Broadcasters (NAB)], now, what do you basically, I mean what's your basic function in terms of all these employees--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --that you supervise--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we have--the first job is the (unclear) of television.  And my primary function is to bring the operator's perspective to our legal and government relations teams as we strategize our advocacy.  In addition to that, we have a department who puts together programs that help broadcasters in a number of different ways.  We put programs together in Las Vegas [Nevada] that might be focused on some of the top issues that we're facing.  We have a sales oriented program that we put together each year through the television department.  And so my role with them is to manage them to make sure that those programs are successful and effective and all of that.  We have webcasts that we do for sales, that we partner on.  So that's the executive vp [vice president] of television role.  And then on the [National Association of Broadcasters Education] Foundation role where I'm president, we again have about nine programs that run a gamut from looking to recruit college graduates to our business and a number of executive development programs along this spectrum, if you will.  And then on the far other end of the spectrum, we have a program called, Broadcast Leadership Training.  So if there's a person who is obviously experienced in the business and are looking to purchase a radio or television stations, this ten-month, one-weekend per month program, gives them everything that they need to know to be able to effectively do that.  And if they don't want to own a radio or television station, just wanna be better broadcasters, this program also works for them.
Story_ID: 120472
Speaker 1: Are there any programs specifically geared to minorities on ownership?
Speaker 2: Well, our programs are open to everyone, but we target women and people of color.  And so we have fellowships and scholarships to those programs, and many of them--again, you just have to be at the place and we take care of the expenses for it.  For example, I mentioned on the front end, attracting people to our business.  And this ties back to a man I mentioned, Ernie Fears, the former--the guy who got me into, I think, a lot of the success that I have.  He left the station that he was managing in Washington, D.C. and became a professor at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in communications.  And he started a program, he conceived with another partner, he conceived what we now call the Media Sales Institute.  And basically, this is a ten-day training program where college graduates who are interested in media sales--and we define media sales as radio, television, cable, digital, print, anyone who's graduated recently from college and is interested in media sales, they go to one of four universities, Howard University, Florida A and M University, Ohio University or coming online in 2014 for the first time, Arizona State University.  And for the first nine days, they hear from sales managers.  They hear from Arbitron.  They hear from Nielsen.  They learn how to put a presentation together.  And, in fact, during the evenings of those first nine days, they're working on their particular presentation, that on day ten of this program, they walk into a room of recruiters, recruiters that represent companies as diverse as Disney, Hertz, Meredith, Clear Channel, and to be in the room as a recruiter, the companies have to have entry-level sales jobs available now.  So I walk in as a participant of the Media Sales Institute.  I've been given a scenario.  I'm presenting to a group of bankers and I'm presenting my station.  And I make my presentation--it's about five minutes.  I'm followed by the other people in my class, and then at the end, the recruiters decide, I wanna see Joe, I wanna see Larry, I wanna see Scott.  And we set up meetings for them to do that.  Before the downturn of the recession, almost 85 percent of the students who graduated from these programs were hired into the business in sales.  And this, again, tying back to Ernie Fears, we have in each of the institutes, an Ernie Fears lecture, which continues his legacy and his involvement in this program.  And that's done for a couple of reasons.  One is, he was a part of the idea generation for this Media Sales Institute.  And it's also a way for me to remember and pay homage to a guy who has meant a lot in my career.  And each year I tell the story about the lunch that we had that caused me to focus on the corner office and the role that Ernie played in that.  So that's one of the types of programs that really works.  A lot of our members will look at the programs (clearing throat) excuse me.  (Hoarse) A lot of our members (clearing throat)--a drink of water.  A lot of our members will look at the graduates of this program and say, I can hire somebody right now who's gotten a head start on the rest of the folks who are just knocking on the door and saying, can I get an entry-level sales position?  And often, they're hired, the other--the ones who just knock on the door, and they're training, if you could call it that, is, here's a cubicle.  Here's a phone.  Here's a computer.  I'll pay you 10 or 15 percent on whatever you bring in.  Good luck.  And having witnessed some of that as a general manager, I know that it's a very drowning feeling that we've now set this person up not to succeed because it takes more than that.  You can succeed, but the odds are stacked against you if that's how your training is.  So, these Media Sales Institutes work in that people apply to them, and all they have to do is get to the school and we pay for their housing, their food, their materials, and then they pay to get themselves back.  And so, and, again, open to everyone, but we really recruit and target women and people of color because they are typically underrepresented in our business.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120473
Speaker 1: Let me ask you something about the transition from analog television to digital television in 2009.  I know the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] mandated that analog signals would, the stations had to change to a digital signal.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And it was during a time of economic slump.  Everybody was mired in this economic slump.  And people had to go out, they couldn't get free TV unless they went out and bought a, bought the subsidized--
Speaker 2: Converter.
Speaker 1: --converter box.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Converter box or had a digital television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a major transition.  And there are a couple of components of it that I will talk about.  The first was a, the first major part of that was the education process that the industry took on to--if you look back four or five years and you talked about analog TV, most viewers out there didn't know analog to digital or what might be possible.  So our industry had to inform the population, the viewers, what this transition was and why it had to happen before, of course, they'd know what to do.  And we, as an industry, through spots and various activities in malls across the country, we had all sort of different ways of communicating what this was all about, raise the awareness level of the transition from low 30s to about 98 percent by the time leading up to the transition.  And a lot of value in terms of spots and concerts--we even had programs where we tried to get into the content of the program where it became a part of the storyline that if you don't get your converter box connected by such and such a date, you're not gonna be able to watch that show.  So, using every means possible, we, as an industry, informed the population.  And then to your very good point, a lot of people were going through a bit of an economic stress and I got a TV that's working fine.  Why do I have to do something to it to make it continue to work after a certain date?  And that's where our government did step in, and they provided coupons for the converter box.  I think the converter box was about $29.95 or something like that.  And you could get converter box coupons to go out and get that and hook up the set.  And then the question was, okay, I got the converter box, but if I'm, you know, a senior citizen, I don't know--connect Cable A to Connect C and what's the, how does it all?  So we actually had, went to fire departments and had other people that we tried to engage in making sure that people who needed help were able to get help.  Stations actually sent folks out.  So it was a major, major undertaking, and I think if you ask members of Congress and stations today, "Was it a successful transition?", the answer would be, yes.  Did it have a few glitches here and there?  Of course, it did, but the transition was successfully made, and today, thanks to digital television, one channel or one station now has multiple streams.  So if you're watching a Channel 4 as a for instance, you get the Channel 4 primary programming which might be one of the affiliates, and then you get another channel that might be old movies or another channel that might be local sports.  But a lot of different content is now being pushed out, thanks to that transition.  And you don't have to have cable.  This is the key piece of this.  You don't have to have cable to be able to access this content, and, in fact, the picture is actually clearer when you don't use cable and just use the over-the-air antenna, whether it's rooftop or set top, to capture the signals.
Story_ID: 120474
Speaker 1: Okay, now, how tough was it on individual television stations to meet the broadcast standard 'cause I know in my hometown, of the top two stations, one converted to HD quickly and had, you know, four digital stations.  But another one did not, I mean, you know, it took them a long time to really get in the swing of it.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things about a mandate from the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] and, you know, is that you gotta do it.  And if you can't afford to do it, then somebody's gonna take the station who can do it.  So there was some pushing on budgets and that kind of things, but ultimately, stations had to do it, and they did.  And I don't think we lost any, if--maybe a few, but I don't think we lost any stations as a result of not being able to afford the transition.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think, yes, stations were able to broadcast, but I think a lot of them were still shooting their analog in the states, you know, they weren't using HD equipment.  Well, I got--maybe I'm mixing it up, but they weren't broadcasting in HD.  That's what I'm--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so there were, yeah, there're a couple of different levels of this.  One was just making sure you pushed out an HD [high definition] signal or digital signal.  And then the other piece of it--and this is where some stations didn't go on right away, is when you're covering news, your news gathering equipment, some stations took a little longer to make that HD.  So you're watching digital television, but it's standard definition instead of high definition in some of the content.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And today, I would say that, you know, most markets, there're some markets that have not yet transitions to high definition news gathering equipment.  But a large majority of folks and stations are.
Story_ID: 120475
Speaker 1: Right.  Now, what sort of opportunity does this hold for, does digital television hold for minority--
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: I know Bounce TV is one--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --success, I guess it's a success.  It was launched, and it seems to be popular on some level with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a very big success, and what Bounce did is they looked at various groups, various station group owners.  And I know Raycom is one of the initial folks.  I think Below [ph.] provided some of their stations.  But basically, these groups patched together digital channels across the country, and Bounce puts its signal on those digital channels.  So it's a very low cost of entry for an African American focused network like Bounce, and it is successful in that some of the ratings in some of those markets is actually outstripping the ratings of some of the regular channels.  And I know there's plans to do even more.  They've got some news plans and some other things that they're working on.  But it is a success. Financially, it's a success.  It's also showing that with these digital sub-channels, it can be put together in a way that provides a platform for African American content.  And on a smaller scale, if someone wanted to go to a particular market and go to a station in that market and say I just want to reach the African American population in this city, there could be a deal struck where it's not costly to do that type of an arrangement and have content that's in that particular marketplace.  So opportunities are there for minorities, African American entrepreneurs who say I've got content or I can create content, inexpensively enough to make this business model work.  Or I'm gonna start out in this market and then expand to others.  Soul of the South is another one of those networks like Bounce that's trying to do the same type of thing, African American content, a little more geographically targeted areas, but similar programming--although they're looking at some local sports and some other things as well.  So there are opportunities there for African American entrepreneurs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I wondered what the extent, I know some of the Christian broadcasting networks, one locally in Ohio, had like maybe eight digital stations--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --in a row, you know, during various Christian broadcasts.
Speaker 2: Right, and if, you know, it's all about, at the end of the day, it's about creating content that people want to watch.  And if you create that content and put it on a digital sub channel and have the ability to market, to let people know that it's there, people will find it.  And that's the combination of what's required to make that successful.  But when you don't have to put down, you know, 15 or $20 million to buy the, to buy a station, this is a very cost-effective way to get into the business and to have a platform to provide content.
Speaker 1: How much do you think a person would need to do, to launch a station?  I know [HM] Andrew Young and some other--he was part of the investment group that--
Speaker 2: On Bounce.
Speaker 1: --that launched Bounce.
Speaker 2: Correct.  Andrew Young and M.L.K. the third [Martin Luther King III]. Those deals, and I don't have intricate knowledge of how that was set up, but those situations could have been a revenue share where there was no upfront cash involved.  If I have--let's say that I own these digital sub-channels, and I don't have anything on one of them.  And someone comes to me and says, I have a library of content that I think will appeal to this particular audience segment that's in this area.  If I can use your channel, let's talk about a revenue share--I'm providing you content.  I've got the expense of the content, whatever that is, and let's split the revenue because right now, you're getting zero for that sub--for that digital channel.  So there're all kinds of creative arrangements.  Or, let's start out with a revenue share, and then, as this grows, I'll pay you more or, you know, you're only limited by the creativity that comes with those kind of deal conversations, but there are a lot of opportunities that are there.
Story_ID: 120476
Speaker 1: Okay, so how do things stand with, in terms of some of the important issues that NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] is dealing with, in terms of retransmission, the retransmission consent process?  Are we still, that's still a big issue, right?
Speaker 2: Still a big issue.  We feel good about the communication that we're having with members of Congress on what that means if it goes away.  And we feel good about our chances of keeping the structure as it is.  You will get a different answer, I'm sure, from the cable side of this.  But we feel very good about where we are.  We've got our work cut out for us because there are people who want to, you know, change that.  But we feel good about where we are.
Story_ID: 120477
Speaker 1: Now, do you see yourself retiring from NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] or--
Speaker 2: Hard to know.  You know, I get--retirement is a word that I haven't yet focused on, and I think full retirement is probably something that would be way down the road.  But I do get calls from groups who are looking to purchase station groups and saying, you know, would you think about running a group and getting some equity in that.  And, you know, I'm, again, the tape that my mom said, "Never pass on an opportunity before you look at it."  So we have lots of conversations that are ongoing, but I do--right now, I'm enjoying what I'm doing.  I enjoy representing our industry.  It's a vibrant industry.  We've got a lot of innovation that's upfront as we develop, also some challenges.  So it keeps things interesting and keeps things moving.  So I'm enjoying it.
Story_ID: 120478
Speaker 1: What role do you see the internet playing in television in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, the internet is an integral part of the communications ecosystem as we see it.  You can't go to any television station that doesn't also have a web presence.  So we've already embraced the broadband, broadcast universe and feel that is a part of our future.  Lots of people are gravitating to the Internet.  We, as station operators, again, both radio and television, under that and are embracing that.  So broadcast, broadband is what we see going forward.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know people still ask, you know, well, why can't I just watch television on the computer?  You know, I guess you can to some extent, but present-time television, is there--are there laws preventing the broadcast--
Speaker 2: Well, there's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --of television signals on--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no laws.  I mean it's--if Disney or if one of the networks wanted to, tomorrow, put content directly on the internet, they certainly could do that.  Now, what they would run the risk of is the affiliate relationship that would be harmed in that.  And that's, again, a good relationship that exists.  So those are the kind of conversations around that.  But, and I'll use Disney because they were one of the first who did this.  They were one of the first networks who said, we're gonna provide through iTunes, a couple of very popular shows.  I think it was 'Lost' and 'Desperate Housewives'.  They said, we're gonna provide it the day after or it was after the initial play on, you know, on the network.  But that was a step toward what you're talking about.  And, again, technology and disruptive innovation is a part of life.  And we've gotta figure out how to thrive in that environment.  You can't just sit on what you've got and hope that it stays there.  You've gotta continue to evolve, continue to stay fresh, continue to innovate to make sure that you have a future.
Story_ID: 120479
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point professionally, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Whew, legacy.  Well, I'll tell you what I'm most proud of, and we've done lots of projects that have been successful.  We've worked with the First Lady [Michelle Obama] and Beyonce and did an across-the-country, let's move childhood obesity initiative.  A lot of successful things that we've done, but what I feel best about is when I have mentored somebody in the business or when someone in the business has gone through one of our programs, our foundation programs, and they call me back and say, "Marcellus, I'm a general manager today, and it's because of, in part, something that you said or something that I observed or some program that we went through.  But, thank you.  This is important.  I wanted to share this with you."  And those types of stories, of success, that I have a little piece of is what I feel best about.  And I think that as long as we do what we're doing in our foundation, as long as I embrace the approach of paying it forward, we're gonna have those successes and people who say, you know, "I'm now a network reporter.  Thank you for counseling me these, you know, these eight weeks 'cause I was going through some tough stuff, and you gave me some good advice."  That's what I feel best about.
Story_ID: 120480
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you feel that you would like to go back and change if you could change it or any move you made that you would, you wouldn't have done--
Speaker 2: Do differently?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I, you know, I don't--I'm sure there's, you know, some little things that I did that I go, Oh, you know, but nothing of any major consequence as I think back.  The career moves that I've made, the additional responsibilities that I've incurred, the folks with whom I've had the pleasure of working and how I've worked with them, on balance I feel very good about all of that.
Story_ID: 120481
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I would say first of all, my hope is that families can be strengthened, and that strengthening will happen through parenting, through responsible parenting because, again, when I look back at my folks, and some of my friends, it's involvement of our parents that put us on the right path.  It's the foundation of the family that helps get you through those tough, tough times.  And our community needs more in that space.  We also need more affordable, higher education, something that I know the President [President Barack Obama] is working because education is, again, you got family, now you need education to be able to grow and realize your full potential.  And so many capable, qualified African Americans and people of color don't have the resources to do the higher education.  And then finally, I think we have to own more of our businesses.  We have to be more entrepreneurial to really be where we need to be as a community.  But those are the three concerns slash hopes that I have for our community.
Story_ID: 120482
Speaker 1: Tell us something about your family.  Now, you mentioned them.  You do have, you're married, and you've got some children that are in school--
Speaker 2: Oh, my personal family, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your personal family.
Speaker 2: Awesome family (laughter).  I have, we have three children, two daughters and a son.  Our oldest daughter gave us our first grandchild just over a year ago.  And she was actually here for Thanksgiving, along with all of our kids.  They came back.  She works for Coca-Cola in marketing, is doing great, has the church as her foundation, she and her husband, doing great.  Daughter number ywo, who, very strong academic student.  They all were good, but she was a very strong--is a very strong academic student, undergrad from University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School [of the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  And then Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] MBA and was recruited by the McKenzie Company to be a consultant.  She met her husband who was in Harvard Medical School [Boston, Massachusetts].  They now--he's doing his residency in New York.  They are now doing, again, very well.  They've been married now about a year and a half--about a year--year and a half, year and a half.  Both married, all four partners there working, which is a blessing.  And then our son, Marcellus the III, started out actually as an entrepreneur, built a business.  It was mobile marketing business.  He actually and his partners built it up, sold it and he's now a digital sales manager.  And he is scheduled to get married in January of 2014.  And the young lady he's gonna marry, we are thrilled, we're absolutely thrilled.  They make a good team, and all six of them are working, have turned out to be great people.  And we're very proud of all of them, all of them.
Story_ID: 120483
Speaker 1: Now, did you--what did your parents [Marcellus Alexander, Sr. and Juanita Rosa Smith-Alexander] think about your career?
Speaker 2: What do they think about it?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what do they think about it?
Speaker 2: I think they think I've done pretty well.  They're not so sure what I do on most days which is kind of how that works.  But I testified once on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.], I think it was actually during the DTV [digital television] transition, and I was able to weave them into my testimony.  And I think that kind of caught their attention.  It was like, okay, now, I kind of see what you do.  But I think they are, they're proud, they're pleased of all of me--not just me, but of our siblings.  And I think they're pleased with the work and the investment that they put into us as a family.  They see it paying off. One of the things that we did, as a family, they were living in the house that we grew up in, which was--how would I say this, less than what they should have been in.  And our family got together and said, "You know what?  Let's build them a house on the property and we don't need a mortgage.  Let's just chip in and make this happen," which we did.  And a lot of credit to my brother, who's there, who sort of spearheaded the project, Lamont, we were able to pull that together.  And they're very comfortable.  We made a good financial decision not long ago where I purchased extended healthcare for them.  So now, instead of having the concern and the debate about should they go into a nursing home if they get to that point or whatever, they're at home.  We have nursing care coming in, professional nursing care coming in 'cause they need that and feel very good about how they are.  I'm sure they feel delighted, and loved, and so far, it's, you know, just a blessing all around.
Story_ID: 120484
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there anything I have not mentioned that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: It depends on what your last question is.  (Laughter) No, no.  Anything that we haven't talked about?  We've covered a lot of ground.  I can't--I think I--if it, I think I mentioned on camera that the historians of the family.  Did I mentioned, yeah, I think I mentioned Ros [Rosalind Alexander-Kasparik].  I did--
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: --I did mention.  Okay, I just--
Speaker 1: Well, you mention them again.
Speaker 2: So, one of the things that I'm very pleased about as a part of this process with HistoryMakers is that it focused us, yet again, on the history of our family.  And the historians, the true historians who pulled together all the information are my sister, Rosalind, and my brother-in-law--not his wife, but my brother-in-law, Doug Herron, who pulled the pictures together, they are the true historians for our family.  And I am grateful for their participation in this.  There's a rich history that we look to build on from this particular project.  And I'm delighted to have been here to do this, which encouraged us to get that information together that we will again build on.
Story_ID: 120485
Speaker 1: The last question, similar to legacy, but a little different, sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think as a person who helped others, as a person who understood that with success comes the responsibility to give back, and more appropriately stated, when you pay it forward and give back on the front end, the success happens.  Again, I can't--I have been fortunate and blessed to have had some good people in my life who've helped me along the way.  And any time I get that phone call back from those mentees and proteges and they say, I don't know what I can do to, to say thank you, other than say "thank you", I always say, make me proud with what you're doing, and also reach back and help somebody else.  There's always someone else who has not yet reached your level.  You don't have to be a VP [vice president].  You don't have to be a president to be able to help someone.  And if you just reach back, that will be the payment that I'm looking for.  And to the person, they say, understand it, got it, and if more people do that, our community will be stronger.
Story_ID: 120486
Speaker 1: --Tell us about this one, please?
Speaker 2: This is Marcellus Alexander about three years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's Marcellus and Oprah Winfrey about eight years ago.
Speaker 1: And that's at the National--
Speaker 2: At the NAB [National Association of Broadcasters] Show in Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 1: Oh, man, okay, that's Marcus Alexander and I'm playing golf and those glasses would suggest that that's probably twenty years ago.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: That's [HM] Dorothy Height and Marcellus, and that was probably five years ago.
Speaker 2: Hold on, please.  Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Dan Rather, Tom Brokaw and me at the NAB Show in Las Vegas, and that was about six years ago.
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  That is my wedding day with my wife, Linda Alexander, her father and mother, Lorene Williams and, he died a while back.  Let me get his name.  Gheez, Warren, I'm sorry, Warren.  And the date was September 20, 1975.  That's a date I'd better remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's me and presidential candidate, [HM] Barack Obama, 2008.
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: This is our family tree that goes back four generations to our current family.
Speaker 2: Hold on, please.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Marcellus and Linda Alexander. What did we say, how many years ago?  (Laughter) This had to be college, so thirty, I'd say thirty years ago at least.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is Marcellus, had to be freshman in college.  So 19--let's call it 1969--1970, 1970.
Speaker 2: This is my oldest sister's wedding, Jennifer and Carl, and that had to be, I'd say forty years ago.  Well, thirty-five years ago.
Speaker 1: Ready?
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is me, Marcellus.  This was a college sophomore shot in my Umoja (laughter) jacket.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: Pretty interesting.
Speaker 2: And this is my family with almost all of our siblings.  Somebody wasn't born yet.
Speaker 1: Can you name 'em all (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, from left to right, Marcellus on the back row, my brother Gerald, Jennifer, my dad, going back to the left, my dad, Marcellus, Sr., my mother, Juanita.  In the front row, left to right, Carmen, Mark and Rosalind.
Speaker 1: And that's me and First Lady, Michelle Obama, and that was three years ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's me and [HM] Valerie Jarrett, Special Assistant to the President [HM Barack Obama], and that is about a year ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And this is me and my wife, Linda, and that is about a year ago.
