Story_ID: 21456
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Gloria Long Anderson, Gloria, G-L-O-R-I-A, L-O-N-G, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And, ma'am, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: November 5th, 1938 in Arkansas, a place called, actually, it was a little place outside of Altheimer [Arkansas], where I lived.  And I lived in Altheimer, A-L-T-H-E-I-M-E-R, but I was born in a little place called Cornerstone [Arkansas], C-O-R-N-E-R-S-T-O-N-E.
Speaker 1: okay, is that like a rural part of Altheimer?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Altheimer is rural too (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what, ma'am, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now, I'm a college administrator.  I'm Vice President for, I'm Vice President for Academic Affairs at Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're, by training, a chemist, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March the 18th--sorry, 17th, 2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're on Auburn Avenue at some house.  It's 515 Auburn Avenue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21457
Speaker 1: All right, now before we go into depth, there are five kind of warm-up questions that we ask.  And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's pale blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I guess that would be Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 21458
Speaker 1: Okay, well, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll ask about them separately to keep them straight.  So can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Elsie, E-L-S-I-E, F., and "F" stands Foggie, F-O-G-G-I-E, Long, L-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Now, I really don't know.  I don't know either that--I don't know her date of birth, nor do I know her place of birth.  I probably can find that out and send it to you.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you give us an idea about what year it might be or what it would be close to?
Speaker 2: No, she, my mother, my mother died in 1975, and she was sixty-seven, I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was born--okay.  So, was she born in that part of Arkansas too?
Speaker 2: She was born in a different part, not too far from there, I think.  But she was born in Arkansas, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what do you know about your mother's side of the family and how far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: I know my grandmother and grandfather.  I don't know, I don't know their birth date or anything like that, but I know their names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother's name was Victoria L. Foggie.  And I believe the "L" stood for Lee.  I'm not sure.  And my grandfather's name was William Foggie.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what did they do for a living?
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather, he was basically a farmer, and my, oh, and my grandmother, she didn't really work.  To tell you the truth, my grandfather had, he worked at the gin.  You know what a, a gin is where they process the cotton.  He worked there, and my grandmother really worked at home.  But she always had a small, about five acres of cotton every year.  And she just did that because she, she wanted to.
Speaker 1: Now, was that a, that was--would she sell the cotton after she produced it?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, every--yeah, she was, she was like a sharecropper on the same farm where my grandfather worked.  I think he drove tractors or he did something like that.  He didn't, he didn't really farm in the sense that he had a farm and cotton and all of that.  But she did.  But she just wanted to have five acres of cotton (laughter).
Speaker 1: That would provide some income (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she wasn't doing it for that.  She would, I--she just liked to have her own little, her own little cotton.
Speaker 1: What I was asking, I guess, is that if she was farming vegetables, I know she could eat those, but cotton, I mean she would sell it, right?  She would sell it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody who, who grew cotton, they would, they would harvest it in the fall, and they would send it to, to the gin.  And they would process it, and they would, they would sell it for whatever amount that they were selling it for.  But she also had a garden, but it was a very small garden.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, okay, so are there any stories about Reconstruction [1863-1877] or slavery or any of that--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that have passed down in the family?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was, did your grandparents or your mother talk about what life was like where they grew up, at the time when they grew up?
Speaker 2: The only thing that I can remember my mother saying was that my, my grandmother's people, her people, had big, a big land and they had a lot of land.  And they had a gin on their land and all of that, and somehow they lost it.  That's all I know about it.
Speaker 1: So, there no, not a story about how they lost it?
Speaker 2: No, I don't really know that much about it because, see, I was little when I was growing up, and I don't really know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother ever talk to you about what things were like when she was growing up and going to school?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: Did she have a chance to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: My, my mother finished tenth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she, she could sew.  I don't know where she learned it, but she could sew.  She could, she could make patterns, you know, you have to have a pattern to cut out the material.  She could do that from scratch.  And she did, she did a lot of sewing for the people in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she was a seamstress?
Speaker 2: Right, and she also worked.  She was a domestic, and she also worked on the farm because my father was a sharecropper.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother ever talk about what she really wanted to be or what she really wanted to do with her life if she had had a chance?
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 21459
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was Charley, C-H-A-R-L-E-Y, Long, L-O-N-G.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: That I don't know.  He was born in Louisiana.  But I don't know, I don't know the date.
Speaker 1: Do you get the sense that he was younger than your mother [Elsie Long] or older?
Speaker 2: He was much older than my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did, do you remember how old he was when he passed away?
Speaker 2: No, I don't, but my father was in World War I [1914-1918].  I think he was, you know, he was almost a teenager.  He was young when he went into that, but he was in World War I.
Speaker 1: He was born around 1900 then.
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: World War I started in 1917, in '14' [1914].
Speaker 2: But I know, I know he was in World War I.
Speaker 1: Maybe 1890, anywhere from 1897, I guess, to 1900, around that area.  Okay, he was born at the turn of the century.  Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know very little about my father's side of the family because I don't know.  When we grew up, we grew up with my mother, going to church with my mother, going to church with my grandmother, my mother's mother and father.  And we had very little contact with my father's family.
Speaker 1: So, you didn't know your grandparents on that side?
Speaker 2: Really, I didn't, I did not know.  I knew I had a, my father's mother lived somewhere in that area.  And he had two sisters who lived somewhere in that area, but that's basically all that I knew.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did they have any stories from slavery or Reconstruction [1863-1877]--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --that they ever talked about?
Speaker 2: The only thing my father, only thing that I can remember that my father said was that he was born in Louisiana, and he was related to the, the Long's who were politicians in Louisiana.  But I don't, I don't know how he was related to them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's Huey Long.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Huey "Kingfish" Long.
Speaker 2: Those Long's (laughter) in Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Right, that's the famous Huey Long that they made the movie about and all that kind of--okay.  But you don't know how they're--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did your father get a chance to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: My father had a third grade education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And unlike today, he could read.  You know, students coming up nowadays, they can finish high school, and they can't read.  My father would read the bible every day.  And he could read, and he could sign his name, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, would that be the expectation of somebody that had a third grade education in those days?  Would you expect that they could read and sign their name?
Speaker 2: I think it was because, well, I guess I didn't know too many people.  And as far as I was concerned, everybody could do it, but I don't know whether that's true or not.
Story_ID: 21460
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, is there a story about how your parents [Elsie Long and Charley Long] met?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know that part of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they did meet at some point.  So--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --do you know if they met in school or--
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your parents, your--and your mother, your father was about fifteen, twenty years older than your mother?
Speaker 2: That's probably about right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, had he been married before or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, once.
Speaker 1: Did he have any children by that--
Speaker 2: Yes, he had a, a lady, a girl, by the other lady.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they were not, they did not live where we lived.  And so I grew up saying that I did not have a sister, and today I do, I, as far as I'm concerned, I do not have a sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you really weren't in association with her at all?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you have any siblings?  Do you have any brothers?
Speaker 2: Five.
Speaker 1: Five?
Speaker 2: I had five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They're all passed on now.
Speaker 1: And where did you fit into the order?
Speaker 2: There were three older than I was, am, and two younger than I am.  And two of the older ones, the first and second one, they were half brothers.  And then the third one was a Long, and I was a Long, and my two younger brothers were Long's.
Story_ID: 21461
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us what were your parents' personalities like and who do you think you take after?
Speaker 2: In many ways, I take after my father [Charley Long] because he was very quiet.  He didn't talk much and anything, he was very, very quiet.  My mother [Elsie Long] was more, more talkative and all of that.  And in a way, I'm sort of like him in that sense, but in some ways, I think I also took after my mother.
Story_ID: 21462
Speaker 1: Okay, now, we always ask this question.  What, can you describe where you grew up?  Now, did you grow up in one place or did you move around a lot?
Speaker 2: No, we moved from the little place, Cornerstone [Arkansas] where I was born, we moved to Altheimer [Arkansas].  And I really don't remember too much about Cornerstone except it was on the, on a rocky road.  In other words, it wasn't paved.  And we had to walk up to the store which was probably about a mile or so from where we lived.  That's about all I remember.  My grandfather and grandmother lived, I would say about half way been Altheimer and Cornerstone.  But we moved to Altheimer very, when I was very, very young.  So I don't remember too much about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, when I grew up, we were in a, we were, we were, went to school.  But we were in, and we had what they called split seasons in the, in other words, we would go to school.  And when it came time to chop cotton, the school would let out, and we would go and chop the cotton.  When, when they laid it by, as they called it, then we would go back to school.  Then when it came time to pick cotton, school would be out, and we would out of school.  And we would pick cotton and school would start again probably around November or so.  And, and so I guess in terms of sounds and mostly what I remember was, you know, working in the field.  And on the weekend, everybody would go to the little town and, I guess, you know, and buy food and just walk around.  I don't, that's about all I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did--where was your--so the household consisted of you and your mother [Elsie Long] and father [Charley Long], your brother--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Two of my brothers.  My oldest brother did not live with us.  He lived with my grandmother, my mother's mother.  And when he got to be a teenager, probably around, I would say maybe sixteen, seventeen, whatever, he went to Chicago because his daddy lived up there, and so he went up there.  My, the next one after him, he was a half brother as well.  He, he stayed with us, but when he got to be about, he got to be a teenager, I would say somewhere around maybe eighteen or so, he got married.  And much to my mother's--she really told him, she didn't want him to get married.  But he got married, and so he dropped out of, out of high school.  And so basically, that left the four of us 'cause they were much older than we were.
Story_ID: 21463
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, where did you start school?
Speaker 2: In Cornerstone [Arkansas].
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: To tell you the truth, I don't really know because when I went, I was going with my, my other--I was going before I was supposed to go.  And it was a one-room schoolhouse.  And I guess it was Cornerstone.  But they didn't call 'em elementary or middle schools and all like that.  But I, I went before I was supposed to go, and when I--what happened, as a result of that--well, I must have been about four years old.  And we didn't have any pre-kindergartens or anything like that.  So what happened was, you know, I could read at that early age, and as I got older, I skipped a lot of, I skipped a lot of classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you not only could read, but you could read fairly well (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I guess so (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you could read at age four, did you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's about right.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have, what kind of material did you have to read around the house?  Were there books in the house for--
Speaker 2: That's the problem.  When I was, when I was growing up, I read everything I could get my hands on.  But that wasn't much because in my, in my high school, well, in the elementary and high school, we had, we didn't have--we didn't really have a library with books in it.  They had, I guess, now, I would call it probably a reading room.  And I read everything they had in there.  But, you know, I'm sure they had in the other school across town, I'm sure they must have had, much, many more books than we had over there.  So to answer your question, I read, I read everything that I could get my hands on, but that wasn't too much because we didn't have too much at our school.  And certainly, because my parents [Charley and Elsie Long] were not, you know, educated, I didn't have any books at home.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were at Cornerstone how long?
Speaker 2: Now, I don't know because it was, I was--when we moved to Altheimer [Arkansas], I was very, very young.  So I'm pretty sure it must have been, it could not been more than five years.
Story_ID: 21464
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of the school you went to in Altheimer [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: They called it Altheimer Training School, and I guess that was the name of it when I first started there.  I'm not quite sure, but I know it was called Altheimer Training School.  As I got older and, you know, and that was to distinguish it from the other school, which was Altheimer High School, which was across-that was the school for white kids.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Altheimer High School was the school for white kids?
Speaker 2: Right, and--
Speaker 1: And your school was the--
Speaker 2: --training school was for black kids.
Speaker 1: When you reflect back on it, do you think that there's a message in those names?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, sure.  You see, it wasn't just that, and my, at my, in my time.  It was basically all over the South.  They would call training school, industrial, you know, and I think it probably meant that they were training us to do whatever they wanted to.  But I don't know what they wanted to train us for.  But it meant that the school, the high school that the other kids went to was supposed to be a high school, like everywhere else.  But I, I can't say exactly what I'm trying to say because really I hadn't even thought of that except that I knew that almost everywhere during that time, students from other places were, were not in high schools.  They were in training schools or industrial schools and that kind of stuff.  And that was to distinguish them from, from the high--the white schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's interesting, however, when, when the schools were integrated, the person who was principal of my school became the principal of the all, of the high school, period.  And where I was, that, that I think that one became an elementary school.  And when the, when all the students could go to the same, same school, then the principal of our school was the principal of the high school.
Speaker 1: So he was, it may-- it seems to me that, I mean just looking at it, was he the best qualified educator in the area?
Speaker 2: Well, I really don't know.  He may have been because I don't know anything about the other people who was the principal of the other school.  And that was after I left anyway because I went to college in 1954.  And that was about the time, you know, of the, of the Board versus--
Speaker 1: Yeah, "Brown versus Board of Education [1954].
Speaker 2: Brown, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay, so you're in high school in the '50's [1950s], from 1950 to '54' [1954], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, actually, interestingly enough, the school that I was in, they had a, I think it was called Seven-Seven Plan, where you go seven years in elementary and seven years in high school.  It doesn't make any sense now, but that's what it was.
Speaker 1: So seven, yeah, that is unusual, seven years in elementary school and seven years in high school or middle school and high school are together.
Speaker 2: But I went to, I went to school for three years in Pine Bluff [Arkansas] at the College High School, laboratory high school 'cause the college had an elementary school, a laboratory, elementary school and a laboratory high school.  And, and I went over there to the high school, and when I, at the end of my junior year, they, they decided to close that school.  So I went back to Altheimer [Training School], and that's where I graduated from.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you went back to Altheimer.  Now, did, what was, you were saying it was hard to get, you know, good reading material.  Did you have a library in Altheimer?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: And so no library, and school--
Speaker 2: The population was 980.  We didn't have a bank.  We didn't have anything.  We had two or three stores, and, and the students who finished from the high school, they got to work in the two or three little stores that we had.  And the rest of us, those who didn't go to college, and when I went to college--only two of us went to college, the rest of them were, were domestics, just working on the farm.
Story_ID: 21465
Speaker 1: All right, so I was asking you off camera if the principal of Altheimer Training School had an advanced degree, and you were saying, as far as you were concerned--
Speaker 2: As far as I know he didn't, he did not.
Speaker 1: And what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Fred Martin.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he later became, you said, became the mayor of Altheimer [Arkansas]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and the principal of Altheimer High School.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, he was not the principal all through my time, during, you know, when I was there.  But he, he came there to teach.  And then he went to the Army and then he came back.
Story_ID: 21466
Speaker 1: Now, was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: My mother, and I have to tell you this, my mother [Elsie Long] belonged to Mount Zion Baptist Church.  It may have been called Missionary Baptist Church.  I don't know.  And my, one of my brothers and I joined the church that was called New Hope Missionary Baptist Church, and that was because they had, they had revival and that kind of thing.  And we joined during the revival.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Church was all day Sunday.  Sunday school, go to church.  Most times there was a funeral.  We went to that.  And then there was something called BYPU, I believe it was, after that.  And they probably had service Sunday night.  So it was like all day Sunday.  And in my hometown, the churches, the people, the ministers really didn't live there.  So they came.  They had one, I think they had one Sunday out of the month that they had church.  So it was Mount Zion, and then New Hope and then another one and then another one.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they all had, were on a circuit ministry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but the, one minister didn't do all of those.  There was, each one had its own minister.  But that minister had a church somewhere else out of that time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have any distinctive role in the church.  Were you the head of anything?
Speaker 2: Well, everybody used to, when they had Easter and those kinds of things, they always had a program.  We all had to be on the program and learn a speech and all that.  And I sang in the, in the junior choir.
Story_ID: 21467
Speaker 1: Now, how many students came out of your high school, about, you know, what was the--
Speaker 2: I think there were sixteen of us who graduated and two of us went to college and one stayed one quarter.  And he dropped out.  And I was the only one who went and stayed the four years.  And I didn't tell you that I played basketball when I was, when I was in high school.  I loved basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you have science in high school?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: No science at all?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: So, so you graduated from high school with no science whatsoever?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I finished high school, it was my senior year, and I, the principal somehow had to take over our classes.  And he came in there and he would make us stand up and read.  And what happened was, I was the only one who could read in the whole group of people in that class.  And we didn't have science, but I guess your question is, your next question is going to be, how did I get into chemistry because everybody else asks (laughter) me that question.  When I went to college, I didn't finish what I was telling you about the principal.  What happened, that was when I realized that I didn't, I didn't really know a lot of stuff, like in English because the English teacher hadn't really been teaching English.  I know now.  So I spent the summer, I spent the summer studying English and studying math.  And when I got to college, we had to take a placement test, and I passed those placement tests.  I didn't have to take remedial stuff.  Now, when I went to college, I was going to, I really wanted to major in physical education.  And the reason I wanted to major in physical education was because I liked to play basketball.  And I suspect that if they had had, if they had had girls' basketball teams then, I probably would have done it.  But we only had intramural stuff.  Now, it's interesting.  One of the things that I did not tell you about my mother [Elsie Long] and father [Charley Long], and I think this is important.  When I told you about the, having the split session, when we, when we had to go back to school, say after chopping or picking cotton, my parents always made sure we went back to school.  In other words, there were a lot of parents who kept their students out to finish up the picking of the cotton.  We went to school, and when we got out, we had to go and pick whatever, you know, pick cotton for the rest of the daylight hours.  But the important thing was either, neither one of them had an education so to speak.  They didn't finish high school.  But it was very important for them to see that we went to school.  And, and I guess I'm thankful for that because if they had not done that, I probably would have been like the rest of the people who were in my class and classes after me, and they just--they'd graduate from high school.  Then they just stayed around doing nothing.
Story_ID: 21468
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were a senior in high school, you knew you were gonna--did you know already you were going to go to Arkansas A & M by that time?
Speaker 2: Well, the teachers basically, number one, we didn't have counselors.  You know, you go in and they tell you, you need to go to college.  And this is what you do.  We didn't have any of that. But there were a couple of teachers who would always, who kept telling me that I needed to go to college.  And the only place that they knew was Arkansas AM and N [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College] because they all had finished there.  There was no, nobody told me I could go, I should go to Spelman [College] or Clark [& Atlanta University] or whatever because they had finished [Arkansas] AM and N, and that was where I should go. They didn't even talk about Philander Smith [College] which is in Little Rock [Arkansas]. And I think there's a junior college over there named Shorter College or something like that.
Speaker 1: Right, Shorter College, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but it was, it was--they just told me that I need to go to college.  And the college, to go to college meant going to AM and N.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, tell us about A and M.  Now, this is 19--
Speaker 2: It's AM and N.
Speaker 1: A, M and N?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Agricultural, there's--
Speaker 2: Mechanical--
Speaker 1: Arkansas Agricultural--
Speaker 2: Mechanical.
Speaker 1: Mechanical.
Speaker 2: And Normal.
Speaker 1: And Normal.  AM and N, that's right.
Speaker 2: And the "Normal", I think came about because before they named it AM and N, it was called Branch Normal College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, so what was it like, and who was there when you got to AM and N?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a freshman, and as I told you, I didn't have to take remedial courses.  And the only person that I can really remember now, but there were a lot of students from all over Arkansas, but the person who is the chancellor of that--it's called the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Arkansas] now.  And the chancellor of the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff was my classmate.  His daddy was the president when I went there.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: His name is Lawrence A. Davis, Jr.
Story_ID: 21469
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's the chancellor now, but when I went there, his father was Lawrence A. Davis, Sr., and he was, he was the president at that time.  And his, Lawrence, Jr., as we called him, we both majored in chemistry.  In fact, there were four of us.  And, you know, the upper classmen always tell the freshmen what they, who they should take and who they should not take, and all that.  And basically, what they kept telling us was, "Don't take Dean Wilson because he teaches chemistry, and it's hard, hard, hard".  And we, we decided to major in chemistry because of what they told us (laughter).  And so that's how I got into chemistry, and I probably thought about going to medical school.  But when I finished college, there was no, there were no scholarships and all of that for black students anyway.  And I don't regret staying in chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, before we have you graduate here, so was chemistry difficult for you, you know, not having had any science?
Speaker 2: Okay, it really wasn't, but what happened was, in the first year when I was there, they changed it while I was still there.  But in the first year that I was there, we had to take something called General Education courses.  So I was not in my major.  So we had to take biological science, that kind of stuff, and English, all of those General Education courses.  And we started our major the second year.  And that was when I took my first chemistry course.  And in, I don't know whether everybody in there had chemistry before, but a whole lot of the students had chemistry before.  And interestingly enough, the highest grade that was made in that course was a "B", and I made it.  And I, in thinking back on it, it may have been that Number One, I didn't have to unlearn a whole lot of stuff that some of them had, maybe had to unlearn.  What I mean by that, sometimes students come from high school, they're not taught the right stuff.  And, but I don't know whether that was the truth or not.  But I did, I don't know. "B" was the highest grade, and I made that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was a freshman, I had the highest average in the college, and I got all of the awards.  And people, my mother [Elsie Long] used to come to Pine Bluff [Arkansas] to get her hair done and all that kind of stuff.  And she said, the people at the beauty shop were talking about they let this little country girl come up there and win all the awards.  But anyway, it wasn't that hard to me.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a social life at the University of Arkansas AM and N?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.  And that's what I try to tell my students, you know, today--well, I'm not teaching now.  I went to every football game, every dance, everything, every basketball, everything that they had, I went to it.  But I did my work first.  I made sure I had done my work, but I went to everything.  So, yeah, I had a social life (laughter).
Speaker 1: And did you join a sorority?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Delta Sigma Theta.  And I was president my senior year of that organization.
Story_ID: 21470
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you--now, you graduated Number One in your class--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I had a 2.967, I think, average.  And that was because I had two B's.  One "B", I deserved.  That was in chemistry, the first chemistry course that I had.  The second, the second "B", I did not deserve.  It was in a course called "Negro History".
Speaker 1: Now, what happened there?  Who was the teacher and set this up for us now.  This is nineteen fifty what?
Speaker 2: It was probably, let's see '54' [1954], probably, maybe '56' [1956], somewhere along that way.  That course was offered in the afternoon, after we had had organic chemistry lab.  But that wasn't the reason I made a "B".  Number One, the professor was dull, and all he talked about in that course--he really didn't teach what I would consider to be Negro History, at least looking back on it.  All he did was talk about the people on Beale Street in Memphis [Tennessee], and how they were swinging their chains.  I remember this, he'd walk around the room, doing this.  And that's basically all he talked about.  He had, we had a little paperback book that we were supposed to read.  And I think we were supposed to summarize it at midterm.  But the whole point is, this is what the man told me after, after I got my "B".  I went and asked him, you know, why did I make a "B" because to tell you the truth, I really believed that I deserved an "A".  And he told me that I had not, I had not performed up to my potential.  And I don't know how he could decide whether or not I performed up to my potential.  I performed enough to make an "A", and that was all he should have given me an "A" (laughter).  And it's interesting, there were other people in there who really, I don't know, probably made "F" at midterm.  I don't know what they made in the end.  But I believed that I made an "A".  But, I don't know.  This man, somehow, and I hate to say this, but I think he kind of had it in for me.  We had to write a paper, and I made one mistake in there, and he came and he talked about it almost half of the, the day or the hour.  So I don't know.  I think it was because I had made all those A's.  And that's why every since I have been teaching, I made sure that I was fair, I was objective and gave everybody what they deserved rather than what I thought they should get.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the name of the book you had for that course?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I'm really curious in 1954 or so.
Speaker 2: All we had was a little bitty paperback.  I don't know what it was about, but it really, as I recall, it really was not a very good book on Negro History.
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you remember the instructor's name?
Speaker 2: No, if I did, I wouldn't say it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I can see him right now.
Story_ID: 21471
Speaker 1: Okay, well, when you were getting ready to graduate then, what were your aspirations?  What were you planning to do next, get a job and teach or what?
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I told my advisor that I didn't want to teach.  And what I didn't know at the time was that the only thing that white people would allow us to do was to teach or preach.  And I knew I couldn't preach, and I didn't--see, I didn't know that I couldn't do all the other things that everybody else could do.  So during the summer, I applied to one graduate school, and they sent me a letter back and told me that they didn't have any money to, you know, to give me to go to school.  That was Stanford University [California].  I applied for a job, and those people, that company was in St. Louis [Missouri], and they, as soon as they got my letter, they sent me the, they sent me the information on the job.  They had an opening and all of that.  And so I filled it out.  I mean they sent that stuff back to me, I guess it was--[phone ringing]--I'm sorry.  I forgot about that.  So they sent the stuff back to me Fed Ex, if Fed Ex exists, whatever they sent back and told me to send it back to them right away.  Apparently, between the time they sent me the stuff telling me that they had a job and to get the stuff filled out and send it back, they must have discovered that my college was a black college because I sent the stuff back in, and then they sent me a letter telling me that they had decided to fill the job by somebody who was already there.  Anyway, during the summer I spent the summer with my aunt in St. Louis, and I looked for job after job after job.  And I could not find a job.  I remember going to one, one place looking for a job, and the man asked me, he said, well, I don't see any PhDs on your faculty, on the chemistry faculty.  And then he asked me a whole lot of questions about chemistry.  And then he said, well, somebody sure taught you a whole lot of chemistry.  But I didn't get a job, and to make a long story short, what happened was, I went--they had an opening in my, at my high school [Altheimer Training High School].  And I went, my mother called me up, and so I went back home.  This was in November, you know, split session, November, the school was starting up again.  They needed somebody to come and teach a whole lot of things other than chemistry or math.  But I went there, and I did that for the rest of the academic year.  And then my, the person who was chairman of the chemistry department at the college called me and told me about a scholarship that the chairman of the chemistry department at Atlanta University had.  And so I applied it and I got that, and the next year, I came to Atlanta [Georgia] to school.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, not to skip over some people, now, the company you applied for work for that turned you down was Ralston Purina Company in St. Louis.  We had a name down here so I thought I'd just go on and say it.  You don't have to say it (laughter).
Speaker 2: That was it.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about Kimuel Alonzo Huggins?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the chairman of the chemistry department at Atlanta University.  I have to remember that because it was not Clark-Atlanta [University] at that time. And he was the one who gave me a fellowship to work on my Masters.  And interestingly enough, he told me much later on that--he gave me a National Science Foundation fellowship.  And he told me later on that they got on him because the rules said it was for teachers, science teachers.  And the people, to be eligible for it, you should have taught for three years.  I had not taught for three years, and there was another fellow in there who had not taught for three years.  And he said they got on him about that.  But anyway, he gave me the fellowship.  It lasted one year, and then at the end of that year, he literally begged me to come back the next year to finish my Masters because I was getting married that summer.  And I didn't, wasn't even thinking about coming back to school.  But he told me, he talked to me.  He told me that he would give me, you know, he could get some money and all of that.  So he was really responsible for getting me back into Atlanta University the second year.  And I got my, I got my Masters at the end of the second year.
Story_ID: 21472
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us how you met your husband?
Speaker 2: He was in school at the college, [Arkansas] AM and N when I was there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you all met in college--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Speaker 1: --at AM and N.  And did he move on to Atlanta [Georgia] with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the first year--I got married between my first and second year at Atlanta University.  And the first year, I mean the first year we were married, he was working in Arkansas.  What was the name of that place?  I can't remember the name of the place, but when I got my degree that following year, we went to South Carolina.  And he had a job in some high school out from (unclear) Lawrenceburg?
Speaker 1: Oh, now, this is after you got your Masters degree?
Speaker 2: Right, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, when I got married, I had worked one year on my Masters degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 21473
Speaker 1: Tell us about your Master's thesis?
Speaker 2: My Master's thesis was, it was in something called Diene Chemistry, more specifically, Butadiene Chemistry.  And the reason I did it in that area was because Dr.  [Kimuel Alonzo] Huggins, that was Dr. Huggins', his research interests.  And so to tell you the truth, I really didn't want to do it, do my work in that area.  I wanted to work with Dr. [Henry] McBay, and I decided that whenever Dr. Huggins wanted somebody to work with him, they worked with him.  And so he gave me a project, and I worked.  I completed it.  I'm not sure I can even remember the name.  It had two substituents on it, but I'm not sure I can remember what they are now.
Speaker 1: There's a name here, Studies on One, Three Butadiene.  It's studies on One or Four Methophenal (ph.), dash one through Butadiene.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had, the, I had to make that compound.  And to tell you the truth, I never really made it, and I tried to tell Dr. Huggins that something that I had seen in the literature suggested that the people who said they made it, didn't make it.  But he didn't hear that.  At least making it the way that they said they had made it, and then some years later, I met a student over there who had the same project, and they, that person couldn't make it.  And what they did, they altered the process and they made it a different way.  But he told me, oh, they had made it.  It was in the literature.  But apparently, they didn't make it the way they said they had made it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a process that you actually invented then, right, for doing this?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't because he wanted me to continue to do it the way that they said.  I didn't do it, but later on there was a person, another person who he gave that same project to, and they could not make it the same that the people in the literature said they made it.  So this, this girl told me that she did something else, and she made it.  But he wouldn't allow me to change the method.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now, what is Butadiene?  What is it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, the best thing I can say is that Butadienes were, at that time, they were being used in rubber chemistry.  But that was not what Dr. Huggins was, what his main interests were.  But I really don't know how they were being used except to say that dienes will do something that we call polymerize.  That means you get one chain and they hook, they hook up that way.  And I'm not sure exactly what his interests in them were except he may have, he may have gotten that from graduate school.  But butadienes do polymerize, and that's why, that's the way they were making rubber.  But I don't know anything about rubber chemistry because I don't like polymerization chemistry.
Story_ID: 21474
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So after you finished your degree, you took a job in South Carolina?
Speaker 2: At South Carolina State [University].  What happened was, I had applied to several colleges, you know, for a job.  And South Carolina State University offered me the highest salary.  And so I went to South Carolina State.  I stayed there a year and a summer, and I think I went back later on after I got my doctorate.  And I taught General Chemistry to all of the students, all the freshmen.  I wasn't too happy with that.
Speaker 1: So those were big classes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I, it wasn't so much that they were big classes.  It was because we had in there, we had in those courses the students who were majoring in chemistry and those who were not majoring in chemistry.  Everybody at the school had to take that General Chemistry course.  And I didn't feel, Number One, that I could teach the majors what they needed to know because the non-majors were in there.  And if I had to teach the non-majors, then I couldn't teach the majors what they needed to know.  And I complained about that (laughter).  The chairman told me, he told me that they had hired two faculty members because they had to teach all these students.  And basically, what he implied to me was, they wouldn't, they would not have needed me if I didn't have to teach all these students.
Story_ID: 21475
Speaker 1: But what happened was, as it turned out, I got invited back to Morehouse [College].  And so--
Speaker 2: Now, did Dr. [Henry] McBay invite you, I mean--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --to Morehouse?  Where did you first meet Dr. McBay?
Speaker 1: When I was at Atlanta University [Georgia].  He was the chairman of the chemistry department at Morehouse, but at the time, they, you know, they exchanged teachers.  He taught at, some of the courses at Atlanta University.  And that's when I first met him.  And interestingly enough, Dr. McBay told me that when they got my application, he--I guess he was on the review committee.  And he was talking about all the A's I had on there and all that.  So he knew me from that, and plus the fact I took one or two courses from him.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is Dr. Henry C. McBay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And so, okay--
Speaker 1: It was interesting.  Dr. Benjamin E. Mays used to go to South Carolina State [University] every year to give a lecture.  I've forgotten what they called that lecture.  And Dr. McBay told him to invite me back to Morehouse.  And what happened--this is interesting, what happened was he came to give the lecture.  I guess I didn't know anything about it because I wasn't there.  But he had the president of South Carolina State to drive him over to my apartment.  And he came in and told me that--and B. C. Turner, who was the president of South Carolina State, stayed in the car.  And he came and he told me that Dr. McBay told him to invite me back to Morehouse.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So this is 1962?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're there about three years before you decide to work on your doctorate degree?
Speaker 1: Okay, when I came back, I came that Fall.  I came to Morehouse, and Dr. McBay gave me one course called, it was called "Organic Chemistry".  And the rest of the time I was supposed to do research in his research lab.  That's what I was doing.  And basically, what I said, this is, and this is how I said it to myself as people say, is that, if I'm going to stay in this teaching business, I have to go back and get a doctorate.  That's, that is not really the way you plan your life, but that's how I planned it.  I didn't plan it, that's what happened.  And so I stayed at Morehouse two years, and during the second year, I wrote for a lots of applications.  And I got two, I got one from [University of] Chicago and one from Howard University [Washington, D.C.] back before I got the others, and I filled those out and sent them in.  And before I could fill out any others, I had gotten offers from those two colleges.  And Dr. McBay is a graduate of the University of Chicago [Illinois] as well as Dr. [Kimuel Alonzo] Huggins, as well as Benjamin Mays.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: But that really wasn't why I went there (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's a lot of influence though (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, but when they sent me the stuff back, they, they offered me a very lucrative teaching assistantship.  Howard [University] offered me one too, but it wasn't as lucrative.  I know now that Howard is a black college, and Chicago is a, you know, has lots of money.  But that was one of the things that had influenced me to go there, and I'm so happy that I went because I don't have to explain to anybody where I got my degree.
Story_ID: 21476
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us--we hear about Dr. McBay all the time, Dr. Henry C. McBay.
Speaker 2: Henry C, yes.
Speaker 1: What was he like and how did you interact with him?
Speaker 2: He was, he was really, he could be funny.  He could tell jokes and all of that, but he was very, very serious about his teaching and his students learning.  That's what I can say about him.  And I don't know, when I--I was in his class, in his--he had a class called "General Chemistry for Teachers" because that was in the, in the NSF [National Science Foundation] grant.  And he taught that, and basically, what he said, there was no such thing as a general chemistry for teachers.  That was, it was general chemistry.  But, and he also used to tell us, he would put a whole lot of references on the board.  And he would say when you get out, I want you to, you know, to read these things.  And I really didn't understand what he meant at that time.  But it wasn't something that we could do at that time, but it was something that we should read later on.  He would always talk about the students, you know, and their grades.  And he didn't, that he didn't care who they were.  He would give them the grade that they earned; when they came in there, they all had an A, you know, and all of that.  He was really funny.  But he didn't play when it came to his coursework.
Story_ID: 21477
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, University of Chicago [Illinois].  Now, did your husband move to Chicago [Illinois] with you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went to Chicago Conservatory.  I'm sorry I keep forgetting, but I keep rubbing my eye because of pollen.  He went to the conservatory, Chicago Conservatory College.  He got a Masters from there.
Speaker 1: Is this the music conservatory?
Speaker 2: Music, yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he was pursuing his Masters degree as you were pursuing your PhD--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --at the University of Chicago.  Okay, now, what did you think of the University of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  Can you kind of explain what you--
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  This is 1965 in Chicago.  Let's see what's going on here.  We've got the Black Panthers are starting, not the Black Panthers, yeah, the Black Panthers were starting up there.  We also had the Blackstone Rangers there, right next to Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I would think, I mean the cultural atmosphere is one thing, but then the atmosphere on campus is a very serious campus.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  Well, the University of Chicago, well, number one, I was not, I was not--I did not get into the University of Chicago because of some affirmative action.  They had always had people, black people, in there.  I'm talking now about chemistry because Dr., I think Dr. [Kimuel Alonzo] Huggins--Dr. [Henry] McBay got his in 1945.  And Dr. Huggins got his before then.  And Dr. Mays got his, but in the chemistry department, they had not had but one other, one female to get a PhD in chemistry.  And it had not been too long.  So I don't want to say that they were not too kind to me, but at the beginning, they were not.  I had to prove myself, just put it that way.  When I went there, I really wanted to learn chemistry like the people who wrote the books.  That's what I wanted to do, and I didn't care how long it took me, but that's what I wanted.  When I left Morehouse [College], I quit my job.  I didn't go on leave, and there was a man who worked in Benjamin E. Mays' office, he called me and told me to come and get my letter and write a letter saying that I wanted to go on leave.  I said, I don't wanna go on leave because I don't want anybody telling me I have to come back because my leave has expired.  So I went there to learn what I, you know, I wanted to really learn chemistry.  Well, the first year I was there, near the end of the first year, I was told that I had to take the prelims, and the prelims, you have to do the prelims before you can go into your research.  They have a set of courses that you take.  You do the prelim.  If you pass the prelim, then you go and do your research.  Well, I told them I didn't want to take the prelims.  I said, I'm not, I'm not really in any hurry.  And they made me take them.  Now, here was the problem.  We had a lab class, and I had spent all of my time in the lab, working out the experiments.  The other people in my, in that class with me had been studying, and when they'd come back to the lab, I would say, "Well, you can't do this, you need to do so and so."  I had already figured out the experiment, and I would tell them how to do it because the experiment came out of the literature.  It wasn't in a book where somebody had figured it all out.  Well, then when they made me take the test, that means I had to take the test, and I had not studied because I hadn't planned to take it.
Story_ID: 21478
Speaker 1: Now, when, after we took the test--the test was about six hours long, and when they told us it was time to go, I was about half way through the test.  And anyway, the next week when--there was an administration there.  I don't know what his title was, but he was the one who was telling us, you know, what our scores.  In the, at the, at Chicago, you either passed the test or you failed it with a recommendation to take it over or you failed it with a recommendation that you shouldn't take it over.  Now, when I went to see him, he just jumped all over me, talking about we let yawl in here and blah, blah, blah.  And then, and I said, well, sir, I said, I don't think that I did--I know I didn't pass the test because I hadn't studied for it, but I don't believe that I did as poorly as you are telling me.  And he just went on and on.  Anyway, I left, and I went to my advisor's office.  And he said, no, he said, you didn't do that poorly.  I made the second highest score on that test because he told me what the highest one was and told me what mine was.  And I hadn't even studied.  My problem was, I had not practiced enough so I could work faster than I did.  And so he said, nah, you know, don't worry about it.  But here's the thing about it.  When they give you a recommendation that says you can't take it over, that means that they didn't have to, they did not have to support you while you were preparing for the next test.  Now, and they told me I should not take it, I should not, I should not--the recommendation was that I should not take it over.  There was one black guy who was working at the cancer center over there.  They told--and he was part time.  They told him he should not take it over.  And there was one or two white fellows.  All the rest of the people they told, who failed it--and most, I found out later that everybody almost failed that test the first time.  But I didn't know that.  Anyway, I had never failed a test in my life, but at least I talked to my advisor.  The other guy, he was really upset because I talked to his wife that night, and I told him, you know, what had happened.  To make a long story short, I went out looking for a job.  And I looked.  I went to some places, they gave me every test that they had for everybody.
Story_ID: 21479
Speaker 1: And, but one, I went to this one lady, and this was a white lady.  And she said, she said, I know you failed the prelims, and she said, if I were you, I would go back and I, I would go home and study.  That's what she said, and go back and take that over and she said because I finished the University of Chicago in chemistry.  And she said, I had a hard time finding a job.  And she said, you're black and you're gonna have an even harder time than I had.  So I won't, I, she said, I could give you this job.  She said, but I don't want to.  I want you to go back and I wish her name.  I wish I had written it down so I could remember because she told me, do it.  And she didn't give me the job.  So I went home and started studying.  And, and I worked every problem--that's not important, but I went home, and I studied.  And I got called up there, and I think what happened was, the man must have, somebody must have told them that they had offered me four semesters of fellowship, and I had only had three.  So the man told me there was job over in Indiana at Standard Oil or there was a professor who had a job.  To make a long story short, I went to, talked to the professor.  I went to Gary [Indiana], and I decided I wanted to work for the professor.  And so he told me what he wanted to do.  And it's important that I tell you.  You told me, you asked me about Chicago.  I'm gonna tell you.  And so he told me what he wanted me to do, and then he told me, he said, "Well, if I hire you, you have to work a full day."  I didn't understand what he meant because he said, if you hire me, I'm supposed to work a full day.  I found out later that the people who got hired did not, did not do any work.  What they did was study for the test.  He said I had to work a full day and study on my own.  Okay, so he gave me a copy of the first experiment that I was supposed to do.  And low and behold--I have to tell you this first, I had had three years of German.  I had not had any French.  The article was in French.  I said, oh, my Lord.  So I went to the bookstore.  I got a French dictionary.  I went home, and I translated it and went back up there.  And I'll make a long story short, I set up.  I ran it.  The last part of the experiment was to do something called Sublimation, and he told me to take it upstairs to one of his labs up there.  So I took it up there, and two of the, two fellows who were his students were working in there.  And they said, you need, you want a, oh, man, I can't think of what I'm trying to say.  Anyway, I put it in there.  They, oh, I'll remember it in a minute.  And I put it, I said, I, no, I'm not gonna need that.  I said because I'm gonna get lots of product.  And so later on, I left it up there, and I went on back down to my office.  And I went to the office to fill out some papers or something.  And all of a sudden, here comes the professor down the hall, and he came in there.  He said, oh, we have lots of nynflorene (ph.), lots of nynflorence, lots.  I said, what is wrong with him?  Now, what I didn't know was that he had had everybody in his group to work on that problem, and none of them had gotten anything except a little bit--I can't, not the microscope.  What, oh, man, I can't think of what I'm trying to say.  They could barely see what they had gotten, those who got any.  He had hired somebody to do it.  And what happened was, I set it up.  I'd run it, and I had lots of the stuff the first time.  And that's why he was--and they told me that he went and calculated how much money he had spent trying to get somebody to make that compound because that was the parent compound in a series of compounds that he wanted to do for his research.  And anyway, to make a long story short, I didn't have any more problems after that.  But--
Story_ID: 21480
Speaker 1: You didn't what?
Speaker 2: I didn't have any more problems after that because first of all, when he would come down there, I would have two and three reactions set up, going at the same time because that's what I had learned from Atlanta University, from [Dr. Henry] McBay, from [Dr. Kimuel Alonzo] Huggins.  That's the way we had done stuff.  We had to work at night, seven days per week.  And so I would work at night.  I didn't work when I was working for him, I didn't.  When I started my problem, I did.  And so, and he would come down, get his coffee, and he would look, what you got going?  What you got?  It wasn't but a few weeks, all of a sudden he told me that, he told me that, oh, you just gone and study or do something.  I can't keep up with you.  And so all of a sudden now, this was the first quarter for the second year.  I was right there where everybody else was, studying for the test and didn't have to do any work because I had done everything that he told me to do.  And he didn't have anything else to tell me to do.  And the lady, the librarian came down there one day.  She said, you look so sad, so, so depressed.  She said, let me tell you one thing.  She said, you can make zero on that test, and you will pass it.  And she was right.  And the first time, I didn't, I learned later that I didn't have anybody to talk up for me.  That's why I failed it because, you have the written part.  Then they get in a group and all the professors discuss it.  I didn't have anybody, any--didn't anybody know me.  They didn't know what I could do.  And so anyway, and even before I took the written part over--there were five of us, and I know that except for one part, a B part, of one question, everything else that I did was right.  So I knew I must have made the highest score and nobody would tell me.
Story_ID: 21481
Speaker 1: Now, this, repeat that again.  What you were saying was interesting about the commons and teaching people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the first year.  We would go in the ladies common room, and I would, we would have problems to do.  And I would teach them how to do those mechanisms and, because I had taught, I had taught the course for two years.  And so they, when, at the end of the course, I got a "B", and some of them got A's, and I didn't do, it really didn't dawn on me at that time.  I still kept doing it until the second year.  At the second year, I decided that I would just mind my own business.  I wouldn't tell anybody anything (laughter) because of what had happened.  But what happened after that, my professor told me, he said, you know I have, I've assigned you to work for me.  And he didn't ask me if I wanted to.  That was even before we had, you had to have--in prelims, you had to have a written part, five hours.  And then you had to have a presentation.  And even before I did my presentation, he told me he had already signed me up.  But to make a long story short, what happened was, I didn't lose any time because when I made that compound, that became my problem.  And, and I had already done part of it.  So it was interesting because, you know, I had never been in a situation like that before.  I had been through two, two black colleges.  And I hadn't, I hadn't gotten whatever I had made, whatever I had earned, I had it on my transcript except in one case.  But I had never been in a situation where I had to prove myself.  And interestingly enough, every since I have been out of, I have been out of school, I have to prove myself.  I did a post-doc at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology].  I had to prove myself.  I went out to California.  I had to prove myself.  And I think it's all related to the fact that there are people out there who don't think that people, black people can really understand chemistry.  And so, and especially a woman because I always said that--and this is really true.  I did not know that a black woman wasn't supposed to get a PhD in chemistry until it was too late.  I already had one.  And--
Speaker 1: So you had already committed the crime without even knowing it was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.  And the lady who did it before I did, got hers--the first one who got it, her name is Reatha Clark-King, and she finished Clark College.  And so.
Speaker 1: Yes, so your advisor was Leon Stock?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my thesis advisor.
Speaker 1: Thesis advisor.
Speaker 2: But he wasn't the one when I, the man was Dr., he was a German, Dr. Klaus, I believe was his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a German person.
Story_ID: 21482
Speaker 1: Now, you got your PhD in 1968?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the year that Dr. [Martin Luther] King was assassinated that year--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: A lot of things, all, a lot of things.  Bobby Kennedy's assassinated that same Spring, and--
Speaker 2: Martin Luther King, when he was assassinated, I was working on my dissertation because at [University of] Chicago, what the people did was, when they finished their research in the lab, then they would come in every day and write on their dissertation.  I was writing on my dissertation at home every night.  Anyway, I think that was when I decided that my contribution to the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968] would be to come back to a black college and teach.  And it didn't have to be Morris Brown [College].  It didn't have to be Morehouse [College], but a black college, to give them the advantage of the education that I had gotten because in my mind I was one who had slipped through the wire mesh fence.  And so I needed to do something for black kids who were coming up.  And it was when Dr. King was killed.
Speaker 1: Now, were you in Chicago [Illinois] in, now, you were there when he moved to Chicago briefly in '66' [1966], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a chance to hear him speak in person?
Speaker 2: No, I was in the lab (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, I realize that lab work is very intense, but I just wondered because I know he was in town and made a big struggle with the Mayor [Richard J.] Daley and all that.
Speaker 2: Well, one thing I forgot to tell you was when I graduated from college, he was our speaker.
Speaker 1: At Arkansas [Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal University]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And I found out, not, it was maybe now, it may have been 10 years ago, but his son, who was the chancellor, told me about how much, how many problems that his daddy had because he brought him there to speak.
Speaker 1: Oh, the son of the president of--
Speaker 2: It was AM and N then.
Speaker 1: AM and N.
Speaker 2: His son is the chancellor now, and we were talking the last time I was there.  And he was telling me how much problem, how many problems that he had.  But I remembered that Martin Luther King, [Jr.], you know, you don't remember anything that people say at those kinds of things.  All you wanna do is get out of there, but I do remember that he said, he said, "Don't go out to be the best doctor, the best black doctor.  Don't go out to be the best black teacher" and so on.  What he said was, go out to be the "best" doctor, the best teacher.  And I, that's the only thing I can remember that he said.  But, yeah, he was very young when he talked to our--and interestingly enough, they had him, they had my picture in the "Crisis Magazine" along with his.  My mother had it for a while.  I don't know what happened to it.  I can't find it now because I was the Valedictorian and he was the speaker.
Speaker 1: Just a word, it's online now.  You can find it online, the whole "Crisis",--
Speaker 2: You think so?
Speaker 1: --the whole publication.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I probably can find it then.
Story_ID: 21483
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Okay, so Dr. King's assassinated in April the 4th [1968], and did you graduate in May or--
Speaker 2: No, what happened was, it's kind of funny.  I finished my dissertation.  I finished everything, but I didn't finish in time to graduate for that semester.  So what I did was I graduated in December.  And the funny thing about it, all the struggle that I had at first, there were only two students who got out before me in the Organic area.
Speaker 1: In the whole department?
Speaker 2: In the "Organic" part.  And those students got out because their professor did not get tenure so he left and went on.  And he got them out.  They got out that summer, and I got--I had finished everything, but I didn't get it in in time, so I got out, in fact, I graduated in December.  But if he had not, if it had not been for the fact that he didn't get tenure and he went on somewhere else, I would have been the first person from the organic class to graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, tell us in, I guess in simplest terms as possible, what your dissertation was about?  I know it was about Fluorine 19, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  There is something called, oh, how do I say it?  Well, my professor was interested in looking at the mechanism of transmission of substituent effects.  That's too much.  We have in organic chemist, we have reaction, reactant in products and reactants come together, and they end up as products over here.  Now, in between over here, the reactant and over here the products, there is something called a mechanism which is how they come together to form whatever is over here, the mechanism.  And my professor was studying the mechanism of certain reactions.  And he had been doing it, using something else, some other technique.  And what he wanted to do, he wanted to try to use another, another way of getting information on the mechanism.  And what he wanted to use was NMR, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.  And if I have trouble saying some words, I had a stroke in 2004.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And sometimes I, the words won't come out like I was trying to think of this thing.  I can't, I know what it is.  I couldn't think of it.  Anyway, he wanted, he wanted to use nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, NMR, and he wanted to use fluorine, and Fluorine 19 because that shows up in the NMR.  At that time, most people only, were only using hydrogen NMR.  So, that's why he wanted, he wanted this parent compound, and he had been trying to get all these people to make it, and I had made it.  And so what you do, we had the fluorine up, that was, we called the parent compound.  And then we put a whole lot of different things at the, down here, we called the substituents.  And we looked at, we looked at the NMR, and how the signal changes based on what is down here.  When we start off, we have an "H" down here.  That's the parent compound.  Then we have a whole lot of different things down there.  And we look at how the signal changes.  And that gave us some information on how, it gave us some information on the mechanism of how these things come together and form this over here.  That's the best I can do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, the end product is what?
Speaker 2: Well, I had to make all the compounds.  The first one I had to make.  It had "F" up here, and "H" down here.  That was the one he was concerned about, and then I had to make a whole lot of the others.  And then I had to go and measure.  Interestingly enough, they got an instrument at the University of Chicago that measured "H" NMR and F-19 NMR.  And I was the only one who could operate it because you had to switch from "H" to F-19.  And don't put this in there, but when I, when I didn't want to, when I didn't want anybody else to use the instrument, I would leave it on F-19.  And they couldn't or they would have to come and ask me to switch it back for them (laughter).  That was a brand new instrument.
Speaker 1: Well, some--
Speaker 2: And there were about, there were two or three other groups in the country that were doing F-19, same kind of stuff that I was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you distinguish yourself at the University in that regard.
Speaker 2: Interesting enough, the man over in the cancer research would send some stuff over there for me to run the F-19 NMR for him.  I don't even remember his name.  He was doing research.
Story_ID: 21484
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said the American Chemical Society held its annual meeting in Chicago [Illinois] that year?  Do you remember that?  Was that after you graduated or--
Speaker 2: That was, no, I was still there.  And Dr. [Henry] McBay and actually, Dr. McBay and Dr. Groves came over to the University of Chicago [Illinois].  And that was when Dr. McBay told me that Morris Brown [College] was looking for a chairman.  You see, when I left Morehouse, I quit, quit, period.  And so they didn't have, they didn't have a job that I could apply for there, but he told me that there was no reason that I couldn't be a chairman of a department.  And so he, he told me to apply.  And so I did, and I ended up at Morris Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, Morris Brown in those days, there was no Atlanta University [Georgia], I mean they weren't all--I mean Clark in Atlanta U were not together.  But you had Clark [College], Atlanta U [University, Georgia], Morris Brown, Spelman [College]--
Speaker 2: And Morehouse [College].
Speaker 1: --and Morehouse, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and we had the Atlanta University Center at that time.  And to tell you the truth, the chemistry, Spelman didn't have a chemistry department.  They sent theirs to Morehouse.  Morehouse, Clark and AU [Atlanta University] were very strong departments.  But Morris Brown's chemistry department was almost like, well, it wasn't like, it wasn't zero, but it had--I had to do a whole lot of stuff to bring it up to par.  And so I had two goals when I came there.  One was to make that chemistry department the best chemistry department in the center, and the best chemistry department of any college of similar size and nature.  And I do believe that I had done that before we lost our accreditation.  The second goals was to complete, to do research.  And that is not an easy thing to do at a black college, but I had a goal to do research.  And before we lost our accreditation, actually, we lost in 2003.  It was about year 2000 when I got to the point where I could crank out patents.  And we lost our accreditation and ultimately, they shut the building down.  And so I can't even do anymore research or anything.  But we had, we had at least a half million dollars worth of instruments and all kinds of stuff.  So we had a good chemistry department.
Speaker 1: Okay, so by the time you left it was a good department?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 21485
Speaker 1: Did it take, what was--did you have an uphill kind of struggle to make it the best or did you get cooperation for (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Well, when I went there, I got a grant the first, well, it was the second year by the time I got the grant.  I wrote a proposal.  I got a grant, and that grant was to have, to get some instruments.  And the smaller stuff, like glassware and that kind of stuff, I went over to the president's office, and I told him, I said, I have this grant.  I'm gonna get this instrument, NMR [nuclear magnetic resonance], and all that.  I said, but I can't buy glassware with it.  And I said, I was--actually, I had prepared my speech, but before I could get it out.  He said, will $10,000 help you (laughter)?  And so, I didn't have any real problem.  And then from there on, I wrote proposals.  The problem I had, and I would still have it today, is that I could not really get any real good research money.  And I think that's related to the fact that Morris Brown [College] does not have a history in research.  And it's a black college, and so it doesn't make any difference, you know, that I have a degree from the University of Chicago [Illinois].  And I'm pretty sure I know I was the best researcher in my group when I was there.  But that doesn't make any difference.  But what I did was, I got the instruments, and all the stuff that I needed to do research through educational programs.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who was in the department with you at Morris Brown?
Speaker 2: Well, when we lost, we--you are familiar with the fact that we lost our accreditation, are you or are you not?
Speaker 1: I am aware of it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that didn't come till much later, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I'm gonna have to start there.  When we lost our accreditation, we had, I think we had seven PhDs in that department.  And when I first came there, there were three people in the department, and two of them had Master's and I had a PhD.  Along the way, we got up to four or five or something.  And then through attribution and whatever, we went back down.  But eventually, we got up to, I think it was seven PhDs.  One, I would say seven doctorates because one fellow has a doctorate in teaching chemistry.  And the rest of them had, were PhDs.
Speaker 1: So, now, you, were you able to really concentrate on research in the beginning?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, what happened was, the dean told me that Morris Brown was a teaching institution.  And there was no, would have been no different from any other college because black colleges are teaching institutions.  And what she told me was, that if I wanted to do research, I had to do it on my own time.  And that's what I did.  Every, in the evening, on weekends.  And we had a, we had a course in our program called "Undergraduate Research", but to tell you the truth, it's harder to do research when you have to teach that course than it is if you were just in there doing it on your own.  But most of the time, I did it in the evenings and on weekends until much, much later on when it got to be too dangerous to be up there by myself.
Speaker 1: So, let's see.  I asked about some of the other people in the department.  We have the names for a couple of people.  Did you work with a Charles Leanna at all?
Speaker 2: That was at Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology].  He was my advisor when I did my post-doc over there.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and then it says here in '71' [1971], that you were, you continued investigating the Fluorine 19.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with the Atlanta University Center for Research committee.  And then, all right.
Speaker 2: Do you have any other names down there because if you do, I can--
Speaker 1: No, just John Middleton was president of Morris Brown then?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, John A. Middleton, and you said he supported--they supported you pretty much from the start?
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Story_ID: 21486
Speaker 1: Okay, now, '72' [1972], were you in the group that founded NOBCChE [National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers]?  Were you in that founding group?
Speaker 2: No, I was not in that group.  Charles Meredith, who was the executive director of the center, chancellor, that's what they called him, he was in that.  But I was never in the group.  I belonged to that organization at one time.  I don't belong to it now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, okay, is there a reason why you got out of it or just because you're not doing the research anymore?
Speaker 2: No, I got out of it even while I was still doing research.  One of the things that happened with that organization is there were a whole lot more people in there who were corporate types than academic types.  And so, you know, they had money to go to those meetings.  If you were at a poor, black college, you may or may not have money.  That was mainly, you know, the reason I got out.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, in '72' [1972], now, it says here that President Richard Nixon appointed you to a six-year term to the Board of Directors of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that come about?  It seems like it--
Speaker 2: Well, I got a call from a friend of mine who lived in DeKalb County [Georgia], well, we'll say Atlanta [Georgia].  But we went to college together, and she told me--and you can figure out what you want to say, and she told me that Sonny Walker had been asked to name somebody, to recommend somebody for that position.  And he had called her, and she had given him my name.  Sonny Walker, William "Sonny" Walker, at that time, I think he was in Little Rock, but he was a, he was high, kind of high in the Democratic Party.  And what happened was, I think that was when the Republicans were trying to get some black Democrats to move over to the Republican Party.  Now, I don't know if that's a fact or not, but he was a Democrat who was being asked to recommend somebody for that position.  And one of the reasons was that at that time, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting had fifteen members on the board, but they could only have one more of either party.  Now, that didn't come out right.  In other words, they could have, half of them could be Democrats and the Republicans could have the same number, but they would have one more.  And so he was, he was asked to recommend somebody for a Democrat seat.  So I was not a Republican.  I was not appointed.  I was appointed by a Republican, but I was appointed to a Democrat seat.  And Sonny Walker was responsible for that.
Story_ID: 21487
Speaker 1: Okay, explain, now, you became the--well, I'll ask that.  But it's not time for that yet.  I was just looking at my sheet.  But tell us about the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.  What did you actually, what was your role on the board and what kind of decisions did you all make?
Speaker 2: Okay, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting was created under an act, I think it was 1967--I haven't looked at that in a long time, to facilitate the full growth and development of public broadcasting in the United States and its territories.  Now, what that meant was that the Congress gave the corporation a certain amount of money and the corporation divvied it up in three ways.  They kept some for the corporation.  They gave PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] some of it and then they gave NPR [National Public Radio] some of it, according to a formula.  As a part of the Corporation for Public Broadcasting Board, mostly what I did during the seven years--and I was there seven years because according to the rules, I was appointed for a six-year term.  But according to the rule you have to serve until your successor is named.  And that's why I was there seven years.  Most of what I did was to try to increase minority and women's participation in public broadcasting in this country in programming, in employment and at board levels.  That's mostly what I did.  So in that respect, then I, I chaired three national task forces related to that.  The first one was for minority programming.  The second one for, was for minorities in broadcasting, and that covered every area, training.  It also covered employment programming and all of that.  That was a real study.  And the third one was minority, not minorities, but women in public broadcasting.  And so most of my efforts were in that area because, Number One, at the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, there were no minorities.  There were, well, I shouldn't say there wasn't no minorities, but there really were not, there were no minorities at higher levels in there.
Speaker 1: There were some on television, but not in--
Speaker 2: I'm not even at PBS yet, at the corporation.
Speaker 1: All right, just at the corporation, all right.
Speaker 2: And there were no women at the higher levels.  And the same thing is true or was true of PBS, who does send the broadcasting and NPR.  Now, it's a little bit better, but I was told that when I left, all the recommendations that they had on the table, that they just forgot about them once I left.  When I, before I left, they had appointed a Hispanic to the board and later on there was a black man who was appointed to the board.  The Hispanic was interested in helping me with what I did.  Unfortunately, the black man really didn't seem to have too much interest in what I was doing.  One of the problems that I and the corporation, the board members, had was in terms of the fact that PBS and NPR are not set up like NBC [National Broadcasting Company], CBS, all those.  They can't tell anybody, any of those stations what to do.  And so what we had to do was we had to find ways of encouraging stations to hire people.  So we had a minority hiring program.  In that program, what we did was to, if a station wanted to hire a minority, we would give them half of the salary, that kind of thing.  One of the biggest jobs that we had, that CPB [Corporation for Public Broadcasting] had while I was on the board was that we establish the Internet--it's not Internet.  We established the satellite connection for the local stations, and that was before NBC or any of the broadcasting stations did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was done what, around 1978 or so?
Speaker 2: Right, somewhere along there.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause I remember something, some national pole where Tony Brown or something had people, like they could actually vote on television, you know, with their phone or something like that, called--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the black presence, I know on PBS in those days, with "Tony Brown's Journal", and I think we had some black people on "Sesame Street", "The Electric Company", and "Soul", I think with Ellis (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ella (unclear).  But what they did was, for the most part, they added some programs that went out on the national level.  And CPB funded some minority programs.  But they changed the way they were doing things.  And so the people, the stations out there had to buy the programs and all of that.  And that, I think that had an effect on the minority programs.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know at some point, I guess this would be while you were there, the Reagan Administration, they sliced public, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting considerably, right?
Speaker 2: Well, what they were always talking about was cutting the funding.  It wasn't really [President Ronald] Reagan.  It was [President Richard] Nixon.  That's when we had the biggest problem.  We had a big problem because as I understand it, the people who surrounded Nixon were not happy with what the commercial broadcasters were saying about him.  And so--and I'm not saying Nixon did this, but the people who surrounded themselves wanted the PBS to take on a different role, which was not appropriate.  And so we had quite a bit of stuff on that.
Story_ID: 21488
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, it says in '73' [1973], you became Fuller E. Calloway professor of Chemistry at Morris Brown [College]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I was asking you off camera, like who is Fuller E. Calloway, and what's his role in Georgia's--
Speaker 2: There's a whole Calloway family in Georgia.  And some of, I think it was his children, maybe his son who set it up when Fuller E. Calloway died.  They set up a trust fund.  And they, the goal of that program is to enable every four-year college and, or university in Georgia to attract and maintain some of the best professors that they can find.  So every four year college in Georgia has at least one Fuller E. Calloway professor or they have at least a slot.  There may be some who don't have anybody right now because they may not have sent somebody up that would be qualified according to the advisory board because you have to send your CV [curriculum vitae] up there.  And the advisory committee has to pick, you know, the person.  So it's not just like the college said, well, I want "X" person to have this chair.  They have to send, they have to recommend somebody, and that person, that person sends, rather the college sends the CV up there.  And they, the advisory committee decides on, you know, who gets it.  But every college and, or university in Georgia has at least one slot.  Some of them have more than one slot.
Speaker 1: So that's basically, when you receive that chair, you are seen as someone who's extremely valuable to the campus, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, and interestingly enough, some of my colleagues didn't quite understand that.  And I was sick one time, and they were running around figuring out who was gonna get this Calloway chair.  But it's not that simple because the advisory committee-I have it right now, even though Morris Brown is not accredited.  I went out sick in 2004.  I had a stroke, and I came back to Morris Brown in 2007.  And the president at that time told me that the Calloway people had told him that they thought I had retired, and if I wanted that chair back, I could get it back.  All I had to do was teach one class.  And so I still have it.  It's really an honor to, it's more of an honor to say that I'm Calloway Professor of Chemistry than it is to say I'm Vice President for Academic Affairs as far as I'm concerned.
Story_ID: 21489
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '73' [1973], Morris Brown withdrew from the Atlanta University Center.  Can you explain to us what the relationship has been for Morris Brown [College], and I guess how Morris Brown relates to the rest of the Atlanta University [Georgia] complex?
Speaker 2: Well, that was short lived.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We had some consultants come in, and I know at least one of them was a Morris Brown graduate.  And he convinced the then president, I think who was Dr. Middleton, that we should not be a part of AU [Atlanta University] Center.  And I think it was probably, well, I shouldn't say.  I'm not sure exactly why.  But anyway, so then Morris Brown talked about withdrawing from the Center, and I guess they--I was not in administration then.  But I assumed that they did withdraw.  But it was short lived because, Number One, at that time, there were a lot of our courses that were being taught at other schools in the center.  And we had to show our accrediting agency how we were going to cover those courses if we're not part of the center.  And so what happened was, I think, I don't know how long it was.  But the college, the other presidents in the center decided that if Morris Brown wanted to come back in, we had to get rid of the president who took us out of the center in the first place.  And that happened.  The board helped Dr. Middleton to resign, and then we got back in the center.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, okay, so--
Speaker 2: But that is different from what happened now because when we lost our accreditation, the center said that we could not be a part of the AU Center.  And so they kicked us out.  And then shortly after that, they dissolved the AU Center.  So there is no AU Center anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did, so the various institutions in the old center would share classes with each other?
Speaker 2: Everything.
Speaker 1: Everything, okay.
Speaker 2: We shared human resources, facilities, everything, everything was available, you know, to the school.  So if I needed, if my student needed a course at another school, early on all that student had to do was register at Morris Brown for the other school and vice versa.  If somebody at Morehouse [College] needed--when I first came here, I had lots of students in my class from Morehouse, Spelman [College] and I had them up until, it was probably somewhere in the early '80's [1980s].  And what happened was, if a student wanted to take my class, and they were at Morehouse, all they had to do was register for it at Morehouse.  In 1998, the AU Center went to a new student management system called BANA.  And it did not allow you to register from your institution for a class somewhere else.  I think that was kind of stupid.  But anyway, so we still had the arrangement.  So the student would have to come over, you know, physically, come over to another campus in order to register.  But it still existed.  Now, it doesn't exist anymore, period.
Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections on that as to whether it's good or bad?
Speaker 2: I think it's bad because one of the things that attracted me to the AU Center was the fact that all these schools were here together.  And it wasn't, I wasn't just working at Morris Brown.  I had all the access to everything, and when I first came here, the Atlanta University person would have to--all of the graduate students had to talk to everybody in the center.  They had to come over to me and find out what I was doing in my research, go to Spelman, all the undergraduate schools.  And then they would decide who they wanted to do their research under.  I had, I had about four students to work on their Masters degree under me.  If, we had also--I'm talking only about chemistry because some, most of the other ones were not as, was not as cooperative as we were.  In chemistry, we had an assistantship program where the undergrad schools would take at least one assistant.  And we would pay part of their salary.  And that meant that that would help Atlanta University attract more students in chemistry.  In organic chemistry, for example, there were four undergraduate classes.  Instead of having four of them, we decided we would have three people teaching it, and the fourth one would coordinate the labs.  And that would give him or her time to do more research.  It was a good thing.  When Tom Cole came here, he finished [University of] Chicago before I did, and I literally begged him to come to the AU Center.  And he was chairman of the Chemistry Department.  Now, he decided he was going to move on up and become the Vice President, and then all of that.  But it was really a good thing.  And, but, you see, the Ford Foundation tried to get us to combine.  I think that may be right, but also instead of, you know, the schools were not gonna do that.  But they did make an agreement that they were going to come together much more than we had been in the past.  And they did it, and they did.  We had a chancellor and all of that, and then when the money ran out, they decided to do something else.  But to answer your question, I thought it was a marvelous idea because it was not--you were teaching at a small institution.  But at the same time, you had the benefits of the whole university, of the center.
Story_ID: 21490
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in '76' [1976], two things happened.  You were made, named Outstanding Teacher at Morris Brown [College], and also Robert Threat came in as new president.  That's in '76' [1976], and you--I don't know if, you tell me if this is in the right space.  But there's a note here that says that you conducted research on Amantadines under the minority biochemical chemical support--medical support program of the National Institutes of Health.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Is that around the same time period?
Speaker 2: It probably is.  We had the, the National Institutes of Health [NIH] had a biomedical program which was really--Jerry Woods was the one who really, I think, encouraged them to put that program in place.  And the AU [Atlanta University] Center [Georgia] went in and wrote a proposal for everybody and sent it off, and it got funded.  And as we brought in more people into that program, the physical scientists really didn't--how do I want to say?  As we brought in more biochemists and biologists and all those kinds of people, then there was not enough space for those of us who were physical scientists.  And so what happened was, most of us got put out of the program, one way or the other.  Now, I don't know, I don't know if that program exists now, and what form it exists or whatever.  I know, after a few years, I was not able to apply for it under that grant.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this grant, and Amantadine is a drug used to prevent viral infections?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let me just try to explain that.  Amantadine, well, Amantadine itself or the salt of it, is an influenza drug treatment.  And there is no, no drug out there, at the last time I looked, there is no drug out there that will cure viral infections.  Amantadine is one that, if you take it shortly after you contract influenza, influenza--I don't remember what--Influenza II, I believe it is, it will help, you know, it will help, it will lessen the effects of it.  It will help you.  But there is no drug out there that will cure it.  Now, what I did was I was looking at what we call homologues or substituents, putting some new things on that one to see if it would make it better and whatever.  And that was basically what I was doing until about 1997 or so.  I started looking at cancer research using the same, basically, the same--not the same drug, but the same molecule.
Story_ID: 21491
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what were you doing with Lockheed Corporation for the National Science Foundation in 1981?
Speaker 2: Well, I applied for an industrial fellowship.  The National Science Foundation [NSF] was offering fellowships for people to go into industry and work that summer.  And I got one to go to Lockheed.  Now, what I did at Lockheed, I thought I was gonna have a particular project to work on.  But instead, Lockheed had a new instrument, and they wanted me to learn how to run it.  It was called an FGIR [sic, FTIR, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy] instrument.  And that's basically what I did.  And I went back the next summer, Lockheed had me come back the next summer to do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '84' [1984] Morris Brown gets a new president, Calvert Smith.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, now, he was president until nineteen ninety--
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: Two [1992], okay.  Now, what, did you have a role in that administration at all?
Speaker 2: Well, that's when I first went into administration.  He was the one who finally convinced me to take the Dean's job.  It was the same as the Vice President for Academic Affairs.  And I took it on what I thought was an acting basis, until for the first year until he could find somebody.  But I stayed in there until 1989.  So that was the first time I went into real administration because I didn't consider the job as chairman of the Chemistry Department as, you know, real administration.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is the period of time in '89' [1989] when you were ill?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 21492
Speaker 1: All right, okay, so in, we were in '92' [1992], okay, where you were named the Interim President again in '92' [1992], right?  And you replaced Calvin Smith?
Speaker 2: That was the first time.
Speaker 1: First time, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this was the first time you became the Interim President?
Speaker 2: Right.   And I quit in January of '93' [1993].  I resigned that position.
Speaker 1: Is there, now, you're going through, I guess the last twenty years or so, Morris Brown [College] has been struggling.  Can you kind of summarize what's going on?
Speaker 2: Well, almost all black colleges struggle.  And the reason is because those colleges, except for maybe three or four of them, don't have the revenues to match the expenditures for the most part.  The student tuition, you know, it covers maybe 60 percent of the expenditures.  But then you have to raise the other part of it.  And if you don't have an endowment, that makes it even worse.  And there may be three or four schools that have decent endowments, like Spelman [College], Howard [University], Hampton [University].  Those are the only three that I can think of.  They have, they have halfway decent endowments.  But even those schools, I would guess, have a problem with cash flow.  Now, Morris Brown, Morris Brown has been having a problem every since I have been there.  One, because we don't do a good job or we didn't do a good job of collecting the money from the students when we had financial aid, you know.  That's one of them.
Speaker 1: So student loan default (unclear)--
Speaker 2: That's part of it.  And so we, back in '92' [1992], now I don't know what was happening before, in '92' [1992] I said I discovered that there was a $6 million deficit.  And the board thought it was $10 million.  And I had sort of done a little bit of calculations, and I didn't think it was that amount.  But that wasn't why I quit.  I quit because they decided they won't do everything.  And they wasn't gonna let me do anything, and so I said, you know, y'all wanna do it, yawl can have it.  But part of the problem was in this particular case, and I think this probably, probably true in a lot of cases, is the fact Morris Brown did not have a summer school.  And I guess because we didn't have much money to begin with, we didn't budget for the whole fiscal year.  And so what happened at that time was, we were looking, we were using money from ahead to take care of stuff in the summer.  And that should not have been.  I do believe that was the main problem.  But this last time, and we got that one straightened out.  We were in pretty good shape.  And I don't think there are any black colleges, except maybe those three that I mentioned, that have lots of money.  People who work at black colleges make much, much less than people who work somewhere else.  For example, the Calloway, the Calloway chair does not pay a whole salary.  What it does is, it pays 50 percent of your base salary.  Now, it, for, by having the Calloway chair, it meant that I could tolerate the salary at a black college.  But my salary was much, much lower than it would have been if I had been at a Georgia State or at a University of Georgia because my base salary was so low.  Now, but the last time, what happened to us should not have happened.  We got somebody in there, and they did something that they weren't supposed to do.  And that had nothing to do with whether or not we had money or whatever because when that lady went into that, into that job, we had a surplus in the budget because I did the budget.
Speaker 1: Now, this is 1998 when Dr. Cross was president.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, this resulted in some indictments and--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.
Story_ID: 21493
Speaker 1: So, has the school basically recovered from that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No.  We, what happened was, she used financial aid money according to the indictment, according to what they said, some of the students weren't even in school.  But basically, she was drawing down money that she wasn't supposed to be drawing down.  Now, the person who replaced her signed a document with the Department of Education saying that we owned them $5.4 million, based on this drawdown stuff.  And he shouldn't have done that, but he did it.  So we owed them $5.4 million.  Then to add to that, the, there's something called an A-133 audit, which we have to do for the Department of Education, for their financial aid.  And there were, I think there must have been about three of those that she didn't reconcile.  And so they added to it.  And we owed them $9.9 million, just that.  That's one of them.  Then we owed a whole lot of other stuff.  But back to shortly after she left, we lost our accreditation.  And when you lose your accreditation, you lose all access to all the federal dollars, financial aid, Title III, all the other grants.  You lose, you can't have 'em.  Now, we got kicked out of the AU [Atlanta University] Center.  We got kicked out of the UNCF [United Negro College Fund].  So we can't get any, we can't get any more anywhere, period.  Yet, we owe probably about, I don't know--well, we got rid of the $10 million one because they settled it for $500,000 last summer.  And so we raised that amount, and we got rid of that one.  But we still have some more stuff.  Anyway, so the problem is until you can get your accreditation back, people don't wanna give you any money.  But you need some money to get your accreditation back.  It's, it's really a, I call it a chicken and the egg or "catch 22" situation.  But we are applying for accreditation, and hopefully, if we can raise enough money to deal with these other bills that are out there, we can become a candidate.  And if you can become a candidate, then you can get financial aid again.  And, see, why is financial aid so important?  It's important because at least 95 percent of our students were on financial aid.  In 2002, we had about 2,500 students.  We lost our accreditation.  We lost the appeal in April of 2003, and in the fall of 2003, mind you, 2002, 25, more than 2,500 students, fall of 2003, 73 students.  And that's what happens.  And there's no way, you know, we can't recover until we can get somebody to help us raise the money.  And all the, everybody says, when you get your accreditation back, we'll be able, we'll look at what you have or, you know, that kind of thing.  So it's a Catch 22 situation.
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: So we have not really recovered.  We think we, we hope we're on our way back up.  But we still have some more bills we've got to pay.
Story_ID: 21494
Speaker 1: Now, in 2002, you received your first patent.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, that was the patent for a process, a chemical process to make a certain class of compounds.  And it was just a little patent.  Believe it or not, I wrote the application myself, and I got it approved.  But for the other patents that I got, they were much more complicated and so I had to get a lawyer.
Speaker 1: How many patents do you have?
Speaker 2: Four.
Speaker 1: Four.
Speaker 2: I have four, and I have an application up there now.  But the first one was a process for making a certain class of compound.  Three, the three others that I have are related to breast cancer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I just got one in September 6, 2011.  But all of that is related--I must say, I had one PhD student from Clark-Atlanta University [Georgia], and he did that work.
Story_ID: 21495
Speaker 1: Okay, you said by 19--by 2007, Morris Brown [College] had only fifty-four students.  So what, how many people are on the faculty now at Morris Brown?
Speaker 2: Well, right now, we have five full-time faculty members because one left.  One, we had six.  We have for this semester, we have, I think, thirteen part-time faculty members and fifteen volunteers.
Speaker 1: Okay, and I have a note here that Rev. C. T. Vivian has tried to organize a call to raise money for the college, right?
Speaker 2: He did that back in, it must have been like 2007, 2008 or somewhere along in that because the city had told us they were gonna cut off our water bill.  And he, he had that, he had something that weekend and raised the money to pay them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you see--what do you see for the future of Morris Brown now, today?
Speaker 2: Morris Brown, well, we just celebrated our 131 years in existence, and Morris Brown has put a whole lot of good people out there who are making lots of contributions in society.  I don't believe that the Lord brought us this far to let us, to leave us, to let us down.  So I believe that somehow--and I'm not a part of the money raising crowd up there, but I do believe that somehow we're gonna get that part straightened out.  I am part of the group that's working on the self study.  And if we can get all of that part straight and in and they agree to it, then by November, we could be, we could be at candidacy status.  And if you're a candidate, that means the, you're eligible for U.S. Department of Education funds.  And I do believe that if we can get to that part, then we can become accredited because there's just one step from there.  But the problem, the thing that, the thing that we face right now is we got a bondholder that we owe some money to.  And we have lots of vendors out there that we owe some money to.  And we owe some money to the faculty and staff because most times we don't get paid.  And that's a real problem for all of us, but if we were to leave the college right now, it would fold.  It wouldn't, there would not be a Morris Brown anymore.  And so we're there, I think there're--I don't know how many people on the staff, but there aren't a whole lot of people on the staff.  And I just told you about the number of people on the faculty.  But if the staff left tomorrow, the school would have to go under.  And so, you know, we stay there and we have people calling us about paying bills, you know.  It's really rough, I tell you, it's really rough.  But, hopefully, it's gonna be all right.  What we need, we need, we either need some AME [African Methodist Episcopal] people with deep pockets to help us out or we need somebody, whether they're AME's or whatever they are, with deep pockets.  And we don't have that.  And you see Morris Brown, not only have we done ever since, and this is why I stayed there, not only do we have some of the brightest kids in the world, we've had them and we still have them.  But we also, we let in people who probably could not go, I know they couldn't go to Spelman.  Morehouse tells a lie.  They could go to Morehouse.  But, you know, we give them a placement test, and we put them in courses which would get them ready for college.  And so I believe that it's not the input.  It is the output that is important.  And so we have lots of people out there, some people who came in who, you know, who were not really up to par.  But also, when you're a black college, most black colleges don't turn out people with lots of money like these white colleges.  So we can't get the kind of money that a Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] or Georgia State, you know, those colleges.  So anyway, that's where we are.
Story_ID: 21496
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back at the things that you've done, you know, at Morris Brown [College] and in your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I didn't understand that question.
Speaker 1: I said, when you look back at everything that you've done in your career, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I hadn't even thought about that.  I think it would probably be the fact that I came to a black college and gave my all to that black college.  Anything else that I did is not important.  But I wanted to give the black students the opportunity to take advantage of what I had learned.  And when I left Chicago [Illinois], somebody told me that you are committing professional suicide going to a black college.  But what I said was, people, the University of Chicago or any school like that can get anybody they want to because they have the money to pay them.  But most black colleges don't have the money to pay, you know, people like, people with the training that I have because after I got there, I got all kinds of offers.  But I stayed there because I wanted--that is my contribution to the Civil Rights Movement [1955-1968].  I didn't go out and march, probably because I'm not nonviolent.  But I was at AU [Atlanta University] when the students were going down and picketing Richie's and all those places and Dr. [Henry] McBay and I sometimes would stand on the third floor of that chemistry building and look at them when they were getting ready to go.  Of course, Dr. McBay used to always say, I don't understand why they have to sing (laughter).  He was so funny.  But I didn't do that, and I used to tell them that, I said, look, when yawl get all these jobs, some of us have to be qualified to take them.  But seriously, I didn't do that kind of thing, but I can do and I have done what I, what I did.  And I don't regret it because I have lots of doctors out there.  I don't have as many PhDs as they get from Morehouse [College], but I have some out there.  The last PhD that I have finished MeHarry [College] in pharmacology.  And she was Number One in her class.  When she went there, she got a four-year, $100,000 scholarship to go to any graduate school in the country.  She chose Meharry, mainly because that was her hometown.  But she--
Speaker 1: Nashville [Tennessee], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you see, there are, lots of people out there don't know that we have good students like that.  And we have lots more of them.  So I think one of the things that people don't understand is that black students, and it's probably less now than it was back when, but black students who come up, who get to college, many of them have to reach back and pull somebody else along.  And so they don't have as much money, first of all, they have to pay off that, those bills that they have from their loans and all of that.  But in spite of having to pay off their loans, they have to try to help some of their brothers and sisters along.  And so it's just hard if you're trying to raise money when you only have the black students, you know, the graduates that are out there.
Story_ID: 21497
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question too.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, [coughing] I would hope that they would stop killing each other.  If I had, if I could wave a wand, excuse me, this is allergies.  If I could wave a wand and make this happen, I would, I would make them stop killing each other and going to jail.  There are more black men in jail than there are on college campuses.  And I think that's, that's the most.  I would also like to see us rise above poverty and also it bothers me that there are so many homeless people out there.  And so if I could do anything about the crime, especially, the black-on-black crime, the poverty and the homelessness.  If I could do anything, I would like to do something about those.
Story_ID: 21498
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask you about your family.  Now, you, do you have children?
Speaker 2: I have one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born July 19, 1963.  He got a Bachelor's degree from the University of Georgia in computer science.  He has, [clears throat] excuse me, he has two children, a girl who is twelve and a boy who is three (laughter).  And that's a, right now he still has a job (laughter).  I say he still has a job because so many people are being laid off and all that.  He's been on that job quite a long time, working as a computer systems analyst, I think is what he's doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, did you remarry?  I know you were divorced at a certain point?
Speaker 2: Yes, no, once is enough.  No, I did not remarry.
Story_ID: 21499
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, is there anything I haven't discussed or haven't raised that we need to talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  You've asked (laughter) everything.  I can't think of anything.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I really hadn't thought about that one, but I guess more than anything I would like to be remembered as a person who always tried to help others along the way.  That's it.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's--
Speaker 2: Because I not only tried to do it by helping my students, I try to help everybody I can.  And that's about it.
