Story_ID: 192683
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Eleanor Adams.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm Russell Adams, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, then L initial, A-D-A-M-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, what does the middle initial stand for?
Speaker 2: The middle initial is for Lee.  My daddy [James Russell Adams] did what he could.  He put the two e's in there, but our son's name is Lowell in the middle, the abolitionist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, that's how we worked out the history of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There, there were Lees all over South Georgia where I grew up. Robert Lee, Herbert Lee, Frankie Lee, and I was called Russell Lee.  And when my sister gets on my case and wants to get formal, like I haven't called her for a while, Russell Lee, you'd better call without us calling you and so on.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: My nickname as a youngster was Buddy, B-U-D-D-Y.  And I asked my dad why y'all call me buddy, and he said that you never meet strangers, and you never stop talking (laughter), so, so we call you Buddy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I, I like that name.  It's not used now 'cause it's an in, in-house name, so to speak.  My wife [Eleanor Adams], of course, calls me Russ, and then when she has something that she wants me to understand, she drags it out, says, Russ.  And I understand the difference most of the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in on August 13th, 1930, at five AM in Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland.  So I did reverse migration with the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I--
Speaker 1: You were raised in--
Speaker 2: In Quitman [Georgia]--
Speaker 1: --Quitman--
Speaker 2: --Georgia.  Quickly, how that happened is that my dad was asked by his dad to come and manage the family farm, which is a commercial farm, had a lot of workers and stuff.  And my grandfather got too old and lost his sight to keep up with who was doing what, and the earliest memories I have of arguments in the family was between my mom [Isabella Ponder Adams] and my dad about whether or not to go to Georgia, and my grandmother made three trips, begging daddy to come back and help with the farm, and we finally got on the train after two or three car trips.  And I remember one with him, just the two of us.  But finally all of us got on the train and took that long ride down to Quitman, Georgia.  The thing that my mother was fussing about was our education.  There were two of us--three of us, my older brother, James Herbert Adams, and my younger brother, who's three years my junior, Franklin Adams, who lives in Maryland now.  We were all--I was about six and we went to Georgia, and the thing my mother feared was that we would not have a good educational situation.  And in a sense, she was right because the school nearest us was a church that was rented by the county for the week for the twenty-five or thirty country youngsters to attend.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, were gonna get to that part, but I just wanted to establish that you were raised in Quitman--
Speaker 2: Q-U-I-T-M-A-N, Quitman, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Now, now, what we're doing now is trying to slate it, but what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 16th, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to your address, but just--
Speaker 2: We are in Suitland, Maryland, three hundred feet outside of Washington, D.C. (laughter).
Story_ID: 192684
Speaker 1: Okay, before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: And the first one is, and they just require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They are--the first one is: what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is fish.  I really enjoy fish any way I could get it, preferably croaker, which is what we grew up on in South Georgia, followed by shrimp.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --And yeah, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring and fall, keep the extremes.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really.  We've been to the Poconos [Pennsylvania].  We usually visit friends.  This year we're going to spend some time in New Jersey, sort, sort of--I travel a lot in connection with my work, so we've been to the islands several times, and I like that kind of work, play.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: As a person who works with a lot of words, I do and I don't.  One of them is, this too shall pass away, and the other one is a cliche, but I love it, the struggle continues, so those two things--hope the struggle makes the other stuff pass away, so to speak.
Story_ID: 192685
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  Can you give us the full name of your mother and her date and place of birth, and spell it.  Spell her name for us.
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was Isabella Ponder, I-S-A-B-E-L-L-A, P-O-N-D-E-R.  She was born we believe April 1902, in Brooks County, Georgia.  My dad's name is James Russell Adams, and he was born in July 1897.  My mother passed in 1961 and my father in 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask you first about your mother's side of the family and then your father's side.  Now what, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: My maternal grandmother, who lived to be ninety-six, meaning that she was, she died in 1954, which means that she was born probably 1860 or there abouts.  She's the oldest named of them--who I have on that side.  Her husband was Frank Ponder.  She was a Davis before she became a Ponder, out of the Waycross Davis of which Arthur Davis is the most famous and so on.  They were also commercial farmers on the other side of the City of Quitman [Georgia].  And my mom was the last of thirteen born to my grandmother and grandfather on that side, and my mom went to Edward Waters College [Jacksonville, Florida].  My Aunt Mae went to Allen University [Columbia, South Carolina], and my Uncle Abner went to South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], neither completed, but in those days just to go was a major achievement from a farm.  And on my dad's side--
Speaker 1: Now just, before we leave your mother's side, are there any stories from your mother's side about, about the 19th century, about Reconstruction stories--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we have--I have one, one, one short interesting story.  There was a relative of my maternal grandmother's.  They called him Uncle Ledley [ph.].  And he fell in love with a poor white woman, so poor that she worked in the fields, which was a rare thing in South Georgia for Caucasian women.  They eloped to the woods.  They stayed in those woods for eighteen years, and then Uncle Ledley comes up the lane to my grandmother's house walking and said to her, Katie dead.  And then he walked back down the lane, and we have never heard of him since.  This was like 1898.  That's the oldest story that goes back that far.  And in my mind I have decided to imagine what their lives were like, but they wanted to be together, and so they had eighteen years in the woods.  And we have conjectured that they would come out one at time to town for things they had to get.  But in Georgia in those days the [Ku Klux] Klan was so strong they did not need masks or sheets (laughter).  And so, they had to--well, they lived the way that story went.  And when I first heard that story I, I was astounded, and I cried because it says so much about the conditions under which people literally were forced to live if they want to live together.  That's the oldest story that I have from that side of the family, unless--a solemn story is one of my Uncle Richard.  Uncle Richard, as the last of the five boys, was told, no, you can't be riding the horses with the rest of the fellows, but, as boys do, out of the sight of the house he gets on this horse, which promptly throws him.  And he comes back to the house with his arm dangling, a real break.  And my grandmother asked, "What happened to your arm?"  "Nothing, it's just bent a little bit."  And of course they had to set it.  And in those days people in the country had no telephones, but they had to do what they had to do on the spot, and she knew how to set it in such a way that it, it knitted back without even going to town, as we call it.  And he would tell us that story about you can't hide everything 'cause something's gonna go wrong, especially if you are wrong.
Story_ID: 192686
Speaker 1: What about your father's [James Russell Adams] side of the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my dad's side of the family--my paternal grandfather was Jonas Adams, who was born in 1874, and who died in 1955 I believe.  And his wife, paternal grandmother, was Elizabeth Young as her maiden name, but then she was born in 1878 and died in 1945.  And I remember so vividly her passing.  She was a midwife, and had the time and the location been right, she probably would have been a physician.  She was known as Ms. Lizzy, Ms. Lizzy, Ms. Lizzy throughout three counties.  And her trademark as a midwife was a long, white apron that just touched the top of her shoes.  That was the pattern in those days.  If you were a midwife you advertised it by having a completely snow white apron that touched the ground.  And every other week she would go into the city to report to the people in the board of health as to what she had been doing, and, and get birth certificates, some new copies, ones that have been filled out by people--for people who couldn't write.  She, when she passed, I remember the funeral because in the church that my great-grandfather and grandfather built for the community [Quitman, Georgia], small church, this was where they had her funeral.  Everybody who could get inside, white and black, got into that church.  And it was amazing the way the different sets of people, in terms of class and race, arranged themselves inside the church.  Respectable old-time members and friends of the family, these friends of the family, of course, they're out front with the family, respectable black after that, then the respectable whites who were careful not to wear their neckties, the men, now the ladies their Sunday dresses--
Speaker 1: So they were--
Speaker 2: --Twenty-five or thirty of the them near the back.
Speaker 1: So they were dressing it down to, sort of in the church--
Speaker 2: Full dress would be equality, if they were dressing like the bereaved, but for them it was a stretch to be there.  And then outside were the "lower income, slightly shady" of both sets, except the African American ones who had been alcoholic, but--"she didn't charge me a thing," and he's drinking, right?  And then the poor whites were, they're in their pickup trucks with their hats off, didn't come inside.  I was stunned by this farewell that the community--'cause she had delivered a couple or three hundred babies over the years.  And all of those families had been touched by her life, and that really got to me as much as missing her.  When my dad died, a similar thing happened in '81 [1981].  Went down to my sister's house, and like so many families, it's the female who's the switchboard about keeping people in touch, so my sister had that role.  And we all gathered to her house, and then comes the police that Saturday.  The funeral is supposed to be Sunday.  And I wondered on an occasion like this what are the cops doing in this house.  And my sister said, "Don't worry about it.  It's, it's all good."  The next day after the--when the funeral procession pull off from my sister's house--that's where we all gathered including the hearse with my dad--every other corner of this small town had a policeman, one black and one white standing at attention with their hats off across their hearts.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay, so now what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was in '81 [1981].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were saying goodbye to--the town was saying goodbye to my dad.  And then the procession drove like two miles an hour out of the city to the three and a half miles and then slowed down to one mile an hour in front of the family farm, which is about a third of a mile on the front.  And then we picked up, again, about four miles an hour speed to the cemetery.  But this is what the police and the town officials I guess, said let's, let's do this.
Story_ID: 192687
Speaker 1: My mom [Isabella Ponder Adams] had two years of college.  My dad [James Russell Adams] had three years of grammar school, perhaps but had "a Ph.D. in life," as we often say.  And I remember there's a story that I wanna share with you about the six weeks before he passed.  The last of my mother's thirteen passed, and so I was down for that like in May.  The first week of July of '81 [1981] my dad passed, but in that May I was present, of course, my brother [Franklin Adams] in Baltimore [Maryland], who at that time was a major computer person at Bethlehem Steel [Bethlehem, Pennsylvania]--he was a math head--and my older brother [James Herbert Adams], who was a small-time contractor, and my sister, who was a public school teacher.  We were all gathered in my sister's den.  And my dad was there, and he looked around, eleven o'clock at night, at all of us, sort of panoramic fashion, and said, "All of y'all are a part of what I wanted to be."  I had to leave the room because we understood what he meant.  He said, "All of y'all are part of what I wanted to be."  So, we said, somebody, "But dad we are you," and then he started crying.  But that's the kind of dad that we had.
Story_ID: 192688
Speaker 1: The family farm has been around since the 1880s, and we have never sold or closed the land out.  We're trying to figure out what to do for the next generation.  We have to go into corporate arrangement where folks will have shares that are calculated in terms of money interest rather than this tree is mine, and the other tree is yours, and so on.  But we raised tobacco, cotton, till my mother [Isabella Ponder Adams] said no more cotton.  She didn't wanna see her sons and daughters humped over this--with, with the strap across the left the shoulder--watermelons, peanuts and corn for the market.  And this is why we use the term commercial farming.  The hardest day's work I ever did was on that farm.  And I remember as a, as a, as an anecdote, but true, the first day to gather watermelons, the truck comes out and hire a couple, three trucks, and eight or nine guys on each truck.  And so I hop off first and noticed nobody was jumping as quickly as I was to get their hands on watermelons.  And so, finally, five on the ground and five still on the truck, dad [James Russell Adams] said, "Okay, all right.  Now the guys on the ground throw the watermelons up to the guys on the truck." Watermelons are heavy, and we're talking late June, early July in south Georgia, so I'm sweating salt in no time.  But from then on I was the last one off the truck (laughter), but I remember that as one of the hardest day's work.  I enjoyed seeing the farm, but not working the farm.  And when my mom noticed that I was reading, and I was always reading comic books, early novels of one kind or another, the rule was, without my knowing it was a rule that she'd made, if he is reading and there is no need for a bunch of other people to be doing stuff in the fields where he could be out there, then don't bother him.  So when I figured that's the game, I read Richard Wright, I read Chester Himes, I read some Saunders Redding, 'Stranger and Alone,' some John Dos Passos, Sherwood Anderson.  By the time I got to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I had read half of the stuff on my own ducking work that was assigned as work at Morehouse.  So those were, those, those were the years.  Now, I wanna say something about the schooling part.  When we went to Georgia the nearest school was about a mile way, this church school I mentioned, Morning Star Baptist Church [Quitman, Georgia] that went in sessions from late September to the first week in May because the older students had to go to work on the farms and pick things and cut grass and so on.  My mom, finally, with my grandmother, mother's concurrence said, "This one ought to go to town school."  Now town school--I'm eight years old at that point, and I'm in about third grade, but town is three and a half mile through the woods.  So I walk three and a half miles through the woods.  I disappear from the main drag after getting to the edge of the family farm and go across in a, in a trail, it's really a trail, cow trail, and then a wagon trail.  And then folks would see me emerge from the brush on the outskirts of town on my way to school.  I didn't--I was so happy to be going to a real school that I didn't think that I was doing anything unusual to walk three and a half miles.  I'd have to leave around six something to get there by eight, eight thirty when classes started, but I was so regular that I was the bell boy, the guy from the country who comes to ring the bell for the city boys to come into class and so on.  Then they put a highway through this.  They finally got all of the legal and the--yeah okay, I'll sell you the land--the straight route.
Speaker 2: Now, now both of these schools are black schools right--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Of course.
Speaker 2: --School, okay.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --I, I just wanted to make that clear--
Speaker 1: Now, we're, we're--
Speaker 2: --For those who--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --See we are talking 1940, where in the country or the city you would see the yellow buses with the white kids.  No buses for the black kids at all on that side of town.  I understand on my mother's side of town where she grew up there was one bus that would take all the black kids who they'd have to gather at some place or other, different clusters, one bus, one trip for them, but no buses.
Story_ID: 192689
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, in the city schools we seldom got new books.  We got the books that were used by the white school when they decided they'll get some new ones for themselves.  We even got an old ty- there was one typewriter in that high school.  I remember 'cause one of the letters wouldn't come up right when I was trying to--I was an office boy, and one of the jobs I had in that high school was to, every month be sent to uptown with a list of the teachers' names to the bank where the bank tellers would count out cash and put it in the little envelopes, and I'd have to sign for that whole cluster of envelopes and bring 'em back to the principal.
Speaker 2: So they didn't pay them by check.  They paid 'em cash--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: They were paying them in cash.  And I wondered what was this about.  And I was later told to avoid being called girl or boy or you.  You send the boy, so you said, "Boy, what are you here for?"  I'm a boy (laughter).  (Unclear) I'm not a guy with gray hair.  And so that was one of the ways of easing the race- racism, by saying okay, we'll send a guy.
Speaker 2: So, so black, the black community--and I've heard these stories before, would think of ways where they wouldn't have to have that, that insult and that, the resulting conflict of being called a boy or--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, you, you, you, you figure out--
Speaker 2: --Your first name and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now they didn't know what to do with my mother [Isabella Ponder Adams] 'cause she had had some college, very articulate.  She was the one black lady in the country who would not work in the fields and put lipstick on her face on Mondays (laughter).  That was a big thing, right?  And they didn't know--and they would try to avoid her, they being white folks, to--or they would talk past the title, with the eye thing and so on.  I learned to talk at some length to avoid saying yes or yes sir and no sir.  Now when we went to Georgia my dad [James Russell Adams] told us that we had to say yes sir and no sir to everybody, especially white folks, and I wondered why.  He said, "So you can keep me out of trouble."  That's how he put it.  Well, I made it a point to, as much as possible, avoid a direct yes or direct no.
Speaker 2: How did you do this?
Speaker 1: I don't know, but I managed most of the time.  I remember once my dad asked me to go to a white partner--see, what a lot of the city whites would do, would make deals with rural blacks to do crops.  They supply the cash for that particular crop, and they had the land, the label. So, these were watermelons again.  Dad asked me to stop by so and so's house and tell him that he ought to come and look at the melons.  I think they are ready to come out.  And when you have these joint ventures you have to agree on the major moves, like harvest.  So I, on my bike--I'm having the bike because now the highway is cut through, and I can ride this bike.  So I bike up to North Court Street [Quitman, Georgia] and go to this person's house, and he comes to the door, gets as red as he could get, his eyes all bulging and breathing hard and tells me to get to the back of the house if you wanna say anything to anybody here.  And I ran from the back porch, "Dad said come collect the melons."  I got on my bike and took off.  Refused, and I did a lot of refusing, as much as I could get away with.  I remember once an ex-Klansman came to talk to my, to my grandfather [Jonas Adams], dad's dad, Old Man Ross Devane [ph.].  He was complaining that the young white guys didn't have the gumption that they had when he was a young guy.  So, young black guys from the [U.S.] Army especially don't know their place.  So he was telling my granddad this.  The protocol was, observe the color line, but talk all kinds of things.  So what he did--my gramps was on the porch, and there were four steps to get to the porch.  Mr. Devane, to use the language of the time, sat on the bottom step with his hat on to let everybody who was passing in the country know that he's a white guy, yeah, but notice, I ain't sitting up there with him.  And he said, made this comment about young white guys ain't as vigilant as they used to be in keeping black folks in line.  And I said, "What's, what do they have to do with black folks?"  And he told my granddad, "That little one talks too damn much.  He's got blue gums, and somebody's gonna kill him."  And granddaddy said, "Now, Mr. Devanie [ph.], no way to talk that way."  And gramps went in the house.  And boy, did this guy get mad 'cause he was abandoned.  And then I walked off.  And so he got up and started walking as fast as he can in the direction of his home, but he was a Klansmen, retired, not a single tooth in his head and wanted--he had known my granddaddy over the years, and was lonesome.  I guess, I think he was a widower at that point, and he wanted to chat in good ole Southern style.  And one of the things that we don't know as much as we could, about the complexities of that--of relationships, the interaction of blacks and whites.  We used to say a good Klansman has a black girlfriend, loved the girl could kill the brother, and that's not untrue, very complex set of relations in the South.
Story_ID: 192690
Speaker 1: I wanted to take you back to grade school--well, about the educational--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the respect for education in your, in your family.  It seems as though they, they really respected the fact that you, you know, had a proclivity for reading and scholarship.  I mean is that, was that unusual in the South in those moments to--
Speaker 2: It was--I'll put it another way.  There was a general respect for anybody who could read, write, or as they say in South Georgia, alfigure, [ph.] but especially the reading part.  And folks like my dad [James Russell Adams] who, when he grew up, there was no school for blacks in the region, not in the country, but if you had land and had money, you would seek a schoolteacher for a wife.  And dad followed that pattern.  There are two stories.  One is that my mother [Isabella Ponder Adams] was teaching out at the Monument School [Quitman, Georgia] where the church was built.  And my grandmother [Elizabeth Young Adams] heard about her and invited her--she'd have to spend a week at this family, a week with the other family, and a week with--and while my grandfolks had nobody in school, they had space.  So she would periodically spend the week at the house, and that's how dad met her.  And when I was a little guy, and they'd--what had happened is this.  Dad left Quitman, Georgia with my mom in 1929 after the [Ku Klux] Klan burned down my grandfather's [Jonas Adams] house.  My grandfather and grandmother went to Tallahassee, Florida and--start open a store.  It lasted about six months because the folks that they had as customers--well, also out of--[Great] Depression was coming along.  And it hit the black community already.  In that last hired, first fired, well, when hard times come, you get rid of your help.  Martha, you could do the dishes.  George, you could do the yard.  And so, my dad and his brother headed north to Baltimore [Maryland].
Story_ID: 192691
Speaker 1: I remember going to first, second--I remember kindergarten in Baltimore [Maryland].  When I figured out the connection between the letter A, the sound A, and the word apple, they claimed the teacher had to force me to sit down 'cause I was trying to explain to all the other kindergarteners how to understand this stuff, just a little guy.  And then I started trying to read, and I'd love to see the differences between spellings there and their, there as location and their as possession; sea as water, and see as sight.  I remember playing those games with myself, and then I started reading.  I'd get the coloring book and would read through the text before I did any coloring.  I wanted to follow the story.  And so, so I got this early interest in reading, and then I would try to write down from memory some of the things that I read.  So by the time I'm seven or eight in South Georgia, I'm reading pretty good they tell me.  So when I went to town, school with my mom [Isabella Ponder Adams] saying let's get him out of the woods 'cause these two teachers in the country school were trying to teach five grades.  The fifth grade would the eighteen-year-olds who came in and was too wet to fly, as they would say.  Why are you in school?  I was too wet to fly.  So that's an old Southern expression too, by the way, when it rains a lot.  And so I was promoted at the end of the first semester from third to fourth grade, and by this time, I'm reading up a storm, comic books, trying to read Reader's Digest.  By the time I'm twelve, I'm taking Life magazine--I'm the only guy that I'm aware of.  I'd save my four dollars and a half 'cause the Life was a dime, but if you got four and a half dollars you get fifty-two issues.  And so nothing gave me greater pleasure, in terms of mail, that on Mondays in the mailbox would be this huge magazine.  And in it were pictures of the, the World War [II] and the outer world.  Life magazine was the television, flip shot television for those days, so to speak.  And I remember so much of [Josep Broz] Tito, [Adolf] Hitler, and the sections on Hollywood, and my mind just went through all of those things.  And then I graduated from that to Reader's Digest and the sect- there were two parts I loved in that.  One was "increase your word power," and the other was, "the most unforgettable character I've met," those two pieces were really of great interest to me.  We took three newspapers in the country, the Quitman Free Press on Thursday, the Thomasville Times and the Atlanta Journal, [Atlanta Journal-Constitution] and my mom was responsible for all of that.  And the great pleasure I would have on Sundays when we'd get the comics.  All that color and stuff.
Story_ID: 192692
Speaker 1: And in high school we went to eleventh grade.  And now Quitman, Georgia, was a typical, very small, less than three thousand persons in the city limits, town.
Speaker 2: Now you say this is in the south of Georgia, right?
Speaker 1: It's thirteen miles from Florida.  I remember so well 'cause we used to get on our bikes and say we're going to Florida on Sundays, make a U-turn at the--the drive around and make a U-turn in Florida, and be back by dark.
Speaker 2: Now was it near the coast or to the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, it's, there's a line of towns in south Georgia, Valdosta [Georgia] on the eastern most part of it with Savannah [Georgia] up the way northeastern and so on.  Waycross [Georgia] in between.  West of that is Thomasville, Georgia, but--and Quitman is sort of in the middle but at the bottom of the map.  And in that town most of the folks worked at Garrett's Mill [ph.].  And I remember once going with my buddy whose dad worked for the mill, one Saturday went by his house--Friday it was, payday, and I saw all these women in the, in line of the paymaster's office outside, black women, about eighteen or nineteen of them and maybe twelve guys.  And I said, "Women don't work at the mill, do they?"  They said, "No, the husbands do."  But they can't trust the husbands with the money, so the mill operator simplified it by pay--giving the money to the wives and so on.  I thought that was interesting.
Story_ID: 192693
Speaker 1: This town's [Quitman, Georgia] school went to eleventh grade.  The white school went to twelfth.  It ended early May, the black school did.  And to show you what the economic theme was like, when I was in tenth grade, there were sixty-five of us in tenth grade.  When I went to eleventh grade, there were eleven of us.  And the practice was, if you were not going to college, you dropped out in tenth so that you can say well, you know, I didn't finish.  Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: Now, though, did the eleventh grade ceiling--now, the black school went to the eleventh grade, the white school the twelfth grade?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Did the eleventh grade ceiling sort of determine that you couldn't qualify for a white college or something--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, no, if you had a diploma.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --Had a diploma.  Now--
Speaker 2: But it did short you a year of school then--
Speaker 1: I don't know because from sev--it's at seventh, eighth--no, eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh, four years.  I think what they did--give an example of, of why I don't think I was shorted.  We had teachers who could have taught anywhere well.  But times are so tough they were in that tiny town.  The principal was the guy who could have been a great lawyer, Mr. Rutherford [ph.].  I remember his history class we all had to give a two-minute talk, the eleven of us, every other week documented on some public even beyond Quitman.  So in that small eleventh grade situation I was the valedictorian, right.  And you know what my valedictory speech was about?  Peacekeeping function of the U--of the United Nations, Article Seven.  I'm in a town of farmers.  The principal knew what I was talking about, a couple of other people may have.  He didn't tell me not to use the topic, but I went into this thing 'cause the United Nations was still fairly new.  And that was my valedictory speech.
Story_ID: 192694
Speaker 1: Now, I got to college to, to, again, get--touch your question again about the quality--
Speaker 2: Well, you graduated in '48 [1948] from high school.
Speaker 1: From high school.  Now, the question was when the year started I ain't dropping out.  My mom [Isabella Ponder Adams] said no, no, no, no, no, you're going to college somewhere or you're into the [U.S.] Army.  Either Sam will take care of it or somehow you--you ain't gonna stay here 'cause there's nothing here for a guy like you, in so many words.  Sure, you could be the principal one day, but hey, I mean the, the, the world is bigger than Quitman [Georgia].  So the Pepsi-Cola Company was offering as their public relations thing a contest for a scholarship, one per state and, and states with, as they call it, biracial school arrangements, meaning segregated arrangements, one for blacks and one for whites.  So Mr. Rutherford [ph.], the principal I mentioned, says, "Russell Lee, you ought to come and take this SAT,"--didn't called it SAT, but it was equivalent of that--test.  "You might get some money or somethin', and you too, Yvonne."  Yvonne was my rival.  Her dad was the most progressive business guy in town.  He had two cabs and a tiny little store and stuff.  And I'm country, she's town, right.  So we were neck in neck in terms of academics.  So I take the thing.  The results come back.  Mr. Rutherford says, "Gotta take you down to Florida State [University, Tallahassee, Florida]."  And I said, "Where in the heck is Florida State?  What did I do?"  He said, "So the white folks can give it to you 'cause there's some doubt about your score being real."  I said, "What?"  So I went up eighteen points.  Now, the results come in that April. I'll never forget it.  The principal, since I'm an office boy, said, "Russell Lee, go over to the grammar school and tell Mr. Nard [ph.] to have all the kids come over and get on the grass in front of the school here," and I do.  What, what's this about?  And then all of the classes empty, like about 150 kids in high school.  So I got on the grass to see what the heck is this about.  And he says, "Two of our students took the Pepsi-Cola all-expense four-year scholarship test.  And we have the results here."  He had a red envelope and he had a gray one, which I have in there, and say Yvonne Danette Corker [ph.] $125 dollars and honorable mention.  I said well, if red is honorable mention, then gray got to be I owe them, right?  (Laughter) so I said oh, it's public.  She's done me in.  Then he reads the gray, "Russell Adams, the state winner, four-year, all-expense academic scholarship to any place in the continental United State."  I got on my bike and almost wrecked it getting home to tell my mom.  And I had a cousin at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], Alvin, who's--dared to go to South Carolina State [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], and was the letter carrier for the city, and his mom had a master's in math and was teaching stuff--and told my mom, and she starts crying, and in good old Baptist fashion, started waving her hands--thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus, thank you, Jesus.  And so that September dad [James Russell Adams] takes me to Valdosta, Georgia, late at night, waiting for the Atlantic Coast Line [Railroad] to take me up to Atlanta [Georgia], and after they've got this paper trunk for me and everything.  And I had traveled--in, in high school I was fortunate enough to have another mentor, Mr. Brooks [ph.], who twice had me spend part of a summer at summer camp, Camp John Hope outside of Fort Valley, Georgia.  And I was also active in New Farms of America, traveled from New Orleans [Louisiana] up to Greensboro [North Carolina], and throughout Kentucky and places.  So dad takes me to Valdosta, and we're sitting in the colored waiting room.  And he takes out his wallet.  And he has four tens, unbent, and he says, "Here's a little money that I want you to have," and he gives me the four tens.  And then he says, "Do this for me: don't forget to pray, stay out of bad company, and do what you're going to do, you're supposed to be doing when you get to Atlanta."  By that time the trained pulled in, and I got on it.  So I entered Morehouse that way.
Story_ID: 192695
Speaker 1: My cousin, Alvin, was a senior at that point.  His sister was over at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and--no, his sister had just left Spelman, and she was at Columbia [University, New York, New York].  And so at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] I had good mentors, a guy named--he was just out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Robert Brisbane.  We called him Bris.  And he came out of Harvard early.  He's head of political science at Morehouse and was mentored a lot of--mentor to a lot of people.  And the second mentor was Dr. Melvin D. Kennedy.  And they, like my principal and Mr. Brooks [ph.], they've continued that mentoring.  So I was known as Mr. Four Points.  I learned when I was at Morehouse that if you made all As you get a $125 dollars cash.  I said huh?  So I was known on occasion as Mr. Four Points 'cause I wanted to get $125 dollars.  And I majored in political science and minored in history and sociology. And I did not know until a few years back that when I finished Morehouse, Crisis magazine ran a roundup about standing grads.  And I'm there as, with highest honors out of Morehouse.  I just knew that I'm trying to get to Chicago [Illinois] to grad school.  And so in '52 [1952], September [1952], after working up in New Jersey at New Jersey State Neuropsychiatric Institute [Montgomery, New Jersey] as an attendant.  I didn't wanna go back to South Georgia 'cause I had--I didn't wanna go to the fields.  And so I asked my sociology prof what should I do.  I've never defied my dad [James Russell Adams] straight up.  There's never been a time when I look him in the eye and say I ain't gon' do it (laughter).  He said well what you do is go on to Connecticut--I mean to New Jersey and write him that you're there, and that you'll be in Illinois and so on, and see him at Christmas, and that's what I did.
Speaker 2: Now, now, just before we get you out of Morehouse, could we--did you know a Dr. Mays there?  I mean did you--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Benjamin, Dr. Benjamin Mays went to Morehouse in 1940 I think as president, after being head of the School of Religion at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  He was a very good friend of my wife's folks.  They ran a restaurant called Khan's Corner [ph.] near Ashby [Street] I guess and Hunter Street, Ashby and Fair [ph.].  And when Mays was a young prof he would eat there.  And when his money ran out he could still eat there, and that was a standard thing.  Young fellows be short on the third week of the month, and they'd have arrangements with their eateries, so to speak.  So they would carry him, so to speak, until he got his money and, and so on.  And so he became acquainted with that side of the family.  I didn't know this until I met Eleanor, but my job at Morehouse--I also got a side job 'cause I wanted some cash beyond what this scholarship was kicking in.  And so I got a job in the director of student life office.  And Mays would wanna make surprise visits to the new--they're now like frat houses or used to be frat houses on that Morehouse campus, and he was so proud of these walkups that he wanted to see how the guys were treating them.  So he'd come over and say, to Mr. Brooks, "I'd like to check out the new building, see how, how things are going."  And my job was to grant--get the key and be the turnkey and lead him around, and so we got to know each other in that way.  At Morehouse we had to go to chapel every day but Wednesday and Saturdays.  The other days, except for Sundays, were days when we were exposed to people who had careers of different kinds.  And that was his way of saying to us, this person can do it, you can do it.  I didn't know it at that time.  "We have to go to chapel?"  That kind of stuff, right?  On Sundays, we'd get the sermon, usually some outstanding preacher and when he's in town from him.  Morehouse did not have courses to prepare you to teach public schools, on the grounds that a Morehouse guy ought to go beyond that, and that was brave in those days.  If you wanna teach you had to go over to Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and pick up some credits to be accredited for teaching.  And so the result was that the thing was a springboard to go on to the master's at least.  And so there was once a study done that showed that at one time there were several--seven historically black colleges [HBCU] with presidents who had done their undergrad [undergraduate] at Morehouse and eighty odd places with high officials in these colleges who'd done Morehouse.
Story_ID: 192696
Speaker 1: When I was at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I was active in the debate team and in the literary circles.  I was a book reviewer, and I was also a writer for the Maroon Tiger.  And this is where I first met [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett when he was editor of the Maroon Tiger.  And Bennett was one of those unusual persons who came to Morehouse simply to get the paperwork that it offered.  He was as knowledgeable on arrival as he was when he left.  We would gather in his room or in the newspaper office just to hear him talk.  And we tried to figure out how does--in those days, the big debates were over socialized medicine and over what should be done with Germany finally and what should be--and is [General Douglas] MacArthur right for running Japan.  Those were the big issues.  And they were beginning to do the desegregation stuff, and Bennett was, was deep into all of that.  And I wrote a political column.  A guy named Louis Robinson [ph.] I think wrote theater, and I think he's still doing that for, for Bennett.  The day Bennett came out, Atlanta Daily World newspaper people hired him.  And then after two or three years, Johnny Johnson [John Johnson] heard about him, of Ebony, and hired him.  But it was an unusual situation, where you had a guy like Bennett, Thomas Dent, who just passed--his daddy had been president of Dillard [University, New Orleans, Louisiana], Albert Dent.  He was on that paper.  Stephen Henderson, who was my colleague here [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], was on that paper.  The fellow who's now an outstanding lawyer, I think O. T. Wells in New York [City], was on it.  And so, we were all there at the same time doing stuff with that paper, and also on the debate teams and stuff.  And I had a good time doing all of that.
Story_ID: 192697
Speaker 1: The notes and the books that we had at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] in political science, and I'll never forget, I had at least three books that were used during the first two quarters of my graduate work at [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], George H. Sabine, 'The History of Political Ideas' [sic, 'A History of Political Theory'] and V. O. Key, Vladimir Orlando Key, 'Southern Politics in State and Nation.'  When I got to Chicago I said oh, wow 'cause when I first met the class at Chicago, I said I may have made a big mistake 'cause these guys as students are sounding like professors when they talk.  They were talking dictionary.  I said oh, well, I can use my dictionary language too, and I relaxed, but the when I first got here these guys--undergrad at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], undergrad at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] going to Chicago for a change of pace, that kind of stuff.  And they were talking the talk 'cause they were trying to impress each other.  And so I got right in there.  And I remember my first B at Chicago from a guy named Walter Johnson who had been the biographer of Adlai Stevenson, wrote up his life and stuff.  So I'm wondering about this B.  I ain't--I'm just a kid--miss--Mr. Four Points.  What's this B about?  And he says, "The other eight people in the class are doctoral candidates.  I let you in for the hell of it," (laughter).  And I said and, "You did good."  He said, "But you're on a doctoral level of doing stuff."  And I said, "But if it's an A, it's an A."  And he said, "Well, it ain't an A."  (Laughter) And, and that was Walter Johnson and me.
Story_ID: 192698
Speaker 1: Just, just a minute, just Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] for one more minute--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, of course.
Speaker 1: Did you know [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: No, but Martin had left in '46 [1946] or '7 [1947] for Boston [University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay 'cause he was, he started young, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, see, Morehouse had, there's a study that's being done on these young admissions.  A lot of guys--this is not to take any credit away from anybody--said I was at Morehouse when I was fifteen going on sixteen.  What [Benjamin] Mays got permission from the board of trustees to do is to have this early admissions problem to keep the enrollment up 'cause the [U.S.] Army was killing the place.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And if you could find guys who could do the work at fifteen and survive, and he did, and the place survived.  'Cause when Mays went down there the place was down to about 280 [students] or 320 or something like that.  When I left it was 483.  Now back to King more directly.  King would come back, what we called money booster shot, do a sermon over at his dad's church and get a boost on this money, right.  And so I heard him preach there.  There were two churches that Morehouse guys--three actually, but two I had a chance to--one was Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] on occasion, and the other was Friendship Baptist [Church, Atlanta, Georgia] because the pastor of Friendship was Reverend [Maynard Holbrook] Jackson, Maynard Jackson's daddy, who was auditing a course in poly sci [political science] with the rest of us, but he was an auditor.  And Maynard was as big as he was at the end of his life.  He was as that big at fifteen, would come and sit in the back with a pint of i- with a gallon of ice cream (laughter).  And his dad was seated up front taking notes.
Speaker 1: He was eating ice cream in church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he'd sit in the back of the room and slurp through it, right.  And so, we would go to his dad's church.  There was something else I wanted to say about the More, More--Morehouse days.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: Well, yes, about King, that, it's in that connection I would, I would see him, but I have never had a one on one with him.
Speaker 1: Okay, now was Dr. [W.E.B.] Du Bois at Atlanta University [later Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] then?  Was--
Speaker 2: I, I think Du Bois was up in New York [City] in '48 [1948].  I think he had been let go from Atlanta University the second time in the '30s [1930s] when they did 'Black Reconstruction' ['Black Reconstruction in America'], and was back up with the NAA [NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] on a special something or other in '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay, I thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had a lot of interesting people coming through that chapel though.  We had Roland Hayes, the tenor.  We had Lester Grainger, who had been head of the Urban League.  We had Walter White, who was head of the NAACP coming through.  We had Louis Wright, the great physician at Harlem Hospital [New York, New York] coming through, had a lot of--and when Hazel Scott came to play, she sashayed into the place.  She was in her physical prime as well as her popularity prime.  And instead of coming in what we call a pulpit entrance, where you come from the back to the front, back of the stage, she walked the long way down the aisle.  And we guys, like in the Army, carried on, and Mays had to sort of do this to, to quiet us.
Story_ID: 192699
Speaker 1: In one of the chapel occasions [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], [Benjamin] Mays comes in with his brother.  Now they had both been Pullman porters.  And this is how Mays had the Chicago-Atlanta route at one time when he was in school.  When he had left Bates [College, Lewiston, Maine], he got a job as a Pullman Porter, which happened to a lot of guys who finished college in those day.  That was regarded as a good job.  But he heard about [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at the end of the route.  His brother continued to work as a Pullman Porter.  And he brought the brother into chapel, and he says, "As you probably can see from my appearances that this is my brother whose tips enable me to continue going to school."  That choked us up.  He says, "This is my brother.  And he has made my life and things that I do possible with the tips he got for carrying other people's bags."
Speaker 2: You know, there are so many negative stories you hear about people, but these are the stories that really make--
Speaker 1: That was--
Speaker 2: --They do--
Speaker 1: --That, that, that, that got to us, you know.
Speaker 2: Families help each other--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --People in other ways and--
Speaker 1: And I never forgot that particular account.  On a lighter note, Mays was movie star handsome in his prime.  And whenever he was scheduled to talk, especially at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], if you didn't get there thirty minutes early, well, you ain't gonna hear him in person 'cause you ain't gettin' into Sisters Chapel.  So one day Mays had on his what they call claw hammer cutaway coat, coat and tails.  We called them claw hammers in south Georgia, right.  He's had this claw hammer.
Speaker 2: With the two tails and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he was walking up towards Sisters Chapel, and my cousin, Mildred--he was known as Buck Benny.  He's always bucking for the best.  And she hollered, "Buck Benny!"  And before she could move out of the way to not be seen, he waved at her, and she had to just wave back.  But she felt like, oh-oh, he is gonna tell the president of Spelman, [Florence] Matilda Read, and so, he never did.  But he had that kind of ease with himself and the people and was a very gracious guy along with his wife, Sarah--Sadie T. Mays.
Story_ID: 192700
Speaker 1: And they had on campus [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] also a Mrs. Stewart [ph.], and most black colleges [HBCU], private had 'em, to work us up on manners.  And in those days Emily Post was the Ms. Manners of the era.  Emily Post was the one.  And we had to follow the middle-class routine and dress for lunch--dinner on Sunday, dark suit, maroon tie, the school colors, maroon and white shirt.  And she'd have all the stemware and the cutlery and all that out, and we had to work through all of that properly.  And when you satisfied her that you had learned how to dine in contrast to eating, she would say, "Well, Mr. Adams, we will miss you next Sunday."  And soon you got done, oh, yay, you don't have to go back in there!  But there was--and there was, and there were a couple of guys that almost became her sons 'cause they were so slow in getting the, getting it together.  There was a guy named Marcus Williams [ph.] that we had to watch.  He was the guy that we would watch.  Marcus was so elegant that, that, that, that it was almost like a caricature of elegance.  He would do all of these things with his hands and picking up and putting down, and raising the glass, and sitting straight, and no elbows out of place, the whole number.  And he was also a singer, but he had these, this exquisite table manners, and the first time I saw a guy with lacquer on his fingernails and was not a problem with the fellows.  He was so elegant.  And so we were told he was at the head of the table, and Ms. Stewart was the other end.  She had the New England high choke collar with the little broach here and the widow's knot back here on the hair.  And the (unclear) and they, where there is no hook, but she wore the glasses low and looked over them--"Mr. Adams, we will miss you next Sunday."  And I said, "Thank you very much."  Then I let out a yay.
Story_ID: 192701
Speaker 1: Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] had an atmosphere of celebrating learning, which fitted me nicely.  We didn't care about what the game was on football, who won or who lost, but did you see the girls that we ain't seen before?  We did have some pride about track, that a gentleman could do track.  And, and--but football, take it or leave.  Basketball, a little more emphasis, yeah, it's okay.  But did them girls come in from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]?  Are we going to see the girls at such and such a place? Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], if you play A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  They gon' whip us, but hey, we're in Greensboro [North Carolina].  So, but on the academics was where the emphasis was placed.  Good acting, good debating, excellent newspaper, and high GPA, grade point average, those were the places where the applause was very, very focused.  And to lose in a debate, oh, we'd be in a debate at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] and guys came and said, they lost that one, but beat those guys at Columbia [University, New York, New York], and we'll roll over the guys at Talladega [College, Talladega, Alabama].  So it was that ferment.  And what we would do on campus debates--'cause you'd have to try out for the debate team.  Guys would go and research the topics that were to be debated, go into the Woodruff Library, now that's called, and do their own research, and have their five by eight cards, and work out the whole stack of 'em.  And guys who could write and guys who could do math were heroes 'cause the math guys would charge you a dollar--say well, ain't you--it's worth more than a dollar for you to pass this course, ain't it?  Well, then give me the dollar.   I'll show you how to work this algebra.  So guys would be doing those kinds of things with each other.  And I remember T. M. Alexander.  T--T. M. Alexander, Sr. [Theodore Martin Alexander, Sr.] was quite well-to-do 'cause he was an insurance fellow and also real estate who had the insurance coverage of Tuskegee's [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] physical plant, big premiums.  So he had an elevator in his house they tell me.  His son, T. M., Jr. [Theodore Martin Alexander, Jr.] was a student at Morehouse.  And T. M. finally persuaded his da- dad to buy him a new car.  The only regular folks who had new cars were veterans of the Korean War or veterans of the Second World War [World War II, WWII] even because they were coming in late, you know, a guy thirty years old, but he's in college finally.
Story_ID: 192702
Speaker 1: And incidentally, one of the larger things that happened during that period was that the G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] made college attendance for black male an expectation.  It was a rarity when my uncle went.  It was not expected.  It was expected that you would barely get out of high school, but one of the unsung things about the Second World War was how the black colleges [HBCUs, Historically Black Colleges and Universities] were really saved for the first time by the raising of the bar in the black community.  That if you went to a col- went to the [U.S.] Army, you could go to college on the G.I. Bill.  And one of the unsung things about that, if you didn't go to college, you could go to a vocational, an approved vocational school.  So it was the veterans, as a parenthesis here, who made the Montgomery Bus, Bus Boycott [Montgomery Bus Boycott, 1955] possible.  The preachers didn't know anything about tight scheduling.  All they know is Sunday morning, 8:00, 9:00, 11:00 collection.  So at St. Jude's, a vocational training thing for vets in Montgomery [Alabama], were about twenty-five veterans who had been in the quartermaster.  They wanted to get jobs driving the buses, repairing them, and so on.  So they volunteered their services to the Montgomery Improvement Association to set up the system of routing so that you could get folks moved across the city without using the buses.  They'd been doing this in the Army, where you hit the ground, and you do it quickly with all these connection points 'cause the city of Montgomery [Alabama] had an ordinance saying that if you, a black person, on a corner more than ten minutes waiting for something you were loitering.  So the pickups had to be precise.  And so it was their contribution on the technical side of the service that replaced the bus system during the boycott that made the thing work.  I got this from one of the guys who taught these guys out at St. Jude's, Ronald Young down in Florida.
Story_ID: 192703
Speaker 1: But the v--so, T. M. [Theodore Martin Alexander, Jr.] wants this car.  He's not a vet [veteran].  His daddy [Theodore Martin Alexander, Sr.] buys him the car and has it towed to the house.  The boy didn't mention gas, right (laughter)?  So, T. M. comes through Graves Hall [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] collecting coat hangers to sell to get gas to run the car.  And at that time the money, the side money for Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] guys was kind of slow.  The money that guys would make would be as waiters.  The various country clubs and white establishment that wanted black waiters and stuff would want a Morehouse crowd of waiters.  And so my job would be to put up the list of the places that wanted six waiters here, and ten there, and five here, and (unclear) and so on.  And so T. M. would miss the cut.  Sometimes the guys will say, "You've got money, you don't need this,"--so T. M. is collecting these coat hangers to get gas to get the car.  So we all would get in the car in the end.  There's eight of us or nine of us sometimes in this Chevrolet.  You had Morehouse then populated with a range of people economically, ministers' sons in particular, high school principals' sons, a whole lot of them, a couple of gangsters' sons.  We know that, that boy's daddy does numbers, but he ain't been arrested yet, that kind of stuff--prosperous farmers' sons, the leading folks who have the big cafe in the small--Donna's and Bill Georgia's [ph.] son, and guys like myself, not too many of us straight from the farm, but there were such guys.  There was a fellow whose name, in terms of what Morehouse could do for people, William King was a science major who ends up at Cal Tech [California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California] as a prof, whose specialty was the study of fluid viscosities, fancy word for saying the surface tension on bubbles, which is very important in hydraulics.  Too many bubbles, the thing ain't gon' work.  He's retired now.  But Morehouse had that kind of intense intellectual joy.  We had a good time competing with each other brain-wise.
Story_ID: 192704
Speaker 1: And we also had young guys' time.  For example, the veterans would gamble and to [Benjamin] Mays', you know, dismay.  And many is the time, they had two or three prefab buildings on campus [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] called vet dorms.  It'll hold like twenty-four and twenty-four within these things, and the windows were small.  And more than once heavyset guys got caught in the windows when Mr. Nixon [ph.] would go down to rig up the gambling, couldn't get through.  It's guys like a fish out of water trying to swim in mid-air.  And I remember some of the drinking songs.  I wasn't a drinking guy, but one song goes, the words: "You bring the whiskey, I'll bring the gin.  We'll never let a sober one in."  And it was--so the, the place was called the Dirty Deuce for some reason or another, twenty people in there I guess.  But we would have all that kind of fun.  And on Sundays when it was raining we'd be depressed, but we'd go to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  Depression comes in that the young ladies were not encouraged to leave campus in the rain, like where are you going walking in the rain?  So we had to sit and do polite talk, a loveseat for the two couple--for the couple, then there's a lady who is on the staff reading the thoughts of Marcus Aurelius, Reader's Digest, another loveseat and another person doing the same thing.  And if it's raining you can't walk outside so you have to blow the Sunday sitting there.  So we knew how to talk in code about Monday (laughter).  And the great Christmas thing was the Atlanta University [later Atlanta Clark University, Atlanta, Georgia] Joint Christmas Carol Concert, where Morehouse Glee Club, the Spelman Glee Club, and Clark [College, later Clark Atlanta University] would all combine for a tremendous--they still do that, in different ways now.  While I was not in the Morehouse Glee Club, I followed the music and went to the events not only because my buddies who were in the thing were there, but because all those young ladies at these other places would be in the crowd, and so that was a major mixer.  The library was a place where we went when we could not afford to go anywhere else to meet young ladies.  We'd go to Atlanta University Library, as it was called, and we would spell it L-I-E-B-R-A-R-Y (laughter).  You studying?  No, yeah, I'm studying.  That's the lie, right?  But we would study, so sooner or later it would be necessary to protect ourselves on academics.
Story_ID: 192705
Speaker 1: But the, the teachers at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] were people who could have been at many other places 'cause Morehouse was not paying much.  In '48 [1948], 'cause I worked in the personnel office where I'd hear things, they were hiring young professors for $3200 dollars who had all but the Ph, but now what would happen is that Morehouse would assist with housing, and I later learned that they would assist with food in that when they do the wholesale for us, they'd get some retails, some small special orders for faculty who would maybe pay a third of what it would be otherwise and so on.  So you could get in kind what you didn't get in cash, and in that way you would have an attraction to offer folks.  'Cause [Robert] Brisbane probably could have gone someplace else, just out of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], but he was so young when he got to Morehouse.  We thought he was a senior, at least the older guys did.  The seniors thought he was--no, no, the seniors thought he was a freshman, that's what it was.  So Sam [Berry] McKinney, who became a famous preacher out in Seattle [Washington], out of Ohio by birth, said to this guy, "Come here, boy."  This is how the seniors would talk to people 'cause they're--in those days a year was like five in terms of mental stuff--"Come here, boy.  Where is your crab cap?"  The crab cap was the Morehouse beanie with an M on it in maroon, but the M is white.  And so Brisbane said I, I, I, I, I'll buy one tomorrow, I'll buy, buy, buy one tomorrow.  So we go in class and here is this guy at the front of the class with the roll book, and we said, "Oh, God, he's the teacher!"  And of course, I'm sure they talk about it later, but nobody said anything about where is your cap boy--but Brisbane, [Melvin] Kennedy, Walter Shivers [ph.] in sociology taught me a lot about how society works in terms of the sociological approach.  The historian, Kennedy, got me interested in the 19th century 'cause his thing was what happened in Western culture that led folks to end slavery, beyond just money.  And I got from English a lady by the name of Dr. Juanita, Ms. Juanita Tuma [ph.].  Ms. Tuma was married to a high official of Atlanta Life [Insurance Company], but her love of teaching and of seeing us blossom a little bit kept her going.  She and a guy named G. Lewis Chandler, who was also an M.A. out of Harvard in English, would make 'Moby Dick' a real story for us, would--some of the others.  A guy named William Faulkner, really deep, not only because he was Southern, because--but also despite his personal racism, he was the most profound writer we have had about the South.  He was wrong on a lot of stuff, but the sense of, of, of rootedness.  For example, my dad [James Russell Adams] and so many other folks in his generation will be out of equipment for forty years and say I'm going home in September.  Where the root is so deep that you can say, y'all been down home yet?  Any call from home lately?  And my brother will ask me, have y'all ta- have you talked to anybody at the house?  Well, Faulkner caught that.  Well, Tuma, the teacher, helped us understand that from the Afro-side in terms of literature as a flashlight on things because sociological stuff on the issue was, was not as plentiful as you might thing.  [E. Franklin] Frazier had done some of his Negro family back in '48 [1948], '49 [1949] and '50 [1950] I think, but even in a private black school, you were careful about how much overt stuff you did on sociological analysis.  I can remember, for example, when we worked with Agnes Scott [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] on stuff dealing with human race relations they called it in those days, right.  We had to do it under the name of Christian fellowship.  You put the word Christian in there that would pacify the folks who opposed the whole thing.  On the grounds that if you make real Christians out of the Afros, they'll be peaceful and let God take care of the bounds, right.  And so we would meet under that label.  Sometimes it's YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association], never YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], even though the females they show up from Agnes Scott.
Story_ID: 192706
Speaker 1: And I remember once a group of us--'Killers of the Dream' had come out by Lillian Smith.  It was one of the essay-type critiques of Southern fake superiority, and arrogance, and racism.  And Lillian Smith had done an earlier novel based on an interracial love affair involving a Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia] girl and white male at one of the other schools, and it was called 'Strange Fruit.'  And the song 'Strange Fruit'--'Bitter Fruit' [sic]--that Nina Simone made her rep come from out of that time.  And so, so we wanted to go up to visit Lillian Smith in Toccoa, Georgia.  She had this mountainside house.  I'll never forget it.  The front side on the long was fifty feet almost of face was glassed in so she could see the mountain.  And the opposite wall was books, just books and books.  I've never seen so many books in a private house.  On the way up there, there were three carloads of us.  On the way up there, we had to get gas.  It was raining.  We stopped at a filling station in some tiny little spot.  And the white guy came out to pump the gas.  In those days they were still pumping gas, where you pump it up into the cylinder and it trickled down with this bell ringing.  And the guy sees me sitting in the car, a white female on one side, white guy on the other side, I'm in the middle.  The guy looked in the back.  He says, "There's a nigger in the car," (laughter).  "I ain't pumping no gas for them, bunch of Communists," and goes inside.  So all the other two cars said we ain't gonna buy any gas either.  The guy who runs, owned the place told the guy this is money, man, put some gas in the car.  So that's how we got gas, when the owner said no, this too much money on the basis that there's a nigger in the car 'cause there were two girls from Spelman, myself, and I think another black guy, and the rest of these youngsters were white, but we're in this discussion group.  And so we go to Lillian Smith's house, and that was the first, as we call it, real author, that I remember meeting.  She was so strong, all kinds of ways, that she could write these kinds of things.  Somebody eventually burned her house down, by the way.  'Cause Stone Mountain, Georgia, is also in Georgia.  That's where the [Ku Klux] Klan used to meet.  And, and so--
Speaker 2: Lillian Smith is the author who wrote the, the book on the--oh, it's about the Nazis--I mean the, the--they made the movie out of, the--
Speaker 1: 'Killers of the Dream' was her, her big essay on racism in the South.  She may have done some subsequent ones that I missed.  But the first two, 'Killer,' 'Strange Fruit' was about a romance, interracial romance, in the Deep South and the fallout from it.  And she was big in those days 'cause they wanted to kill her and other folks were applauding her and so on 'cause we're talking between '48 [1948] and '52 [1952].
Story_ID: 192707
Speaker 1: The NAA [NAACP, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] I didn't know at that time had these cases already, one out of Delaware and Bolling v. Sharpe [1954] case here.  And they were looking for the one out of Kansas and 'cause they were working on these cases in, in, in, in, in, in, in '52 [1952] and '53 [1953] in finally they go to the court.  The court sits on 'em for a year, and we get in '54 [1954] in May, of course, consolidated but under the name Brown v. Board [Brown vs. Board of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483].  At that time, I leave, I leave Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] with two or three kinds of money.  I didn't know it was oil money, Rockefeller Foundation.  A general education board was giving--because I had this high average and all that, it was the source of that.  But also, the State of Georgia was part of what the ex-Confederate states had put together in response to a case coming out of Missouri, ex rel. Gaines v. Missouri [sic, Missouri ex rel. Gaines vs. Canada].  Well, the ruling was, if your state will not permit you to attend a tax supported place that your taxes support, the state must pay, if you're qualified to be in the program, your expenses to an out-of-state place that will take you. [sic, Missouri ex rel. Gaines vs. Canada ruled that states must provide in-state institutions for African Americans or allow them to attend the white institutions]  We call it out-of-state aid.  I think I got some of that, and I did not have to fill out any papers.  I didn't know that.  I just know I had enough money lined up at my finishing Morehouse to take me all the way, virtually all the way through the Ph.D. program at [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]--
Story_ID: 192708
Speaker 1: Now how did you come to choose the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Good question.  I thought of Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Harvard said for the Ph.D. you need two languages.  Well, hey, I'm just up from ebonics, right (laughter).  I said man, I ain't got time to learn two languages, but I did have French at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I had been reading about Chicago [Illinois] in novels, James T. Farrell, 'Studs Lonigan,' the trilogy, and Nelson Algren, 'Never Come Morning' and 'The Man with the Golden Arm' later, and Willard Motley, 'We Fished All Night'--reading this stuff, right.  But I also, on the down home practical side said look, if I don't make it money wise and otherwise, I will have to get a job.  And I was told that if you wanna work in Chicago you can find work, the stockyards for starters, the post office if you pass the test, and if you can drive, the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] (laughter).  And I didn't know anything about Harvard having--I didn't know anything about Boston [Massachusetts].  And if I had trouble at Harvard and had to layout, what would I do and where would I do it?  And so, and then I was being urged--there was competition between my professor, [Robert] Brisbane, from Harvard and my professor, [Melvin] Kennedy, from Chicago.  And it was Kennedy who, I mean it was Kennedy who was saying to me that they got all kinds of jobs in Illinois, in Chicago.  Boston ain't got nothing but snow.  And Cambridge [Massachusetts] got nothing but, but that also.  So it was that kind of calculating.  One, I don't--do I have to pick up a second language?  I can barely do French 'cause the lady who was teaching French at Morehouse, white Dr. Aldi Moore [ph.], we would get her to talk in English about her good times in Paris [France], so I didn't learn much French from her 'cause I was ducking the guy who was a tyrant in French, Edward A. Jones [ph.], and to my regret I did that.  And so I had to buckle down hard to get my French at the Ph.D. level at Chicago.  And that's--but it was for a practical reason and with the urging of Kennedy who had gone to Chicago for history.
Story_ID: 192709
Speaker 1: 'Cause just give me a chance to expand on the issues a little bit.  I often say to, today that I went to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] actually on--I traveled between Morehouse and Quitman [Georgia] on the back of the bus by law.  And I went to Chicago [Illinois] on the front of the train by law.  I later learned that during the slavery years, the folks who drove the horses and loaded the stage coaches had to sit up with the bags, and that was where the slaves sat.  I also learned that the front of the train was where the folks who did the firing of the engine worked, and these were slaves initially.  And so, their rest quarters were right next to the engine.  And when they were allowed to have other people just like them aboard, they placed them in the sleeping--not sleep--the sitting car where the slave firemen worked.  My dad [James Russell Adams] briefly was a fireman too, and that was a black job.  It was the only job that you could get in the engine, even when slavery ended, ended was that of a fireman, which is shoveling the coal and so on, but back of the bus to Atlanta [Georgia], front of the train to Chicago.  And I could remember when we left Baltimore [Maryland] going to Georgia, the debate was where to get on the train, in Baltimore or in Washington [D.C.].  As in get on the train in Baltimore so you won't--and get on the front.  That's where you gon' have to get when you get to Washington anyway 'cause in those days, the North-South Atlantic Coast Line [Railroad] route: Washington was the place where you obeyed the Southern laws.  And so Union Station [Washington, D.C.] was the great musical chair, so to speak, arrangement; if you're coming from Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], going say to Richmond [Virginia], you may have boarded in Philly without the segregation rule being applied.  But you had to, before going into Virginia, follow the law of Virginia and points south.  So it was a big thing of making the switch.  And there were switch places all around at the border states for that kind of business.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: So, so, in those days, we were in Atlanta, for example, before going to Chicago.  We could not ride on the elevators in the department stores that whites road on.  Whether you were Benjamin Mays or whether you were Benjamin Mays' maid, you had to use the freight elevator.  That's how the racism worked in the, in, in, in Atlanta in those days.  There was a fellow at the airport [Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] who sat on a bale of cotton in Atlanta, and he was dressed as an Uncle Remus type.  He had a crumpled hat, a cotton wig with white locks, and when he would see a white person at the airport, he would say, "Welcome to the South.  Welcome to the heart of the South.  Welcome to Atlanta."  And the few blacks who flew were mostly ministers, doctors, high income real estate property holders and so on, he would not, if, if they were black, say anything, but one of the first things the Civil Rights Movement did was to get him retired off of that bale of cotton.
Story_ID: 192710
Speaker 1: And, and, in Chicago [Illinois] when I arrived on campus [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I was assigned without any effort on my part or any participation on my part to 1414 East 59th Street, better known as I-House International House.  Anybody who was not Anglo-American would end up at In-House.  That was the spot.
Speaker 2: So was that the purpose of International House, to--
Speaker 1: Not really, but it simplified housing of folks who were not of mainstream America.  And ironically, I had room 452 at Graves Hall at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] and room 452 at International House, one of those weird mathematical impossibilities.  I'm in this thing.  In-House was also known by some people off campus as Uncle Tom's Cabin (laughter).  I said anybody who was black in Chicago and living on some property--as a matter of fact, I was the first person to desegregate a place called Snell Hitchcock Hall [Amos Jerome Snell Hall and Charles Hitchcock Hall, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] on Chicago's campus.  And I can remember on arriving on the campus I was assigned to Room 21 Snell.  And there was another person assigned to the room also, room for two, two beds flat, no bunk at that stage.  The young fellow comes in, Lenny Freedman [ph.], sees me, goes to the desk and says, "There's a black guy in my room."  I was there first, right, but, "There's a black guy in my room."  And Shannon Lauschbowell [ph.] on the desk, a Quaker, who was into supporting all of this stuff, says, "Yes, we know."  Lenny was tense.  He did not take off his clothes that, the first two nights.  I was tense 'cause I'd been brought up in Georgia saying you don't sleep where white folks sleep and you don't eat with white--where white folks eat, not really.  So I'm tense 'cause we got this sleeping thing.  There's a white guy.  I didn't know he was Jewish.  That wasn't the thing.  He was white.  That's what I saw first.  So, two nights he's waiting.  This is like a Friday night.  He was waiting for Monday to go or to get a change of room over at the administration building where everything is on five by eight cards, right.  He fails.  They wouldn't change anything, and he's too poor to do anything about it.  He finally breaks down, and he was I'm sure lamenting the fact that he's a poor Jew.  Later on, he thought out, and we became roommates, in the sense of the ease of back and forth and stuff.  And I used to say to Lenny, "Lenny, you're kind of smart.  Why are you studying from eight in the morning to eleven and twelve at night every day?"  And he said something to me I shared with my students.  He says, "My mama runs, my mother runs a delicatessen.  And she opens at seven, and she closes at midnight to keep me here."  That wiped me out again, that she opens at seven, and she closes at midnight to keep me here.  He went to med [medical] school finally and became a professor of surgery somewhere in New York, but he started out working on his master's [degree] in biology, wondering why am I in his room (laughter).
Story_ID: 192711
Speaker 1: And I also--I remember a scene on that campus [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I had a good time in grad school, by the way.  Part of it was I'm an exotic.  The bear can dance and say something, and I realize that now 'cause I would also have these episodes.  I was a research assistant to the Walgreens Foundation director, Walgreens drugstore money.  And some days I'd come into Professor Jerome Curran's [ph.] office, and that's part of my job early.  And a guy in sociology, won't call his name, said to me, "Why are you janitors always using the phone for your personal business?  This is an office for professors."  And I said, "Well, I'm here because of that.  I'm the research assistant to Jerome Curran," who was a full professor.  This guy wasn't, right.  The guy got real quiet and said nothing to me after that point at all.  He was embarrassed.  Another time I had a grant to do an electoral study.  And I had enough money, ten thousand dollars, to hire folks to do stuff in the field.  And many of the applicants who would come in and go to the nearest white guy sitting near me to say that I heard that y'all are hiring research folks for fieldwork.  He say, "Yes, the director of it is right there."  And the guy looked right past me.  And then we'd have this problem all the while.  That's the way it is, in so many words.  So I had those kinds of experiences.  I also had some folks who didn't understand what they were doing when they were doing me a service, a favor.  Two young ladies, one Jewish, one not Jewish, said, "Russ, we hear that you've got an unlucky number for your birthday.  We wanna take you to a movie."  I said, "Huh?"  And so I said, "Say what?"  "Wanna take you to a movie."  It was 'Birth of a Nation' at the Biograph [Victory Garden Biograph Theatre, Chicago, Illinois].  I'm the only black guy in there.  And I said, "I can't sit through this."  "But we thought you'd appreciate it 'cause we wanna talk about it."  And I said, "Well, we can talk about it right--sitting up there with these other Nazis watching it," (laughter) and so on.  That's what I mean by the failure to understand context and stuff.
Story_ID: 192712
Speaker 1: I would long to be around black folks, especially to try to meet the young ladies, right, before I met the beloved.  What would happen is that when the young ladies hear that you are in that school and you claim you ain't got no car that you're taking Cottage Grove Number Four [bus route, Chicago, Illinois]--well yes, I, I knew that bus line schedule as the drivers did, you know--and I'd say yeah.  They'd say, "We think you're lying.  You ain't got no money?  I ain't taking no bus."  I remember one social worker, a sister that I was trying to talk to, I took the bus out to her house.  It was called South Park [Way], [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr. Drive], right, 75th or 76th and South Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I take the bus out to her house, and it starts raining, and I'm sitting there chatting with her.  And she says, "Where'd you park?  I'll drive you over to your car."  And I said, "I took the bus."  She said, "Huh?"  I said, "I took the Cottage Grove--the South Park."  And so she says, "Well, I'll tell you what, I'll sit with you in my car until that bus comes, but if we are to talk some more, you ought to be driving."  That took care of that, never talked to her again.  But I'd be so lonesome though to talk to black folks without doing this editing that one does when talking across racial lines.  And there's always this editing that we do, whether we admit or not.  So I'd go up to a place called Brown's Barber Shop [Chicago, Illinois].  That was like 53rd, near Englewood or Ingleside [Avenue].
Speaker 2: Ingleside, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Brown ran the shop.  And like most black barbers who are proprietors, they're there every day so they know a lot about a lot of stuff.  But I just wanted to hear the cadences of the afro accent and voice and stuff.  And so I'd go--I had hair to be cut in those days (laughter), so I would go and sit for three hours after my fifteen minutes in the chair to, and listen to guys talk like they did in south Georgia when I would do the same thing.  I think he's passed on now like 'cause it's thirty years or more ago.
Story_ID: 192713
Speaker 1: But on campus I had at [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] some of the stars of political science and didn't know it.  I just know that, that this one is Hans Joachim Morgenthau, and this one is Herman A. Finer, international specialist also.  This is David Easton, who later became a giant in the field of behavioral political science.  And I knew that this was Charles A. Harding, who was a nationally known guy in agricultural policy studies.  And two other things stand out, though, on, on Chicago, I think.  The one time I saw W.E.B. Du Bois, he was in his late eighties and had just had his big tussle about his passport and is he an agent for the Soviet Union and the Communist Party membership and stuff.  He wasn't at that time, and parenthetically he joined the Communist Party officially on his last week in the United States on his flight to Ghana.  The other person I remember in his last years was Paul Robeson.  When Robeson came to Mandel Hall on that campus [University of Chicago], they had sharp shooters around the wall.  And so Robeson said, "I don't know what for.  I'm just a singer doing his last appearances, meaning no harm, nor have I ever meant any harm during my life."  And he says, "Maybe they need the overtime."  I also remember a guy named Anton J. Carlson, who did a standard book called 'The Machinery of the Body.'  But I remember him as a guy when the House Un-American Activities Committee [HUAC] came to campus in '54 [1954].  They inquired of him, "Why are you advising these leftist groups?" Of the Sharfman Knights [ph.] and the Young Stalin Knights, and the, well, the Septembers and Octobers--these are all Russian interested groups.  And he says, "A man of your age and distinction, why are you talking to--why are you serving as advisor to these groups, these young folks?"  He says, "Because they're young, and they need to know things that only age can give you."  And they left him alone in that kind of, kind of thing.
Story_ID: 192714
Speaker 1: I also remember I'm hustling for this side money.  I'm always after this side money, no matter what kind of scholarship, official money 'cause I wanna be able to move around and not have to write up where this money went, not that I was doing something wrong.  So I got a job with the, the acquaintance who had the newspaper concession at [Albert Merritt] Billings Hospital [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  You'd buy the [Chicago] Sun Times.  In those days it was a dime on the stands.  Buy it for three cents and sell it for a quarter.  Buy the Sunday thing, which was a quarter I guess, and sell it for a dollar on the floor.  And so I would take one of the evening shifts of delivering--at that time Chicago, 'Chicago Daily News' was still being published.  And so, in making the rounds, I'd come out maybe with twenty-five dollars, and I'd have twelve of my own--of, of that, in terms of my cut, for less than an hour--less than two hours moving around that floor.  Now, point of that is that they started desegregating Billings Hospital.  They started with either the sister or the wife of Haile Selassie.  She was on what we called Section A-3, high private, high private, high privacy, high cost room.  I think she was the first person, female of color to be allowed on that floor, followed by Mahalia Jackson as the second person of color to be allowed on that floor.  At that time [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was going through the debate through the debate in political science of whether or not a Jewish person should ever be chair.  They heard that Morten Gwatsen [ph.], a Jewish professor, had terminal cancer and he'd had a year to live.  So he was made chair, and he died on time.  I remember the debate at Billings Hospital over whether or not a Jew should be allowed to head a subdivision of the hospital (unclear) because in that time, '54 [1954], '55 [1955], you know, Chicago was basically a Baptist, it started out as Baptist, as you probably know, or did you?  The Rockefellers put in between 1883 and 1910 thirty-four million dollars, and the Rockefellers were big Baptist.  When I was there, the superintendent to the hospital, a guy named Ray Brown [ph.], was a North Carolina aristocrat, Protestant.  His assistant was a guy named Noel Tish Harveshall [ph.], as British as he could be, all up in his mouth and stuff when you--when he would talk and such.  The folks who ran the gift shop where the newspapers were distributed were upper income North Shore ladies married to wealthy people connected with the steel and stockyards money 'cause I also met Harold D. Swift of Swift Packing Company [Swift & Co, later part of Conagra] when he was a patient in, in, in that hospital.  And I'm going through this kind of detail to say that as advanced as Chicago was academically, it reflected social stratification of folks.  In the mailroom where I was employed, my supervisor was a low income Jewish guy named Heisler [ph.], Gerald T. Heisler.  Supervisors could wear the white coats, as long as you didn't have a stethoscope or any medical stuff on it.  Workers had to wear the gray coats.  Well, I refused to wear a coat.  I ain't gonna--I'm a student.  "Russell, I told you time and time again, tell you time and time again don't put on the white coat.  There's the gray coats for guys who are sorting mail."  So I said, "Well, I don't need no coat to sort mail.  I'll just take the weight."  And so, I would, at this mail window, I would hear fellows talking, these physicians--C. Philip Miller, Miller Brewing [Company, later MillerCoors] family, and they would talk about, well, I don't know whether we should vote to have this thing or not with Jews doing such and such.  Finally they voted that Leon Jacobson should be the director of Ben May labs [Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  And that was a big discussion, but he finally--
Speaker 2: So, so what you're saying is that University of Chicago is, was still struggling with the Jewish question, let, let alone a--
Speaker 1: Not meant the afro.
Speaker 2: --Black person.  They hadn't even gotten to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Here's how the stratification went for the non-medical, just what I could see.  The folks who handled the clean linen were Irish and Polish.  Folks who had the stained linen were black and had to wear blue, sky blue jumpsuits.  The folks who did the white clothes wore white outfits.  The physical plant folks who were black wore a certain color clothing.  Almost all of the guys who did the ups, cleaned up, scrub up, and close up (laughter).  We call 'em the ups.  So it was rigidly stratified.  And so as a graduate student, black, working in the mailroom, I was an anomaly.  What do you have him wear?  And I said, "Well, if I can't wear no white coat, I ain't wearing no gray coat 'cause I ain't full-time laborer," even though when heavy stuff would come in I would be asked to help the guys unload stuff.  But I would be as slow as I could be so they would say he's in the way (laughter) 'cause I ain't wanna do any lifting.  I didn't do it at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  I didn't go out on any waiter calls.  We used to have an expression: take a tray and see America (laughter) 'cause America open up for you as long as you got this tray.  And I could remember those kinds of battles.
Story_ID: 192715
Speaker 1: And I could also remember when J. Robert Oppenheimer of the Manhattan Project that did the atomic atom smashing stuff and Leslie Groves who headed the project for him on the military side and a bunch of the vets that help split the atom, they met at Stagg Field, where under the stands at [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] they had done the first sustained nuclear reaction experiment.  So they came back to celebrate.  And I'm walking down this thing, and I see a photographer trying to get a picture of three Afro-American kids climbing the little tree to juxtapose them with the fellows meeting at the stadium--at, at the field--to talk about commemorating the split of the atom.  And I told the guy, "Get your behinds out of the tree."  The guy wants to show here are black folks still in trees, right (laughter), and here these guys splitting the atom.  And they wanted to get 'em all in one shot.  I said, "Get your ass out of the tree."  "What's wrong?  What did I do?"  "Get down out of the tree.  You might fall and hurt yourself," but I really wanted them to get out of the guy's shot 'cause he wanted to get one of these unusual juxtapositions to make a social statement without saying that's what it is, right, and, and so on.  But I went through Chicago, got all my coursework out of the way, but I felt like a stack of footnotes.  I didn't know much about things that were not academic, and I sensed it.
Story_ID: 192716
Speaker 1: Now was [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin on campus [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] at that time?
Speaker 2: No, no, John Hope Franklin came after I left.  He came in the history department, and he also had to go to Brown [Brown's Barber Shop, Chicago, Illinois] to get his haircut 'cause the other guys that claimed that only thing I can make out of here is a big N on your head (laughter), do something to a guy like that.  And what's, what's wrong with that, that kind of stuff?  Matter of fact, the first black guys who came to [University of] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] like Alison Davis in education, was told they would help him with housing, but it had to be over on the east side of Cottage Grove [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Woodlawn [Chicago, Illinois], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and stuff.  But when I got to town [Chicago, Illinois], in addition to the housing thing, the big battle was over whether or not they should hire black waitresses on 63rd Street, the part that's closest to the lake [Lake Michigan], which was still predominantly white in terms of clientele and ownership of things.  And it was also downtown the big battle of Stouffer's Restaurant [Chicago, Illinois] on the same point, should they hire black waitresses?  In other words, the desegregation of public amenities in the North was still happening in the mid--the early '50s [1950s].  When Brown vs. Board [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 347 U.S. 483] came down, and when the other--when, when, when the interstate movement of, of, of goods to hotels and stuff was seen as--segregation was seen on that point as a burden on interstate commerce, that's what they were saying, while the schools, it was unconstitutional to split 'cause its denial of equal protection of the law.  They got on the transportation thing from the angle of commerce, saying that racial segregation was a burden on interstate commerce.  And when the hotels in Atlanta [Georgia] said that we, well, well, we aren't interstate commerce--said well, you're traffic is, and your suppliers are, and therefore you are affected by the, the policies that we're gonna follow in terms of desegregating public, public facilities.
Story_ID: 192717
Speaker 1: In the, in the '50s [1950s] when Chicago [Illinois] was still struggling with downtown Chicago, not to mention residential stuff 'cause the thing I noticed when I did go downtown is that the folks who got on the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] at Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] were almost 90 percent white, but if you're riding the 'EL', it was black or white in terms of folks coming and going between Hyde Park and downtown.  And at that time IIT, Illinois Institute of Technology [Chicago, Illinois] was big in those days.  Michael Reese [Hospital, Chicago, Illinois] was still in business.
Speaker 2: It's still going on.
Speaker 1: I know.  And State Street, rather the Dan Ryan [Expressway, Chicago, Illinois], was the, the, the main artery that went downtown.  And Dan Ryan was being discussed, but it was ten years away almost from a reality.  So when I became weary of campus [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and didn't really know what I wanted to do for the Ph.D. paper, two things had happened to me: one, I met a discussion group that was black root of folks around a guy named Alton Davis.  Alton Davis had been the 'Wings Over Jordan' advance man and PR guy, and he was into public relations of sorts.  And he got a contract to help put together the 1963 McCormick Place Afro Unit observation--observance rather.  So he formed a group called the American Negro Emancipation Centennial Authority.  And the young folks who worked with him are called the ANECAs as an abbreviation.  John Johnson was part of that.  The--John Bracey was part of it, who's up at [University of Massachusetts] Amherst [Amherst, Massachusetts].  Sonja Stone, who went to [University of North Carolina] Chapel Hill [North Carolina], who is now deceased, was part of that.  Burroughs [sic, HM Thomas Burrell], an advertising guy was briefly a part of it.
Speaker 2: Burrell.
Speaker 1: Burrell.  John Burrell.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Tom Burrell.
Speaker 1: Tom Burrell.  Well, in those days, he was passing out throwaways.
Story_ID: 192718
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Karen E. Sutton.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'm Dr. Russell Adams, that's R-U-S-S-E-L-L, A-D-A-M-S.  And I'm employed at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] as chair of the Department of Afro-American Studies.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July 28th [2003], and the time is two PM.
Speaker 1: And it's 2003 is the year, right?
Speaker 2: And of course 2003, the year.
Speaker 1: And this is a follow-up to an interview we started about two weeks ago, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: --we're--this our--we're gonna attempt to conclude, have this, this, this attempt.
Story_ID: 192719
Speaker 1: I think we, we had finished discussing your career as a probation officer in Chicago [Illinois].  Now you went from Chicago to North Carolina Central [University, Durham, North Carolina], right, in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, in 1965--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --as assistant professor of political science.  It was a very small department, three people.  And the person who had started the department was approaching retirement.  And the idea would--was that I would succeed that person, which I did.  And from 1966 to '69 [1969] I was chair of the Department of Political Science at North Carolina Central.  We were able to give, for an undergrad operation, a fairly good introduction to the field of political science, had courses on constitutional law, on public administration, on state and local government, and on political organization.  We were very proud of those courses in those days.  And then I received an offer to come to a new urban grant college.  And at that time in [Washington] D.C. that college was called Federal City College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.].  I came up in September of '69 [1969] and was chairman of the Department of History and vice chairman of the humanities division in which history was located.  Now the original idea when I came up was that I was to head the black studies program, but then between the recruiting discussions and my signing on, there was a change in planning, and so the department was never created, and instead, the interest that would have been covered by that department were transferred to the history department.  And for three years I was at the University of the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.], which was established to offer educational opportunities to folks who, for whatever sets of reasons, had not been able to continue from high school.  So our, in '70 [1970], our freshmen class age averaged twenty-two.  So there were people who were beginning college at that age.  And we had two or three things to do.  One was to offer remedial support for older learners, and two, to tap the nonacademic wisdom of these learners.  So they did not come to us one sided.  A lot of people would say, ah, twenty-two years of age, what can they do in college?  They can do a lot, and they did a lot in that they brought life experiences that an eighteen-year-old would not have.  And we offered them skills enhancement that we had and so the two operations worked pretty well.
Story_ID: 192720
Speaker 1: Then after a three-year period [at Federal City College, later University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.], I--my name I suppose circulated around the region, and Howard University [Washington, D.C.] folks became interested in my joining them.  And so with some mixed emotions, I made the switch from University of the District of Columbia [formerly, Federal City College, Washington, D.C.] to Howard in 1971.  And I was asked--I wanted to get out of administration 'cause I wanted to spend more time doing my writing and research.  So I was asked to simply handle the mail and inquiries about jobs from folks at Howard, who wanted to come to Howard that is.  And--
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm sorry, for the black studies department--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: To, to a--for the Department of Afro-American Studies, where I was assigned.  And so I agreed to do that for a year.  And when the year was up, I was told by one of the deans that they were quite satisfied with what I had been doing for the year and that they had called off the search for a chair 'cause I was to be the chair.  And that was in 1971.  And I have been in that capacity since that time.
Story_ID: 192721
Speaker 1: There has been a price that I have paid personally.  When you are in management situations, the scholarship slows down in terms of personal scholarship.  You're enabling others to do things.  And in managing, to enable others to do things, some of the work that you had planned to do at a certain time is not done because you're in meetings of one kind or another, or you are hearing good and bad things, you're (unclear)--you're making a, an administrative operation function.  And that is not supportive of your own scholarship because there are only so many hours in the day.  There was a time, for example, when I tried to do full-blast scholarship and full-blast administration, but that would take me to campus [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] on Saturdays and Sundays until Mrs. Adams [Eleanor Adams] said no way will our family be fully abandoned in pursuit of academics as such.  And I understood.  So now my practice is five days a week for Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and the rest of the week for my life's companion and our family, and that has worked most of these years very well.  And I had to say this because when people ask why certain things either happen or don't happen because for everything that's done there is what they call in economics an opportunity cost.  You give up something here to get something done there.  And if one looks carefully, a person such as the late John Blassingame, while he was at one time head of the program of Afro-American studies at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], his full attention basically was on his scholarship.  One looks at the world authority on Marcus Garvey, who is Dr. Robert Hill.  He basically stayed--focused on his researches on Garvey.  And [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin for a while, of course, was head of history at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  But his major productions were behind him when that happened.  And, and, and I don't wanna go on and on on that particular point.  But I've enjoyed enabling others to do things, not that I have not done as much as I would like to do.  Nobody--no scholar really ever gets everything done because soon as you do one thing, there's another piece that you'd like to do, and sometimes you don't get a chance to do it.
Story_ID: 192722
Speaker 1: But our department [Department of Afro-American Studies, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] has specialized in supplying advice to public school systems on how to use Afro materials constructively.  And my part of that work has taken me from Meadville, Pennsylvania, on the north, to Miami Dade Junior College [Miami Dade College, Miami, Florida] on the south, to Tuscaloosa, Alabama, on the west, so to speak, throughout the Middle Atlantic States where we specialize in curriculum advising and also teacher training.  And I'm rather, said bluntly, satisfied with what we've tried to do.  We don't get as much action on that front now for two reasons: one is that the Internet makes materials accessible to people and information about materials; and two, we were part of a wave of enablers throughout the country that sensitize oncoming teachers to what we were talking about, and those folks are now in place, many of them; and the oth- third part is that there has been a slowdown of the psychic energy that galvanized the black community in general.  And so, so there has been a, I won't say an abandonment of the central thrust, but it's been a modification of it.  Ethnic studies now, for example, a lot of places that had, say twenty years ago Afro-American studies departments, now will call these units, blended with Puerto Rican studies, with gender studies, diversity operations, one place in New York--I won't call the full name of it--they call it the Pluralex Department [ph.], meaning four or five different units put in, into that one place.  I make the argument, however, that there is no honest substitution for black studies or Afro-American studies.  When you ask, what field of study represents an attempt to solve a problem of human relations and power relationships?  What other department and whatever other subject is bigger than the one that's traditionally covered by Afro-American studies?  And then to make it less abstract I ask this question: what human relations issue occasion a civil war in this country?  And that is the measure of the gravity of the subject.  And the other measure of the gravity of the subject is that the subject continues no matter what you say about we are colorblind, that is behind us.  When a [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover has trouble getting a cab; a Russ Adams is asked when does the music start; you remind me of my yard man and so on by folks who don't mean any harm.  But where the problem is so deep they don't know they have it.  And when you look at what I call the gap problem, gap in education levels, gap in income levels.  You look at the Sunday morning problems.  The Sunday morning problem is that America is as segregated as it gets in the name of God, so to speak.  And so you have this continued salience of the problem, no matter what anybody says about that's thirty years ago.  And then you pick up the paper and somebody's been either lynched, or had to run for their lives, or were, were penalized for being, not for doing, simply for being, which is the heart of racism, where as one [Ku Klux] Klansman put it, "Black folks were God's mistake."  Now that is a heavy, heavy thing to push on anybody, so that the subject then has gotten even more complicated and is still extraordinarily serious because these gaps representing who is not getting various things.  I had a situation down in Tennessee about three months ago where a person said to me, "What does math have to do with social justice?"  And I had to say to that person that math is the quantitative x-ray by which we determine what is just and what is not just and the distribution of the goods in a society, who is getting what, and how much, and for what reason?  And you have to be able to track that with numbers.  So that you can't follow everybody individually; you use statistics and the idea of the just wage.  Just is an ethical statement; wage is a quantitative statement, fair pay, honest wages, starvation wages; exploitation is a quantitative and ethical statement, and, and therefore you cannot then argue that the gaps don't reflect the continuation of the problem or the fact that while African Americans make up 13 percent of the population, they do 45 percent of the jail inmates of which there are two million folks in jail in this country, the largest in Western society and so on.  So that instead of Afro-American, black studies thinning out as time goes on, I'm arguing for a refinement of how to look at the problems and how to expand the conception of where, where the problems are located.
Story_ID: 192723
Speaker 1: For example, this country has very thin sense of the Caribbean situation where there are millions of folks who look like the folks that we call African Americans here.  As a matter of fact, one of the problems we have at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]--not a problem, but situation--is when a person from Trinidad or Jamaica here's the word Afro-American, they will say my folks have never lived in America.  I'm a student here at Howard.  I feel left out when you say Afro-American.  And so I, and I understand that, and this is why a lot of the departments call themselves black studies or Africana, having to do with Africa, meaning you could cover that kind of a complaint with the broader definition.  I spent some time talking to a young lawyer female from Brazil where the Afro-Brazilians, whose numbers are almost twice that in terms of black folks, a mere thirty-eight million here, there are almost sixty-five or seventy million persons of Africa sitting in Brazil that this country's educational foundations fundamentally ignore.  And I use the word foundations to say that there is an orientation that people are not aware of that directs their attention in a certain direction or keeps it from going in a certain direction.  And the focus on 1619 and the United States proper, in terms of understanding the world, means that you have to make a special effort to include the people in the Caribbean or to realize that if the proverbial person from Mars had to get one person to represent all of the people carried out of Africa to the Western Hemisphere, that one person would have to come from Brazil; and that one person would be a female speaking Portuguese; and that one person would have to be a person who is double religion, Sunday's Cathar--Catholic and Monday's Candomble, a mixture of Shango and Yoruba religions.  So Afro studies then is to me the beginning of asking what has been the African experience outside of Africa in the Western Hemisphere.  The next two stages, one--the second stage would be for me the Caribbean, and the third stage would be not only Brazil, but Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, and Panama of course, in order to get a rounded picture of the connection of black people to the Western Hemisphere.  [W.E.B.] Du Bois saw it when he talked about the problem of the 20th century being the problem of relations of the darker peoples of the world with the lighter peoples of the world.  You see, so people don't add that other part that he talked about to say at probably the 20th century (unclear)--to the United States says that you skip half of this thing.  But then in, in all fairness, the Civil Rights Movement here in the states provided the vehicle to take the study of our experience from where [Carter G.] Woodson left it when he died in 1950 to the next level, which has to be an institutional level.  Now Du Bois--I mean Woodson had so many problems with institutions including Howard when Howard was run by a white president who said that we didn't need to have the (unclear) represented by the work of a man like Woodson.  And Woodson swore he'd never really work as a faculty person.  Now he made an exception, went to West Virginia State [University, Institute, West Virginia] briefly--that he would live on grants and whatever else he could get in order to do his work independent of being told what it ought to be.  And, and, and so he es--established, of course, the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History [sic., Association for the Study of Negro Life and History, later, Association for the Study of African American Life and History, ASALH] even before he came to Howard.  And--but at the same time, he almost singlehandedly promoted black studies, and we called it Negro history during his time, the Journal of Negro History from 1915, the Negro History Bulletin from 1926, and then the establishment of chapters of folks who were not tied up with a campus payroll to study the black experience.
Story_ID: 192724
Speaker 1: When did Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] first start approaching the idea, and how was it received?  The, the, the, the department was established before you, you came there, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but only three years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, Howard moved into what we now call black studies through the history department.  Now when [Carter G.] Woodson was there in 1920, '22 [1922], he wanted to start a course on the history of black folks, and he was turned down.  Then it was [William] Leo Hansberry, who, in the late '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s] in particular, started looking at Africa.  And yet, at the same kept finding resistance, and I'd have to say this in terms of the accuracy of the record as much as it comes to me.  Howard was, to some extent, beyond medicine and law, ambivalent about the social analysis of the black experience.  They would do the medical because it's obvious that the folks they're treating are black.  They would do the law because the problems black folks had with the law were up front.  But just as Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], and to some extent Howard, had trouble deciding what to do with the spirituals, the music, whether you should sing them Anglicized or whether you should sing them with the dialect that the creators used when they did the songs.  When I was at Morehouse in the late '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s], Spelman and Morehouse were still to some extent debating on how to handle that music.  So you have had this doubleness [double consciousness] that [W.E.B.] Du Bois talked about.  On the one hand he says that I am American but on the other hand I am also African.  And so the problem that places like Howard had, how much of either to promote consciously and with some pride.  And so when a fellow named Nick Aaron Ford did his book 'Black Studies: Threat or Promise' [sic., 'Black Studies: Threat or Challenge'] back in '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Now he was a professor at Howard?
Speaker 2: He was at Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Morgan, okay.
Speaker 2: And he got a little grant to ask the question: to what extent was Woodson's work being picked up by institutions with regular budgets?  And he found that Howard, indeed, in '52 [1952] had the most courses on black folks.  They had eight, but they didn't call 'em that.  They had stuff on the Negro in politics, the Negro in the city, in sociology.  Because of Rayford Logan, four or five courses in the history department on that, that dealt with the experience.
Story_ID: 192725
Speaker 1: Then in 1968, when there was a--what I call a moral earthquake across the country, the Vietnam War had occasion on a whole lot of reaction.  Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] had the experience of chasing off campus the students, the director, the, the guy name [Lewis Blaine] Hershey, of the Selective Service System as a representative of our being involved with Vietnam, with all of the pros and cons of the ethics of being involved as successors to the French and trying to run somebody else's country.  In the wake of that, Howard had a change in its law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] leadership, had a change in the presidential leadership of Howard.  For example, Mordecai Johnson had retired I believe in 1960 or '65 [1965], and a fellow named [James] Nabrit [Jr.], who had been a prominent lawyer, had taken his spot.  He had to retire.  And at that time, [HistoryMaker] James Edward Cheek was the poster person, so to speak, of the new radical, but responsible black college presidents.  And he was based at Shaw [University, Raleigh, North Carolina].  And Time magazine had listed him among the twenty most impressive young college presidents in the country.  And the board of trustees at Howard said that's the man that we ought to get to follow Nabrit.  That he'll bring the energy and the views of this new generation of folks dealing with the black experience and dealing with black education and education in general.  And so he comes to Howard in '69 [1969].  Part of the settlement with the students was not only a change in then personnel at the leadership parts--Patricia [Roberts] Harris was over at the law school, for example, one of the, the first black female to be in the president's cabinet and so on.  But the, the part of the settlement was, since Howard had a Department of Classics celebrating Greece and Rome of antiquity, since Howard had a romance language department celebrating France and Spain, but look in the mirror and there's nobody black at the adminis--at the departmental level being studied officially, there ought to be a department whose job it was to look at the experience of persons of color, especially in the Western Hemisphere. And so the net result was the establishment, then in 1969, of a Department of Afro-American Studies that had, by the time I was approached, already in, in, in the '70 [1970] actually, two people trying to run it.  For whatever sets of reasons, there was this quick changeover.  I suspect in one case, the person wanted to do too much too fast.  Howard is like the Queen Mary, it turns around slowly, whatever it is.  And so when I was approached while being at the University of District of Columbia [formerly, Federal City College, Washington, D.C.], the idea as I've said earlier was that I was simply to stand in until they could finish their national search.  I found the list.  I'm won't tell you whose name was on it.  There were some high profile names on that list.  I didn't regard myself as high profile, not as much as a lot of folks said I was and so on--was at North Carolina Central [Durham, North Carolina] before I went to UDC.  I was trying to do some voluntary stuff with what we now call black studies, and was having some success we think with that.  But it was the drift of events that got Howard into not saying oh, we got eight courses.  We got history; we got poly sci [political science]; we got a school of social work dealing with black folks, and our school of religion [Howard University School of Divinity, Washington, D.C.] preaches to 'em all the time and so on.  And say, yeah, but for an undergrad instructional unit, you have all of this respect for Europe via these departments that deal with the classics and with the languages and so on.  And it is not enough to say that the historians are covering the subject because they deal with documents, and they look backwards.  Why not have a department that looks three ways?  And this is my way of, of phrasing what I think they were saying: one that looks back, one that looks around, and one that looks to the future.  And that's, to me, is the three-ply, that's really the African ver--version of, of how time works.
Story_ID: 192726
Speaker 1: You know, one of the African things is that each person has these three elements, the ancestors reflected in heredity, the present reflected in what your body can do, and the future, the products of being a family person with kids, the next generation.  And so I have transferred that kind of model into thinking about what Afro-American studies or black studies is supposed to do.  It is supposed to do the corrective business of handling the stereotypes and distortions of the past.  It is to do an analysis of contemporary situations, and it is to ask: and then what?  And that is the future.  And so it has been that kind of philosophy that we have tried to evolve over the thirty years I've been at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  So that the--so my writings have dealt with, among other things, helping to define the field, the epistemology of the field, namely, what are its foundations for looking at these things in the past, these things in the present, and the prospects that we anticipate for the future?  So it's not simply then--and, and history departments don't work that way.  Soc [Sociology] departments may look at the present, but not too far back in the past.  And no department specializes as such in the future, except when folks do extrapolations in what they're currently doing.  And so our idea then at Howard has been to have a department that has these three elements.  And so we have our courses designed, almost all of them, with that kind of three-way focus or three-ply focus so that students will see that you studied the past in order to get a grip on what we're talking about, look at the future to discern the problems that we still are working in, and around, and among, and then you ask how to move to the next stage in dealing with the problem so that you can have the strength of the past, the insights of the present in order to have a, an evolving vision for the future.
Story_ID: 192727
Speaker 1: One of the rationales behind the notion of conceiving of the past, or present, and the future as a continuum is to help our students [in Department of Afro-American Studies, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] overcome the negative side of being so focused on the present where there is no sense that the present that's really the latest edition of the past.  And the present is also then a preview of the future.  We call this preparing students not only for the 100 yard dash, which is the present, but for the 440 and the 880 relay, which is the future, and that one blends into the other.  And in the old days, when Russia [sic., Soviet Union] was running big time, they talked about five-year plans and ten-year plans.  And while I don't run that part with my students, I give them the example of the National Cath- National Cathedral [Cathedral Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul in the City and Diocese of Washington] here in Washington [D.C.], which was--the ground was broken in 1822 [sic., 1907], and the first stones, the cornerstone laid then.  And they finished it in 1989 [sic., 1990].  And of course this is the American example of what was not all that uncommon in Europe, where places like Notre Dame [de Paris, Paris, France] had a hundred and fifty year developmental history where the very--the other major buildings were designed to be carried on past the lives of the folks who started them.  And we are trying to promote among African American students this kind of thinking so that--and I'll say it kindly--that can get past the sharecropper mentality where you go from one crop to the next, and that's the end of the story, but where you can think in terms of not years or this year or last week, but in terms of the fifth year, the tenth year, the twentieth year, because life is long, and people do live those stages.
Story_ID: 192728
Speaker 1: And one of the problems I often say in my political courses of the Civil Rights Movement [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.] is that they did not think in terms of next year, five years from now, and ten years from now what we ought to be pushing.  They were so, so overburdened in a sense with dealing with the immediate definition of problems, keeping their energy to deal with the immediate problems, that there was not a group looking over their shoulders to ask: after these problems are handled, what do we have to yet continue to do?  Now we are trying to back into this whole business of timing, in that we have this big slippage between the beneficiaries of the movement and the folks who almost, by our own doings, are trapped in a time warp, the so-called inner city problems and stuff where you not only have the disabilities of the anonymity of the city where folks don't talk to each other unless they know each other.  But then you have this compounded by the fact that the class divisions have emerged as a serious negative situation--make it less abstract.  When I was a kid, say fifty years ago, the little town where I grew up [Quitman, Georgia] was one where the class situation of the schoolteachers, which made a distinct class, from those whose students they taught.  The gap was not nearly as pronounced as it is now because we all went to the same three churches, the First Baptist, the Second Baptist, and the Methodist A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal].  And folks who went to church, and everybody pretty much did, this is what everybody did together.  My mom [Isabella Ponder Adams], who, after the three of us came into the world, stayed home from teaching school to rear us.  But on Saturdays, the neighborhood kids in this little country location would come to our house.  And my mom would set up the living room to have class.  It was her way of wanting, wanting to still teach, but at the same time, offer a service beyond the house of the things that she could do, which was teach pretty well.  This is all grammar school type stuff, but I remember how our living room would be set up for having other kids in the neighborhood come by for class on Saturday.  And these would be folks who were sharecroppers' kids and whose incomes were not as ours was.  My dad [James Russell Adams] was a commercial farmer who would hire ten and then twenty and thirty people to do things, meaning there was a payroll coming from somewhere.  That kind of managing of income diversity disappeared with the urbanization business and when the middle class beneficiaries of the Civil Rights Movement could and did move away from the inner city in very large numbers across the country, whether we're talking Chicago [Illinois], whether they're talking Detroit [Michigan], Cleveland [Ohio], or Cincinnati [Ohio], or [Washington] D.C., folks who can afford to buy BMWs, and Saabs, and Mercedes [Benz], don't live with the folks who buy used cars.  And therefore, the modeling that the classes did for each other--it's not simply the middle class is saying to the lower income folks, you could do this if you act a little differently and do a little differently, but where the kids of the middle class could see that there is a human and humanitarian responsibility for their buddies that they meet at the playgrounds because we--the classes on recreation would meet at the same place for the young folks, whether it's football, basketball, baseball.  If everybody's going swimming in the, not necessarily the black pool 'cause they didn't have black swimming pools in a lot of these towns, but where you went to the creek in the country together, and so you didn't think in terms of class.  You think in terms of who's coming to the swim thing today and so on.  Well, that disappeared with this increased ironic flexibility for the black middle class.
Story_ID: 192729
Speaker 1: And so we have then this gap where the lower income folks have mixed feelings about folks speaking standard English, and driving the Mercedes [Benz], and doing the "been to" talk, been to the islands, been to Europe, been to Africa, got my artifacts where- however fake they may be.  And I use that term because in some of my trips to Africa, guys will say, "How old do you want the antique to be?" (Laughter) He said, "I got guys making it out back.  Yeah, I could bury it for six weeks in some oil and get a certain look, or do you want to freshly cut some that we'll finish tomorrow," and so on.  But the larger part being that the cross-fertilization of inspiration and insight that the old proximity generated is harder to come by.  So we have students at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] who, to some extent, are what some people call Afro-Saxons.  They have been so Europeanized, and don't have the experience of going to Big Mama's house for the summer in Biloxi [Mississippi] or Waycross, Georgia, outside of Memphis [Tennessee], because they don't do that these days.  Where my generation used to say after forty years of being away from Quitman [Georgia], well, I'm going home in September.  We don't say that as much as we once was said this and so on, so that there's been a price that's being paid.  And we in academic situations have a moral responsibility to continue to say that the struggle continues.  And that these are the dynamics of the struggle, and the price is being paid for the changes, and to also keep a vision of what the struggle is still about.  And the reparations situation that has evolved to some extent wasn't around during the Civil Rights [Movement] era.  It was the integration and equality without asking, what do you mean by this other than opening the doors and let me sit next to you on the counter?  Let me buy a house next to you out in the neighborhood and have my kids in the same place where your kids are.  But as Malcolm [X] used to say, America is a morally burning building [sic., Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., "I fear I integrated my people into a burning house."].  Is this what you're talking about that you wanna be a part of?  In other words, should there not be a vision of saying America can do better by itself, including us as an upgrade in the whole thing, rather than simply saying let me be exactly where you are 'cause the way you are includes the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK]; the way you are includes economic plutocracy; the way you are includes a materialism that is excessive in a lot of cases; the way you are is not enough.
Story_ID: 192730
Speaker 1: Oh, well, we--I was, I was saying that, that Afro[-American] studies people have a responsibility to try to say the struggle continues, and the price that we have paid for change ought not to be overlooked, but ought to be addressed in such a way that we can get something constructive out of, out of the change that we're not getting.  In other words, this field is the one field that is trying to keep a comprehensive view of where we have come and where we are, and also at the same time where we are trying to go, that there is no other academic field dealing with trying to keep the picture in focus--
Story_ID: 192731
Speaker 1: Can I ask you about your publications and stuff?  You--there's one book that I think everybody's probably--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's, that's, that's the one book.  In terms of works in progress, I have two.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that one is.  We should say it on tape.  It's 'Great Negroes: Past [and Present]'--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That is my signature publication, the one that has gone national.  Most scholars don't have that luck.  Usually twenty-five or thirty people will read what they do, I wanna say at most.  Right now when we have a national convention of people specialized in black studies, we can have anywhere from eight [thousand] to twelve thousand people in attendance.  And yet out of that group, there are less than fifty that are known as household names, but other folks still doing good work.  I think I'm in that probably fifty not only because of the book which went national, but because of being at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and also writing for The Journal of Negro Education.  And they still have that title.  They're debating now on how long will they use that as its, as the title.  But I have tried to focus my writings in recent years in two areas.  One, defining the field, and so my articles have been reprinted in a number of outlets.  And the other has to do with my work in progress, a major book on the foundations, the administrative foundations of black social advocacy, which is what I did my dissertation on.  I'm trying to ask the question: behind the speech is what else?
Story_ID: 192732
Speaker 1: That, that particular work is one that aimed at--is aimed at asking, when we get past the language and prominence of the oral sides of advocacy, what have been the administrative foundations supporting people who are advocates?  And I did my dissertation on what I call volume one of, of, of the answer to that, and that is during the 19th century I attempted to look at the administrative efforts behind a James Forten, behind a Henry Highland Garnet, behind of course a Fred Douglas [Frederick Douglass], behind a Henry McNeal Turner.  There was always some organizational situation and an audience that they were addressing that had meetings and dues and so on.  For example, the American Society for Free People of Color [sic., American Society of Free Persons of Color] was one of the earliest.  And some of the very earliest was the Massachusetts Colored General Association [sic., Massachusetts General Colored Association] that became the foundation for the New England Anti-Slavery Society and so on.  And I've been working on this for a very, very long time because I think it is important for a people to understand that the next stage is to have, as the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the Urban League represent, a vehicle for people who don't make the speeches, but who do supply the person power to support the speakers and to carry the ideas out to folks who are not necessarily prominent, take 'em to the churches; take these ideas to the schools. [Carter G.] Woodson did this on a grand scale and almost--he's filling a vacuum really.  I think that is extremely important.
Story_ID: 192733
Speaker 1: The other project that is of a work in progress has to do with getting a group of professors, which we have done, to generate a series of essays that we call 'Come Join Us Brothers: History of the Black Community and the Civil War.'  And what we have done in these invited essays is to reconceptualize the Civil War as the evolution and expansion of the black community from pockets in New York, Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], Illinois, Boston [Massachusetts] to cover the nation east of the Mississippi, that the real emergence of black community has to do with the freedom to move around and to be in different locations, so that what had been a nucleus of black folks in Atlanta [Georgia] becomes an enlarged Atlanta black community.  The same thing is true of New Orleans [Louisiana]; the same thing is true in Alabama, that the Civil War was an opening up of the potential for community where you could then have the churches and the emergence of public education in the South.  And it's not an accident that most of the folks who went to [U.S.] Congress during the antebellum--the post-bellum years, emancipation, Reconstruction years were people who had lived in the North as free persons, but got elected as Jefferson Long in Georgia, Robert B. Elliott in South Carolina, to congress from a black constituent base in the South.  And the other point we're trying to have the essays make is that the 180 or 200,000 folks in the [U.S.] Military and in the [U.S.] Navy represented the largest cluster of persons of color, in this case mostly males, who were asked to do the same thing in the context of freedom.  The earlier situation had been twenty-five folks here, thirty there, go to this side or the other, have folk--twenty-five folks coming to a meeting of the Negro convention, twenty-five from say, Virginia.  But they have to sneak out of town to get there, make sure they got their passes on 'em and so on.  So you have a massive expansion of voluntary stuff when the Civil War ends.  You have the Freedman's [Savings] Bank, which was set up as a repository for the money the veterans had been paid and so on.
Story_ID: 192734
Speaker 1: We wanted to then use the occasion of the Civil War to say that we have a nationalization of black community life and hence the eruption of college seeds.  Make it concrete, Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], 1867; Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], 1867; Morgan [State University, Baltimore, Maryland], 1867; Bowie [State University, Bowie, Maryland], 1867 [sic., 1865]; Claflin [University, Orangeburg, South Carolina], 1867 [sic., 1869]; Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina], 1880 [sic., 1873]; Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], 1882 [sic., 1881]; Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] 1880s I, I believe [sic., 1866]; Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] even earlier, and so on 1854 [sic., 1856]; Cheyney [University of Pennsylvania, Cheyney, Pennsylvania], 1854, '56 [1956] [sic., 1837] and so on.  This was a remarkable expansion of situations, from situations where black people could not gather without white supervision before the Civil War.  Every five black persons, if you're gathered, you ought to have one white person to make sure that everything's gonna be all right, so to speak.  We had black fraternal and sorority in the sense of adults, not in terms of colleges, but in terms of self-help and solidarity groups erupting around the country, Daughters of the Eastern Star [sic., Order of the Eastern Star], [Fraternal Order] Knights of Pythias, these various associations that were giving mutual aid and comfort, taking the place of insurance companies, and a burial aid societies.  All of these things came in tremendous numbers throughout the South.  And when the Reconstruction, the political leadership was pushed out of public life, they went into the college formation and life arrangements.  Many of these individuals who had been in [U.S.] Congress or in state and local government ended up in the black colleges and in the black churches that were now sprouting up right and left, the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal], the CM, Colored Methodist Episcopal Church and so on in the South.  And so we're trying to show, show this administrative evolution.  And the reason I have been in, engrossed in this is that the, the administrative infrastructure, infrastructure for community life has to be looked at and expanded, in that the black community does not have at this point the economic corporate structures.  But they have these voluntary social structures that can have economic potential once the solidarity issues are addressed.  Let me pause and drink some water.  Once the solidarity issues are addressed, the next stage is to move to the economic ones.  Now the church has been the voluntary situation, and of course, the schools with their funny reliance on the tax base that blacks don't control and so on.  So I'm, I'm hopeful that my writings in that area will contribute to the insights that we need to evolve to ask what does an impoverished population face in dealing with a highly organized financially tied together population?
Story_ID: 192735
Speaker 1: And as I say in my course dealing with comparative slavery [at Howard University, Washington, D.C.], most of us were brought to this country through what we now look back and call the first multinational corporations.  In order to go to Africa and to make the triangle movement, you need the equivalent of a quarter million dollars to do this, and poor folks could not really take part in that.  And so the corporate administrative organization of the larger society was already in place.  After all, when we look at the Pilgrims, they came under what was called the Mayflower Compact.  Now you change that word to contract, and you get it right.  And so it is the need to have us understand that while we talk about individualism, the strength of the larger society have not come from individualism; it has come from collective action.  And so when somebody tells us one at a time in your character, it is not only been character; it's been cooperation and corporation, C-O-R-P, that the power of folks who run this society has been generated.  It has not been the conscience of character.  It's been the consciousness of corporate action that the strength that this country reflects has been generated.  And I'm trying to say to folks it takes all of the business of conscience, but it also takes the business of collectivity, collective action, and--and, and to use it to, to, to look at the worst of it.  Lynchings have been community affairs (laughter).  Seldom has there been a situation of a solitary person going to beat up and destroy the life of an African American.  They come in the numbers, as Shirley Brown would say.  And, and, and so I'm trying to in, in this part of our--my work--say to folks it is that working collectively that we advance, independent and related to any character issues.  It is the collectivity, and it was this kind of fear during the old days that led to the formation of state militias to keep slaves in line on the one side and Native Americans at bay on the other side.  The right to bear arms was built into the [U.S.] Constitution to do those things.  The National Rifle Association [NRA]--I'm not being hysterical here--the National Rifle Association is an extension of that part of the constitution that says you keep order with the slaves and with the Native Americans by making a militia person out of every Caucasian male.  And that goes deep into the history of the country.  And so when folks take about black history, that was long ago, the National Rifle Association is rooted in that long ago, and they're very powerful.
Speaker 2: Well, there's, there's also been an argument on the part of criminologists that policing in the United States, especially in the South, started as slave patrol--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes, and the greatest study that the larger society ever did on black folks is a book called 'American Dilemma' ['An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy' by Gunnar Myrdal].  You may have heard of it.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, it was started at the request of Newton D. Baker, who was police chief in Cleveland [Ohio], who says we can't lock up every black person that we think ought to be locked up.  We need to understand the sources of our problems.  And he persuaded other folks to have the Carnegie endowment [Carnegie Corporation of New York] to put up a large piece of money to study race relations.  They put up a half million bucks and went to Sweden to get a guy [Gunnar Myrdal] who was not brought up in this system to pull the studies together and make a statement.  So that that's the history of, of, of the first massive effort of Caucasians to study race on a national basis.  And of course, they pulled the people from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], the people from Atlanta University [later, Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia], and from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and then scholars, the few that were around in other places, to do the study, so that Afro-American studies then is a continuation of the effort to understand what has been the situation of these two groups meeting in these unequal circumstances, or as Andrew Hacker says in his book ['Two Nations: Black and White, Separate, Hostile, Unequal'], black, white, separate, and unequal, and the problems that are tied up with it when you say we're talking democracy here.  We are talking about democracy as a goal; we're talking about democracy as a malpractice; and we're talking about democracy as an aspiration; and we're talking about democracy as inclusion.  And so Afro studies is really not just black studies.  It's American studies because our problem is not generated simply by being black.  It's the response of the nation to the presence of black folks and to the discontent that this practice has generated in the, in the, in the black community, -ommunity, and therefore in the nation.
Story_ID: 192736
Speaker 1: Yeah, just in terms of publications, you've been a consultant to Time Life--
Speaker 2: Time Life, McGraw-Hill, Scholastic.  Right now I also serve as an expert witness on legal stuff involving blacks.  Currently involved with a major thing in Illinois where I'm asked to give an opinion that reflects social science understanding of what the background of the issue might be and so on.  So we do not only academics as information retrieval, but also assist companies in getting a context in, in, in the, in the legal system, context of what the issues are.  And we do a lot of stuff with, a lot of work with evaluating manuscripts that come up to companies.  'Cause a lot of folks are writing lots of things, and I'm one of the, I'm sure, many people, persons who are asked to react to either a proposal to do a book or to a draft in full of a, of, of, of a publication.  And, and a lot of us at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] do this for, for companies.  And I regard that as very important because the things that we advise on, if they do it right, probably help improve the product that, that, that is done.  Or if it's a very poorly done, and, and we, we, we render a whole lot of that, we will say that this I would not support because: one, the factual work is thin; the style is condescending; or the conception is erroneous, and then we have to write explanations of that.
Speaker 1: Now have you--give me an example of one you where you've had to actually stop or, or, or, or try to derail (unclear)--going in the wrong--
Speaker 2: There, there are a couple of manuscripts out on slavery that would have been typical of something that came out in 1925 or 1930, that far off.  In one particular book, it was said that the fact that slaves live longer in North America meant that slavery was better in North America than in Brazil.  The fact that 20 percent of the slaves in the North worked indoors meant that it's not all that bad, so they could go to court and protest their mistreatment.  And you had to remind them of the moral issue that any enslavement was wrong, that there was no such thing as, [Frederick] Douglass would say, "a good situation" in that your future was whatever somebody else wanted it to be and not what you wanted it to be, and, and that you could be sold at will with no recourse and so on.  So, you have to say to writers, don't let material variations lead to conclusions that the system was not all that bad.
Story_ID: 192737
Speaker 1: Now there was one particular case in, I know that, that comes to mind where computers were applied--
Speaker 2: This is the case of the Engel and Fogelman [sic., Stanley Engerman and Robert Fogel] called--
Speaker 1: 'Time on the Cross' ['Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery'].
Speaker 2: --'Time on the Cross,' which led to a whole lot of controversy because when they talk about how many times somebody was beaten compared to somebody else, the fact that the young white kids working in the Pennsylvania coal mines had a higher accident rate than somebody working in the tobacco fields, and therefore these kids were worse--and therefore the kids were worse off than the guys in the tobacco fields and so on, those kinds of things, or the number of lashes somebody got in Mississippi compared to the number of lashes they got in Massachusetts.  Now the problem with that particular time on the cross-treatment was a total lack of insight into the sociology of enslavement 'cause the principal author [Robert Fogel] of that book was a specialist in railroad and freight hauling.  And so he applied to statistics that you have on how many cows are loaded, and how many cords of wood were hauled, and how many coal car--carrying cars are shipped out of Pennsylvania to the treatment and shipping of slaves from Virginia to Alabama and to Texas.  And so this person did not have the rest of the background and insights needed to do a sensible thing on slavery.  'Cause the end of the, the, the net result in the book, which was heavily promoted by somebody that said at long last we've takin' slavery from the hands of the bleeding heart liberals and placed it in the hands of hard-hearted econ- hard-headed economists who take nothing but the facts for their point of departure.  And, and, and I mean they had sent out readers' aids for this book, sent out publicity to all levels of instruction on, on, on that, saying that at long last we have taken black studies from the hands of those who are special issue ax-to-grind types to the objective folks, and had meetings around the country on this.  And when they finally weighed in with the folks who had been in the field a long time, they said that it was the work of amateurs who did not understand the subject and whose publishers had been misled as to what the product really was.  It was a conservative product, serving conservative ends, and was back almost to the kind of thing that Samuel Eliot Morison and others got into when they say asked for Sambo.  His songs reflect that he was not as (unclear) as we have been led to believe.  And his smile on Saturday night was a sign that all was basically okay.  Back to the school of slavery argument that says but for being in the states, he could have been a lunch, the lunch of one of his neighbors in darkest Africa (laughter).  And so you still have the Ulrich B. Phillips type folks.  Ulrich B. Phillips was a fellow who wrote a very fascinating book, a book that on the surface appeared to be a good sociological treatment, but under it all was the notion that slavery was good for all involved (laughter).  And Engerman and Fogel didn't quite get to that level, but they were not all that far from it.
Story_ID: 192738
Speaker 1: And so one of the things that we do in the field, and that I've done a lot of, is to say to companies when they send me a manuscript, and I'm looking at two now, that fall closer to that direction than to the type of work that John Blassingame did in 'The Slave Community,' ['The Slave Community: Plantation Life in the Antebellum South'] or that C. L. R. James did in 'Black Jacobins,' ['The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution'] Jacobins, when he talked about the revolutionary energies that led to self-liberation in the folks in Haiti.  And so there is a place for this kind of work 'cause part of the responsibility of folks in the field of Afro--black studies is handling what we call, I call, retrieval and rectification, retrieval for stokes--stuff that's been skipped, rectification for stuff that's been misunderstood, and respect, are my three r's.
Speaker 2: Let me, let me, let me just pose this, too, that, that the task that you set out on is often I think underappreciated in a sense that you're dealing with an onslaught of information that you have to add a corrective to or, or another insight too.  I mean it's a tremen--very--at one time I think in the--at the '73 [1973] conference of the Associations for the Negro--the Study of African American Life and History [Association for the Study of African American Life and History, ASALH] in, I think it was Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], [Robert] Fogel and [Stanley] Engerman's book ['Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery'] was being discussed and there--I think John Henrik Clarke and others and yourself discussed about the, the task.  And I think Clarke pointed out that we didn't have--other than John Blassingame's book, there wasn't a single, another volume by a black historian that dealt with slavery.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That and yeah, and I've been concerned with, with, with trying to understand why.  All kinds of reasons--I once said that John Hope Franklin could give it maybe two to three chapters in 'From Slavery to Freedom,' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans'].  Benjamin Quarels, about the same, even [Carter G.] Woodson himself, no more than couple of chapters.  C. L. R. James was the first person of African descent to do a whole book on the Haitian side of it.  Blassingame was the first American born black scholar to do a whole book with the slave community.  But people like Ulrich B. Phillips and like Ava Racraven [ph.] and, and like the Dunnings out of Columbia [University, New York, New York], the Burgesses out of some, some other places, have had a vested interest and monopoly in a sense in terms of getting things published about the field.  And this was what was called the Southern school.  Now, [W.E.B.] Du Bois did what he could in 'Black Reconstruction [in America'].  It was not about slavery, except that his book was the first that dealt with an aspect of it, his dissertation ["The Suppression of the African Slave Trade to the United States of America, 1638-1870"], the suppression of the trade, but not the sociology of the practice.  He dealt with the efforts to end the trade to North America.  And that was his, of course, dissertation.  That was the first publication of the Harvard Historical Series [sic., Harvard Historical Studies] and so on.  But the kind of work that says what has been the reality of the practice in North America.  I've been fascinated as to why that was such a delayed subject in terms of extensive treatment.  One was the lack of people who wanted to publish the work, including black institutions who didn't have the money and, and so on to do it.  The other is similar to, I think, the pain that--and, and, and the aver- the avoidance that we have in the field of art.  Black artists did not do the undraped female figure until the '60s [1960s], and yet there was [Henry Ossawa] Tanner and there was [Hale] Woodruff, who done a lot of the silhouette work that we see reproduced still.  And, and talking to a number of the artists, they says well, if you wanna get sponsorship and get exhibited you had to please the Caucasian sponsors in terms of fellowships and so on and the black middle class in terms of respecting the black female, that she's been exploited enough, exploited in the sense of no choice about a lot of things in her life, and therefore you don't wanna join the parade of her--showing her body; and therefore, you had this reticence.
Story_ID: 192739
Speaker 1: The pain of slavery for a lot of folks was such that they would say look, in order to do more than two or three chapters on it would be to bring back memories that we are not happy with.  But that falls in the same sort of general avoidance that we had about the spirituals, where you fuss about Saturday Evening Post running something called a Scattergood Baines series with black characters speaking dialect.  And you have this mixed feeling about Paul Laurence Dunbar, happy that he wrote 'We Wear the Mask,' but not quite as happy about 'Oak and Ivy' or 'Songs of the Lowly Life,' [sic., 'Lyrics of Lowly Life'] where he talks about lies, I see those feet, now as we bows our head for somethin' to eat--
Speaker 2: Yeah, if the moon is right--
Speaker 1: We don't--yeah, we don't--so, so we, we, we, we, we, we, we, we like the fact that he be celebrated, but we aren't quite as happy as we wanna be about his use of dialect, which he heard secondhand, by, by and large, in that he's an Ohio guy.  He's not from Mississippi.  It took Sterling Brown in the late '20s [1920s] and early '30s [1930s] in his thing, 'Southern Road,' to deal with dialect in such a way, and it was urban mostly, it's, it's urban dialect, which is not plantation dialect.  But it was not New England Standard English to, in a sense, calm people down like Alain Locke, who praised his work, that is Sterling Brown.  'Cause it does take a kind of sensibility to do that borderline between minstrely [ph.] and language, where the folks use the language to condescend and authenticity, where the folks are using the language to tell the truth.  And so in the study of slavery we have had to walk the line between the Europe--Ulrich B. Phillips, who basically said look, look, fellows, it ain't all that bad.  The brothers they're just--the blacks folks unfairly criticizing his ancestors, and those who would say on the other hand, how can you teach the subject of slavery in a desegregated classroom?  And I've had this situation.  I don't call it a dilemma because I try, when I teach my course on slavery, and I've had white students in the classroom, is to be as true to the subject, not to who is sitting there, but to the subject as a subject, and use the kind of language that is not insulting, but at the same time not avoiding things.  And then use what I call third-party elements, machines; let them, let the video tell it; let the data say something; or give assignments where everybody has to do something.  For example, I give geography assignments where folks will have a sense of the geography of slavery, not only transatlantic but statewide.  The economics of it, look up the companies that did this, the Royal African Society and then a society--traders to Gambia and so on, by giving folks something to do with the subject, all of 'em having something to do--
Story_ID: 192740
Speaker 1: There was a, a recent movie, 2002, came out in December.  And won, I think won one of the Academy Awards for something.  I can't think of what, but directed by Denzel Washington--
Speaker 2: Is that--not--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: That was a--no, it's--
Speaker 2: 'Antwone [Fisher']--
Speaker 1: No, no, it was the--now I can't think of the name.  And I had it on the tip of my tongue.  But in the movie the young--it's about a young man and, and having grown up an orphan being mistreated in many ways by different foster parents and so forth.  And he at a certain--he, he's in the [U.S.] Navy, and in the Navy the character by, played by Denzel Washington gives him a book to read to understand why black people mistreat each other in certain ways.  And that book was 'The Slave Community' ['The Slave Community: Plantation Life in the Antebellum South'] by John W. Blassingame.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so your comment to me is.  Your question is?
Speaker 1: It's, it's--so I mean our past is--can be used to understand where we are now.  'Antwone Fisher' was the name--
Speaker 2: 'Antwone Fisher,' yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Antwone Fisher.'
Speaker 2: That's what I said Antwone.  It's [HistoryMaker] Antwone [Fisher].  Yeah, the--you have to have the past.  Now, millions, maybe tens of millions of dollars every year is spent by the mainstream society on the past.  The museum culture in this country is rich.  Museum by definition are retrospective organizations.  They preserve stuff.  The [National] Mall [Washington, D.C.] is, again, a monument to the past.  The memorials, [Thomas] Jefferson Memorial, Washington Memorial [sic., Washington Monument], all these memorials, they have millions of dollars devoted to the past.  Then when Afro say and about our past, they say look, you're looking back.  The future is what you ought to be looking for, boy, in so many words.
Story_ID: 192741
Speaker 1: The slave burial ground [African Burial Ground, New York, New York] is one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, the slave burial ground project was one where Howard University [University, Washington, D.C.] received permission to hold for seven years the remains of at least 450 enslaved Africans that were interred in New York [New York] and whose burial grounds became the location of federal construction until it was halted.  The point of Howard's request to use the bones was to reconstruct from the DNA outward as much as one could the lives of the deceased, folks who were probably interred around the time this country was being organized, say from the 1750s to probably the 18--early 1800s.  And this is the seed time of the republic, as some people have used the language to say this.  The idea would be to ask for these particular people, what can we learn from what is left of their existence about life of African descended folks in New York City at the time of their passing and what?  They've learned a lot of things.  They have learned that there were closer ties to Africa than we thought.  We have learned that many of them had hard lives, although living in New York as a region.
Speaker 1: Many were worked to death.
Speaker 2: We have learned that they were overworked, and therefore their bones don't reflect the normal lifespan of people at that time, of other folks who were not so overworked.  Even though New York itself was--how should I put it--rather advanced in terms of tolerating--and I won't use the word fair treatment, but in terms of tolerating.  It was a seaport town.  It was a town where a lot of the stuff that came out of the age of piracy.  New York was one of the biggest places you get, you get rid of stuff that was taken from the Spanish and the Portuguese ships and stuff.  As a matter of fact, Philip Livingston at that time, the governor of, of New York, as a location for a long time--he's one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence and the [U.S.] Constitution--was a stolen goods guy.  He was a fence of goods taken from piracy.  And the recent movie, the current movie out on the pirates, by the way, is a movie that makes the typical mistake, they don't talk about who got the slave goods that made the treasures in question.  The mining was done.  You know, a million folks were brought from Africa to, to simply do the mining of gold and silver.  And yet that does not come up about, well, who did the mining?  Who did the smelting?  Who did the loading and the fabrication of these objects that the pirates were moving around?  Well, these were black folks basically.  And yet you start with the treasures and the pieces of eight and not the rest.  But New York State was, at least New York as a colony and later a state, was a major outlet for this.  As a matter of fact, the oldest black nonreligious organizations was the Black Seafarers Union that was made of the stevedores working the docks of New York.  As a matter of fact, in 1808 they started their own, lack of a better phrase, a senior citizens' home for retired and superannuated seafarers in that a good third of all of the people working the ships coming in and out of New York and Boston [Massachusetts] were black folks.  And this is why people like John Paul Jones had tremendous amount of interest and respect for black workers because they made up half of their crews and stuff.  This is especially with Steve Necatur [ph.] and the rest of 'em.  And so the New York burial ground folks not only reflected the sailors, but also the caterers, because you see, the Caucasian middle class had a value of saying the wife is not to cook.  She is to have a lower status person white or black, do the cooking.  And in the case of New York and Boston, it was the Irish and the Afro-American enslaved folks who did that kind of work.  You see the folks in their fancy clothes.  The folks who made the clothes were black seamstresses.  So the two highest status jobs that blacks had in New York away from the docks was cooking the food and the tailoring work, the seamstress and tailoring services.  And the other high ranking job was the folks who hauled things, the draymen, the folks who ran goods back and forth throughout the city.  These were the kinds of jobs that were available that had some prestige attached to them.
Story_ID: 192742
Speaker 1: And so the folks who were in the burial project [African Burial Ground, New York, New York] we think many of them were the stevedores, the males in particular, the others were the cooks and the, lack of a better word, Cinderellas.  The Cinderella, the story, you know used to has a, a blond, young, white female, but the real Cinderella was the black females that kept the fires going and did the cooking.  And the word cinder--Cinderella is a little fire girl or fire maintainer, a maintainer--maintenance person and so on.  And so, that's just one of the kinds of things that when you re- reconfigure the history of, of situations, this is what you get.  And the--now New York State was the last of the northern states to end slavery, by the way.  And that was because of the Hudson Valley being the Mississippi [River] of the North, Hudson Valley being where the corn and, and other kinds of--and wheat, a very important carbohydrate source was raised.  So whereas Massachusetts ended human bondage in the 1780s, New York State was the last one to end it, and they did so in 1827, when the power of the Albany [New York] oligarchy as they call it and the, and those big time farmers could not prevail against what was happening in the city proper, where the money guys found it profitable to tolerate the ending of slavery and so on.  I won't go too deep into the, the history of this, but this is the kind of work that we do when we reconfigure the received accounts of things.  We ask well, what was the role of black folks in the production of goods?  When did this, when, when--did a change come at certain times of--periods of history, certain types of changes and certain times in, in history.
Story_ID: 192743
Speaker 1: In the study of slavery itself, Southerners had a monopoly on it for a long time.  And so they told the story from the angle of the beneficiaries.
Speaker 2: And just to point out, I think many have said that southern historians have had control of, over the whole Civil War period for a long time.  I mean the southern historian establishment basically controlled the interpretation of the Civil War and the 19th century and all that?
Speaker 1: That's, that's true.  Part of that has to do with the 1876 and 1880s joint meetings of the blue and the grey associations where the telling of the story was left to the Southerners who wanted to continue the struggle by retelling the story from their perspective of why the war happened.  Whereas the Yankee historian started concentrating not on the Civil War, but on the evolution of the economic side of the North and on issues dealing with manufacturing and industrialization.  And so their energies started going in that direction.  Unknown--the emergence of American imperialism for the first time, the Spanish American War and the Philippine situation, whereas the Southerners then went into the vacuum that this attention being shifted left.  And the annual gatherings of the veterans of the two wars were increasingly dominated by Southerners who wanted to say that the Lost Cause is not really lost, that they could continue telling the story, they would become custodians of the legacy of the Civil War.  And that's what they ended up doing down until the Civil Rights Movement.
Story_ID: 192744
Speaker 1: The southern monopoly was, in a sense, probably broken by the Civil Rights Movement, in that one of the aspects of the movement was the academic side saying that--one of--the monopoly that the Southerners had over the struggle, what I call, to make America what it said it was, that was broken by the Civil Rights Movement and also by the unanticipated demands of black students who are now going to place the monot- predominately and historically black.  And I remember in the mid-'60s [1960s] there were predominately white institutions who were paying recruiters to spot black students to increase their enrollment.  One place was giving three hundred dollars a head.  I'm not making this up.  And this brother was having a good time.  He was saying, "Hey, I got six in last week, so it's adding up."  But the real boost to break that monopoly came when [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King's [Jr.] assassination led to, I use the word (unclear)--outreach by places that had not really cared either way about having black students on the premises, tremendous outreach.  I was a party to a meeting by a major foundation which said that it spent between 1968, April, and 1975, June, fifteen million dollars supporting black studies initiatives on the grounds that they felt that the nation needed to have a situation where black folks could tell their story.  Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] was the beneficiary of some of that money, $145,000 came from a certain foundation to establish the department where I'm located.  And that was in '69 [1969], right after the assassination, and that was true across the country so that by 1975 there were two hundred places that had black studies programs; there were sixty-five places that had black studies departments.  And debate was over staffing: should people be full time in the departments or should they have what they have what they call joint appointments and so on.  Howard opted to have full time.  Now, this laid in a critical mass beyond the group that had been nurtured by the Association for the Study of Afro Life in History [later, Association for the Study of African American Life and History, ASALH], in that you had folks, whether they were full time or part time in the departments that were coming up, you had folks who's full time was concerned with retrieval, as I've stated, and rectification of the record on the black experience.  And this led to the emergence of a body of writing that was not southern and implicitly pro-southern.  This broadened the field, in other words.
Story_ID: 192745
Speaker 1: There were still folks doing good work.  As a matter of fact, a lot of the publications coming out of these departments [Afro-American studies departments], interestingly enough, interestingly enough, was published by southern academic press--presses.  Louisiana State University Press [Baton Rouge, Louisiana] has a pretty good list.  And Louisiana was where some of the most vicious stuff on Reconstruction occurred, you know, 1866 when a lot of folks were burning up in buildings and shot when they came out and so on.  The University of North Carolina Press [Chapel Hill, North Carolina] started bringing out good things by some of the folks who had been recruited by the Black Studies Movement.  The North Carolina Academic, North Carolina Academic Press [sic., Carolina Academic Press] out of Durham [North Carolina] has some good things out.  Larger point being that the old southern monopoly was greatly modified.  As a matter of fact, the Southern Historical Association started publishing and supporting what I call esoteric.  They went into fine detail on things and were not as, as, as, as presumptuous as they had been about the black experience.  They started doing what I call plantation specialty things, bookkeeping methods of so and so's plantation; so and so and the levy, and that's okay.  But the, the probably borderline guy between the two was C. Vann Woodward, who did some interesting stuff, 'The Strange Career of Jim Crow.'  He became a national figure on, on this.  But then that's, that left room then for people like [HistoryMaker] Manning Marable, and for people like the upgraded [HistoryMaker] John Hope [Franklin], for [John] Blassingame so that we have a body now of folks that don't have to, in a sense, look over their shoulders when they do their writings.  John Hope Franklin is the dean and transitional guy between, say 'From Slavery to Freedom,' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans'] which first came out in 1947, and who's eighth edition came out in the year 2000, more or less.  You had a John Henrik Clarke, who didn't have to, in a sense, get a clearance from anybody to get stuff out, although he had trouble and never succeeded in getting a publisher to do a--his version of black history for the general public, 'cause his take was a little more radical than, than, than Franklin.  Franklin had been pushed, by the way.  It was not his idea to do 'From Slavery to Freedom.'  It was Alfred A. Knopf who sensed that there was a market, but then who invested in Franklin and who got this thing out.  And now the field is wide, very, very wide, and that's all good.
Story_ID: 192746
Speaker 1: You have people writing sociological things.  You have people who are writing heavily polemical stuff.  You have friend like my good friend and colleague, Dr. Gregory Carr, who is specializing in what I call the Nile Valley School.  As a matter of fact, some of my writings have been attempt to, an attempt to classify different sets of folks.  I argue that there are three or four sets.  There are the Nile Valley folks, the (unclear) is the most prominent type; there are the African continentalists who write things about the glory days of Africa; there are the Eastern Africanists like Joseph Harris, who is of course at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], just retired from Howard; there are the infusionists who say that we can infuse Afro studies with other things; there are the interest group folks who says anybody who's writing stuff that most interest of black folks be able to take their stuff and so on.  And these groups are big enough to have their own conventions, so to speak, and so that if you are not a Nile Valley person, you're not invited to their meeting, and not any hostility, just don't ask you and so on.  If you're an infusionist they say well, you're not a Nile Valley and so on.  So, we have, we have that kind of range in this.  I am probably an infusionist since I have put a lot of my energies on how to use materials.  And the 'Great Negroes' ['Great Negroes: Past and Present'] book has been used by a lot of folks who add it to, and supplement it with, and so on.  And I have no problem with that because one of the things that I learned early in dealing with public schools is that if somebody's been doing something for twenty-five years with some success, no matter what you say, they will not, not drop all of their stuff.  They will use--they will say oh, this is interesting and ahead and so on, and, and I, I respect that.  Because to say to someone you have been totally wrong, and some folks have been totally wrong, they will say yeah, okay, all right.  I won't admit that, because if I admit that then they will have to let me go.  And I'm not giving up my income because you have shown me that I was probably off base, but I'll slowly make a Queen Mary turn, a slow turn to use some of your stuff.  And so some of the work I've done, people have said, "Be that as it may, we still have other kids whose traditions are not the same as Afro traditions and we have to recognize that."  And they are not entirely wrong.  So it's--so you can't go into a place with an either or philosophy then because folks will not roll over and die 'cause you had me rewrite.
Story_ID: 192747
Speaker 1: And if they're--I remember doing some stuff in Pennsylvania where the principal said in this high school, "We invited you here to shut some folks up, but we know that the minute you get out of here they will get back to doing what they've been doing," and I can't, you know, control that.  And that's true.  But the larger, the larger thing that has happened in the Black Studies Movement has been a legitimate, legitimization of the study of the black experience in the context of American education.  Because before the movement got some institutional support, it was seen by a lot of folks as a complaint, that these folks got a complaint.  Hear them out and get back to business as usual.  But even Bob Jones University [Greenville, South Carolina] has some folks who look at the black experience.  There is a black studies department at the, at Brigham Young University [Provo, Utah].  I used to know the guy's name that ran it in those days, ten or fifteen years ago.  My own work has carried me to Africa, to Holland, to Austria, to West Indies.  I have worked with Slave Ship project in Key West [Florida].
Speaker 2: Henrietta Marie?
Speaker 1: Henrietta Marie, yeah.  So, so there is now no overt opposition for black folks saying to the world that the black experience has something of value because it is the American experience.  And you can no longer deny that there is something to be understood because the problems are still ongoing.
Story_ID: 192748
Speaker 1: What are your--some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: One of my concerns about the black community is this one-third of the community that feels alienated from the other two-thirds and from the American society in general.  It's a large community; it's a large number of folks.  Some people say it may be seven or eight million people.  That's a lot.  That's more than some countries, you know.  That there should be and must be a way of handling our education in such a way that we see the connection that once existed inside of the black community that did not by default lose that much of it, of the community.  And by default, meaning that we have not done stuff, not that somebody kept us from doing it, but we have defined our own problems in such a way, the middle class, that there is not a definition that includes them aggressively.  So it is my hope that the Black Studies Movement can revive and expand the tradition of inclusion so that there can be workshops so that the churches and the sorority type groups can do an outreach that is authentic, and that is inclusive, and that will upset the policymakers.  You see, we have left that community to the policymakers.  And they get around to it when they get around to it, and sometimes they don't get around to it.  And so they, they, they leave the community to its own devices, so the community becomes a dormitory, an isolated dormitory.  And all these communities are increasingly dormitories, but this is a deadly dormitory that we hear from, from the police, from the shootouts, from the drug-outs, and we can't indefinitely tolerate that.  Because when this community reproduces itself, it's an enlarged and metastasized dilemma, so I hope that, that, that, that urban studies, as they, as we once called it, will be seen as American and black studies combined.  So I hope that we can do something with, with that.  The other thing that I hope we can do is to say to the larger society greater inclusion of us does not mean, as folks have used the Michigan affirmative action case [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003], that black inclusion is white exclusion.  Somebody once said: for every one opt- option that we have, whites who might be affected have half a dozen remaining.  Or as one guy said to me, America is the Caucasian's living room, and it's the black man's basement.  There's some rough truth in that.  And of course I have to try to (unclear) that particular person, but we on the stairs.  But because we're on the stairs does not mean that we're invading your living room.  But this is our living room too.  And we have been in some ways excluded from it.  And to aim black studies not simply at the black community, but also at the larger white community, I think is a good thing.  There are a lot of folks who think that black studies deals only with black folks.  But we wouldn't have the problem to study if we didn't have these other folks connected with the problem.  And we have to say to them in a way that the Civil Rights Movement did not that we are really studying America and its social structure when we talk about Afro studies, that, that, that we're talking about America.  And it is not simply inclusion that's entertainment or inclusion that's spectator sports, where--or inclusion that's an Oprah Winfrey thing.  But it is a definition of America as a place that the old spiritual has the words for: it's a place of plenty good room; there's room, there's room.  And black advance does not mean white retreat or white slowdown.  And the big job of Afro studies is to calm the nation down so that they can see that black presence is not white rout, or white deception, or white danger.  That's, that, that's a very important concern of mine, I think, where the Civil Rights Movement is over in that sense, but it's just beginning in the sense that I'm trying to describe it.
Story_ID: 192749
Speaker 1: Now, you've been at this a long time, but what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Probably getting people to think deeply about the role of the black experience in defining the American experience.  I've been writing on what they call epistemological topics, meaning having us look at the deeper role of ethnicity and of the struggle in defining what it means to be an American.  And I don't mean that in a flag waving sense.  We were here before the Mayflower, but the nation started talking in color terms before the [U.S.] Constitution and which means that this is a sense of how deep this thing is.  And if my work has been one that says our struggle predates the constitution, antedates the constitution, the constitution, our struggle has survived as a problem, all of the wars, means that the problem is deeper than ourselves.  And if I can promote an understanding of that, and if my work has been in that direction, then I feel that that's been a probably interesting and useful way to have lived--that it is deeper than the constitution.  It is deeper than the wars, and it points to something beyond our community.  It points to the larger community, and it hopefully will raise the question: What is so deficient in the larger community that it sees our presence as danger?  Now, I used to worry about--there's a book, the, the title is, and I'll say it directly, 'Get That Nigger Off the Field: An Informal History of Baseball' ['Get That Nigger off the Field!: A Sparkling, Informal History of the Black Man in Baseball' by Art Rust, Jr.]. And I used to wonder why the presence of one black person or a few blacks in this large society leads to the paranoia that society has?  And I was looking at something about the caste system in India, where two people have done some things, and now we have to kill the whole neighborhood.  They have touched the hair of the prophet or something.  It's called status pollution that Caucasian reaction to black presence has been akin to what some people have to call status pollution.  Well, now what is so sacred about your status that the presence of other people in that status situation leads to these horrific reactions?  Therefore, you need to examine the foundations of your own status to determine what is so fragile about it, not what is so precious about it, but what is so fragile about it that to include other people as your brothers and your sisters--is it so fragile that you have to abandon the status or kill about it?  Or is it the old Groucho Marx thing, who once said he would not join a club that would take him.
Speaker 1: If he was a member, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Our presence does call for a reconceptualization of what it means to be an American.  And I think this is not simply the business of dealing with the presence of Hispanics or the presence of people of Iranian and Iraqi and is--and Muslim descent.  They're here.  We're all here.  And when they answer the question about black and white, then syllogistically they have answered the other questions at the same time.  If my work has been in the direction of helping people raise the question, it's been a life worth having been devoted to this kind of a topic.  When I was younger, I once wondered what kind of work would, would, would, would, would be worth doing for, for nothing.  And by chance, I suppose, I've ended up answering my own question.  I would do my job without compensation if I could afford it.
Story_ID: 192750
Speaker 1: Sir, would you do anything differently you think?
Speaker 2: Probably not all that different.  I probably would have had a situation where I would put more of my time on the academics of my career, rather than on the administrative politics of my career.  I would have been able, I think, to have done more directly on the topic myself than furnishing perhaps a springboard for others.  I prob- I probably would have not been as involved in administration as I have been.  Administration, as I said earlier, is in support of these things, but it also takes away from what I could have done more of directly.  And some days I have a sense of I wished I had, and some days I say well, it's been okay as it is.  But I think I would have had less of the administration and more of a direct focus.  A, a [Robert] Bobby Hill arrangement, where the whole thing was on Marcus Garvey.  A fellow at Stanford [University, Stanford, California] on [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.], [HistoryMaker] Clayborne Carson, where his whole work has been on, on that.  Yet I have had a lot of pleasure out of helping other people.  But I think I would have left the chair of poly sci [political science] [sic., chair Department of Afro-American Studies, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] fifteen years sooner than I am leaving it.  I think that, that--I'm, I'm, I'm saying that almost in a, in a, in a soliloquy, because it's a, it's a good question that I'm not a hundred percent sure I have answered the way I wanted to answer it.
Story_ID: 192751
Speaker 1: Has it been easier to do Afro-American studies at, at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] than it would have been at, at another--one of the big state schools or--
Speaker 2: It depends on where, what state it would be.  I think of Darlene Hine's work at East Lansing [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan].  She's done a tremendous job there.  Ron Walters [HistoryMaker Ronald Walters] over at [University of] Maryland [College Park, Maryland], on the other hand, may not have been as productive, may not be as productive as doing it--as he was during his years at Howard.  And so, now, the situation at Howard is one where you have many people doing parts of what I'm doing.  Howard has 150 courses on black folks.  Our department handles about twenty-five of them.  And so, the question of ease, nobody has told me what to do, what not to do at Howard, although you realize that so and so is doing this, then you probably shouldn't try to do the same thing exactly the same way.  I think I've had it easier because I have been at Howard, on the other hand.  I think that.  I don't have the problem of racial inhibitions.  But then on the other hand, I have the problem of probably financial support in a different way than I would have at another place.  But no, I have been a free agent at Howard in terms of thematic focus.  And I think that's true of Howard generally, despite the 150 odd courses.  In the works now at Howard is plans for, are plans for a national center for Afro-American history and culture.  One building that was once D.C. Teachers College [later, University of the District of Columbia, Washington, D.C.] building will be devoted to this.  African studies will go in it, Afro-American studies will go in it, and parts of Moorland-Spingarn [Research Center, Howard University, Washington, D.C.] will go in it.  Moorland-Spingarn is, is center for black history and social research will all be in there one of these years and monies are being raised to upgrade the building for that.  And that's a happy development.
Story_ID: 192752
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?  It's slightly different from legacy.
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a--man, this sounds so obituary.  It is I guess--as a good teacher, good person, hopefully a learned professor, one who didn't take the titles too seriously, was proud of the formal parts of it, of having come from a farm to Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and then to teach at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], hopefully that none of that was wasted on me, and that folks would still continue to remember some of the things I have tried to say and do.  As a matter of fact, I remember the people now who said that I told my kids to take your course, and I feel proud that that happens a lot.  People that I have taught twenty years ago will say, "You might not remember me."  That's the favorite expression--"but," and then they will tell me.  All those rewards when you don't have money, you treasure those.  And of course to be a--to be a lecture prof [professor] means that you have decided that that's what you're going to do and what comes with it is not wealth, but not of a material kind, but wealth in the sense of service and the feeling that you are living in the minds of folks that, one that's under, under the sound of your voice, you know, and that's not just rhetorical, that's, that's, that's real.  A lot of my students are professors also now.  A number of them are lawyers.  A whole lot of 'em are schoolteachers.  And they are folks who back thirty years ago say, "I got your book.  We still have it.  My grandkids got it."  All those are pleasant sounds, you know.
Story_ID: 192753
Speaker 1: And some people ask me, "Well how do you like working at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?"  And I start smiling, and I say, "Yeah."  "Why you are grinning?"  I said, "'Cause I'll be there, I'll be there tomorrow."  And it's that kind of--I couldn't have anticipated how that would get that way; I had no idea.  I wanted a job where I could read and write and not lift things (laughter).  And when I was a kid I wanted to be an, an, an artist, and I still draw and stuff, weekends.  But I thought you had to have some defect that justified your sitting down all the time because growing up on the farm, to be able to move, you had to be out there with the, with the crops.  You had to be out there with the animals.  You had to be in good physical shape all the time.  And if you're not doing that then there had to be some other reason that overrode that.  And when I was a little guy I thought, well, if I was just slightly crippled (laughter) that would explain why I'm sitting at an easel or why I'm reading and so on.  And I had forgot about my mom [Isabella Ponder Adams] had been a teacher, you know, and it worked out where I don't have to be crippled.  And I do sit, and I do get paid. And so all that has been okay in terms of things.  If I had to do it again, I guess it would work the same way.  I would do it the same way.  To repeat, to have a career that took me to the top predominate African American institute, the historical black college and the discovery of different parts of the world.  It's not bad.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, thank you, sir, and thank you--
Speaker 1: It's been an honor to have, to be a part of The HistoryMakers series.  Had no idea that what I've tried to do would be of that interest, but presumably it has been.
Story_ID: 192754
Speaker 1: This one I am--this was made in outside of Vienna, Austria.  I was sent by the state department [U.S. Department of State] to do what we now call diversity demonstrations.  And these are the people in the workshop.  Half of them had lived in the states [United States of America] and spoke English without an accent.  I was there--that was 1980.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This one is in St. Thomas, the [U.S.] Virgin Islands, and I'm running a workshop on cultural preservation.  The issue was how to train public school teachers there to train their students to distinguish between show business, show business and the real culture, in that there was a lot of confusion about when the votes come in, folks behave one way.  When votes leave, they behave another way.  And so I had a contract to run some workshops on cultural preservation.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself as a graduate student at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  This was probably 1958, '60 [1960].  That's my graduate student years, one of my pictures.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: That's one of the Virgin Island pictures of one of the teachers at the workshop.  I don't know who that is, but that's a companion to the one on the earlier Virgin Islands shot.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and Bishop Desmond Tutu in Cape Town, South Africa.  I had taken a group of students to South Africa and to Israel.  This is 1995, and this is the Cape Town location shot.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and my youngest brother taken at, in Herndon, Virginia.  We were visiting his daughter's home.  And that's what that one is.  That's my brother, Franklin Adams, who is retired from the steel mills.  And he was one of the few people trained in computerized movement of steel.  He's quite a fellow.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Mrs. Adams [Eleanor Adams] last year at some social gathering, and we were proud of our outfits got put together (unclear) but that's what that is.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a, this picture is a, a, a picture of ten years ago, 1993, myself and Mrs. Adams, again, at a social thing, not sure where that was.  But it shows me.
Speaker 2: This is at the Royal Majesty--on the Royal Majesty cruise ship.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: Captain's ball (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay we're--
Speaker 2: --July 1993.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son [Russell Lowell Adams], who is a--employed by the United States Drug Enforcement Agency [DEA] as a policy analyst.  And this is about two years old, the picture.  He's still with that agency.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, so 2001?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a montage of my life at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  The person down here is Mrs. [Joyce] Rose, who's the first employee of the department [Department of Afro-American Studies].  She's departmental secretary.  The person in the straw hat is Mr. Ethelbert Miller [HistoryMaker E. Ethelbert Miller], the well-known poet.  And this is the pic-- (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The top left is Dr. Lila Ammons and my wife, Mrs. Adams on campus.
Speaker 1: To the right of that is a shot of graduates of two years ago I believe, some of them.
Speaker 2: And there, of course, is a picture of myself.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  When was that take?
Speaker 2: That was 1992 I think, ten years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Is my son, Russell Lowell Adams, who is part of the [U.S.] Department of Justice--I mean Depart--Drug Enforcement Administration, staff analyst.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: It's a picture of a conference on black studies, and that must be about twelve years ago at Howard University.
Speaker 1: The person in the straw hat is Mr. Ethelbert Miller, who is an internationally known poet, member of the department.  And that picture is at least ten years old.
Speaker 2: This is a--Jesus, I think it's a social at Howard.  We have a lot of those.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, year or other people identifiable?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure who they are at this point.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And this picture is myself on one side and Andrew Billingsley, the sociologist, on the other side.  And I'm not sure who is in the middle, but I know they--that's Andrew Billingsley.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: This is the Virgin Islands again, the schoolteachers that we were working with on cultural preservation.  That's amazing, you guys got all that down there, okay.
Speaker 1: This is myself and Dr. Ammons at a commencement.  This is about a year ago.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: Let's see who this is.  This is myself and my colleague Michael Frazier.  This is about ten years ago, commencement time.
Speaker 2: This is a, this is a picture of my colleagues--oh, man, this is a long time ago.  This is about twenty-five years ago, members of the department twenty-five years ago.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What's the occasion for the photo?
Speaker 2: Let's see, what was the occasion?  I think it was--what the heck was this?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Or what is that location?
Speaker 2: This is in our media center on campus.  And this was our last meeting of that year, twenty-five year ago of the, of the department.  None of these people are with us now, but this is a 25 years back snapshot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 2: I had done a talk for the United States Mapping Agency [U.S. Geological Survey National Imagery and Mapping Agency].  I was receiving a plaque in that connection, United States Mapping agency.
Speaker 1: This is Mrs. Joyce Rose, who is the first member of the department.  She was hired to watch the males and answer the phone, and she has remained with the department from those days.
Speaker 2: This is a picture about two years ago.  This is---to my left is [HistoryMaker] Colin Powell, and at--we were at a meeting where the discussion of, of Howard and the state department's need to get together to train minority students for careers in the state department, and that is happening.
Story_ID: 192755
Speaker 1: The two full images--images of my paternal grandfather and grandmother, Jonas Adams and Elizabeth Adams, Jonas Adams, Elizabeth Ad--Elizabeth Adams.  My grandfather is the person who developed the basis for the family in terms of economics, farm.  And my grandmother was a midwife.  And this is a--this is a, an item that I was asked to do for the American Association of Retired Persons [AARP] as a teachers' training piece, and they wanted a picture that was not conventional, so they chose that one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of our son and daughter.  That, Russ [Russell Lowell Adams] was probably fourteen or fifteen, and she was in her twenties.  Our daughter is a paramedic, and our son is with the drug enforcement administration.  This is when they were in their teens.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother.  This is Isabella Ponder Adams, the schoolteacher.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know about when that was taken, either what her age was at the time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That time, that must have been--she was probably in her thirties, thirty-two, thirty-three.  Yeah, that's about thirty--when she was about thirty-five years old.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in about 1997, '98 [1998] taken in the Bernard Fall Room at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] as a part of Howard's publicity imagery, imagery.  That picture was used to advertise the university.
