Story_ID: 187799
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for the History Makers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Carl Edwin Anderson.  That's C-A-R-L, E-D-W-I-N, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My birth date is September 29, 1934 and I was born in St. Louis, Missouri.
Speaker 1: What is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired university administrator, having spent let's say thirty-two years of my professional career at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 19, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your address.
Speaker 2: You're in my home--in the library in my home in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Yes, all right, okay.
Story_ID: 187800
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions that we always ask, and they are lightweight questions that only require a short, lightweight answer.  The first question is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like lots of foods.  I think my favorite would just be in the broad area of Chinese food.  In other words, if you can get it, whether it's Lo Mein, whether it's egg foo young, the broccoli and beef, you name it.  I just like an assortment of Chinese food.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite color is brown and that stemmed from my childhood when the brother of mine, who is one year younger, when my mother [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson] would buy us suits for Easter or Christmas or something like that, I always got the brown suit and he got the brown--got the blue one, so I kind of developed an afinity for brown.  So I think my favorite color is brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I used to think that spring was my favorite time of the year because the rebirth of everything, the regeneration of all kinds of vegetation or what have you, but I have concluded that I don't have a favorite.  I enjoy all the seasons.  There is something special that reveals itself to me during every season, you know, that we know.  When we went to Miami [Florida] once during the winter time for a soccer championship game, you know, involving Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I said, "Oh, this is ideal.  I left snow in Washington to go there," and I went there and it was warm and balmy.  We had on shorts and everything, and I said, "Oh, I could move here and live," but as soon as that was over, when I came back to Washington and engaged the winter once again, I said, "Heck, I love this too," so I could live anywhere, in just about any season because I love them all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  It might sound strange to some people because I consider myself--I call myself an "urban cat."  I love the urban setting.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) An urban cat.
Speaker 2: I am an urbanite, an urban cat, whatever you want to call it.  My wife and I enjoy going to New York City [New York, New York], securing an accommodation right off Broadway, the taking in the Broadway plays, of course, she does the shopping at the stores there, and just walking through various neighborhoods and what have and witnessing some of the cultural diversity that is so evident in a place like New York.  So we like the urban setting, even though I must acknowledge, I did fall in love with Jackson Hole, Wyoming when we went there for a brief period in the Grand Teton [Wyoming] and the Yellow Stone National Park and what have you, but our favorite is really urban setting, primarily New York, which we frequent maybe about three times a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite expression, and I don't know whether I coined it or not, but it goes like this, "You can never achieve excellence by practicing mediocrity."
Story_ID: 187801
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you some questions about your family, about your family background and I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, and I'm going to start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's name was Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson, and Blanche, B-L-A-N-C-H-E, E-L-I-Z-A-B-E-T-H, H-O-O-P-E-R, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.  Everybody knew her as "Elizabeth" or "Bert."  No one knew her as Blanche.  In fact, most of the kids, her children, didn't really know that her first name was Blanche, but at the time she passed away and we were getting things together, we noticed that some of the documents had "B. E. Elizabeth Hooper Anderson," and so that's when we realized that Blanche was really the first name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was April 14, 1909 in Uniontown, Kentucky.
Speaker 1: Now, where is Uniontown?  Do you know what's close to?
Speaker 2: I never been there, and really don't know.  I have often thought that I wanted to trace the family tree and what have you, and I've gotten some stuff together, but I have not pursued it as vigorously as I should.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You know there's a place where Kentucky practically meets Illinois and Missouri right there at the Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Well, she moved to St. Louis [Missouri] or actually she moved to Brooklyn, Illinois when she was three--three years old and lived there for a while, and then the family moved to St. Louis, Missouri.
Story_ID: 187802
Speaker 1: Now what do you know about her [Anderson's mother, Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson] side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Basically to her mother, her father, who I vaguely knew, and her brothers and sisters, who I knew fairly well, those who were around us, because for a long period of time, some of them actually lived with us.  The mother lived with us, the grandmother lived with us, grandma Hooper, and one of her older brothers, Carl, has the same name that I have, lived with us for a while.  And there was Ike [ph.], and there was Jake [ph.], there was Alfred [ph.], and Homer [ph.] and she had sisters, Lottis [ph.] and Coreen [ph.].  It was a large family.  So most of lived in St. Louis and so we saw them rather frequently.  And grandma Hooper lived with us for a number of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your grandma tell you any stories about or talk about what your family was doing in the nineteenth century, any stories about slavery or reconstruction or any other sort of thing.
Speaker 2: No, she didn't do much of that.  Even though we interacted rather frequently, she was not that much of a talker.  She was rather stern, and you had better be well-behaved while you were around grandma; and I can only remember grandpa, because he passed away in the late '30s [1930s] or early '40s [1940s], so I was a very young child when he passed away, but my remembrance of him was that he a very--he was sort of a large man and I was told that he was Indian, in terms of his heritage, and he had a long mane-like hair, wore it kind of long, but my memories of him are very vague, but I think that's fairly accurate, but there wasn't a lot of conversation about those very early days.  I do recall that in talking with--in engaging with some of my cousins particularly, we found that growing up in a segregated society, those of my cousins who were very fair in complexion, they managed to get jobs in settings that were not normally open to people of color; in fact some of them were very fair.  And during the work day, they passed as white, but otherwise they lived in our community, and identified with all of us, but there was one who was a bank teller.  There was another who owned a barber shop out in a community where we could only work in the daytime and we're not supposed to be around in the evening.  And he had a barber shop.  And the barber shop had all white customers, and in the evening, he would come back home to his--to a black family.
Speaker 1: Did your relative ever discuss the dynamics of how they pulled that off?
Speaker 2: I'm sure we had conversations, but most of us were aware of the fact that the fairness of their skin made it possible for them to conduct themselves in those occupational areas because no one else in the family who was of darker hue seemed to be able to break through and have any of those kinds of jobs that were considered to be either semi-professional or professional.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there was that--it was apparent.
Story_ID: 187803
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Raymond William Anderson.  That's R-A-Y-M-O-N-D, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N.  Now, he was born in St. Charles, Missouri on January 23, 1907 and St. Charles is just across the Missouri River from St. Louis [Missouri] on the western edge, so he grew up really in St. Louis, Missouri.  He had several brothers and a sister, and, of course, his mother, then grandma Anderson, we would call her and was Francis Anderson.  He had several brothers.  Those that I recalled off hand, there was Francis [ph.], one of the brothers, there was "Rottie" [ph.]--I think his real name was Rodney, but we called him "Rottie."  There was an older brother named William, but I didn't know him, and there was a sister named Melba, and we all interacted rather frequently.  My father was a janitor for most of his life and various jobs, either working in the homes of wealthy people who lived in the suburban areas, or once he worked in the meat packing place, but for most of his work life, he was a sexton at a church in St. Louis called, Kingshighway Presbyterian Church.  In fact he retired from that position, and I recall all of us went there for a celebration and a presentation of the watch as the case usually is.
Speaker 1: Was this mostly a white church?
Speaker 2: This was a white church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, it was purchased--it was sold and purchased by a black congregation and it's Wayman Tabernacle--Wayman Temple Tabernacle Church.
Speaker 1: C.M.E  church?
Speaker 2: I think.  It's either C.A.M.E. or A.M.E.  I'm sure in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think Wayman is a C.M.E. name, but, yeah.  Okay.  Now, did they have any stories about the nineteenth century or anything that they passed down?
Speaker 2: No, my father always tried to impress upon us that things weren't easy and you needed to, you know, get yourself prepared in order to, you  know, face this world, but he was just a hard worker.  He just got up every day, went and did what he had to do, and, you know, returned.  And I think the only enjoyment or recreation that he had--he did a couple of things, he occasionally would fish and sometimes he would go with a few buddies and hunt to shoot squirrels and rabbits and occasional a possum.   And then he drove a bus for the church to pick up the members for their Tuesday night meeting, and he would drive the bus on Sundays to pick up the kids for Sunday School, so he was quite immersed in the church.  And that was about all he did in terms of outlets.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the year of his birth?
Speaker 2: Nineteen 'o seven [1907].
Speaker 1: Nineteen 'o seven [1907], okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 187804
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother's [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson] personality.  What kind of person was she and what did she do?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very gregarious and outgoing person, very likable, everybody liked her.  She was rather outspoken.  Schoolwise, she only went to her second year in high school in contrast to my dad [Raymond Anderson], who only went to the sixth grade and had to drop out of school when his father died to help his mother and the family.
Story_ID: 187805
Speaker 1: But my mother [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson] never had--she had eleven children.  My mother and father [Raymond William Anderson] had eleven children.  That was a full-time occupation just raising eleven kids.
Speaker 2: Now, can you name them for us?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.
Speaker 2: Tell us--I know you can and where do you follow?
Speaker 1: I hope I don't forget anyone, but starting in order, the eldest was Blanche, the next was Raymond [ph.], the next was Glenn [ph.], Jacqueline [ph.], Donald [ph.], Carl [ph.], I'm in the middle, Lawrence [ph.], Guinafred [ph.], Richard [ph.], Darroll [ph.] and Reginald [ph.], so there were eleven of us, and I was in the middle.  And it was a pretty tight-knit family.  We all lived in three rooms, and we grew up--that's what we had.  We had three rooms and a flat in St. Louis, Missouri and we managed to get that fourth room when my father decided to talk part of the basement and carve out a kitchen area, so we were able to expand just a bit.
Speaker 2: Small house, there were a lot of people there. (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --At that time there were as many as all the children, mother and father, sometimes grandmothers, sometimes uncles living there together as we grew up.
Story_ID: 187806
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your father [Raymond William Anderson], what was he like, and what did he do?
Speaker 2: My father was a much more reserved person. He was rather quiet, very much involved in the church activities.  He was a very pleasant person, but not a gregarious person.  He was rather stern in terms of disciplinary interests and you didn't cross him.  If my mother [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson] said, "I'm going to tell your father when he gets, home," you know that you better straighten up or you were due for a spanking or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he get to go very far in school?
Speaker 2: No, he went just to the sixth grade, had to drop out because his father died, and he helped his mother, you know, bring income into--for the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187807
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson and Raymond William Anderson] met?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm not quite sure.  I'm sure that my mother has probably--my mother probably told us, but I don't recall just how they met.  I know that she was in high school, and they both lived in a neighborhood not far from one another, and somehow they got together, and that was it, but I don't recall the details.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187808
Speaker 1: Tell us about growing up.  What were some of the sights, and sounds, smells of the neighborhood that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a very close-knit neighborhood.  You knew everybody who lived up the street, down the street, across the street, anywhere between your house and the school, which was about six or seven blocks away.  They knew you.  We, along with the Andersons, along with the Mosleys [ph.] and the Jacksons [ph.] were the large families.  They each had eleven children in them, so we were all over the neighborhood, in and out of one another's homes.  We had organized activity on the playground, ball teams, you know, arts and crafts.  We had the little community--one of the things that we used to enjoy was the kids would get together in the neighborhood and put on productions on the back porch of some of the neighbors and we'd charge nickel and dime for people to see the production and we'd do the singing and the dancing and the comedy and all those kind of routines.  And that primarily took place at the Mosley's house because they had the big, back porch, and--but just a wonderful kind of experience because at that time, you walked to school, you knew everybody.  You knew when they were frying fish when they were frying fish because, you know, during that time, you had the heaving influx of flies, and if you would pass somebody's house and see flies on the screen door, you knew that person was either frying fish or eating watermelon because the flies were attracted and they would swarm around the door, trying to get to that.  The Coca-Cola Bottling Co. was one block from my house.  So every evening the trucks that would make the deliveries would line up pass my house.  They waited their turn to go into the bays to unload and to reload for the next day delivery.  There was a big catering called Kaufman [ph.] where you could go and buy sandwiches.  They prepared sandwiches and other items for workers all over.  They delivered them in their trucks to construction sites and what have you; and it was close enough for us if we wanted and had the money, we could walk into the place.  And, of course, you had all of the smells of all of the deli of the foods they were preparing in the Kaufman Deli.  Then there was the neighborhood bakery that were largely run by German people from German ancestry that we loved to go to.  And there was one in particular that we loved to go into called Dunlaps [ph.] where they cooked the donuts every night, and you could stand in the window and see the donuts spindling into the oil, you know, bobbing up and down, going through and then you'd see them icing them, and then they'd put them on the containers, and then sit them on the racks, and you just smelled the donut's smell waffling through the air.  So we had the local stores where you could go, and at that time when you wanted something like pickle, for example, they were in barrels, and you would actually go and they would give a fork, and you give push around, you know, and stick the pickle you want and pull it out.  When you bought meat from the stores, you would see the cut the piece that you wanted from the carcass or if you wanted hamburger, you would see him put it in the grinder.  So all those smells were, you know, there, wafting through the air in the neighborhood.  Then on weekends in the spring and summer, people would bar-b-que.  They would get their #2 galvanized tubs, put the grate over them and put the coals in the tubs and they would put the spare ribs on and they would cook them.  And the churches had fundraisers by cooking them, and they had homemade ice cream where they would mix the stuff and put it in and put the ice around it, and put the salt, and then churn it until they  made the ice cream.  Then there was a watermelon garden up the street.  Then in the summer and spring time, you could go get watermelon and sit out at the tables and enjoy.  So it was a community--everyone knew everyone else and if you went to school with the youngsters and the parents knew one another, and there was always a coming and going in one another's homes.
Story_ID: 187809
Speaker 1: Did you have the vendors in the streets, I mean the guys that would sell the watermelon? -- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We had horse-drawn carriages where they came through.  There were several types; you had the vegetable and fruit people.  You had the people who wanted to buy rags, old clothing, and papers, newspapers, and other furnishings, whatever you wanted to. --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the "rag man" they called him.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and the guy would come through the neighborhood, and he would say, "Rag-a-seller, rag-a-seller,"  I guess he meant rags for sell, but it sounded like he was saying "rags-a-seller" and everybody would run because they were fascinated by the horses, and the other--the ice, you know, we didn't have the fancy refrigerators that we have now, and you usually had the ice box and every day or every other day, you had to buy a block of ice to put in the refrigerator to keep things cold; and, of course, many people had the ice box windows or the window ice box in this winter time, where people, if it was cold enough, they would put the food in those boxes in the winter, and let nature provide the frigid environment that was necessary to keep the food wholesome, all of this was part of growing, but it was routine for us.  I remember when there was something that I'll never forget, we had--and I don't know the name of the bakery--but they produced a loaf of bread that was one-half wheat and one-half white, and you could actually--it had a compartment in the middle, where you could actually divide, you could break it, and it was still sealed, and if you only wanted one-half of bread, you only had to buy the half you wanted, and leave the other half.  And, of course, the stores, they all ran a little credit arrangement, where, you know, you would go to the store and you'd say, Mr. so and so, here is the list, my mother wants, they would give you those things; and then they would mark down what the cost was and put it in your book on your credit sheet.  And then on the weekend, I guess when your parents got there money, they would go to the store and pay the bill for the food and things that you had gotten during the week.  So it was kind of exciting in a real sense, when you reflect on it, but, of course, I wouldn't want to go back to it. (Laughter)
Story_ID: 187810
Speaker 1: What kind of little boy were you, when you were growing up?  What did you like to do and what were your goals as a little boy?
Speaker 2: What kind of little boy was I, rather devilish.  The thing I remember, I was always inquisitive.  I always wanted to know what was going on.  I was always considered to be a good student, and I was fairly well behaved, and as a result, I always got positive feedback and reinforcement, and as far back as I can remember, whether it was in the neighborhood with neighbors, at school, at church, wherever, at the community center, I was always singled out, and given some significant role or part in whatever was going on, and if I wasn't given that, I nevertheless got positive reinforcement.  I can recall in school, again, if they had a production, I was always given a significant role.  If they were selecting someone to go represent the school, I was usually involved in that.  And it wasn't just in the part of the teachers and the community as a whole.  If my fellow students had to participate in the process, they somehow always selected me to represent them or to be a part of something, and, as a result, as I've said, I think that positive reinforcement, which even to this day is part of what I think helps drives me.  As a result, I expected rather high expectations for myself.  I didn't want to let others down, nor myself down; and so I always set rather high standards for performance and always felt that I could achieve them if I applied myself.  And that's basically it.  I was active.  I was pretty good at baseball.  And we had a game called, cork ball.  I was pretty good at that.
Speaker 1: What was cork ball?
Speaker 2: Cork ball was--well, the way we played cork ball, which was not the official way was to take a broomstick or a mop stick, that was the bat, and we used a tennis ball rather than an official cork ball, and you would have a pitcher and a catcher on the opposite team, and a fielder, three people.  And the batter--when the ball was thrown, the batter tried to hit that ball.  If he swung and missed and the catcher caught it, you were out.  So the next batter would come up.  You'd get three outs before the side retired.  If he hit it, it depended where the ball went.  That is how you determined whether it was a single, a double, a triple or a home run, so you advanced without running to the base, based upon where the ball landed.  And if you hit so far, that was a home run.  And we'd play right there in the street, right from the house.  And, of course, at that time, you didn't have a whole lot of cars. And you didn't have to get out of the way too often to let cars get by, but everybody in the neighborhood played cork ball.  We played a game called "Indian ball," which is the derivation of cork ball, played with a larger ball, and a regular baseball bat.  We did a lot of--we built a lot of skate boards, not the kind that they have today.  These were the kind they had today.  These are the kinds that were built on the L-shaped.  We had the place with the foot and the handle up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: -- the 2 x 4 and the crates, like a box and a crate in the front.
Speaker 2: Right, and we built our own and, of course, we did a lot of roller skating.  We didn't have the roller blade.  We had the roller skates and when you--and after you use the roller skates the way they were intended whole period of time, then you would break them and they would become the wheels for your skate truck that you built and a lot of bicycle riding.  I remember my gift from my parents when I graduated from grade school was a black and one Schwinn bicycle.  They asked me what I wanted and I wanted a Schwinn bicycle and that's what I got.  My parents didn't have much money, but again that was the gift they gave me when I graduated from grade school.  That's what I asked for.
Story_ID: 187811
Speaker 1: So all through grade school [Dunbar Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri], high school [Charles L. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri], and college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], that was the kind of response that I elicited; and I frequently was in a leadership role either by designation or because I would organize things.
Speaker 2: Now was that because--did you have--did all your brothers and sisters kind of function the same way, or were your parents [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson & Raymond William Anderson] real encouraging about that?  Where did it come from? (Simultaneous)
Speaker 1: The reinforcement was always positive, and I guess like for most people, if it works for you, you utilize it and you do it; and it worked for me.  And I found--for example, when we had these productions on the back porch of my friend's homes, frequently, you know, I was the emcee.  I wasn't the song and dance man, but I was the emcee.
Speaker 2: Did you help organize them?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I helped organize them.  I got the tickets together.  I handled the money.  I was the promoter and that sort of thing.  It was a very positive feedback for me. I remember when a little later on when I went to college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois], my very first quarter in college--we had the quarter system--I was majoring in Political Science, and I was in Political Science or they called it Government 101 and into the sixth week of the twelve-week quarter, my teacher, who happen to be the associate dean of the college saw me walking across the campus one afternoon and he said, "Anderson," and I said, "Yes sir, Dr. Turner [ph.]."  He said, "Are you on scholarship?"  I said, "No, sir."  He said, "Could you use a scholarship?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  He said, "Stop by my office tomorrow."  I stopped by Dr. Turner's office the next day.  His secretary handed me an envelope that I was to take the Bursar.  I took it to the Bursar.  The Bursar said, "Just a moment," came back to his window, refunded my tuition from my first quarter and said, "your tuition is paid for the four years."  You know, and I've had many instances in my life where I've had that kind of good fortune, where people have been supportive.  When I was a student in college, my parents didn't have any money to send me to college.  I left home to go to college to Southern Illinois University with a $136.00 in my pocket.  Tuition was $27.50, plus $2.50 for textbook rental.  I paid that.  I got a room out in town in a lady's home, where I think it was $12.00 a week for the room or something like that.  And I got a little job raking leaves, cleaning up buildings at the university, and again picking on the theme that I developed a little while ago about the positive feedback that I elicited from people, the lady whose house I lived in, she adopted me.  There were four others living there, but she adopted me.  And she would come to the doorway--we stayed upstairs over her home-- and she would say, "Anderson," and I would say, "Yes, Ms. Edwards," and she would say, "Do you have any clothes that you need washed?  Anderson, have you had dinner?"  And there were four of us up there, but she would do that for me; and I can't explain it, but I was a student in college and I would come home from time to time in my little ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] uniform, and I would walk through the neighborhood, neighbors would call--would say, "Stop by, I got something for you."  They slipped $2.00 here in my hand.  Give me some wash cloths here, asked me if I needed some food to take back to school, this sort of thing; and it was almost like I was a community project when I first started college.  Friends would give me money.  My parents didn't have any money.  And my parents would scrap $4.00 or $5.00 to help me, but the tuition having been paid, and I got a job--I had a job the whole time I was in college, I was able to make it, but I think it's largely due to the reinforcement that I got from people, going back as far as I can remember--
Story_ID: 187812
Speaker 1: --Let me take you back to high school [Charles H. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]--well grade school [Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School, St. Louis, Missouri] and high school on some level, but who were some of the teachers that encouraged you or that you looked up to?
Speaker 2: All of them, all my teachers, Mr. Hangleman [ph.] Ms. Montgomery [ph.], Ms. McWilliam [ph.], Mr. Hamilton [ph.], Mr. Jackson [ph.], even the principal, Mr. George Dennis Brantley [ph.], graduate of Talladega College [Talladega, Alabama].  When I finished college and came out here to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], when he found that I was here at Howard University, he called me, and when he would come out to recruit for teachers at Howard University, he would always make his business to have dinner with me.  So but--and there is Ms. Rodgers [ph.] in Mathematics, and my homeroom teacher's name I'm blocking on, but that's the kind of reception that I got.  There was Mr. Bilups [ph.] and it was all positive.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary school was Paul Laurence Dunbar Elementary School [St. Louis, Missouri].
Speaker 1: And your high school?
Speaker 2: The high school was Charles H. Sumner High School, both in St. Louis.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 187813
Speaker 1: And you graduated from [Charles L.] Sumner [High School, St. Louis, Missouri]?
Speaker 2: I graduated from Sumner in 1952, June '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Went to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois] primarily because a couple of my high school friends who were in the January class just before my June graduation came back to college night program and they talked about how things were at Southern Illinois University, and one of the persons was [HM] Dick Gregory who appreciated me in high school by semester and another friend named, George Henry [ph.].  They had gone to Southern Illinois University.  And I didn't have money to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] which I thought I wanted to attend or the University of Illinois that I thought I wanted to attend.  They so impressed me about Southern Illinois, that I decided to go there.
Story_ID: 187814
Speaker 1: Now what was Southern Illinois [University, Carbondale, Illinois] for you--well, when you were a senior--let's go back a minute I guess to high school [Charles L. Sumner High School, St. Louis, Missouri]--well, I don't want to leave out any of your high school activities, but did you run for student government in high school?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --oh I ran for student government.  I received what they called, "The Citizenship Award," which is the highest award that the school bestowed upon a student for having contributed to the life of the institution and that's voted by the students, themselves.  I was president of my class, my graduation class.  I was president of the Hi-Y group.  I worked at the community center as assistant boy's director, the--while in high school.  I was a member of the city-wide student government association.  I was a writer for a magazine called Teen Talk.  I was my school's representative to put in the article that appeared every month about what was happening at Sumner High School, so I was quite involved at the activities of the high school.
Story_ID: 187815
Speaker 1: So when you graduated, had you chosen a career or did you know what you wanted to pursue as a career when you were on the verge of graduation?
Speaker 2: When I graduated, I knew at that time that I wanted to study political science, and I also thought that I wanted to prepare for a career of public service, running for elective office.  That's what I really thought I was aiming toward.  It did not turn out to be quite that way because when I graduated and I accepted a job at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], I sort of pushed the elective politics thing aside, but I've always had a kind of a burning interest in public policy issues, political things.  You don't want me to get started on that because I'm pretty open in my views.
Speaker 1: What inspired that?  I mean were you inspired by local politicians or possibilities--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I don't know that I was particularly inspired by local politicians.  It just seemed to be an interest.  I always read the newspaper even as a kid.  When the newspaper was delivered to our home, St. Louis Post Dispatch, every day I read the newspaper, so I kept up with what was going on.
Speaker 1: Did you get the black papers?
Speaker 2: Yes, we had the St. Louis Argus and The Tabloid.  The Tabloid was the crazy paper, you know, the one with all the dirt and the gossip, but the St. Louis Argus was the black newspapers and the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, and the St. Louis Globe-Democrat, the Post-Dispatch was liberal, the Globe-Democrat was more conservative.  I always favored the Post-Dispatch, but I always kept informed of what was going on.  I would like to get about the city.  If there were things being built, I wanted to see them.  I wanted to see them going up.  I wanted to see--visit them after they had been built.  That's the kind of interest on had, you know.  It has never left me, even now here in Washington, I like to see things being developed from the ground up.  I like to follow it.  I'll stop somewhere if there is some construction going on to see what--how it's coming along, what's going up, what is it suppose to look like when it's finish and have something to say about it while it's going on and then after it's up, to comment on it and critique it; and say, "I think that's a wonderful addition," or "I think that's horrible," or what have you.  It's my own personal view but I still do that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and get excited about it.
Story_ID: 187816
Speaker 1: SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]--[Charles L.] Sumner [High School, St. Louis, Missouri] was a segregated high school, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: SIU is integrated?
Speaker 2: Integrated, that's correct.  That was my first full scale involvement in education on an integrated level.  And I must say, however, while integrated, there was still a lot of self-segregation that took place at the institution, itself.  For example, in the student union, or student center building, all the black kids sat over in one section and related to one another and the white kids sat in another section.  I'll never forget the dean called me one day because I was selected to be on the student council by the administration.  The first quarter if you wanted to serve, you had to apply, that is the freshmen had to apply.   I applied.  They selected me to be on the student council, so the dean called me into his office one day and he said, "Carl, tell me," he said, "Why do all the black students segregate themselves over in that section?"  I said, "Well, you look at it segregating themselves, but they're with their friends.  They're with the people that they associate with, and identify with, and live with."  I said, "Another way of looking at it is why do all the white kids stay out of that section and sit on the other side?"  They're with their friends.  They're with the people they deal with, they socialize with, they're in fraternities with and sororities with, but we had a lady, I can't remember her name.  She was the wife of the head of the music department and she was an activist.  She was a white woman.  She was an activist with a group called CORE.  That was when CORE was first getting started, and I joined.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Congress for Racial Equality, James Farmer.
Speaker 2: Congress for Racial Equality. And I joined it.  And one of the things that we planned to do was go down on Sunday morning to the First Baptist Church of Carbondale and integrate the church on a particular Sunday morning and evidently the church people had ticked off because we all--you know about twenty or thirty of us--had met this lady--I'm sorry I can't remember her, but we met with her and we marched down to the church, and as we ascended the steps going up to the church, the doors flew open, the minister stepped outside, extended his hand and said, "Welcome," and took us into the church and sat us right down front, but the thing I liked about Southern Illinois was the president and his wife, Dr. Delyte Morris and his wife, Dorothy Morris, went out of their way to make certain that students of color felt comfortable.  They invited us to their home for dinner with guests that were coming as speakers and participants in university programs.  They had functions at their home and made certain that it included everybody.  They gave jobs in their home to students.  They supported all of our activities and I think--and I'll never forget that.  In fact when Dr. Morris left the presidency and came here to Washington for a brief period to work, he came to visit me and my wife at our home; and we were quite honored for his having done so.
Speaker 1: So he was--I would guess he would be kind of an unusual leader for a state school in Southern Illinois--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no question about it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --in Southern Illinois, which is quite like--it's more like the south than it is like Illinois.  I mean it's southern Illinois really.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, but he--Dr. Morris made certain that everything at the institution was open; and I'll never forget some of the--even though my major was political science, the teachers that really sparked my enthusiasm and interests were in the humanities, Dr. [E.C.] Coleman and Dr.Fanan [ph.], and Dr. [Julia M.] Barber and Dr. [Georgia] Winn, teaching Greek Mythology, and Roman Mythology, and the English Literature, and American Literature.  They were just exciting teacher and would make that literature almost come alive and just stimulated my interest.  And I suspect had I not been in political science, I may very well have majored in that area.
Story_ID: 187817
Speaker 1: Did you have any black teachers at that campus [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: At that time, we had no black teachers.  One came toward the end of my career there, and I forget the discipline that she was in, but, no, they had a lot of black employees and that sort of thing, but at that time they didn't have any black teachers.  One of the beautiful things about the school was I joined a fraternity, Kappa Alpha Psi and we engendered a form of competition among ourselves.  We would challenge one another to get the highest average.  We participated in all of the universities, in the athletic intermural, in the variety shows, in the academic competition.  You name it, we made certain that we were involved in it.  The dean assisted us in getting a house just off the campus in neighborhood that had--where blacks did not live, and we got that house and maintained it for many, many years, but the thing that I'm most proud of was that of all of activities in which we engaged was the fact that--in the fraternity counsel, there were about fifteen fraternities, and each quarter, they had a trophy that would go to the fraternity with the highest academic average at the university, and if you had the highest average for three consecutive quarters, you could retire the trophy.  Well, we won the trophy for fifteen out of eighteen consecutive quarters and we retired and leave four of the trophies.  And we were determined that we were not only going to make our mark in the variety shows and in the murals, but we were also going to show off academically, and we challenged one another and had bets going among ourselves.  "I bet I get a higher GPA this semester than you."  And we were quite proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you engage in campus life in similar fashion to as you did in high school? --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh absolutely. I was voted the--I was given by the university the service--the Southern Illinois University Award, which is given to the student who contributes most to the student (unclear).  I was voted most valuable fraternity man.  I was homecoming chairman in 1955.  I was on the student council for several years, the inner-fraternity counsel.  I was selected as a resident fellow in the dormitory.  I managed the little snack bar and store that we had in the dormitory, where people would come and buy the snacks in the evening time.  So I had a wonderful time. I had a wonderful time.  And I always tried to make it possible for one of my brothers, and what have you, to succeed me because often I was the first in those categories and what I always wanted to make sure somebody was behind me that could step in and that I could recommend, and that's what we did.
Story_ID: 187818
Speaker 1: Now, you graduated in '56 [1956]?
Speaker 2: In '56 [1956] with my bachelor's degree.  I remained for two more years and obtained my master's degree.  I was given a graduate assistantship.  In fact, again, after I got my bachelor's degree, I was pondering what I was going to do, whether to go get a job, go to graduate school, or what have you.  On graduation day, after graduation ceremony, and I was returning to the dormitory with my wife and my mother [Blanche Elizabeth Hooper Anderson], and other family members, I found a letter in my mailbox, and the letter was an offer of a graduate assistantship in a program that was going to be inaugurated that fall in college student personnel administration.  And right then I decided that, why not?  You see what I mean when I say that how things have happened to me: I get the scholarship walking across the campus, my teacher says, who happens to be the associate dean, "Do you have a scholarship?  Do you need a scholarship?"  I go to my mailbox on graduation day.  There is a letter telling me that they're offering me a graduate assistantship to enroll in this graduate program, room and board paid for, the tuition paid.  So it's been--I've been very fortunate, extremely fortunate, and would not for one moment suggest that I did this on my own.  I have been helped all my life, and I have appreciated it and respected it and understood it.  And I think that's why since my retirement from Howard University [Washington, D.C.], I have devoted so much time to a program  raise scholarship funds to help needy kids in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.] public high schools attend college.
Story_ID: 185671
Speaker 1: How did you and your wife [Ida Anderson] meet?  This seems like an interesting story.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  You see my wife and I grew up in the same neighborhood.  She lived in the 3200 block, in fact 3217 Magazine Street [St. Louis, Missouri].  I lived 3132 Magazine Street [St. Louis, Missouri], one block apart, so I've known her ever since we were little kids in kindergarten and she always claims I used to pull her pigtails when I, you know, would sit behind her, and all that kind of stuff, to try to get her attention, but I always accused her of coming after as opposed to my going after her, but, in any case, we went through grade school together, and we went to different high schools.  And we went to different colleges, but we maintained a relationship, and got married at a relatively young age, and have raised three children.  And like I said, she has been a tremendous partner.  I couldn't have asked for better.  I mean she is--anything that we have decided to go into, she throws herself into it.  I remembered when I retired from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  She said, "Now, what are you going to do with yourself?"  I said, "Well, I'll find some things that will interest me," and so forth and so on.  And she said, "Well, you know what I think you ought to do?"  I said, "What?"  She said, "I think the first thing you ought to do is to develop your study."  She said, "Let's take that bedroom downstairs and develop a study and make it your office," she said, "and there you will have a place that you can go and do the things that you enjoy doing, just as you did when you would leave the house and go to the university for all those years;" and she said, "it'll help you through the transition."  So she went out and helped me buy the bookcases, and the sofa, and all the things that we needed.  And as a result, I spend, I would say, a considerable amount of my time in my study writing, working on projects, doing what I have to do and that sort of thing, but she has been there.  She is a wonderful homemaker.  She loves beautiful things.  And she goes out of her way to acquire art and the furnishings that reflect, they're rather eclectic but somehow they all harmonize and it come together because she has that special gift for putting colors together right, and putting objects together right, and that sort of things, a very special gift.  And so she makes the home extremely pleasant, and so we enjoy having friends in and entertaining.  She enjoys that.  The kids all come over to help when we're having a party.  My son will do the bartending.  My daughter will do--help her mother get the food out, or they'll take the coats, or they'll do--so it's a big family enterprise when we get together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when did you all get married?
Speaker 2: Back in 1954.
Speaker 1: So you were at your second year at SIU [Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: That's right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it'll be fifty years next year.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Speaker 2: And so far so good.  We'll still hanging in there (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She is very, very special.  When we were preparing for the interview, she's the one that went in through all the files and the archives and what have you to try to find the photographs and what have you, you know.  She's the one who did that.
Story_ID: 185672
Speaker 1: Now, when you finish graduate school at SIU [Southern Illinois University Carbondale, Carbondale, Illinois]--now this is '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: It's '58 [1958] I got my master's.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But let me tell you another story about that.  That's interesting--talking about help when I was concluding my graduate work, the dean, the very one, the dean of students at I. Clark Davis [Isaac Clark Davis] at Southern Illinois, who was instrumental in getting our fraternity house across town, where no blacks had ever been, in terms of living, they asked me if I would be willing to remain on at Southern Illinois and work there.  And I told him that I really wanted to leave, and get away, and try my wings in another setting, that would have been very supportive, but I wanted to branch out.  So he said to me, "Where are you interested in going?"  I said, "I really haven't made up my mind.  I have prepared to teach if I have to."  I said, "But what I really want to do is get to involved college administration."  And he said, "Would you have any objection if I put you in touch with a gentleman with whom I attended a two-week seminar at Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] and his name is Dr. Armour J. Blackburn?  He is the dean of students at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], he said, "we were roommates for two weeks at Harvard.  I said, "No."  He put me in touch with Dr. Blackburn.  Dr. Blackburn said, "I'm going to be at French Lick, Indiana, attending a conference in about a month,"  he said, "Is there any way you can get over there for an interview?"  I says, "I'll get there."  I went back and told my dean and I said, "I don't know how I'm going to do it.  We don't have any money."  I'm married now.  We don't have any money and got a kid.  He said, "University will send you."  So he sent me to French Lick, Indiana and paid my expenses to meet Dr. Blackburn.  I met Dr. Blackburn.  Dr. Blackburn offered me a job at Howard University and the rest is history.  That's how I came to Howard University.  And after I got there, after about a year or two, Dr. Blackburn promoted me from resident hall director to director of student activities, and one day he called me into his office, and he said, "You know, Howard is my Alma mater and I've had a good career here, and I owe it to Howard to train at least one person on my staff to be capable of succeeding me when I leave."  And he said, "If you're willing, you can be that person."  And I agreed that I would want to do that, so in the evenings, after regular work, he'd call me to his office, we'd talk about the day's activities, what transpired, how he responded, how you do this, how you do that, what you had to be careful of, how you write this proposal, how you develop this, that and the other, and actually put me--served as mentor to train me. And no guarantees, you know, president comes in, he selects his own staff, but one day Dr. Blackburn suffered a stroke following a particularly tumultuous time at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and the next morning--I didn't know he had suffered the stroke that night, the next morning, the president, who was James Nabrit [James Madison Nabrit, Jr.] sent for me and sent--by that time, I was the associate dean of students, and he said to me, "Did you see Dr. Blackburn this morning?"  I said, "No, I had not seen him."  He said, "I think Dr. Blackburn has suffered a stroke and I sent him home, and I've given him a leave to get himself well."  He said, "In the meantime, I'd like for you to serve as acting dean."
Story_ID: 185673
Speaker 1: Now, we've covered I guess a lot of time quickly, so I just wanted to check the dates.  So you arrived at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: In 1958, September 5, 1958.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We drove up in my little Ford--red and white Ford Victoria that my wife and I had purchased and drove all the way from St. Louis [Missouri].  My parents didn't want us to go.  They wanted us to stay home and work.  I was the only one in my family to go to college.  You see out of the eleven children, I was the only one to go to college.  And I think they sort of wanted me to stay there and work.  My father said, "You sure you want to go all the way out there?"  My wife and I were determined, so we packed our little car with our belongings and our son, and we headed out to Howard University, Washington, D.C.  I will never forget my first experience driving in that Pennsylvania turnpike.  I never saw such curves in my entire life.  It frightened me to death, but we managed to get there and reported for duty.
Speaker 1: How long was before Dr.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Dr. [Armour J.] Blackburn--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Yeah, Dr. Blackburn got sick?
Speaker 2: Before he what?
Speaker 1: Before he had his stroke? That was quite a while.
Speaker 2: That was about 1969 or '70[1970], between '69 [1969] or '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you're talking about eleven years later?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: About eleven or twelve years later?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was during that tumultuous time of student unrest, student protest.
Speaker 1: So student unrest on campus really--I guess it started on '68 [1968] or so?
Speaker 2: Oh at Howard, it started earlier than that.
Speaker 1: Did it? Okay.
Speaker 2: Because there was considerable agitation early in the '60s [1960s] to integrate the Glen Echo Amusement Park, out in Montgomery County, here in Maryland and to integrate every vestige of segregation facilities that were segregated here in this area.  We had students like Lawrence Henry, who was Student in Divinity, who carried on and moved in that direction.  There was still little pockets of segregation here in the [Washington] D.C. area and students were determined to defeat it, but a little later on with the development of SNCC, the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, and the other group on Howard's campus called, "NAG," Non-violent Action Group, you began to get the agitation for all kinds of improvement.  And after a while, they turned inward.  Initially everything was external to the campus, but then they turned it inward.  And they started calling for the elimination compulsory ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps]; the elimination of compulsory freshmen assembly; the relaxation of parietal to rules and regulations governing dorm life, or visitation--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, Howard, in that sense, I guess was following suit a lot of colleges and universities in the country.  They were changing--I mean--the dorm regulations.  A lot of things were changing then.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --free speech movement in Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, but Howard was right in the mix because we had the leaders, the Stokley Carmichael, Courtland Cox, Jarrod Green.  They were right here on the campus.  There are many others whose names do not come to me at this point.
Speaker 1: Stokley Carmichael, being the most prominent one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were here.  They were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that people would know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --was here. Rap Brown was here. H. Rap Brown. So, all that was going on here.  It really came to a head when General [Lewis Blaine] Hershey, who was head of the selective service board or commission, whatever it was called, the draft board, they came to speak at Howard University; and the students prevented him from speaking.  And the university felt that it had the duty to discipline those students who prevented General Hershey from speaking.  And, in the process of trying to conduct the hearings and what have you and to take action, Dr. Blackburn sustained a stroke, but that was a particularly heady time.
Story_ID: 185674
Speaker 1: Was--what were some of the, I guess, pressures on Dr. [Amour J.] Blackburn that you think would cause him to--I mean did he feel sympathy for what the students were doing?  Was he agitated against them?
Speaker 2: Well, the issue, one of the critical issues was how do you approach the question of discipline?  Does the university have the right to summarily administer--meet out district discipline without due process or without a hearing or what have you?  Or do the students have the right to expect due process, notification of the charges, proper hearing, review, and decision?  Dr. Blackburn steadfastly maintained that students did not surrender their constitutional rights and duties and right to do process when they enrolled at the university; and he steadfastly maintained that.  However, when the assembly and administrators and what have you got together with the university attorney to examine that question, it came down on the side of arbitrary dismissal.
Speaker 1: So Dr. Blackburn was caught in a crutch I guess (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's right. In fact, Dr. Blackburn, and I'll never forget it because when he was told that that was what he was to do was to move to send letters of expulsion to those thirty-nine students, who had been identified involved in that, Dr. Blackburn, we went down--I was in the meeting--we went back to his office.  He had his secretary to remain.  He dictated the telegram that was to be sent to all thirty-nine of them and he told me that this was the most difficult thing he ever had to do in his entire life.  That night, he suffered a stroke.
Speaker 1: I see.  Yeah, these were times when, I guess, people had to really look inward to see where they really stood on things.
Speaker 2: And but he was a strong believer that students were entitled to due process and it was the university's obligation.  And there were others, including the university attorney that argued that Howard was a private institution and as such did have to accord that form of due process that they could summarily dismiss, so the decision was made to do that, and it took its toll on Dr. Blackburn.  He lived for approximately two years, two and a half years after that.
Story_ID: 185675
Speaker 1: Now, this is a time period when you're working with college students on black college campuses, some of the traditional ways of disciplining students or some of the rules were starting to break down because--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --I just wanted to set this up that the black colleges up until I guess that time had been the most strict of American colleges.
Speaker 2: No question, no question. When I came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], freshmen women had to be in the dorms at 7:00 o'clock in the evening until homecoming.  And after homecoming, I don't know it was arbitrary date in the fall, they could then stay out until ten or eleven.  They were not allowed to go downtown to the shopping district until after that period.  There was no such thing as coed visitation.  If you went to a dorm to visit a young lady, you sat in the lounge.  You couldn't go up to her room, or if she came to your dorm, she couldn't go up to your room.  There were a number of things that were codified in the list of expectations for the students at the university. And many schools had a kind of wall plate statement that they included in their statement or their catalogue that said that the university reserves the right to discipline any student for failure to maintain a level of conduct consistent with what is expected of a college at this institution.  It was a sort of blanket wall plate statement that it charged the university with a right to just do what it will--what it would when it came to disciplining students.  And many of the historically black institutions had pretty high clad procedures.  And in Alabama, one of the first cases was contested when the president of Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama] put those students out and they went to court and the court indicated that they were indicated to due process, notwithstanding the fact that Alabama State was a state institution.  And, you know, you can go all the way back to Berea versus Kentucky [Berea College v. Kentucky, 1908] back in 1910 or '11 [1911] where they put some students out who found in a drinking establishment, and they suspended them, and at that time, the court ruled in favor of Berea College [Berea, Kentucky], saying that institution acted in place of the parent in local parentis; and if the institution decided that the student was not to do that, they were, in fact, an extension of the parents--it was an extension of parental authority, therefore, in local parentis was the guideline, all the way up until the--what was it?--The '60s [1960], the Alabama State case.  That's when the due process thing became more apparent; and Howard found itself involved in court cases, where, initially, a district court judge issued injunctions and favored the university position.  Some of them were set aside and overturned on appeal, but [Armour J.] Blackburn argued and I think rightfully so that the students did not surrender their constitutional right to due process at the point of enrollment at the university.
Speaker 1: Now, what this dilemma represents I think from what's been written recently about the origin of black colleges and universities, there have been a couple of books about black education in America, you know, trace the beginning of some of the black colleges and it seems to be--this seems to be an ironic turn of events, but it seems if you look at the history of it, it's on a collision course I guess.  Maybe you can comment on it, but a lot of the colleges and the universities like Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia] and Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] were founded by white reformers who were missionaries in their zeal, if not missionaries, in fact, who set very strict rules for behavior and standards with the goal being to uplift the black people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that's true, but I think that one of the things is the perpetuation of those rules stem largely from the notion that we, as people, had, that educated people behaved in a certain way, that we had to be better, we had to exhibit higher moral standards than other people, and so we kind of perpetuate that and we even today, we do it in our religious activities for the most part.  And this was the basis for maintaining that and when the students hit the wall on that, universities had to respond.  And for a period there, from the early '60s [1960] all the way up until the late '70s [1970s] and again a little of it in the late '80s [1980s], the universities had to make a judgment.
Story_ID: 185676
Speaker 1: One of the--I was trying to think--it escapes me right now, but--oh, one of the extenuating factors that had to be taken into account during all of this is the Vietnam War.  You see, we had the draft then, and so that meant that every eligible young man was a candidate for shipment to the war in Vietnam, and there was a massive anti-war movement that was developing in this country because these young people did not want to go to fight that war.  Many of them did not want to go.  And I'll never forget the occasions where students would come to my office begging and pleading with me to do something about altering the records to make them ineligible to go to war.  And I can recall a number of former students and teachers, particularly ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] teachers, who have been killed in Vietnam. So you had that external pressure of the war and internal pressure of the institutional rules and what have you, and it gave the protestors all the fuel they needed.
Speaker 2: And the other factor too that really agitates this is the Civil Rights struggle, which--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that was all part of it.  It was all a part of it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --which--simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: -- and you remember [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], it was all a part of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He came out against the war and called it "morally irreprehensible."  And so that just pulled it all together.  It caused the Civil Rights Movement to envelope in a sense the war.  And all these forces came into play.  And I always maintained that the fact of just strict parietal regulations on the campus were not, in of themselves sufficient, to provide the momentum for the massive protest, the Civil Rights Movement, the war, and these other kinds of things, and it caused them to take on these institutions.  And you remember what happened at Berkeley [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California], where the students had the riot, and the students were hurt at South Carolina State [University] in Orangeburg [South Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Free Speech--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi] and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yeah, the Free Speech Movement in Berkley--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and at Ohio--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio].
Speaker 1: --at Kent State, and we were determined at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] that we were not going to have a situation where our students were put in jeopardy and possibly be killed by agents of the law coming to enforce some, you know, law.  We tried our best to deal with it as best we could without employing police force.  And the university did go to court on a number of cases to seek injunction; and there were a number of occasions where they sent U.S. Marshalls up to the campus to try to resolve issues, but working with fortunately Mayor [Walter] Washington, who was the mayor of the city and Dr. [James Madison] Nabrit, the president of the university, a great civil rights lawyers in his own right, who said that he was going to do nothing to jeopardize the lives of the students at the university even if it meant that we had to go through some turmoil and some difficult times.  He was not going to call up the police to beat up on the students.  And so, it was a very, very difficult time.
Story_ID: 185677
Speaker 1: How did, how were--there are some situations I guess I'm thinking about and I wonder how they were handled.  You have on campus [of Howard University, Washington, D.C.]--for instance, Stokley Carmichael, who later became Kwame Toure who is now deceased, and Courtland Cox, for instance, when they were agitating and organizing for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee], did they--were they allowed to--did they do that in during time period when they were not in school or were they in school?
Speaker 2: They were in school for the most part.
Speaker 1: Were they allowed to keep matriculating as they organized?
Speaker 2: As long as they satisfied their academic requirements, they were--in fact, to a certain extent, they may have even been encouraged.  You see that was the dilemma that many of many found ourselves in because being victims of racial discrimination and almost legal apartheid in this country.  There were many things that we supported at a proximal level that the institution had to be careful on how it responded to them because if you recall now Howard University received major appropriation from federal government for its support and maintenance.  So how do you do that?  You can't use university funds to promote it.  So you had to be very careful; and there were ways and there were strategies that we devised to accommodate it.   One of the ways was to encourage, for example, a non-violent action group, which Stokley and a number of them were involved in in pushing, wanted to be officially recognized as a campus organization.  Well, the process for being recognized involved endorsement by the student body, the student government.  Well, I worked hard to try to convince them that the strength remained in being outside of the institution, not inside the institution.  And the student government went along with my position that you can do anything that you wish and most of what you wish by remaining outside rather than coming under the strictures of university rules and regulations; and that was the decision that the student body made--the student government made, and I worked hard to try to convince them to do that. There were, for example, the religious groups that were affiliated with the university that, at times, wanted official recognition and offices and things on the campus.  And again, I worked hard to convince them that their strength was in being free and independent and not under university regulation.
Story_ID: 187918
Speaker 1: We were just discussing the state-supported schools that felt, I guess, that pressure, that state money--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Well, you had the political pressure.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You had the governor and the legislature pressuring the leaders at those institutions, those presidents to take that kind of drastic action to short circuit those students and their activities.--(Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --There is a well-known case of Southern University [Carbondale, Illinois], right?  You remember the case of Southern, where the president actually dismissed a large number of students--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yes, large number of students.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --for being involved in sit-ins.
Speaker 2: And they had in a many number of schools, but I still feel even to this day, there are certain types of groups that serve their interests best by remaining completely free of the university, where you have the freedom to come, and move, and go unencumbered by rules, regulations, and procedures.  All you have to do is obey the law; other than that, you can function.
Story_ID: 187919
Speaker 1: Now, would you say that that was the biggest crisis--student crisis that Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] faced, when [Armour J.] Blackburn had to struggle?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Unclear) well, that certainly was one, but we had several major protests.  That was one of those--others occurred in the early 70s [1970], and then we had some even toward the late '80s [1980] for one reason or another.  Some had to do with the recommended or proposed changes in the curriculum to establish mandatory courses in African American history or studies--other kinds of factors, I don't recall all of them at this point, but Howard has been--let me tell of one of the student leaders at Howard used to say and they documented it in a video and they would play this video for the freshman as they came in orientation and the student body president was seen saying, "At Howard University, students are revolutionary and they must be prepared to act in a revolutionary fashion," and that was part of the freshman orientation, the student government portion when they would have the student--the freshman; and many students that came to Howard viewed themselves as leaders, number one, and they see themselves as agents for change; and they present themselves that way, they act that way.  And if you look back at the history of the university, you will see that an awful lot of those leaders came from Howard University; and Howard was the focal point for much of the concern.  Even not too long ago when they had the Affirmative Action case before the Supreme Court, the Howard students organized and mobilized with other students from other historically black colleges, marched from the Howard campus to the Supreme Court with ban and everything--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Just this spring--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --to protest, just--on the day that they were having a hearing.  So Howard students see themselves in that light and they project themselves in that light.  And they certainly have for the forty-five years that I have been identified with the institution.  And I think that's one of the things that makes the institution so great.
Story_ID: 187920
Speaker 1: Do you have any reflections on some of the activists at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], for instance, Stokely Carmichael or Kwame Ture I mean? What he is like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who?  Stokely?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What was your personal reflection of him?
Speaker 2: Stokely was a very bright, articulate student, very capable, and affable, very likeable.  And one of the things I remember most about him and liked most about him was that he could disagree with you, and the disagreement could be in a gentlemanly fashion.  He and I didn't always see eye to eye on things, particularly as it related to the university, but we never had a disagreement that erupted into any kind of personal animosity.  We remained friends throughout; and when Stokely was in town, I would go to his rallies and would make a point of seeing him, and when he was around campus, if he would see he would embrace and hug me.  H. Rap Brown, I did not get to know.  I'm not even certain that he ever enrolled as a student formally, but he was always here, and he would engage in football and other little activities on the field with others when he was around, but I didn't get to know him very well.  Courtland Cox, a very able, controlled, stately presence-type individual, for whom I always had the utmost admiration and respect and he reciprocated and in turn accorded me that Gerard Green in the law school, who gave them a fit there--in the law school, the same thing.  The interesting thing was that no matter the provocation, no matter the issue, no matter the level or intensity of the effort, they never refused to communicate with me.  And some of my warmest moments were in communicating one-on-one with them.  When the students took over the administration building, being the vice president for student affairs, again, I was the lead administer in communication, going back and forth, and in no time did the students ever deny me access to their inner circle.  At no time did they cut off communication directly with me.  If they blocked the building and I needed to communicate with them, the door was open for me.  I could go in and speak with them.  I could go to my office and function.  They would come to my office and talk to me.  We had a relationship that I think facilitated the resolution of a lot of the issues that we were wrestling with.  And I'm not saying it to boast.  This isn't a boastful presentation.  This is I think a manifestation of the respect that I had for them, and they in turn reciprocated and accorded me.  And I deeply appreciated it, and I can't remember all of the leaders, but even when Larry Henry, back before the big protest on the campus started, led the effort to integrate Glen Echo Amusement Park [Glen Echo, Maryland] and what have you, and was under great strain and pressure.  That never stopped Larry from being cordial, and respectful, and cooperating with university officials, many of whom supported everything he was doing, but could not do it as official representatives, but had to do it in their own individual capacity, so we had to walk that fine line.
Story_ID: 187921
Speaker 1: Well, there's a role for student agitation in terms of change that the student has a, I guess--would you agree the student has a brief opportunity to act in a, what would seem like a emotional way, you know, that you don't get when you get older--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --you're deal with young people--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you don't get that same chance.
Speaker 2: You're dealing with young people in the process of becoming.  They don't come here already as professionals, you know.  They haven't taken on all the behaviorism and characteristic of the professional.  They're young people in search of lifestyle, a career, an opportunity to make a difference, and you have to respect that, and I hope that I did in my working with them, and I think that I did, but I used to tell my colleagues the thing that we had to keep in mind was that these young people come to this institution primarily to get an education and ultimately to receive the emblem mater of the institution saying you're a certified graduate of Howard University and only we can give or grant that privilege--we're the only ones.  And if we can just become--if we can maintain our sense of proportion--if we can talk and relate to one another and work with them and trying to work through these issues, and be open enough to honestly acknowledge that frequently we don't know that this way is better than that way--that if we can do that ultimately we reach a point where we have an understanding, and the students can get back on track toward their ultimate goal, which is to be certified with the (unclear) as 100% graduate of this institution and only we have the authority to grant that, and I think most of my colleagues understood that, and so we were able to work through the very, very difficult circumstances.  I remember when the students were agitated for sits on the board of trustees.  They wanted first to have seats in the faculty in faculty meetings; and ultimately, the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] worked out an arrangements, where these things were done.  And we didn't lose anything as a result of it.  Our statue was not diminished because students and faculty members ultimately became members of the board of trustees.  Even to this day, this is the case.  There are student members in the board of trustees at Howard, faculty members in the board of trustees at Howard.  And I don't know whether the students are involved in the faculty level.  I really don't know because I'm not there now, but back then faculties--many of the faculties made arrangements to accommodate a few student representatives to sit in and engage the faculty in their meetings.  So there were many things that we could, and the university was responsive eventually because you have to work through these things.  Not everyone subscribes to that approach, but, ultimately, the university did and I think we became a stronger, more viable institution as a result of it.
Story_ID: 187922
Speaker 1: Now, your office, I guess, would approve, like, student activities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, as vice president of student affairs, I had responsibilities for admissions, the registrar, financial aid, student employment, student activities, the university center athletics, the career planning placement, the student judiciary, the--I'm sure--there were fifteen different departments that I had responsibility for--or major areas of university life.  And that caused me to be very much involved in most aspects of university life.  And on occasion, I even taught.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And in my capacity as an administrator, I always viewed myself as a teacher.  I would tell my staff, "You are a teacher first.  You must be prepared to share with your students at any tine, no matter the circumstance, whatever wisdom, understanding that you have that could further their development, so I always furthered my education.  And a buddy of mine, who used to work with me named Walter Hawkins, used to always refer to what he called, "that teachable moment."  He said, "that you have to be wise enough to know when that teachable moment presents itself, and you have to seize it to work with the person with whom you're engaged." So that's how I viewed myself, I'm a teacher first, no matter the title.  And sometimes students would get confused and say, "But you're the vice president of student affairs, you are the representative to the administration," I said, "No, no, no.  I'm hired by and paid by the administration.  I am an administrator; however, do I have a prospective and a mechanism to present that prospective that is often supportive of your views and your understanding of what university life should be?  Yes."  I bring that prospective to the table, but I am (unclear) student representative.
Speaker 1: Once again, a political science lesson.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, again that opportunity to teach; and I felt so keenly that that was my role, that was my role, and I enjoyed my work immensely.
Story_ID: 187923
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever have as a--in terms of student activities, was there ever a time when you thought a certain activity just wasn't a good idea?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --wasn't quite up to stump?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --wasn't a good idea, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes, many, many times.
Speaker 1: It doesn't necessarily have to be political.--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Case and point when they would plan for homecoming activities and they were gonna have a variety show.  And you always had that tendency to go a little over the edge, to go a little more risque or even vulgar; and you felt that that was not the appropriate thing to do.  Well, you say to yourself, how do you deal with that?  Well, I would engage the student.  I would say, now, if your mother was out there--if your mother was sitting in the audience, would you want your mother to hear you say what you said now, or would you want your mother to see what you're doing now, or what about other people?  And I would engage them and try to get them to make an adjustment and most often they would, but you always knew in the back in your mind that when the lights went down, and the curtain up, they went out on the edge of the stage, you didn't know what was going to happen.
Speaker 1: It was live, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.  It was live, and you just had to sit there, and keep your fingers, eyes, and toes, legs crossed and hope for the best.  And I would say nine times out of ten, they didn't fail me--nine times out of ten, but you leave it to them.  You have to turn it around, and let them realize, you know, it's not your job to censor, self-censorship is the best form.
Speaker 1: So they're not just embarrassing the university, but they're embarrassing themselves in terms of everything.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's the way we work through it.  And I thought there was a form of teaching--there was an opportunity to teach because I knew I couldn't stop it if they got out there; and they did it.  And we weren't in a position to throw them out or to censor them, you know, you create more problems than we had before, so you just had to work with them and encourage them to do the right thing.  I always told them whatever activities they elected to engage, should be conducted on a level that reflected the added ingredient of a college-level student that made any person who viewed it, say this is better because of the experience--because of their college experience, having been a part of this.  This is made better because of that, rather than just have something, you know, just for the hell of it--make it better, and it goes back to what I said to you before, you know, you don't achieve excellence by practicing mediocrity.  Always shoot for excellence, and this is something that I learned as a young person, and has maintained me throughout my life and my professional career.
Story_ID: 187924
Speaker 1: Now, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I think I mentioned to you that since retiring from the university, I've been very much involved in what is called The Kappa Scholarship Endowment Fund, which I help my fraternity develop locally, that is, to raise funds for scholarship for needy students who are graduates of District of Columbia public high schools.  We have been somewhat successful in that effort, having raised an endowment now that exceeds a $1,200,000.00 and we are awarding about $50,000 to $55,000 or $60,000 dollars a year in accrued interest.  I feel very strongly that maybe growing out the help that I got when I went to school and the help that I've gotten all through my life, that we have an obligation to try to help young people who want to better themselves through education, to get that education.  That's one thing.  I am very, very concerned that we--I don't want to say that we've lost, but we're close to losing the battle for the black, young male.  I saw this emerging back in the early '80s [1980s] when I would observe the buses that came to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] with the students who were coming to visit the campus to decide whether or not they wanted to come to the university; and when they would disembark from the buses, year after year, I started seeing fewer and fewer black males, more and more women.  And I noticed that in terms of the enrollment at the university that college and after college--at that time, we had seventeen or eighteen schools and colleges, every year, one or two would go from being majority male to majority female. And to this day, I could be wrong because I don't have all the data before me, but I believe every school and college at Howard University is majority female, including Medicine, Dentistry, Law, Religion, all of them are majority female.  And you could see something was happening, the black males were disappearing.  They weren't even getting to the senior graduating period in high school, and this was a great concern of ours.  And I can't sit here and pretend that I have the formula or that I know what has to be done.  I know that what we have to do is put our shoulders to the wheel with all of us who have capacity to assist to reach out and try to work with these young people and to save them, and to keep them in school, so at least they have the opportunity to go on.  If they don't get to that point, there is no opportunity to go on.  Like I said, I don't have a magic formula, but you lower your bucket where you can, and my case along with the numbers of fraternity, we've lowered our bucket to work with the youngsters in various programs of tutorials, scholarships, and that sort of thing, hoping that it makes a difference, and one of the greatest satisfaction derived from all of this occurred on October the 26th when we had our 20th Anniversary fundraising gala and we brought back the very first student to whom we gave a scholarship to speak the 700 guest assembled.  And he, not only reminded us that he grew up in a project, that he had no idea that he could go to college, but he got a scholarship from us, he went to Howard University, majored in Business, graduated, got a master's degree at another institution, took a CPA exam, passed it, became a vice president at Verizon, the telephone situation, and now is a vice president of a private telecommunications firm here in this area.  You don't know if your little money did that much, but you'd like to think that it did.  You'd like to think that it helped.  And you can't say that he did it because of it or in spite of it, but you do get some satisfaction in the belief that somewhere along the line that helped him to realize his potential.   And so that's what I do now, and that's what I enjoy doing.  And I have devoted I guess the rest of my, you know, useful life to.
Story_ID: 187925
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would have done differently when you look back on it all?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I've thought about that before.  I can't say that I would do anything differently.  I've made mistakes, but I can't say that if I went back and had the same set of circumstances, that I would have decided differently.  I've been fortunate in terms of my own emotional make-up in the sense that I don't fret about water that has gone over the dam.  I try to bring to a situation the best intellect available, all of the concerns and the issues that have to be weighed, and make the decision that I think is the best.  And once I do that, I can live with it.  If I realize, however, that my decision may have been a mistaken one, I don't have any trouble whatsoever in going back to the source and say, "Can we rethink that?  Can we take another look at that?  I think that maybe we went the wrong direction on that. I have a problem with that."   Therefore--I think I attribute that to my emotional make-up, you know.  I don't know what a psychologist would call it, but I can live with my decision because I don't harbor any ill-will toward anyone.  I don't have any hatred towards--hatred is an expensive thing.  It destroys the inner being, and I don't' have time for that. I used to tell my staff that you don't have to like a person to work with a person, you don't have to love a person to work with a person, you just have to do the job that the university hired you to do, and that is to try to help reach that student and bring out from that student all the potential that he or she possesses.  That's what your job is.  And if a student is entitled to something--just like when we had student protest--there were some staff members who wanted us to withdraw scholarship support from those students who were occupying the building.  There was nothing in the regulations that said, "If you misbehave or judged to have misbehave, you will lose your scholarship."  In the absence of that, forget that.  He's got the scholarship, he's entitled to scholarship.  If he's entitled to it, he has it.  Let him have it, and when you are judging him, you judge him for a scholarship.  You judge him on the criteria that are available there.  You don't go back and say, "Well, I can recall"--if that's not part of the criteria, then that should not be part of the equation in reaching it.  And when you do that, you project a sense of fairness that allows people who don't agree with you to at least reach the conclusion that we may not agree, but I think that what you did was honest and fair.
Story_ID: 187926
Speaker 1: Do you have any brief reflections you can share on some of the presidents of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.]?--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Presidents of Howard?
Speaker 1: Nabrit [James Madison Nabrit, Jr.], [HM] James Cheek, [HM] Joyce Ladner.
Speaker 2: The--well, those with whom I worked?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Um, there was Dr. [Mordecai Wyatt] Johnson, who in my estimation, is probably one of the most amazing educators to ever live and operate in the United States.  Dr. Johnson had a capacity to--a speaking ability that was nothing short of astounding.  He was an orator of the first rank.
Speaker 1: Now, Johnson was president during what time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --President in (unclear) 1958 to 1960, my last two years.  I'll never forget.  When I first came here, three or four days after I arrived, the dean of women passed away, and she had been sick with cancer for some time.  She died.  And one of the first events that I went to where Johnson was a speaker was her funeral; and I had never heard such a spellbinding orator in my life.  Dr. Johnson looked over the casket and said, "Sister Sadie," her name was Sadie Yancy [ph.], "rise up sister Sadie and take your place among the saints," and he went on and delivered this oration, and I kept looking up at the casket thinking Sadie just might get up the way he was carrying on, but Johnson had a vision for this institution and developed this institution to a first rate institution.
Story_ID: 187828
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about Dr. Nabrit [Dr. James Madison Nabrit, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Dr. Nabrit, the gifted orator, was a man of great presence, who smoked a big cigar, and he dressed well, and he had a kind of down-home Texas drawl that was very engaging and he was very insightful and piercing, and the, as I said, there was a hiatus in his administration because he left after a year or after becoming president to go to the United Nations as ambassador and then he came back and so he had to pick after.  And at the time he came back, we were in a state of turmoil and so he had engage that, and I'll never forget what he said that he would do nothing to cause harm--to bring harm to any student at that university by calling the police and what have you to come to that campus to put that a student protest, that he had devoted to civil rights, and that he was not going to engage in that at this point.  And I have a very personal thing about Nabrit that affected me, again, going to back to how you helped.  When Nabrit named as acting dean when Dr. [Armour J.] Blackburn became ill and it was going to about six months into that, and it was about time for Dr. Blackburn to come back, and my advisor at the University of Maryland [College Park, Maryland], while I was doing my doctorial work, called me to tell me the time was just about expiring for me to complete my doctorial work, and I needed to get busy.  I decided to go to Dr. Nabrit while I was still in that capacity of acting dean to see if he would be willing to grant me leave of absence to finish my doctorate; and I did that.  He said, "Yes, how much time do you need?"  And I said, "I know I'm going to need a minimum of six months."  He said, "Well, as soon as Dr. Blackburn returns," he said, "you are granted six months leave from your position."  And I left his office, got out into his secretary's area and it hit me, how you gonna to make it?  You don't have any money.  If you're gonna on a leave, you won't have a salary.  How you gonna get along?  So I turned around and I said to his secretary, Ms. Newman, I said, "Ms. Newman, may I see the president again?"  So she buzzed him and said, "Mr. Anderson wants to see you again."  I walked into his office, and before I could open my mouth, he said, "You need your money, don't you?"  I said, "Yes, sir."  He said, "You have full salary for six months."  And so, again, we don't make it in this world alone, we get help all along the way, some of it known, some of it unknown, but we get help all along the way.
Story_ID: 187829
Speaker 1: And Dr. Cheek [HM Dr. James E. Cheek] came in 1969, and the very first day that he took over as president, I got a call from his secretary that said the president would like to see you in his office tomorrow morning.  I said, "Fine."  I went to his office the next morning.  He informed that he was going to restructure the administration of the university and that he was creating a position called, "Vice President for Student Affairs," and he was offering me that position.  I had never met the president before, so I figured that Dr. Nabrit and other people must have said something to him or Dr. Blackburn said something to him for him to do that because I did not even know Dr. Cheek, and Dr. Cheek offered me a position.  I said, "Dr. Cheek," I said, "I'm very grateful, and two things that I would like to do.  One, I'd like to talk it over with my wife,"  I said, "just as importantly I want to know what this means in terms of Dr. Blackburn's position," who was the dean of students.  What does this mean?  I said, "Dr. Blackburn has been my guide and mentor for these many years and I said, "I would not want to come in any situation where his statue is diminished by my so called promotion," and he said, "You don't have to worry about that."  He said, "Dr. Blackburn has indicated that he wishes to retire."  And so the next day, I called the president and told him that I would be glad to accept the position.  And I worked with Dr. Cheek for twenty years.  Dr. Cheek was a man or is a man of considerable vision.  He has a broad view of education and the role that African Americans ought to be playing in it.  And he articulates it extremely well, and when he came to the university, he sought to put that into play and I was pleased to be part of that team.  And the thing that I like most about him was once he gave you your charter and your assignment, he allowed you to do it, and he supported you and he got the resources necessary to enable you to achieve your objectives.  So I had the privilege of working with three truly outstanding educators.
Story_ID: 187830
Speaker 1: Sir, when you look back on the things that you have done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think that I was fortunate enough to arrive at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] at a time when I could and I think I did make a lasting impact on the development of greater student freedoms and involvement of student in the life and development of the institution.  I worked hard to involve students in every aspect of university life, so that they would be exposed across the spectrum of university life, that they could contribute to it, and feel a part of it, and responsible for it.  I restructured student government; I restructured student life; I restructured student activities.  And even to this very day, the former students with whom I have the greatest relationship, they were those who were there with me at that time when we worked together to strengthen the student's role in the development of the institution.  Remember we were coming out of a more traditional kind of heavy lifting of parietals and to move those over, and to substitute them with a sense of personal responsibility and commitment to do what you know is right to do.  That takes a lot of selling, and fortunately Dr. Blackburn and Dr. Nabrit, and eventually, Dr. Cheek were right there and willing to give me the kind of support that I needed to help move those programs.  And I believe that's it.  The students at Howard are involved in every dimension of university life routinely, and that's what we did, working to preserve freedom of the press, working to preserve freedom of expression, working to preserve the freedom of organization and to getting together to organize to conduct activities, working together to have speakers of your choice--working together--all these kinds of things; serving on the board of trustees, working with faculty.  If there is a legacy, I think that's it.
Story_ID: 187831
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  That's a little difficult.  What I would say that a person who gave his best.  I gave my best.  When I had a challenge before me, the challenge was to deal with it.  And I never flinched because I thought honesty and integrity were the cornerstones to any lasting achievement, and so I approached the assignment with an openness, with honesty, with integrity, with a willingness to elicit from others a point of view, and a willingness to honestly consider them, and also with the foreknowledge that I didn't always know what was best.  And so if we can work together to fashion a resolution that had the potential to evolve into something that was bigger than us, then that was what we would shoot for.  And I'd like to think that is what others will think that I tried to do.
