Story_ID: 493171
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're gonna start by slating.  My name is Adrienne Jones and I am the interviewer.  Neculai Burghelea is the videographer.  Sir, if I could get you to state your name and to spell it, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Maurice Ashley, M-A-U-R-I-C-E, A-S-H-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Can I get you to tell me the date of your birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born March 6, 1966 in Saint Andrews, Jamaica [Saint Andrew Parish, Jamaica], in the West Indies.
Speaker 1: Today is September 18, 2007.  And if you mi- if you don't mind telling us the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're in Park Slope, Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an international grandmaster of chess.
Story_ID: 493172
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna start out by asking you five People magazine-ish type questions.  I'll ask the question, you just respond with whatever comes to mind.  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Favorite food.  Hm, the first thing that sprung to mind is a Jamaican breakfast called ackee and saltfish, ackee is A-C-K-E-E.  Most Americans have never heard of it but when my mother [Thelma Cormack] makes some ackee and saltfish with some roast bread fruit, fried bananas, fried dumplings it's on, nothing like it.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: You know, it used to be absolutely, unquestionably summertime but summer in New York [New York] is nothing like summer in Jamaica.  And so now summertime is getting really, really hot for me, the humidity is terrible.  So I would say springtime when the promise of summer is here.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have a favorite color.  I don't think I have a favorite color.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I've been a lot of places for chess, I've traveled a lot of places, so I get a vacation with my job so to speak, you know, 'cause I just get to travel so, to so many different places.  But maybe my favorite place I've been to, most spiritual is Iceland, just a, an amazing place, very raw, very natural, still has a number of geysers, and the earth seems like it's just being made perpetually.  So, Iceland springs to mind as a, as a favorite spot.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite phrase?  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I have a favorite phrase, beginning with what the--?  (Laughter) But, but, I, I, I think I, I think I probably don't.  I mean, I think I do but I can't tell you what it is, I don't know, I'm sure my wife [Michele Ashley-Johnson] could tell us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But maybe if you think of it later--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you could tell us.
Story_ID: 493173
Speaker 1: We wanna start by talking about your family background.  I'd like to start with your mother.  If you could tell us your mother's name and where she was born?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Thelma Jeanne Cormack [Thelma Cormack], Thelma, T-H-E-L-M-A, L-M-A, yeah, and Jeanne, N-E, J-E-A-N-N-E, and Cormack, C-O-R-M-A-C-K.  She was born in Jamaica also.
Speaker 1: Where in Jamaica did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Saint Ann [Saint Ann Parish, Jamaica], county of Saint Ann but then moved to Kingston [Jamaica] with her family very early on.  Most significantly, I mean included in this is my grandmother, Irma Cormack, her mom, because my grandmother is the one who raised us when we were young.  So Irma, I-R-M-A, was a huge part of my family history.
Speaker 1: So maybe we'll talk about Irma and then we'll talk about Thelma.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you know where Irma was born and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: Irma I believe was also Saint Ann in Jamaica.  She, I don't know where she grew up, I am not really as familiar with her history as she grew up.  She was a teacher, taught for many, many years and had had her seven children, one of them being my mother.  Two of them passed at very young ages, one at birth and the other at twelve years old.  And then so it's my mother and my four uncles that I, that I remember coming from Irma.  Very strong-willed woman, had to be, and just took care of the family.
Speaker 1: So did she tell you any stories about when she was a young person?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother when she was already up in age, let's see, she was born in 1904, and she was very fair-skinned, much like my mother.  I think she had some Scottish background in her, but I'm not quite sure really where the name Cormack comes from.  But she was I said fair-skinned.  And she didn't regale us with too many stories of her, of her youth.  Her tendency was to tell ghost stories.  And so she loved to scare the mess out of us with what in Jamaica are called duppies instead of ghosts.  And she would tell a lot of duppy stories about people going into cemeteries and, and policemen who, who ride in those little three wheel things that, that all of them are duppies (laughter).  So she would just scare the mess out of us and tell us about ghost stories on a regular basis.  And she had, she had a very sort of armageddon type personality, like the world was always gonna come to an end if you didn't do the right thing, so she kept us in line with all her stories about, about, you know, bad things that were gonna happen if you didn't work, if you didn't act right.
Speaker 1: Do you have an example of something that you might have not done that she indicated the world might end and so therefore--
Speaker 2: No, you know, she'd whip you if you didn't do the right thing (laughter).  I, I got beatings regularly (laughter).  So back in Jamaica capital punishment is law (laughter) as opposed to against the law.  So, you know, you got your, you got, I got my fair share of beatings from her for various things.  I remember one year, the reason I lived with my grandmother is because my mother came to America, to New York [New York], when I was two years old, she left the three of us, my brother [Devon Cormack] and my younger sister [Alicia Ashley], in the care of my mother, of my grandmother in 1968.  The U.S. had opened up immigration laws at the time to people of the Caribbean and my mother took advantage of the opportunity to come here and work and she left us in my grandmother's care while she was here working for the next ten years.  So, you know, she had to keep us in line and here was this woman who was sixty-four years old taking care of three kids her, her, her daughter's three children and by herself, I mean there was an uncle, one of my uncles helped out and they tried to watch over us, but they weren't living with us, they had their own families and stuff.  So she, she just had to do what she had to do.  And I remember getting my last beating when she was seventy-four years old so she was still taking, giving us that discipline.
Story_ID: 493174
Speaker 1: I remember one occasion my mother [sic. Ashley's maternal grandmother, Irma Cormack] had sent down us notes in a book, sorry, she had sent down blank notebooks for school.  And instead of me saving the notebooks for school, I decided I was gonna draw in the notebooks so when the summer ended and it was time for school there were no notebooks, so that really upset her great- greatly (laughter) and she got out the belt, started beating me, I ran outside away, ran, trying to run away from her, she chased me outside the door into the yard and at the time we lived on a compound where there were two homes and we lived in the front one and another family lived in the back one and they had three dogs, and the dogs heard the beating and got very excited, ran up to me and started barking all around me and one of them jumped up and bit me on my ear and my ear started bleeding and that's when my grandmother stopped (laughter) and decided okay, the kid's in trouble.  And they started talking about whether I need the tetanus shots and should I go to the doctor, all kinds of nonsense.  In the end I didn't get any tetanus shots, and she considered it just punishment for my not having those schoolbooks.
Speaker 2: Your grandmother was older so I take it that you didn't know any of her other relatives besides your, her children, your uncle, the four uncles (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, those, the relatives I knew were not her age.  Her, she didn't live with her husband at some point, they broke up at, at some point during their, after, right after the kids, their kids were all born, or at some age, I don't remember exactly when but they had broken up, so I didn't know my grandfather.  And I don't recall any sisters of hers or anything like that, it was not where my family memories are, they're all with my uncles.
Speaker 2: How would you describe your grandmother if you needed to describe her to someone else?
Speaker 1: My memory of her is as being stern.  I don't recall her being playful; she was a very serious woman.  She was a, a teacher who valued education and thought that it was important that that that we get a great education and so she taught us a number of things when we were young.  I remember being very advanced in school for any class I was in I knew the stuff long before the other kids knew 'cause she taught us everything at a very early age.  So she was, you know, she was a willful women and she had to be quite strong to hold the family together with all her kids and then the grandkids that she was taking care of.
Speaker 2: And how do you think that she knew what to, information to provide you and your siblings with?
Speaker 1: She just gave what she thought was important.  She, she didn't worry about anything else.  She knew what was up for her and she, this was important, this what you're gonna get.  And so she just taught us straight--and plus all her training as a teacher this came natural, you know, that she would just teach the things that you're supposed to know when you go to school.  And, and I, that stayed with me, the idea of teaching kids before they go to school instead of waiting for school to teach your kids to, to pass that on very early so that they have the basics before they walk into school.
Speaker 2: And do you have a sense of where your grandmother was educated for her profession?
Speaker 1: Not at all.  Not at all.  I don't know much about her, in fact.
Story_ID: 493175
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit more about your mother, Thelma [Thelma Cormack].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How would you describe her?
Speaker 2: She's cut in very much in the mold of my, my grandmother [Irma Cormack] as far as certain seriousness and, and purposefulness.  But I, her sense of humor is different and she laughs easily, in many ways at silly things she'll laugh.  But she love, she loves to, to have a bit more fun I think.  But a very hard worker.  When she has a plan, she's gonna stick with it to the very end until it's proven--until it concludes, and she's gonna make it work.  Very much a, a visionary, you know, she's, she, she decided she would come here by herself away from her children which is to me the most difficult decision any person could make in their lives.  And, and work to bring us up and it took her ten difficult years taking care of other people's kids at first before finding a, a regular office job.  And, you know, but she did it, she did it and she made it work.  So very, very willful in that way.  But a big, also a big proponent of education as, as topnotch, as a priority.
Speaker 1: Did your mother tell you any stories about her upbringing with her s- I guess, what's that now, five brothers and sisters who actually survived and then--
Speaker 2: She grew up with four brothers.
Speaker 1: Four--
Speaker 2: She has four brothers, there are five of them, the four brothers plus her and the two who passed.  No, no, we don't have a lot of stories from back then.  There's, there's, there's not many that I, no, I, I can't even say I recall anything significant.  One of the problems with living away from a parent is that you don't become as close to that parent as a young person, and you don't get a lot of their youthful stories until you're a bit older and you less appreciate the stories because you're older and you're not even that interested 'cause you're teenager now and you're into teenage things.  So I started living with my mother when I was twelve, and by that time you're already thinking, that's the age when you're thinking about your peers much more so than your parent.  I had to scratch and beg to get details about her relationship with my father [Frank Ashley] for example, 'cause they separated at a very early time for me when I was only one years old.  So, that, the past is not like necessarily her favorite topic.
Story_ID: 493176
Speaker 1: And do you have a sense of the assessment that she [Ashley's mother, Thelma Cormack] made when she decided to come to the United States and work?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, she was, she was desperate, she felt it was necessary.  It's like this is something she had to do because we were not gonna leave our situation, we're gonna be stuck in a poor--Jamaica at the time was, it's, it's still a poor country but was extraordinarily poor.  And she felt that her (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Nineteen sixty-eight [1968]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], Jamaica, yeah.
Speaker 1: Or late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Late '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: And do you have any sense of what events put Jamaica in that position at that time, I mean, loosely, just sort of loosely explain.
Speaker 2: Well, Jamaica was, was colonized by the British up until 19- Jamaican friends are gonna kill me, but either '61 [1961] or '62 [1962].  And that colonization as you can imagine, you know, keeps the, the Brit- the British didn't do a dramatic amount to make Jamaica fabulous, if you will.  Not a lot of, you know, colonies benefited tremendously depending on the colony, depending on what they could provide with the host country.  So Jamaica had some bauxite, which could be made into aluminum, but Jamaica never had the capacity to make it into aluminum to really make money.  So, we ended up having to sell the ore itself which was much cheaper than the aluminum which was used then to make planes and other things.  So, with the, with the dearth of natural resources that, that were compelling, like oil for example, Jamaica just didn't have that much and then you get, then it turned into a service economy in which it took, it's taken the country a lot of years to try to turn itself over into, so that's what it is.
Speaker 1: And do you have any knowledge about why immigration to the United States opened up in the late '60s [1960s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was just, well, I can't tell you--
Speaker 1: For Jamaicans?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't tell you the real political reason so to speak, but at the time, immigration, they had a much more open door immigration policy, the United States did, to Europeans and that became a contentious issue at some point in the '60s [1960s].  Also there were, there was a desire as England loosened its feel of the colonies, right, 'cause, because now everybody was gaining independence back at that time.  You know, the United States had such close neighbors that it made sense to, to have a friendly relationship with them.  So I imagine that was part of it too just to, to mine the best of the best from the islands because, you know, natural people resources are always a good thing you get the most hardworking and intelligent and industrious coming from the islands to the country and then they're of benefit to your society.
Story_ID: 493177
Speaker 1: And do you have a sense of what your mother's [Thelma Cormack], how your mother's plan unfolded?  Did she know anyone who lived in New York [New York], you know, just any sense of sort of how she came to place herself to start doing what sounded like childcare--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then later working in an office?
Speaker 2: Well, friends in Jamaica were already beginning to make the move, people were discussing it and when the opportunity opened up everyone was talking about: "Is this something we should do?"  Other islands were already getting in on it.  So, she saw it as an opportunity for herself and she had a friend who came ahead of her.  So she knew she would have somebody here she could always talk to but she didn't really know anyone seriously and New York was just a completely new experience for her.  She was already twenty-eight years old?  Yeah, twenty-eight years old, so she was young enough to feel like, you know, let me give it a shot and see what happens, let me make this thing work.  It was funny, I say funny, and the odd thing happened to her, she came, she came here on April 3rd, 1968, and the very next day April 4th--like so she's, she's here, it's like a dream come true, it's amazing, she's arrived here in New York, here in the United States, ready to, to start building a life so she can bring her kids over, and then the very next day Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] is assassinated.  And she said she was just thinking, oh my god, I cannot believe that I came to this country, that such a cruel thing could happen.  And, and she said it was tough, you know, just thinking that she, she's gotta move on and first of all you're in a new place, so you don't even understand how the culture is taking such a shock.  Dr. King had actually visited Jamaica, I believe it was the year before, and talked about the opportunities here, and, and talked about equal rights and all that.  So, he had been an inspiration to Jamaicans too.  So to come and just have that cut off immediately was quite a shock for her but she kept on keeping on.
Speaker 1: And did her work in the United States make a, have a significant impact on your life in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely.  She would send money down, I was, we're, the name is barrel children, you know, you're a barrel child because barrels, making barrels and they stuff them, big barrels, I mean, talking, five feet tall--
Speaker 1: I've seen one actually (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  And you, you stuff 'em full of flour and, and all kinds of food and, and notebooks and toys, and whatever you could, and you could get together and you just ship it down.  And, and Mama, what we called our grandmother [Irma Cormack], gets 'em and open it up and here's something that we have extra food, and, and supplies.  So, yeah, it, it definitely made a dent, but it wasn't making us rich for sure, the neighborhoods we, we lived in were quite poor.
Story_ID: 493178
Speaker 1: Can you tell me your father's name and do you know where he was from?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Frank Ashley.  And he was also from Jamaica.  He lived in a different parish, but I don't know which one.
Speaker 1: And do you know any stories about your father?  You indicated that you know very little, so I don't (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My father and I now have a great relationship, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Fantastic.
Speaker 2: I know some stories.  His mother, my grandmother, Olive Spence [ph.], she was another tremendous woman, had a number of kids, all my uncles, who I was not as close to, and aunt, uncles and aunts, she had more children than my, than my maternal grandmother [Irma Cormack].  And she was another strong-willed woman.  We would get to visit her from time to time 'cause she knew of her grandkids.  And another one, very much in the mode of education matters, always checking to see if we knew our math and our timetables and stuff like that.  Very, also a bi- great sense of humor.  She was big on laughing and having a good time with the grandkids.  But my, oddly for my moth- for my father, he was not a Spence, which, you know, it's just similar to my sister and I not being Cormacks, my mother's last name is Cormack [Thelma Cormack], and that was her family name.  My last name is Ashley because my father's last name is Ashley and they weren't married.  So, so we were sort of like, we're outsiders my sister [Alicia Ashley] and I from the Cormack clan because they're all Cormacks and we're Ashleys, right.  And then my father on top of it is also an outsider from the Spence clan because his mother had a child through another Ashley as opposed through her bigger family, which was Spences when she--she had him first, him and, and, no only him as a matter of fact, and then didn't have another relationship with that, with that man, another child by that man and had a bunch of Spences.  So, so like the Ashley there was this small window, we don't know really know much about the rest of the Ashleys, who the Ashleys are, I'm sure I have tons of cousins I'm, that I would just walk right past on the street in Jamaica.  But, but he also ended up going to boarding school when he was a young man.  And so he, it furthered his feeling of feeling like an outsider, but he went to, I think it was Catholic boarding school and ended up really pursuing his education in a big way and pretty intelligent guy.
Story_ID: 493179
Speaker 1: So did you have contact with your father [Frank Ashley]?  When you said that your, your parents broke up, I took, I interpreted that in the wrong way, and thought that perhaps you didn't know your father, but when your mother [Thelma Cormack] left to came to, come to the United States did you spend time with your father--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: --while you were living in Jamaica?
Speaker 2: The sequence of it is that they had a relationship, like he was married and had two children, then he had a relationship with my mother and had two children and which were my, myself and my sister [Alicia Ashley].  My mother had a prior relationship which was my older brother, Devon [Devon Cormack].  So I actually have two brothers and two sisters.  The only full brother--or the only full sibling I have is my sister, the younger one, which was my father's child with my mother.  The other, my older, oldest brother was my mother's, had a prior, previous relationship, my mother.  And the other two is my father's, from marriage from this, to woman, that's brother, sister then brother.  So, so, he lived with us for maybe the first year of my life approximately, lived with my mother and then they broke up.  And even though--not only did they break up, but he came to America first, and then a year or so later, she came to America.  But then he would visit us often, he would come down and he had a big transformation in his life, he, he went back to his Catholic roots and, and found religion and truly transformed himself as a person.  And, 'cause he used to mess around in terms of gambling and drinking and stuff, you know, and, and then he just, everything, just changed his whole life and found religion and just went on the straight and narrow from then on.  And, so he would visit us, he would visit us frequently but he would travel around the world, he was a dancer, he was a professional dancer; he danced with Martha Graham [Martha Graham Dance Company].  And so he would travel all around and go to Australia.  I remember vividly when he went to Australia and came back with a, a boomerang and I was like, what is this, you know.  So it, that impact, I remember that early impact having a big influence on my life, the few times I saw him and the artifacts he would bring back would inspire me and later, when I became a traveler myself, it was great to be able to go to all these different countries, it reminded me of what my dad used to do.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Another serious brother.  Incredibly smart, incredibly intellectual, funny, at the same time, great sense of humor, loves to laugh loud, big and loud, and, but also incredibly spiritually centered, great sense of, of and I don't mean religious, I mean spiritual.  So, very grounded.  I take after him in a big way.  Of, of all the children, the, his four children, I'm most like him in that that centeredness, that spiritual grounding, just, you know, you take life for what it is, you go with the flow, you, you look for hidden meanings, you look for deeper meaning I should say and that's what he's about.  And, and very worldly.  Learned different languages, taught himself French, taught himself Spanish.  Very, a very international person.  A world citizen if you will.  Loves to play games a lot.  Taught us games too, taught us a lot of card games, a lot of--.  He taught us dominoes; cards; Ludi, which is a Jamaican game; he'd teach us card games from countries he'd been to.  And then when we visited him when we were in this country, he'd, we'd visit him once a week and he would show us these new games, one game was called kings from Belgium and so he really gave us a sense of the rest of the planet.
Speaker 1: And so when your father came to the U.S. he also came to New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was already in New York, too.
Speaker 1: And I just wanted to ask a couple more questions about your [paternal] grandmother, Olive Spence [ph.].  Did you know anything about her upbringing?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  No.
Speaker 1: And was she also a teacher?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  No, I don't have--I have no idea.
Story_ID: 493180
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I have a horrible memory for a chess player by the way (laughter).  I have a hor- horrible memory for incidents for some reason, it's bad.  Earliest memory of growing up.  Probably the earliest one is being on the back of a van, a tr- a, a truck but not a big truck, with all our stuff in the back moving from, from St. James Avenue to Allamanda Avenue [Kingston, Jamaica].  And the very idea that I was moving from home, from a home that I had known to another home was scary.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I guess, I was seven.  Yeah, I guess I was seven.
Speaker 1: You've talked about a couple of breaks in your life, so I kind of would like to ask you to describe what your family life was like, perhaps starting as a babe when you were living with your mom [Thelma Cormack], and then explaining how she went away and going to your grandmother's [Irma Cormack] and just what exactly that was like for you?
Speaker 2: I have an earlier memory, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have an earlier memory of being beaten in a school by the teacher (laughter).  I remember, yeah, okay, so, her name was Ms. Black [ph.], big sister, and I had done something wrong in the classroom, I forget what it was, and she called me to the front of the classroom and told me to put my hand down and she got the ruler, beat my hand several times.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: It was before we moved, that's all I remember.  I must have been second grade, maybe I was six, I remember.  But getting that (gesture) that was rough, just getting hit flush on the hand several times for being bad.  So that's earlier.  Probably, probably the beatings I'll be able to trace the beatings all the way as the, as the real memory just (laughter)--.  I was a sensitive child, I hate, I hated it, that was the worst thing you could do to a child is hit the child and I knew that then too.  I remember when I was a kid saying, one of my, one of my, yeah, I remember, I remember I was ten years old, this is a little bit later, saying to myself, I cannot wait until I'm grown up and I have kids of my own, so I can show how you actually should treat children, and this is ten years old, this is like my promise.  And, and I, I like did what I planned to do.  I wanted to have two children.  I wanted to have a girl first, then a boy, it's like I knew this all was gonna happen, and I knew I never was gonna touch 'em, I was gonna treat 'em like angels, and exactly what happened.
Story_ID: 493181
Speaker 1: My mother [Thelma Cormack]--so I'm two years old, I don't remember my mother leaving, my brother said I cried at the airport as she left.  Of course, a two year old is gonna cry, what the heck.  So, she leaves to come here to make a living to bring us up, that's her big plan.  And so we end up staying in Jamaica living with my grandmother [Irma Cormack] and the three of us, my older brother, Devon, D-E-V-O-N [Devon Cormack], my younger sister, Alicia, A-L-I-C-I-A [Alicia Ashley].  And, so we live in Jamaica with my mother, I mean, my grandmother.  And, you know, as a young person there's a lot of play, you go- you're going to school, but then I get to finally go to first grade and go to school [Seaward Primary and Junior High School, Kingston, Jamaica], and, and that was the, the essence of it.  There wasn't any television in Jamaica.  TV in, in the early '70s [1970s] was two channels, both started at six o'clock, the news came on first for an hour so kids don't watch TV, I mean, it's gonna be late soon, you're gonna go to bed, so we learned to play a lot.  We were outside a lot playing any kind of game whether it was hopscotch, whether it was throwing rocks at each other 'cause we were stupid.  Interesting, Jamaica is one of the bigger islands in the Caribbean, so if you don't live near the water, you don't really see water, you're not a beach person, I didn't even learn to swim until I was eleven years old which is ridicu- you know, like an island you should learn how to swim before that.  I didn't learn how to swim until I almost drowned for the second time.  So, we played a lot of soccer which is big in Jamaica, cricket, running, racing, just running after each other, you know, tag, kind of sports, just things you could do as a boy, climbing, old gullies that were abandoned, just climbing in there and throwing rocks down and trying to avoid broken glass and stuff like that.  Just playing naturally, any game that came up.
Speaker 2: Did you and your siblings have any responsibilities around the house?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I had to wash dishes, I had to wash my own clothes.  I think that was it.  My grandmother did all the cooking.
Speaker 2: What about holidays?  Can you tell us which were the most important holidays in your house, and how were they spent?
Speaker 1: There were no holidays.  There are no seasons in Jamaica, at least not typical seasons as we, you know them here 'cause there's no winter.  Christmas was probably the most exciting time so to speak but Christmas came, there was a gift from my mother and that was it.  I don't--birthday, there were no real birthdays and stuff like that we just, the days pretty much passed.
Speaker 2: And could you describe what your neighborhood was like?  Like what was your house like, what was the block that you lived on like, or the area that you lived in?
Speaker 1: There were a lot of, Jamaica has a lot of one story houses, right, you don't build up houses where hurricanes can knock them down.  And there are no basements and stuff like that, so there's a lot of one story houses.  Where we lived was a very poor neighborhood, the houses were small, the streets weren't paved, streets were small, you could barely fit two cars on the street and that's all you could.  Even now I look at it, now when I go back and look it, I laugh like how do people drive down these streets.  But just, you know, just a lot of small homes basically.
Story_ID: 493182
Speaker 1: What sights and sounds and/or smells, that when you experience them, remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: The only thing that reminds me of growing up is my mother's cooking.
Speaker 1: What did your mother [Thelma Cormack] cook?
Speaker 2: No, I shouldn't say that.  Different things remind me, give me a sense of nostalgia.  What my mother cooks reminds me of what my grandmother [Irma Cormack] used to cook which is ackee, saltfish--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --dumplings, banana, yams, breadfruit, things like that, there's always a taste of home.  So my mother's cooking most reminds me of what Jamaica was like.  But from time to time if I see a mountain, if I drive by a mountain, I just recently went passed the Alleghenies in Pennsylvania, I see that I immediately remember the mountain back in Jamaica, not just the, you know, tall over, ours, our home, our final home.  And any time I see the sea, I see water and I'm immediately reminded of the last home I lived in in Jamaica 'cause I would turn on to my block and the sea would, Caribbean Sea would unfold in front of me.  Those are the three things I most vividly recall.  Even when I s- even when I live in Brooklyn [New York], and I go over the Brooklyn Bridge and I see water and I'm like, okay (laughter) and I just remember, I have flashbacks.
Story_ID: 493183
Speaker 1: Now, during the period of time that your mother [Thelma Cormack] was working in the United States, how often did she get a chance to come back, or did you all travel here to visit her?
Speaker 2: The reason we never traveled here is because we didn't have a visa to travel.  So, that was what she was, her plan was, the moment we could visit we were staying which is what we did when I turned twelve.  She visited once every year or so when she, she had a couple of weeks off.  So we would see her.
Speaker 1: And then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And always an event when she came.
Speaker 1: Wh- how, can you describe a little bit about it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Mummy as we called her was coming home and I think she was a complete stranger to me.  So it was always this exotic woman coming from afar who was trying to take care of us and who we knew was our mother, who we would write too in letters but, you know, you just didn't know her and she would come and she was there and, and Mama [Ashley's maternal grandmother, Irma Cormack] was my real mother, so, so there was this, this period of trying to get used to this person being in, being back and then just that fast she was gone.
Speaker 1: So when you became twelve, you and your brothers and sisters were all eligible for visas?
Speaker 2: She had been working on it the whole time so we would go to the immigration office and take pictures and get our passports and all, we spent time doing that.  And then finally when--it's not eligibility, it was, it was readiness on her part; she wasn't ready, she wasn't financially stable enough to bring us over, had an apartment to bring us into and all that, she just wasn't ready.  And the whole process took all that time too.  And maybe, maybe, maybe eligibility was a part of it too, maybe there was some legal eligibility like you had to be here for a while to prove that you were a good citizen so to speak, so maybe 'cause it's ten years, it sounds too precise, maybe that was part of the reason too.  I don't know, maybe you had to work for ten years to prove that you could bring the other people over.  I'll have to ask her when I talk to her.
Story_ID: 493184
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary s- I guess, I wanted to ask you about elementary school because you're still in Jamaica, but I guess now that we're still talking about your childhood, did you learn to play chess as a child?
Speaker 2: We played a lot of games like I said, we played a lot of games in Jamaica.  You didn't have any TV so you didn't have much to do, after school you find stuff to do.  So we played a lot of board games, Ludi, which is a chase game; you go around the board until one of you goes, gets all your men into heaven.  It's a very popular Jamaican game.  Checkers, which we called draughts, everybody played.  Dominoes was everywhere, the men sitting out back playing dominoes, drinking Red Stripe beer, listening to reggae music was every night in Jamaica, so we all learned how to play dominoes.  And then any other games that just happened to come our way, we'd just do it, you know, so you had some card games.  And somebody brought a chess board once, like hey, here's another one, let's play some chess.  And so we learned the rules pretty quick and then we just started playing, but nobody knew anything, they, they didn't know there were books and tournaments and grandmasters and stuff like that, so it was just another one of the games.
Story_ID: 493185
Speaker 1: Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Seaward elementary [Seaward Primary and Junior High School], Allamanda Avenue in Tower Hill [Kingston, Jamaica].  Pretty good school, pretty good school.  My favorite teacher, Ms. Guthrie [Vinnette Guthrie], was there.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about Ms. Guthrie.  How did she influence you?
Speaker 2: She was a sweet woman, she was sweet, she was kind, she loved her kids, she, you, you came to school to hug Ms. Guthrie, I mean, that was like the reason you went to school.  Ms. Guthrie was just a nice, sweet lady.  And, you know, just had a great sense of purpose about her children and teaching them the right things.  She really influenced my education a lot; that was fourth grade.
Speaker 1: In what ways did you feel her influence?
Speaker 2: It was in her love, it was in her love for the kids.  And she loved, she, thirty--I, I actually spoke to her recently which we're talking thirty years later, spoke to her on the phone and she remembered me still which is stunning for me, like you gotta be kidding.  But she just had that kind of feeling for her students.  And I was a very sharp child.
Speaker 1: But I mean what did you take from, from that love from her?
Speaker 2: That school was, you know, school was cool, school was important, school was fun, school was, was a warm, could be a warm, joyous experience as opposed to an alienating one, and a smart child is valued.  So, that was reinforced by my [maternal] grandmother [Irma Cormack] also, but it's something different when you're actually experiencing it with this, with the teachers.  'Cause I mean the very next grade school wasn't so much fun 'cause my, my teacher used to love hitting on (laughter) beating on me.  But, but not her, she was quite a special lady.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you in elementary school--
Speaker 2: I was always--
Speaker 1: --perhaps after Ms. Guthrie's class?
Speaker 2: Even before, I was always one of the top students in my class, always.  My grandmother helped out, so.  I was always one of the top students, I was always a sharp kid, I, I could do something, other kids would like be sick of--like, how could he do that?  I always knew my math, I was always the top student in the school.  Just always, you know, sharp but also a tremendously shy boy so I was, I wasn't one like one of the popular kids so to speak 'cause I was just--I knew a lot of stuff but I was shy.
Speaker 1: Were you well behaved?
Speaker 2: I think I was relatively (laughter) well behaved but, you know, I, a lot of school bored me, so I got in trouble for being talkative.  I still get in trouble for talking too much.  But, I got in trouble for being talkative because I, the school was boring mainly, you know, you didn't, it's like a lot of things like that's boring, that's, let's get on with it already, hurry up.  So I ended up talking a lot in class and getting beatings for it.
Speaker 1: As an elementary school student, did you have a sense of where you were going with your life?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did you have any idea what you thought you might wanna do when you grew up?
Speaker 2: Nope.  I had, I just wanted, I just lived day to day back then.
Speaker 1: And how long were you at your elementary school?  I'm sorry, I, I did not register the name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seaward, S-E-W-A-R-D [sic.].
Speaker 1: Seaward.  How long, how many years were you at Seaward?
Speaker 2: Three years.
Speaker 1: So that was from six perhaps?
Speaker 2: Third grade to fifth grade.  No, the previous elementary school I don't even, I don't remember too much from except a beat- another beating.
Speaker 1: Well, how old are you le- how old are you when you're leaving Seaward?
Speaker 2: I left Seaward when I was ten years old to go to Wolmer's Boys High School [Wolmer's Trust High School for Boys, Kingston, Jamaica], which you get into, there's a big test every year in Jamaica--it's, it's like the specialized high school, a specialized high school test here in New York [New York]--where every kid in the country takes this test at the end of fifth grade or during fifth grade and your score on that test determines which high school you get into around the country.  Wolmer's was one of the better high schools, one of the, one of the top public high schools in the country.  To get into Wolmer's meant everything, like your, it's like your path is set by just getting into the school and I scored well enough to qualify for Wolmer's and so I went to Wolmer's one year from eleven, or when I was eleven to twelve years old.
Speaker 1: What grade were you in when you attended?
Speaker 2: They, it's a different standard, it's called forms, and so I went to, to my first form, the very first form in Wolmer's.  So I was in, I spent that one year in first form.
Speaker 1: Before you moved to the United States (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Before I came here and came into seventh grade [at Arthur S. Somers Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York].
Story_ID: 493186
Speaker 1: Did you and your [maternal] grandmother [Irma Cormack] and your brothers and sisters attend church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What kind of church did you attend?
Speaker 2: I think it was Anglican?  I don't really remember.
Speaker 1: How often did you go?  What was your relationship with the church?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday just on a Sunday every Sunday.  It wasn't, I wasn't particularly religious or cared, I just went 'cause my grandmother told us we had to go.
Speaker 1: Did you participate in any church activities?
Speaker 2: We had to do Sunday school so we were the Sunday school kids, you know, the kids who went off and did Sunday school.  I, my only memory, my vivid memory of that is I had memorized the books of the Bible, the Old Testament, and I could rail them off, and that that caused a little bit of commotion too (laughter) like how did a kid do that?  So I would just start off: Genesis, Exodus, and then just start going, whoa.  But it was just a memory thing, you know.  Again a smart kid with nothing better to do.
Story_ID: 493187
Speaker 1: In your time at Wolmer's High School [Wolmer's Trust High School for Boys, Kingston, Jamaica], did you then have any sense about what you thought you might do with your life?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: And were there any teachers there who particularly impacted you, or fellow students who left an impression on you?
Speaker 2: The teachers in Wolmer's were excellent, right, they knew that these kids were the, were like the top kids in the country and that they were training us for greatness.  But and so all the teachers were pretty good, all of them were just teaching us.  The one good thing about Jamaica is that the education, one of the good thing about what the British did in Jamaica, was they left an educational system in place that was fabulous, right.  So you could get a first class education unlike what happened to me when I came here.  So we were getting just excellent math, science education, we were studying the Queen's English, I mean, we were just, it was, by and large great preparation for life.  And it's kind of unfortunate that I only spent a year because it would have been nice to learn some more stuff before I came here and went backwards, but it's just how it was.  My friend, Dexter Ebanks, E-B-A-N-K-S, was my best friend in Jamaica and he lived in a wealthy home.  So when he took me to his house, I was like, you gotta be kidding, you're living large, it was like 'Fresh Prince' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'], you know, going to Bel-Air [Los Angeles, California].  I was like, this, you live in houses like this in Jamaica.  I mean, he lived, manicured gardens, and nice home and all that.  I couldn't belie- I was like going to a different side of the tracks, you know.  And so he showed me that there were other possibilities too.  But he was a good kid and he and I were both shy kids, we were laidback--but we were also the smarter kids in the class.
Speaker 1: Are you still friends?
Speaker 2: Nope.  I haven't seen him since I left Jamaica.
Story_ID: 493188
Speaker 1: So, tell us about, first your trip to America, and then where you enrolled in school?
Speaker 2: The trip to America, I remember leaving my [maternal] grandmother [Irma Cormack], saw her for the last time on that day, it was August 28, 1978.  Coming to America, thought that, America was gonna be Bel-Air [Los Angeles, California], we were moving to Bel-Air; that's the image we had in Jamaica.  By that time you saw, you, you, you know, a lot of American television was imported on, into, into Jamaican, on to Jamaican television.
Speaker 1: What were you able to see?
Speaker 2: You saw a lot of cartoons.  We saw 'Roots' when it first came out.  I remember like, I didn't really watch the more adult shows but when you saw them, it was a spectacular, the streets were paved, I mean, that sounds stupid, but the streets were paved.  There was, there was nice homes, big homes, like ridiculously big no matter how small they are to us in this country, they were just, they just seemed large, you got a two-story home that's a mansion.
Speaker 1: Well, it's 1978 so are, is, are 'Dynasty' or 'Dallas' on?
Speaker 2: I don't think 'Dynasty' and 'Dallas' were on yet (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I think it's a little early but--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure, it might be a little too early 'cause I remember seeing 'Dynasty' and 'Dallas' start when I came here.  So I don't think they were the- they were on yet.  But whatever shows, and there were some shows that would come on and you'd just be like, you know, wow.  Not even the sh- the fact that it wasn't even the shows, it was what was happening in the background, the furniture, right (laughter)?  The apartment was like what (laughter)?  So, so I told my brother [Devon Cormack] (background noise), this was a bet I had before we came to this country, he's twenty, I'm twelve, right, he's eight years older, so he had a little bit more wisdom.  He says, I told him, "We're gonna live on the top--.  We're gonna live in a, in a twenty-story building, and there's gone be a pool on the roof."  Oh, I'll tell you what I, I remember a show that was on, 'The Partridge Family.'  'The Partridge Family' was the hit, right, the big hit.  Danny Partridge, they were on the bus all the time, they were traveling, they had the house, women were, were chasing him all the time, the girls were always after him, so I knew I was coming here, there was gone be girls chasing me, there were, there was gonna be--I don't know where I got the pool on the roof from, I still had to figure out where that memory came from but I bet him twenty dollars, I didn't have twenty dollars, I didn't have five dollars (laughter) I didn't have a dollar (laughter) and I'm betting him twenty dollars, I bet him twenty dollars 'cause I knew I was gone make some money, that there was gone be a, a twenty-story building with a pool on the roof and that's where we're gonna live.  And I, and I was--when I was bragging to my friends, other friends of mine who knew what was going on in America said that there were streets paved with gold, that we were gonna be able to, to just pick up gold off the street.  We were stupid, and, and, yeah, and, you know, so you, you had the girls, you had the streets, the, the people, the, the girls chasing you, the gold paved road, it was like heaven, we were moving to heaven that was the idea the milk and the honey was gonna flow.
Speaker 1: Automobile.
Speaker 2: Oh, we, every, everything was gone be there.  We were gonna move to heaven, so that was my impression of moving to America.  And my brother took the bet, you know, like that's a stupid bet, I'll take it.
Story_ID: 493189
Speaker 1: And we got on the plane, I remember getting hit on the plane too (laughter) the, the flight attendant hit m- (laughter) the flight attendant smacked me because when she told us to put our seatbelts on when we were landing, it was at night and my brother [Devon Cormack] was very strategic he made, had me sit next to the window when we were taking off, but when it was time to land, he said, "You know, let's be fair and change seats."  But this was before, you know, when it was like on the descent so we changed seats so now I was on the aisle and I couldn't see the view of New York [New York] coming down so he was like, wow, look at all the lights and the stuff.  And I had never seen nothing like that in my life and so I tried to get up, took my seatbelt off to get up, this was on descent, to get up to look at the view of New York first time seeing it, and the flight attendant came over and smacked me.  Should have sued her, I would have made some money.  But anyway she said, "Sit down."  (Laughter) Told me to sit down, it's like, "Oh, I'm sorry," and put it on, I had to crane my neck to see it, to see New York.  We came into JFK [John F. Kennedy International Airport, New York, New York], my mother [Thelma Cormack] picks us up, it's a stunning moment, it's like, you know, kid--kids meeting their mother, finally gonna live with your mother for the first time in your life that you can remember.  We got in the car and started driving from the distance from JFK, from John F. Kennedy to Brownsville, Brooklyn [New York], going probably up Linden Boulevard, no doubt, and now I'm looking around at the homes and they not looking so special, they're not looking so large, in fact, there's garbage on the streets, that alone just sh- floored me like what is this.  Pull up, Rockaway Parkway, 376 Rockaway Parkway, pull up to a home that, a, a structure we've never seen, like, you know, it's like this, the four, the four, the two-story, four family things, that I still don't know what they're called, right, 'cause it's, it's not an apartment building, it's just two stories tall, there's four families living in it and we pull up, it's hot, it's hot summertime at least that, so the weather wasn't a problem, but there's dirt on the street, there's four abandoned buildings on the corner, large abandoned buildings, now serious, well, more like three stories, four stories high abandoned buildings on the corner.  My brother said his first impression of the home we, we came to was that he just was witnessing a jail, like there was a jail, we're just moving to a jail.  I step out of the car, look around, now my conception of America is radically altered (laughter) I mean, I look at my mother and I said, in Jamaican, (speaking Jamaican Patois), in Eng- "Who are we visiting?"  And she sa- (laughter) and she turned and looked at me and said, "This is your home fool."  (Laughter) And, and to me, now, wait a minute this cannot be right, this doesn't add up (laughter).
Story_ID: 493190
Speaker 1: (Laughter) And so we went in and, and went upstairs to a two-bedroom apartment, and I'm trying to get used to the idea that this was even smaller than the house I was in back in Jamaica, what's the deal with this?  And roaches, it just wasn't, it wasn't cool (laughter) it was, it was like what happened here.  And we had to share, my twenty year old brother [Devon Cormack], my, myself, and my sister [Alicia Ashley], who was eleven, just turned eleven, all had to share the same bedroom, we had the bunk beds and the, you know, the rolling cots from underneath and that, that was the new home.  That was what my mother [Thelma Cormack] had worked ten years for (laughter).  So, you know, it was a rude cultural awakening, man, it was hardcore.  So, you know, and then the next day she took us around the neighborhood [Brownsville, Brooklyn, New York], we were looking very Caribbean, so (laughter) you know, clothes we were wearing were straight island, I don't know what our haircut must have looked like compared to the other kids but we were looked at like we were spooks from another planet, you know, by the brothers, we're talking about the kids in the neighborhood 'cause we're in an all-black neighborhood.  And they were looking at us like who are those people?  I'm sure we looked, you know, reggae down (laughter) it was crazy.  And we were walking up the street, I'm like looking around like what is this place?  And she took us around to the school I was gonna go to, Arthur S. Somers [Arthur S. Somers Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York].  She took us to this school and there was graffiti on the walls.  If you did that in Jamaica, the beating you would get, would be hardcore, I am sorry.  There was graffiti on the walls.  I said there's graffiti on the walls (laughter).  My mother was like, yeah, graffiti.  We've never seen graffiti.  It's like how can you put graffiti on the side of a school?  Schools in Jamaica were like temples, it was temples, you, you went to school for something, you were getting an education it meant something.  We know graffiti was like--what could possibly be in that place that you wanna go to when they sprawling all that stuff on the side of the building?  It was terrible.
Story_ID: 493191
Speaker 1: The only good thing was when we woke up cartoons were on television.  That was the sh- that was like this is, oh, this is good.  There were cartoons on TV.  And that was, you never had that before, you woke up in the morning and there's television on.  So, for the kids that was a nice thing but the other stuff was jacked up.  And then Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York], '78 [1978], Tyson [Mike Tyson] lived in Brownsville.  Tyson left Brown- it was too, you know, Brownsville was too rough for Mike, so you know how Brownsville was, Brownsville was rough.  So we came to America and it was just a, it was, the, the drugs, the violence, the only thing we understood was the gunshots 'cause we had that in Jamaica so that was--.  But it wasn't all the time, it wasn't every day like it was here, here was every day, every night, kids getting in, you know, accidentally hit by drive-bys, it was every single day something was going on.  You would read in the paper about somebody else dying because of the shots.  And it was like, it was like musical gunshots every night, like deep in the projects back in Brownsville, every single night, gunshots; you had to be inside.  Unlike Jamaica, when Jamaica really gets crazy around election time, like when we left in '78 [1978], we were two years removed from a truly traumatic election period because as soon as the elections start and it's voting time, everybody is getting shot at and jail, and the two parties are shooting each other trying to reduce the numbers so you can vote, (laughter) you know, you'll win the election.  So that was messed up, (laughter) right, that was a bad deal.  But, and then you had helicopters flying overhead, the helicopters were coming in the neighborhood and, and picking up folks.  I was terrified for my brother [Devon Cormack] because he was voting age and I thought that at some point they was just gone grab him off the street and put him in jail 'cause all the voting age young men were being hauled off to jail, all of them.  So and the party in power--I'm telling you it's, it sounds funny, but it's real--the party in power would, would go into, would sweep the neighborhoods, and pull the, the young men into jail, in part also because the young men were being violent, so they were the part, the ones that were targeted first.  So I was scared for my brother every day.  But coming here, it was real, then you were scared for yourself.  I wasn't so worried about myself in Jamaica but here you were scared for yourself 'cause gunshots were going off every night.
Story_ID: 493192
Speaker 1: Now, you said your brother [Devon Cormack] was twenty?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: When you come here, what does he, what does he get himself engaged in--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --does he go to, is he enrolled in school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right away he enrolled in college and started going to a community college.
Speaker 1: And had he been attending Wolmer's High School [Wolmer's Trust High School for Boys, Kingston, Jamaica]?  I know that--
Speaker 2: No, he was in Kingston College [Kingston, Jamaica], another reputable college in Jamaica.  He had graduated from Kingston College.  It must have been a couple of years before, maybe it was a year removed from Kingston College.
Speaker 1: And what did your brother study?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't remember what he studied in college.  I just know he went to school; that was it.  And then he, and then he didn't graduate 'cause he really needed to get a job to help my mother [Thelma Cormack].
Speaker 1: And what kind of a job did he get?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I have no recollection.
Story_ID: 493193
Speaker 1: So why don't we talk about a little bit of the elections that would occur in Jamaica and the atmosphere that would surround elections.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the difference in Jamaica, the difference in Jamaica, the violence in Jamaica and the violence in the U.S. is that Jamaica's, Jamaica's violence is very election related.  It's power related.  So there were two parties in Jamaica, the Jamaica Labour Party [JLP] and the People's National Party [PNP].  And around election time it would be like a war.  People would take sides, the side in power monopolize the power base.  Everybody, it's like everybody, if you're, if you're a foreign party the party just simply takes over the country and then they can hire all their friends and the police end up siding with that party and, and so the other side is really left out of the economic possibilities.  So, people would just be shooting at each other.  I'm, there's tons of stuff that happened right, it would always be right around the election.  I remember the election of '76 [1976], the things that would happen like the, the helicopters hovering overhead looking for young men to drag off to, to prison.  Young men getting shot frequently, young men are getting, getting into it with each other a lot.  I was, like I, I mentioned, I was terrified for my brother [Devon Cormack] 'cause he was nineteen, at the time he was actually just eighteen years old but he was just of election age and I was worried that he would be killed.
Speaker 1: You said something about a woman losing her home for discussing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a woman who--
Speaker 1: --politics.
Speaker 2: --who started talking, we lived in a JLP neighborhood that means in Jamaica, the, the neighborhoods are stratified by party, along party lines.  So, JLP and PNP people didn't live together because of the potential of violence that could happen.  So, this one lady opened her mouth and said that--and the rumor goes that she opened her mouth and said something about p- something favorable about the other party.  And I remember standing outside her home watching it burn to the ground because somebody had burned it down because, because she had favored the other side, and they forced her to move out of the home with her, herself and her two children.  I remember when I was going to school when people were dragged off buses, armed gunmen would come on buses and ask the people directly, "Which party do you favor?"  And your answer better be their, the party that they're from and anybody of the other party either were beaten or you didn't see them again.  So it was terrifying to even ride the bus 'cause you didn't know what might happen but you had to ride a bus to go to school.  So, so stuff like that just, you know, the, the level--.  I remember one story, it's very stupid, there was a no man's land between neighborhoods, between Tower Hill [Kingston, Jamaica] where, where I went was my neighborhood and then this other neighborhood next to it, which I don't even know the neighborhood but the kids, the little kids would throw rocks at each other like I'm JLP you're PNP so I should hit you with a rock.  So we were busy throwing, the kids were throwing rocks and I was walking past strolling oh, yeah, kids are throwing rocks, I'm a kid, let's go.  I grab a rock, I start throwing it at the other kid, kids across the way, and all of a sudden a Rastafarian stands up next to, to the kids on this side and starts, pulls out his gun and starts shooting, just to shoot, I'm right here, he's next to me, the other kids are on the other side and he just starts busting caps into the others, to the other kids, there are kids on the other side.  So that was enough for me, I was out.  I don't know who started shooting back but I was gone.  And it was just random stuff like that that happened; it wasn't totally random, it was all politically related.  Then once the elections were over everybody got their sanity back and everything calmed down, your violence went, everything was like, everything was cool.  It's all good now 'cause you guys won and that's it.
Speaker 1: And would people be able to work together?
Speaker 2: Yeah, then afterward, then you're just, then it was regular, it was nothing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So separate neighborhoods but--
Speaker 2: But working together.
Speaker 1: You might work with someone from the other party.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.
Story_ID: 493194
Speaker 1: Can you compare that violence to the violence that you're feeling and seeing in Brownsville [Brooklyn, New York] in 1978?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So I come to Brownsville, but the violence in Brownsville is different, the violence in Brownsville is poverty and drug related.  In Jamaica, we all poor, most of us is black, racism, I don't know what racism is, I, I'm not old enough yet to really understand that there really was some racist power structure in place in Jamaica; it wasn't prevalent, I was never ar- I was not taught about being black was a difference, being black, I, I didn't understand myself as a black man potentially inferior to others.  I don't, I didn't see myself like that; it didn't exist.  So I could just be smart, I could just be a smart kid and be smart, there's no funny relationship between intelligence and race, it was irrelevant, we're all hanging out, you know, we're all in school together, we're all smart, we're getting good grades, we're getting 90s, that's normal, that's not something special.  Come here, and suddenly there's radical shifts.  First of all poverty, not having money matters, you're gonna live different now but the fact that you ain't got no money means that you wanna go get some.  The fact that you wanna, the fact that you're disenfranchised from a, a different kind of power structure, the white power structure keeping the black power structure, keeping African Americans in check for so many years, despite the civil rights gains, which had just literally just happened in '78 [1978], Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] had died ten years later.  That, that hadn't really trickled down effectively into black America.  It's forty years later, it still hasn't but not totally, still hasn't let's put it that way.  But then for sure it was a lot of raw growing pains going on.  So, drugs had infiltrated the neighborhood, hoods, Brooklyn [New York] was flash po- flashpoint for violence for sure.  Brownsville was--it was Brownsville, Bed-Stuy [Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, New York], Bushwick [Brooklyn, New York].  And then, of course, you know, you had, you had the other neighbor, East New York [Brooklyn, New York], Canarsie [Brooklyn, New York], you name it.  And everything was stratified along race so you didn't, you learned, I had to learn that I couldn't leave the neighborhood without knowing where I was going to the next neighborhood because it mattered that you're on somebody's else's turf so to speak back then.  It was just and, and that violence didn't stop.  Jamaica at least after election the violence stopped.  In Brooklyn, violence was continuous and--
Speaker 1: So you're--
Speaker 2: --and, and it was aimed at, and it was mainly between drug dealers.
Speaker 1: So you're saying when you moved to the other boroughs where black people were predominant, you had to be careful about where you were going?
Speaker 2: Even the, yeah, it, it was worse in white neighbor- you know, you know, you didn't go to like Bay, not Bay Ridge [Brooklyn, New York]--but all these Bs, oh, which is the other one?
Speaker 1: You said Bed-Stuy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, Bed-Stuy, Bed-Stuy was black but--
Speaker 1: Brown-
Speaker 2: --for the white neighborhoods it was, it was like Sheepshead Bay [Brooklyn, New York], it was, I don't know why it's not coming to me, it's not Bay Ridge it's--Bensonhurst [Brooklyn, New York].
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Bensonhurst.  You didn't go to Bensonhurst because bad things happened.  And, and, you know, you read the stories in the paper, guys getting chased down trying to get past the highway, boo, gets run over by a car and it's like getting chased by a white guy so he said okay, I know not to go there.  So you learn pretty quick that race mattered and that race mattered in, in the United States, I didn't realize that.  It took me a while to really get that education in this country.  But the violence in, in America was very different, the violence in Brownsville was very, very different.  It was haphazard, it seemed, because I was outside of the--you know, where, where do you walk, who are, who are the bad guys, who are the drug dealers?  And, and, and you could get it yourself, I mean, there were a lot of fights in school.  I didn't get into too many fights.  I got into one fight over a sports related--actually two fights, it was both sports related.  But, the, the violence level was just way higher here, way higher.  And Jamaica was bad, but it was just really earthy here.
Speaker 1: And what kind of drugs are people doing?  Are people doing crack [crack cocaine] yet or is--
Speaker 2: Crack hasn't, hm--
Speaker 1: --it's a little bit early?
Speaker 2: I don't know but it's not crack.  Crack came, crack was just--
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: --about to hit the neighborhood.  So cocaine must have been here already, heroin already was here, but I'm reflecting 'cause back then I had no idea.
Story_ID: 493195
Speaker 1: So what school did you enroll in?  Did you school, enroll in the school with the graffiti on the walls?
Speaker 2: That was the school, that was--
Speaker 1: And what was the name of that school again?
Speaker 2: Arthur S. Somers Junior High School [Brooklyn, New York], 2- junior high school 252.  And, I remember taking the test, 'cause I was from Jamaica they had no history of how I did in elementary school, so I had to take a reading test.  And I scored perfectly; I read at a twelfth grade level.  So they put in the 7SP, which was the class for all the geek kids, smart kids in the school.  The best class you could be in in the school for the age.  First day of school, I'm in the top class in the school, first day of school, all the work is obvious, I was doing all that stuff the year bef- the beginning of the year before in Jamaica, in Wolmer's [Wolmer's Trust High School for Boys, Kingston, Jamaica].  So I'm thinking, this is not right, something's wrong here.  Like why are, why my, I shouldn't be in this grade, I should be at a higher grade.
Speaker 1: And you said 7SP so is that seventh grade?
Speaker 2: Seventh grade, yeah, 7SP is like special program [special progress], special classroom.  So, but it's the right age for where I am because I'm twelve years old, so seventh grade is right.  So, they felt they were, and it was the best school.  In fact, that school would, would skip eighth grade, our, I mean that class, that whole class would skip eighth grade together we jumped from seventh grade to ninth grade, nine SP.  So, to me that means that they knew we were getting the raw shaft (laughter) like y'all not learning this, what you should be learning you should be out of the game.
Speaker 1: And when you were skipped, were you skipped within the same institution or did you go to a four year high school that started at ninth grade?
Speaker 2: No, we went, went to ninth grade, we went from seventh grade to ninth grade in this--
Speaker 1: Within the same--
Speaker 2: --within the same junior high school before they started changing it over to middle school.  So first day of school I'm like what is this?  So I go home to my mother [Thelma Cormack] and I said, "I must be in the wrong grade."  My mother has never had a kid in America so she doesn't know what the educational system's about, she has to go to work the next day.  She said, "Well, why don't you take your Jamaican report card to the school and talk to the guidance counselor and maybe she'll put you in a better grade."  So I go back to the lady, the little upstart (laughter) twelve year old, twelve year old, go back to the lady, I said, "Excuse me, but, you know, I think I'm in the wrong grade, wrong class, here's my report card from Jamaica where I finished third in my class, this should show that I belong, you know, in a, in a better grade."  That lady took one look at me and like (laughter) she, like, like I was a rat, you know, like what is your problem?  (Laughter) She said, "You're in the best class, that's where you belong, that's it."  And the way she said it, I'm like, I'm not gonna argue with this lady, you know, it's what's done is done.
Story_ID: 493196
Speaker 1: So I went into the class [at Arthur S. Somers Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York] and when I tell you bored out of my mind, it was like--.  The, we had, we had a great math teacher, homeroom teacher Mr. Rosen [ph.], I loved him, and he was our math teacher, right, and he would have, and he did things where he would take us to Burger King, he would take the kids who could figure out especially hard math problems to Burger King.  So of course, you know, I was at Burger King all the time.  And the kids started catching on, you know, like my friends would be like, "Yo, Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Ashley], what's the answer, what's the answer?"  Right, 'cause they want to go to Burger King.  So, but here was the problem, the problem was he would put a problem on the board and it was supposed to be really hard, and the kids would come in, these are the smartest kids in the whole seventh grade, they would come in and they'd be like, "Okay, that's too hard."  And let's say there's twenty-five of us in the class, four of us would go to Burger King.  I remember coming in the class and he put a problem on the board and it's like you put the, it's as if you had put on what is one plus one, that's how easy, I looked at the problem and I said, "That's the Burger King problem?"  I thought the whole class was going to Burger King 'cause it was like, you gotta be joking.  Again, it was the same thing, four of us went to Burger King because the rest of the class couldn't get it.  And it, you know, it was then I started realizing the disparity, it's like why is it that you're in this country that I had fantasies about, and these kids in the best class couldn't match what we were learning in a normal--okay, our school was a great school, but it was a normal class the year before in Jamaica.  I'm talking the equivalent of sixth grade, the sixth grade kids in Jamaica would whoop the best seventh grade kids in the school in America; that makes no sense.  Years later I realized what the heck was going on in this country and what kind of education was being passed on to the kids.  What's funny is in Jamaica, I actually had a, we got a textbook when we were, we happened to get our hands on a fifth grade textbook when we're in fifth grade [at Seaward Primary and Junior High School, Kingston, Jamaica].  I didn't realize it would affect me tangibly because I didn't recognize that I'd be moving to America and all that stuff would happen.  When I was in fifth grade we got a fifth grade textbook, you know, big, bold letters it had fifth grade on it, and we opened the book and we died laughing.  We were like, what, are you kidding?  This, this is, this is a joke.  It was like what we learned in third grade, like what is this?  And we're laughing at the problems, and addition, and the multiplication, it's like this is a joke, we're flipping pages.  Just read the book straight, it was like a, it was like reading a, a kid book to my son [Jayden Ashley], you know.  It's like what is this, what is this, this is easy, ah, they stupid, they stupid.  And then toss it to the curb.  Little did I know that I would be shortchanged when I got here and that it was systematic, it was system wide that in the, born in a certain neighborhood, go to a certain type of school, this was gonna happen to you.  And that was my, that was my first taste of the inequalities in the educational system.
Story_ID: 493197
Speaker 1: So while you're attending school in the United States, do you have a sense about what you're gonna do after you complete your education?
Speaker 2: No, no, I come to America I just wanna learn about America.  The United States is like, it's like a, like a playground or a survival test, however you wanna put it, and I wanna learn as much as I can.  So, the places where I was deficient were like social studies, history class.  I knew Jamaican history, I didn't know American history at all, so I had to learn everything anew.  So it was fresh for me learning about [President] George Washington, [President] Abraham Lincoln, all that was first time hearing about it.  And so that was big.  The other thing was big is just learning, you know, is, I'm, I'm twelve and I'm an adolescent and I'm starting to get, you know, the girls, right, you're starting to get interested.  I was already getting interested in Jamaica.  And I was first getting interested in Jamaica and then I came here, but all the girls spoke different and they looked different and their style is different and I just feel diff- you know, and I'm shy as it is so it's like what am I supposed to do (laughter) right, I don't know what to do.  So, so I make friends and as I make friends with them I'm clinging to them 'til I try to learn the ropes, like what, you know, this place is a, a, a strange place for me.  I remember getting laughed at for standing up in class and addressing the teacher as sir.  Like, Mr. Rosen [ph.], I remember vividly Mr. Rosen said, gave us a problem, "Who knows the answer?"  (Raises hand).  "Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Ashley]."  I stand up, the kid next to me says, "Sit down."  I'm like, that's what you do, it's a teacher, you respect them; you stand up, you answer the question.  And I said, "Da, da, da, da, sir."  And the whole class went, "Sir?"  (Laughter) Like, what?  And he looked, he said, he looked to the class and said, "I'm gonna like this kid."  'Cause, of course, you know, we were just brought up different--in school, school was like respect.  So I was just different, I was different.  I remember I won the spelling bee for the school [Arthur S. Somers Junior High School, Brooklyn, New York], right, I represented the school in the spelling bee contest.  And I was on stage spelling a word, I forget what word it was, but it had included the letter Z.  Of course, in Jamaica, you say zed, not Z.  Why did I, why did it have to have a Z, I'm on the, the, the stage, I say zed in my Jamaican accent and the entire auditorium of kids, in concert go, "Zed?"  (Laughter) Like what is this kid talking about.  And, and the teacher had to like shush all of them, "He means Z, he means Z," and I learned to say Z after that you can best believe.  So its little things like that you don't recognize as you come into a country.
Story_ID: 493198
Speaker 1: And also, back then it wasn't cool to be from the islands.  Back then it was like banana boat, you know (laughter), blood clot, breadfruit head, this, everything was just--.  And if you were from the islands invariably you were from Haiti.  So, "I'm Jamaican."  "No, you're Haitian."  "No, I'm Jamaican."  "No, you're a boat refugee from Haiti."  "I'm Jamaican."  "Okay, but you're from Haiti."  (Laughter) Like, yo, what's this?  So it didn't pay to be Jamaican.  Now, you know, you got your, you got your Shabba Ranks, you got, you got all, all the music and the reggae come over, now, it's like everybody wanna wait to--what is it, 'Stella Got Her Groove Back' ['How Stella Got Her Groove Back'], you know, what, everybody want a Jamaican man all that, that whole cultural shift that's happened, but back then, unh-uh, you just came off a boat.  So it was, it was tricky for a while.  And the style too, 'cause, you know, you gotta wear the right sneakers but my mother [Thelma Cormack] thought like I'm not paying that much money for them sneakers you must be insane, I don't have the money to pay, so I got the rejects.  And it's not cool wearing rejects in the hood, that, that's not working, so I had, I remember I was wearing black sneakers before black was in style.  The first time I wore black sneakers, because they were rejects they were black and they were like suede I think, some fake suede, whatever, and they got into me so hard over them sneakers man, they called them Batman sneakers (laughter), I was Batman.  Now you wear black and the kids are like, it's black, big deal.  But kids don't think like that if it's not the style, it's not correct.  So I was wearing reject black sneakers, so I was styling before my time but I was getting eaten up over wearing Batman sneakers.
Speaker 2: So did you ever feel like you acclimated or what part--what I'm hearing from you actually is that, you know, initially I thought well, perhaps after a couple of weeks, but it sounds like it was a year or two or five before you really felt some sense of normalcy?  Not really?
Speaker 1: You never, you know, you're getting, you, you never quite get it.  You have, what happened was I got, I had friends, I had, I befriended immigrants like myself.  So I had one of my best friends, actually I had a, an American friend also, Steffen Dunbar [ph.], S-T-E-F-F-E-N.  And Stef was just cool.  So he ended up being as a good friend of mine.  Mark [ph.] McHale, M-C-H-A-L-E, he was another good friend of mine.  So there were some kids who either got it, or their parents were from the islands, so it wasn't that mysterious to them.  If you're making fun of that you were making fun of their parents, so they were like, you know, whatever, he'll be my friend.  Then I had some, and then Leon Munro [Vincent "Leon" Munro], whose sister was in my class, his father was from Grenada.  And then we, I had a couple of other friends who were either Jamaican or from Barbados, so we hung out.  You know, we understood that we were the outsiders.  And we hung out, we played handball together, we ended up playing chess a lot together, doing martial arts together.  I befriended, I had friends, I had people who were outside the, that circle and that way you could learn a little bit more about the circle itself.  And eventually, you know, I came to get with the program.
Speaker 2: And in your neighborhood [Brownsville, Brooklyn, New York], were there any other people living there who were from the islands?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, yeah, it was a real, it was when the wave really started back then and, and so it became even more so.
Speaker 2: And so did you have Jamaican neighbors?
Speaker 1: My aunt lived next door with her family, so that was it, but I don't remember--
Speaker 2: Was that your mother's sister or your father's sister?
Speaker 1: She was my mother's closest friend so we called her our aunt.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Still my mother's closest friend.  So, yeah, so we ended up, it was enough, it was just enough, you know, you just don't, you don't need ten thousand friends, so it was enough.
Story_ID: 493199
Speaker 1: Where do you go to high school?
Speaker 2: Brooklyn Technical High School [Brooklyn, New York].  That's where I first fell in love with chess.
Speaker 1: Tell us about, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: I was in class, Brooklyn Technical High School is another one of those schools you test for in, in, in New York [New York].  So I tested the specialized high school test, my whole ninth grade did, and I was one of the kids that made it to Brooklyn Tech.  So we, so I ended up, remember I'm actually a little young for Brooklyn Tech, I'm going into tenth grade as a fourteen year old, so I'm slightly young going in the class, slightly immature for the, for the grade.  Again, little trouble making friends but I finally befriended a Haitian kid of all things, and he played chess in school, in class.  Now, you're not supposed to do that, but he was on the side with his little chess board during some drawing class we had, we had some, some class, that was drawing some whatever, and he had a little chess board on the side playing.  So I was like oh, I know how to play that game.  Of course, I didn't know any, really know anything about chess, so I played him and he killed me, I didn't understand it because I always beat kids at games, always.  It's like why can't I beat this kid at this game?  I'm supposed to beat him.  Then I was in the library and saw a book, and I don't remember the name of the book, but I just remember it was black, and I was like a chess book, chess books exist?  Okay.  So I opened the book and there are--.  Now remember I'd already learned chess in Jamaica playing with my brother [Devon Cormack], but he didn't know anything either.  I was like, there's a chess book, I'm a check this book out.  So I checked the book out the library, I read the book, and it has strategies, and it's telling you, you can do this and that and other things.  I'm like oh, this is hot.  I'm going to use this against him.  So I go back to school, played him, and he beat me still.  So I'm like what's going on?  Turns out he already read books, he had like four books and he knew stuff and he'd been playing with the stuff he learned from the books.  His name was Clotaire Colas, C-L-O-T-A-I-R-E, was his first name, Colas, C-O-L-A-S, was his last name but we all called him Chico.  And Chico had been reading books and but what he did was slick, Chico was real slick.  He took me, he told me I was a good player, he was like, "Man, you're good, you're pretty good, you know, what you should come to the chess club 'cause you're good."  So I was like chess club, okay.  So I go to the chess club with Chico, we sit in the cla- in the chess club and we play and there's all these kids from all over by the way, and this, this best kid is Stan Rozenfeld [Stanislav Rozenfeld], R-O-Z-E-N-F-E-L-D, from, from Russia, that's my first taste of Russian kids being the, Russians being the best chess players.  And, so I'm sitting in the room with, with Chico playing, he beats me.
Speaker 1: When you say chess club, you mean the high school chess club?
Speaker 2: The high school chess club, yeah.  He beats me--they like met every Tuesday--so he beats me--right after school.  And he goes up to the front of the room, goes in a book and writes something in the book.  I said, "What did you write in the book?"  He said, "Oh, you know, in chess club we keep score of whoever wins and loses."  Turns out, that who- the score in that book decided who would be on the chess team and get to travel and go do all kinds of nice stuff with the team.  So what Chico was doing was, he was recruiting scrubs by telling us we were pretty good, bring us in the room, whip on you, and then go write the score up that he had a good score against this person, then he'd go get another person and that's how he was recruiting people for the chess club, and that's how he got me involved in the chess team, chess club, I was never good enough to make the team.
Story_ID: 493200
Speaker 1: Chico [Clotaire Colas] and I fought every chess, every single day after school for hours and--.  Just every day, three o'clock, bell ring, we got a free room in the, in the school, when the club wasn't meeting, which it was only once a week, and we would play every single day for the next two and a-half years.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Two and a half years nonstop, every day from three o'clock to seven o'clock.  And going home, doing homework real fast and then studying chess and then going back to school, wait until school is over and play chess again.  And that was my daily routine and that's how I got good at chess, that's, I got good quick because I was just, I, it became my life the moment I, that happened in high school and that's when I knew what I wanted to be.  That's the first I understood, before then I wanted to, you know, I was dreaming about like sports and stuff but that day, at that time in fr- in sophomore year at Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] in the tenth grade, I understood I was gonna be a chess, I wanted to be a chess player.  I shouldn't say I wanted to be a chess player, that I only wanted to play chess, that's what I wanted to do was play chess.
Speaker 2: And did, were you aware of anyone doing that for money?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: So you just were fundamentally thinking this is something that I'm doing.
Speaker 1: I just wanna play chess.
Speaker 2: And is, are you thinking this is something that I wanna do for a living?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Just this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Not in the early stages.
Speaker 2: --I'm doing this.
Speaker 1: This is what I, I love this.  I love this, I wanna do it every day.  And so I would read, and then finally, you know, Chico was a little bit more advanced and also you had guys like Stan Rozenfeld [Stanislav Rozenfeld], the kid who was the, the best kid in the school and he was an expert player which to us was like mystifying, he would play four of us at the same time and beat us, no problem.  But Stan saw something in me, and so he invited me over to his home, which was in, which was next to our neighborhood [Brownsville, Brooklyn, New York], but mainly populated by Russian Jews.  And I had to like cross--you know, how New York [New York] is, there's always a big road to cross--and cross over to the other side and their neighborhood was well-kept, clean, quiet, birds, walking and, you know, I'm like where am I right now, I need to watch what I'm doing 'cause I'm being watched.  And I go into his house and his family's cool and he's the, this is my kid, my friend from school who plays chess, and his family knew all about chess so it wasn't a big surprise to them, maybe a bit surprising, you know, this black kid from school coming in, but they're from Russia, they immigrated so it's like, you know, whatever.  And I sat and played him chess and he was a cool, cool guy.
Story_ID: 493201
Speaker 1: So you didn't make your high school chess team.  Can you give us a sense of what the chess team would do, what kind of benefits they were, that they had access to in terms of their play as a team?
Speaker 2: Our chess team traveled to the national championships to play, and so just traveling by itself, and the only time I'd been on a plane was from Jamaica to, to New York [New York].  And, and being part of a team that represented your school, something you can put on college applications and things like that.
Speaker 1: So outside of playing with your friends, did you get an opportunity to play outside of school?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  In fact, I played wherever I could play.  And a big moment in my life came when I met--well, let me back up a little bit.  I, Leon Munro, his real, his first name is Vincent, Munro is spelled M-U-N-R-O [Vincent "Leon" Munro]. His dad was from Grenada.  His sister was in my 7SP class and 9SP class.  She also ended up going to Brooklyn Tech [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York], so we, and, and then later we were in college together too.  And, and we were an item for a little while too.  So, Le- their family was Jehovah's Witnesses, they were involved with Jehovah's Witnesses.  And I would hang out with them and we'd play chess.  And, and eventually something in what he, they were talking about, Jehovah's Witnesses, resonated with me and so I came home and told my mother [Thelma Cormack] I'm gonna be part of Jehovah's Witnesses, which she called Jehovah's wickednesses.  (Laughter) So, I was like okay, but, you know, it's not that serious is it, and she knew it was really serious that what I was getting involved in.  So I was involved with that for six months; I quit chess during the time I was involved with them, didn't play.  And I had already decided that what I was gonna do was become a missionary and work--this is sixteen year old--work after, that that was gonna be my life, I was gonna go from door to door and preach which is what they taught that you should do.  So I spent, it was, and it was more like nine months heavily involved in learning the Bible and scripture and why other people have it wrong, and why only Jehovah Witnesses were gonna be saved and the whole nine for a solid nine months and I didn't play chess during that time.  And I knew I was gonna be, and, and I knew I was gonna do it, I was gonna live at Bethel [Brooklyn Bethel], which is downtown Brooklyn [New York] and with making like forty dollars a month or some random figure 'cause you were being, you were gonna be tended to and then you're gonna preach the word and that was your, gonna be your life.  And you couldn't, you couldn't have blood, you couldn't do surgery and have blood transfusions, told my mother that, she told me the story of when I was a kid, when I was born, I had to have, I had to have surgery.  My, when I came out of the birth canal my head was too big, so I couldn't come out and they had to use forceps and they ended up squeezing my brain, my head, and rupturing a blood vessel and anyway I was out, I was out for three weeks, in the hospital for three weeks at birth.  But I don't think that's why they gave me the surgery, the surgery was when I developed the whooping cough and a growth developed on my stomach and they had to cut it off, so she had to, I had to have a blood transfusion.  So that's, you know, she started hearing me talk about no blood transfusions, she was like, "Are you insane?  You wouldn't be here today without a blood transfusion."  So, you know, stuff like that got a lot of problems (laughter) in the house, me talking about Jehovah's Witness stuff.
Story_ID: 493202
Speaker 1: Anyway, at some point--before we quit chess, before I quit chess for a while, we had met another Jehovah's Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses] who played chess, a guy named Roy Moore [ph.], Roy Moore who had a friend who worked on the Long Island Rail Road and who had a friend on the railroad who played chess a lot and this, and this friend's name was Willie Johnson, who was a rated chess player and everybody called him Pop.  And because I was whooping on Roy, Roy said, "Well, I know somebody who can whoop on you."  And I was like, "Ain't nobody can whoop on me, I don't know what you talking about, and let me hurry up and see this friend."  So he set it up that we would go play against his friend.  And we go to his apartment in Brooklyn [New York], in Park Slope and the friendliest guy, he's in his thirties, laughing, "Hey, come on guys, come on in."  And his, his place was, was wild, he had like beads hanging from the door and he, he had a bunk bed, and the bottom, the bottom bunk, the bed is not there, and it's just a, it's a chess table, this is where the, the guys come and play chess.  And he puts on Dolphy [Eric Dolphy] or some Coltrane [John Coltrane], jazz music, and we're like, who is this guy?  I mean, he's straight out the '70s [1970s], like--.  And, and he says let's sit down and we play, so I sit down and they was like, "This is the kid," so we start playing and I start doing good, I got a good ga- he's writing the moves down even, I got a good game going, soon I'm like, I'm, I'm winning this game and the friend is like, Roy is like what is going on, why is this kid winning.  And slowly Pop is getting more and more pissed off like, I thought this was some scrub you brought (laughter) you brought a kid who could play.  And I'm also a nice kid, I'm not one of those braggadocios, you know, I'm just like, I know about respecting my elders and all that stuff, but I knew if I had to put a whooping on you that's what I had to do.  So we didn't get to finish the game because his friends came over and that was like their, that night to play chess, and so the, all of these guys came over, Steve Colding, C-O-L-D-I-N-G [Ernest "Steve" Colding], and Ronald Simpson, Chris Welcome, all of these grown men show up right, guys significantly older than me.  And they come in, it's like, "Who this kid?"  You know, what, boom, light up a joint, whoa, what is going on now (laughter).  So now they smoking reefer, you got the jazz going on, you got the chess tables, they starting to play speed chess and me and Leon [Vincent "Leon" Munro] are like, yo, we Jehovah's Witness kids, we, we don't belong here at all (laughter) you know, this is, this is not a place for us.  And meantime Pop is like, "Come on, man, we got kids here, you know, cool out a little bit."  So he's trying to keep it on the low, be responsible, but them brothers was like, "Come on man, they gonna be here, they just gone have to deal with it."  And they playing for money, and I'm like, I can't hang around with these guys but they're good, you know, I, I wanna beat these guys.
Story_ID: 493203
Speaker 1: And so, turns out that they also played in Prospect Park [Brooklyn, New York].  And there were chess tables in Prospect Park at the time.  So I said, okay, so I'm going to up to Prospect Park 'cause these, that's where they hang out.  So I ended up, Leon [Vincent "Leon" Munro] and me, we went to Prospect Park to get games and we played there and then we started finding out who were the best guys.  And this one guy, George Gold- George Golden, that's G-O-L-D-E-N, George was the man, right.  George was about the same age as Pop [Willie Johnson] and, and he was the like, he was like a god.  He, at the time wasn't better than the best of them anymore 'cause William Morrison and Ronald Simpson had already challenged George and showed that they could beat him but I would later learn the history of this group.  And I would later learn that they called themselves the Black Bear School [Black Bear School of Chess].  And the way they became the Black Bear School, Pop tells the story and all kinds of embellished history or I, I don't think it's embellished but, you know, it sounds like craziness.  But the idea behind the school was, George used to whoop on everybody and then Chris [Chris Welcome], George, and Minio, Herminio Baez, it's H-E-R-M-I-N-I-O, Baez.  Minio used to, they were like--no, wait a minute, Minio was on the other side, so Minio was with George, it's Chris, Steve [Ernest "Steve" Colding], and Pop, no, no, wait a minute, D.C. [Duncan Cox] is in here so, so it's, it's Pop, Chris, and, and D.C. which stands for Duncan-something, I don't know what the C is.  But anyway, they all hang out playing chess together but Pop beats on all of them and takes their money so they wanna beat Pop.  So they study everything about Pop's game, they're in the private, they get, they get like Russian chess books, they get German chess books; they don't even read German, they get German chess books and a dictionary and read the chess notation, you can, you know, you have note, chess notations because chess is a eight by eight board so it's read like a grid and the bottom is A, B, C, D through H and 1, 2, 3, 4, through 8, so A1 is the, that lower right hand corner where A cr- A crosses 1 on that square and you read the squares like that.  So they would take the German chess book, where L is bishop, L is laufer, so it's a bishop, right.  And all the names don't match, and they would take the book out, it's the Weltgeschichte, those are the books (laughter).  They would take out the books, they would grab a dictionary, and they would see laufer and they would look up laufe- said like, "It's an L.  Okay, it looks like an L, yeah, it's an L.  A-U, okay, look--what is that?"  "Yo that's a bishop, a laufer."  "What's a laufer?"  "It's a laufer, it's a bishop."  And they would read and learn, you couldn't go with Russian because Russian, Cyrillic alphabet and you couldn't match, you know, it would be way too hard but they, but they learned how to do the Russian chess moves.  So when you saw a C you knew it was, it was a bishop and it, they didn't know a C was actually pronounced like an S in Russian so it would be, s- for (Russian word), which is bishop.  And, you know, all they knew was C meant bishop, so C, when you see a C, that's a bishop.  And you had this funny twirly thing that was a rook but it, they didn't know it was an L that it sounded like an L, and that was (Russian word).  And, you know, all that, they were just like deciphering codes like Egyptian hieroglyphics so you could get the best books so you could study that.  And literally snail pace study, this is how crazy these guys were for chess, and that's how they prepared for George.
Story_ID: 493204
Speaker 1: And they prepared for George [George Golden], and they called George up and say, "George, we're ready for a match."  And George was like, "Are you crazy?  I'll bust all of y'all asses, this is gonna be easy."  He comes over, it's wintertime, he has a coat on, Pop [Willie Johnson] remembers, coon hat, he comes, and they've studied all his openings, they know exactly what line he plays, they've got lines on, they're ready, they're prepped, George walks in and it's like walking straight into a mine field.  They blow George off the board, each one systematically, George walks into one line, boom, explosion, and then one, boom.  And what George didn't realize, that it was a trap, as Pop tells it, is that the other two weren't playing each other.  Well, what happened is one would play and the other two would watch what was happening to George.  Usually you got a bunch of guys together, these guys are playing, so other guys would play, but George is so into what's going on he doesn't realize that the other two are watching how he's being destroyed.  And then, even though he lost, George didn't get up, somebody, the winner would get up and then be replaced by somebody else 'cause they all wanted him and they murdered him, and he's better than all of them and he couldn't understand what happened.  And when he finished getting slaughtered, he puts his--he jumps up, he's running out of the room, he, his hat is on sideways, and they're like, "Come on, George, let's finish this!"  And he's like, "What, mothers--?"  He leaves the room.  And they can't believe it.  So they lean back, they're smoking a joint, all of them are like, "We just beat George, can't--this guy was like the king."  So they said, "We gotta do, we gotta give ourselves a name."  And they start thinking about a name and they called them, they, they finally, Chris [Chris Welcome] comes up with the name, Black Bear so we, the Russians have a school, the Russian school of chess and they call themselves the black bear school.  And they're like, the black bears?  What is--what is that?  And Chris, and they say, you know, "That's like a dumb name."  And he said, "No, no, no," Chris said, "This is what's great about this name, we're gonna call ourselves the Black Bear School [Black Bear School of Chess] and people are gonna hear black and think it's just niggers just talking about being black and black power, and they're not even gone realize it's a real school, like, like we really study."  And they're like, yeah, that's what we gonna do (laughter).  And that's how the Black Bear School came into existence.  And so I came into that tradition of those guys who took chess seriously.  They were not making any money period, but they took it like it was, like, like I was taking Jehovah's Witness [Jehovah's Witnesses] stuff that's how they was studying chess like biblically from books, deciphering old code, and they got pretty good, they were the best group of pro- best group of African Americans in New York [New York]--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --not in New York, in the country, the best group in the country.
Story_ID: 493205
Speaker 1: Do the Black Bear School [Black Bear School of Chess] players compete in tournaments?
Speaker 2: They did, but their main desire was to kill each other.  And there was, there were cliques in the school, so George [George Golden] after getting hammered was not very happy and realized that people were catching up to him.  So he goes out and finds William, William Morrison, young talented teenager who is incredibly gifted at chess and he grooms him.  And William comes and wipes up everybody and he can't understand, William is a tournament player, been playing tournaments, William grew up in Park Slope [Brooklyn, New York].  And so now William is like George's--wait a minute, oh, no, no, I got it backwards, I got the whole thing backwards, excuse me, let's, let's stream that back.  This is what happened with William, Pop [Willie Johnson] walked into a library and sees a black kid playing in the library, and it's William.  So William is obviously gifted, they can't understand how William can play as well as he plays, he's like twelve or thirteen.  So they ask him if he would play somebody for them, which was George.  What had happened was once George figured out what they did to him, George cleaned up everything and went back, and went back to his dominant self, beating them.  But then they got William and William came and took George's money as a kid.  And George saw the writing on the wall that William was an incredibly strong player so George eventually finds another kid, Ronald Simpson.  And Ronnie has been playing in the barbershops and stuff like that and he grooms Ronnie.  And so now George is grooming Ronnie, and Pop and Minio [Herminio Baez]--and Pop and Chris [Chris Welcome] and them are grooming William.  So William and Ronnie become the, the like the flashpoints or the, you know, the warriors and they're battling one, from one side to the other.  William was slightly better, but Ronnie caught up pretty fast and they both passed George clearly.  But there's tremendous tension in the school from these guys.  Always, the whole dream was, the, we have to beat each other, so they didn't, it was a sense that was very self-destructive for me because their idea was we play against each other and we try to beat each other and we don't really go out and play a lot of tournaments.  And so they tried to even keep their ratings low, which in, in chess tournaments ratings, you have ratings going all the way up, so you have rankings like class D player, class C, class B, class A; then you have expert, master, then senior master, which is as high as you can go in the United States.  And then you have international titles, international master, and international grandmaster, which is the highest title you can get.  So these guys, and, and this was all based on the numerical system, based on the, the level of your opponents and how many points you get depending on who you beat.  These guys didn't wanna play in tournaments 'cause tournaments gave you prizes based on which category you were in, right.  So they wanted to keep their ratings low, not play too much and maybe win a big prize for an amateur which could be $6,000, $7,000, which was nice money.  So they didn't care to play in tournaments; they played amongst themselves.  But the wars that they had against each other were like world championship wars, I mean, it was intense, there was always music, reefer, chess, you know, scene, and it was, I wanna destroy you kind of thing.  In walks mild-mannered [HistoryMaker] Maurice Ashley and Leon [Vincent "Leon" Munro], now, what are the, these guys are crazy, right.  They don't care about us, they wanna take my money, even though I'm a high school kid, Steve [Ernest "Steve" Colding] is saying stuff like, "You know, I'm gonna beat him now so one day when he's a grandmaster and he comes back the trauma is gone be so, so serious that he gonna lose to me even then."  This guy is cra- you know, that, this is the attitude they had like everybody has to take their lumps, it was, it was Brooklyn [New York], it was straight Brooklyn, but it, but because of it they all got good.
Story_ID: 493206
Speaker 1: And is this the period of time during which you learned the rankings that are involved in chess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that you decide you wanted to be an international grandmaster?
Speaker 2: I had learned the rankings in high school with Chico [Clotaire Colas].  And this was a time when I, when Leon [Vincent "Leon" Munro] and I were playing a lot, Chico and I were still even.  And, you know, I had taken a break from chess but then I came back to it when broke from the Jehovah's Witnesses, it was like I found the passion again.  And right then is when I decided I wanted to become a grandmaster when I was graduating high school [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York].  And I wasn't gonna go to college because of Jehovah's Witnesses, but now that I had broken from them, I decided, and I hadn't applied to any colleges, I mean, I had done nothing as far as college was concerned.  I got a, when six- when 1600 was a top on the SAT, I was not studying school stuff or anything like that, although during my break with the Jehovah's Witnesses I started paying attention to school again, you know, so I took the SAT, I did great on the SAT, I got a, a 1360 when 1360 would get you in a lot of places.  But I wasn't, I didn't care, I wasn't going to college.  So by the time col- summer rolled around, summer of '83 [1983] when I graduated, I had nothing lined up.  And now I was no longer a part of Jehovah's Witness and now I wanted to go to college so I ended up having to apply to a city college and I went to a New York City technical college [New York City Technical College; New York City College of Technology, Brooklyn, New York] just to be going to school.  And but chess was back, the love was back, playing against these guys, playing against Ronnie [Ronald Simpson].  Ronnie was, used to crush me.  Hold on, could we pause?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Sure.
Speaker 2: My daughter [Nia Ashley] just walked in, so I should--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: I was talking about Ronnie beating me and the Black Bears [Black Bear School of Chess].
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, so I, those were, those guys were my challenge, I wanted to beat them, and so I started hanging out with them a lot more.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that the fact that they were in competing, in fighting--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --was a depressor for you, I don't mean it was depressing but I mean it threatened to hold you back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started to realize that they really only wanted to play each other.  And by that time, I had known about tournaments and I started reading magazines and realized that there were such things as grandmasters and that the grandmasters were the best players.  But these guys had no aspirations of becoming grandmasters, not from anything I saw.  And, in fact, they saw grandmasters as like some elitist group of white guys, 'cause there were no black ones, who played pretty good but they had no real, I mean and we were, we, we thought their games were the best games, you could see how great they played but it was not, it wasn't real for us.  And being a boy and not knowing any better and, you know, having a knack for the game, I wanted to be a grandmaster, it was like, yeah, I could do that, that's what I wanna do.  And, and so watching them was a bit like, I just need, I need to beat them, I need to get passed them to take it to the next level.
Speaker 1: What was your first tournament, or how did you get yourself involved?
Speaker 2: It was with Chico, and Chico and I did it in, in high school actually, we started playing in high school.  First game I ever played I lost to a guy, Paul Song was his name, I remember him and I would meet him years later in tournaments.  And then I won my next three.  This is the unrated tournaments for beginners.  So I lost my first game, it was unrated and under a certain class, which was low, and I lost my first one and I won my next three and then I came back the next day and won--won three and lost one.
Speaker 1: Was there money involved?
Speaker 2: There might have been, I didn't win any though.
Speaker 1: You have to pay to play?
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have to pay to play.  That was always a problem 'cause we didn't have much money and my mother [Thelma Cormack] was like what is he doing?
Speaker 1: What kind of money are you talking about?
Speaker 2: Twenty bucks [dollars].  Yeah, but its, you know--
Speaker 1: But it's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like what are you doing, yeah.  So I ended up playing tournaments and knew about tournaments but I just got, you know, it's like, it was, it was a, I was born to do it.  I was born to do it, I didn't realize I was born to do it so when I found it, it all came, it just came very fast.
Story_ID: 493207
Speaker 1: Did you earn the rank of national master after high school?
Speaker 2: Well after high school; I was twenty years old when I did.
Speaker 1: And is that after you started attending City College [City College of New York, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right about that time.
Speaker 1: About the same time?
Speaker 2: 'Cause I went to col- I went to New York City Technical [New York City Technical College; New York City College of Technology, Brooklyn, New York] for two years and realized there was nothing there for me.  I didn't wanna do any of the engineering that I was doing in my Brooklyn Technical High School [Brooklyn, New York].  I was, they didn't really, no, that's what it was, I didn't have engineering in New York City Tech, so I had to transfer to City College to get engineering.  And then when I transferred I lost all my credits from New York City Tech, I kept--out of the thirty-six credits I got, I kept eleven.  And then--so it was like starting school over almost.  Losing, I lost like three semesters' worth of work.  And so then I went to City College and I started engineering and realized that I didn't like it at all.  And switched majors and became an English major.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Why did you choose English?
Speaker 2: There was a professor at the, at, at New York City Tech who inspired me as a writer and made me wanna write and, and suggested that I had some writing ability.  And also English was a lot easier than engineering, and I was gonna be a chess player and I didn't care.
Speaker 1: Did you write about chess?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh.  I was studying chess, I was finishing college, my goal was to finish college because my mother [Thelma Cormack] said you had to finish college.  That's why I brought you to this country, you have to finish college.  But I was gonna be a chess player so I didn't really care about college.  I mean, it was interesting but it wasn't anything special for me.
Story_ID: 493208
Speaker 1: (Background noise) And what was your tournament schedule like while you were in college?
Speaker 2: I played a, a lot of local tournaments.  And there were a couple of big tournaments that are held every year, the New York Open [New York State Open] and the World Open in March and in July, but it wasn't that arduous.  You know, it, I, I played a lot of local tournaments.  I wasn't that, you know, even though you're a master and in real chess terms, I was nothing, I mean there are masters at ten, you know, little prodigies who become world champions.  To be twenty years old and a master is an average person.  But what had happened was I started chess so late that in a sense--if you, if you sort of do a, a formula of kids who start when they're five and become masters at eleven and twelve, I really started at fourteen and became a master at twenty, so I was in a sense, a prodigy for the game but I had started so late.  So I was catching up very fast to the stuff that I might have been able to do when I was younger if I had learned the game younger.  And so like I became a master at twenty and then I became a, a senior master at twenty-one and that was like fast like how do you, you know.  Suddenly guys who were beating me one year just couldn't beat me the next year, it doesn't happen easily, take a lot of years to go up the levels in chess, sometimes you spend ten years at the same level.  So I was just catching on to the game very fast.  And I didn't get trained, there was nobody, you know, feeding me with a book, it was just me playing tournaments, the Black Bear School [Black Bear School of Chess], and me at home reading.
Speaker 1: And what about at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], was there a chess club there?
Speaker 2: Eventually there became one, yeah, because I was--no, there was a chess club, there was like a mini chess club and then I became president of the chess club for a semester.  But I was older.  With City College--okay, so now, now the next real period that happens in my life.  I, I've become a pretty decent player but I'm nothing--I can't make a living off the game.  And then I get introduced to a foundation, the American Chess Foundation and they take teachers, they bring teachers to inner city schools to teach them about chess.  At the time I'm twenty-two years old, I'm a senior master, I'm still in college, but college ain't doing nothing for me.  I wanna be a chess player but it's a fantasy right now.  In real terms I'm old enough that I should be out of college, but I'm behind.  So I meet this, this guy, Doug Bellizzi [Douglas Bellizzi], who I later found out it was a, another person who was involved, a Jewish lady, whose name will come to me, who saw me, thought I was a nice young man, and she had some influence at the club, and there were all these white teachers going into the school system, and she felt like I would be perfect, like why don't you hire him?  And so Doug Bellizzi came up to me, Betty [ph.] Deichmann is her name, Deichmann is D-E-I-C-H-M-A-N-N.  And Doug Bellizzi is B-E-L-L-I-Z-Z-I.  So Doug comes up to me and says, "Would you be interested in coaching?"  I was like, "I don't know, what's it about?"  "Well, you'll being teaching, you know, kids, going into neighborhoods teaching kids chess."  And I was a natural teacher, I knew that.  So I'm like, "Maybe."  And he says, "Well, you know, you'll get fifty dollars an hour."  I said, "I'm, I'm willing to do it."  (Laughter) "It's a done deal, it sounds great."  So I would end up teaching about six or seven classes a week, which to make that kind of money each week for, for basically six or seven hours of work, was excellent.
Story_ID: 493209
Speaker 1: So I started going to these different schools and teaching kids chess, and I started out, that's how I started my coaching career.  So college took a back seat.  I started going to City College [City College of New York, New York, New York] now for one or two classes, I started going part-time, I didn't try to finish my degree because it wasn't so relevant and I couldn't do the work, play chess and the degree at the same time, but I knew my mother [Thelma Cormack] wanted me to get a degree.  So I--but I got heavily into coaching the kids.  And so heavily into it that within three years I took a team to the national championships and we won.
Speaker 2: Was that the Raging Rooks?
Speaker 1: The Raging Rooks, yeah.
Speaker 2: And what kind of team members did you have on the Raging Rooks?
Speaker 1: The Ra- I first started with a school, Mahalia Jackson elementary [P.S. 123, Mahalia Jackson School] in Harlem [New York, New York], and that group graduated to junior high [J.H.S. 43, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. School, New York, New York]; I had them for a year.  We actually were able to take them to a nationals, they got their first taste of the nationals.  It was guys like Michael Johnson, Brian Watson [Dwayne Brian Watson], Jonathan Nock, N-O-C-K, couple of other kids, those were the three serious ones, the talented ones.  And when they had their first taste of the nationals, I wanted to stay with them, we went to Tempe, Arizona, to play.  And it was taking them to the nationals, ignited a, a sort of, teaching them in general and taking them to the nationals radically changed my view of politics and inequality in, in America.  At the time I, I had a sor- I had a naive attitude, it was almost like having blinders on.  Coming from Jamaica there was no sense of racism so I refused to recognize racism in this country as any sort of impediment to any goal.  So anybody who would say, well, it's because we're black, I would say, that's garbage, we don't believe in that in Jamaica.  You can do anything you want.  So while there was a natural ceiling in a lot of the minds of African Americans, coming out of Jamaica I felt like that ceiling doesn't exist, I'm gonna do what I wanna do.  And then when I started teaching the kids, I had the same attitude with them.  You can be anything you want, we're gonna do well at chess, I'm gonna show you how to do it, it's gonna be easy, trust me, and we're just gonna win.  And the kids were like, yeah, I, I like the way this guy talks, and there was never any doubt in my mind that we'd be successful.  So we went to--the first nationals we went to we actually won some trophies, and the kids were like, yeah, we could keep doing this.  But I slowly started realizing that it wasn't so simple.  And I lot of things happened like the Tawana Brawley case, this, you know, despite all the whether or not she told the truth about being raped by these white guys, the, the resultant general animosity and the inflammatory rhetoric and the, the, all the, the negativity that came from the case, opened up my eyes to what was like real rac- a racial tinderbox in the city and subsequently in the country.  And then I started really understanding racism, that's like the moment I really started understanding racism.
Story_ID: 493210
Speaker 1: I remember being at the tournament, I remember Jonathan [Jonathan Nock] being at the, you know, there were not a lot of black kids at this tournament.  We were in Arizona.  The kids had never been out of Harlem [New York, New York], first time on a plane.  They're in Tempe [Arizona] and Jonathan was analyzing--there's a group of kids analyzing this chess position and Jonathan who is now a chess b- you know has a chess bug, he comes over and he looks at the position and he sees, I see a move that I know is a great move and Jonathan spots the move, so he decides to show the kids the move.  And he reaches his hand and I can see that he sees it, I'm like proudly waiting for him to show them the move, and he goes, "Look, look," and he goes like this to grab it, and a white kid, maybe a couple of years younger, grabs the piece and tries to make a move.  And Jonathan is like, "No, no, no, no, no, that's not the move," and he tries to take the piece out of the kid's hand to show the other move.  And the kid says, "Let go of the rook, nigger."  And Jonathan went, "What?"  And rolled back (laughter) 'cause a Harlem kid is not gonna play, even though the kid was tinier than he was, this kid was gonna learn something.  And I saw what Jonathan was about to do, and it was gonna get ugly; Jonathan would have destroyed the kid.  So, I grabbed Jonathan's arm to pull him back and he looks he said, "Mr. Ashley [HistoryMaker Maurice Ashley], you, you saw, you heard what he said to me?"  I said, "I know that, you, you don't, you can't let that get you like that in this place."  And there was a coach of the other kid there, and she was smiling.  And I'm looking at her like, you realize, you know, what's up, and apparently she didn't understand what happened because Jonathan is furious like, I'm supposed to hurt this kid, and within ten seconds the kid comes over to him and apologizes and Jonathan is in shock.  Like huh?  And they go back to the position and they start--it's like the kid, the kid doesn't--he's like, the kid was like seven or eight like so many years out of this, out of home, you know, a home life that's what you called them.  And does it really hurt their feelings?  I don't know it's just what I hear.  And now he's apologizing to Jonathan, Jonathan's in shock 'cause he didn't expect it.  You, you, he's learned you're supposed to take care of business, now the kid's apologized, he has to readjust his thinking.  And then all of a sudden they're back together playing again over the chess board which also showed me the magic of the game that it could bring cultures together in very funny ways.
Story_ID: 493211
Speaker 1: And so we, we come home and I remember Jamal Wallace [ph.] was the other one, J-A-M-A-L, Wallace, we come home from the tournament, we come back to Harlem [New York, New York], and Jamal looks around Harlem, we're in the cab coming home, and Harlem just looks different and you could tell it looks different 'cause we just came out of this city [Tempe, Arizona] that was pristine and, and natural and all that stuff and you come back to Harlem and Jamal, he's looking out of the window and he said, "Harlem is dirty."  And it's the first time he realized that, he's lived in Harlem all his life and it's like the first time he's come back and Harlem is dirty, you mean, the city doesn't, a city doesn't have to be like that?  And I--it's like me sitting back going, these kids, this game is opening the stuff up for these kids, they just, they're coming with a different perspective now, and they appreciate it, you know, they can tell they've come back to a certain type of life and that it didn't have to be that way.  And, then I understood that I wasn't just teaching them chess that life was a part of it, and that, and not only was I being inf- was I informing them that I was being informed by the process, that I was learning too.  And that's really when I started becom- being aware of being a black man in America and that it was a difference.  It didn't affect me because my brain doesn't change, it's like I'm a be good that's how I'm, that's what I'm about so you, you can tell me I'm black and I'm alive, but it affects them.  They have the mindset, they're poisoned, they're poisoned by low expectations, they're poisoned by racism, they're poisoned by being in an environment that's rough, the violence, the drugs.  And they see me as somebody who is dif- was the same, like I grew up in it, but somehow I'm different, I'm like a, I'm just, I don't add up exactly.  Like I can go and talk and be like, yo, what's up, what the deal? 'Cause by then I had known how to talk, but I'm also gonna say, but hold on this is, this is this move right here, and this is how it works.  And it's like, he's giving us some power; he's making us do something better.  And by that time we were going to tournament- little tournaments, small miniature tournaments in the city and beating kids, so it meant knowledge was power, it was real.  It wasn't, I'm learning math and what's this math thing for?  It's, I'm learning some more moves, and when I go to the tournaments I'll win, and I'll take home a trophy.  So it was a very experiential knowledge.
Story_ID: 493212
Speaker 1: Now you said you wanted to stay with the Raging Rooks, did you get to do so?  Like after you took them to that first tournament --
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --you had commented that you really wanted to stay with them.
Speaker 2: --so what happened was I leave, we leave that, we leave Mahalia Jackson [P.S. 123, Mahalia Jackson School, New York, New York], we go on to the junior high school, junior- Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. junior high school [J.H.S. 43, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. School, New York, New York].  And I've worked with these kids now for a year, I wanna keep staying with the kids.  There's a chess club at this school, and there's a gentleman by the name of Richard Gudonsky.  And Richard, a white guy, Gudonsky is G-U-D-O-N-S-K-Y.  He had a chess club at the school, he played chess; he loved to play.  So during lunch time he played a couple of times a week.  And, I come into the school as a senior master, he knows he can't do anything with me.  So he s- so we still have this program going so I said, "You know, my kids came from this other school, they're pretty good.  I would like to keep training them here and any other, other kids in your chess club."  So Richard says, "No problem, you can take them into a separate room, and if a kid can beat me, he'll go in your room."  And that way we got all the best kids.  So we're in this room and I'm starting to teach them chess, and I meet other kids, Charu Robinson, Charu is C-H-A-R-U.  Sammy Padilla, P-A-D-I-L-L-A, was a Latino kid.  Steven Yow, Y-O-W, Asian kid.  Kasaun Henry, another black kid, K-A-S-A-U-N, Henry.  So, this group merges with my old group of Michael Johnson and Dwayne Brian Watson and Jonathan [Jonathan Nock] now, merges with that group and suddenly we're a powerhouse, we're, we're tough.  And I'm in there twice a week showing them chess.  And we go to tournaments and we start destroying people as a team.  We're like hammering, who are these black kids?  They're just good.  And what Richard had asked me was, "How do I get these kids good?"  I said, "They have to play every day."  So he opened up his lunch- his room at lunch time, every day, like any kid who wants to play chess can come in the room and play.  And so every day they're playing chess.  And then he even started early morning chess, if you wanna come to school before, come to chess before school we'll open up the chess club.  And the kids just took to it like water, and they're like, this is, so my kids are playing every day.  I'm only seeing them twice a week, but they're playing every day, twice a day, then they're going home and playing each other, they're on the phone playing each other talking about chess moves.  And so the bug is in there; they're infected.  We go to our first nationals [National Junior High Chess Championship] as a, as the Raging Rooks and because of a formula where you have to have four person, four people on a team, Kasaun was too good for--like some of the kids wanted to play on a lower section, Steven was older than them, not Steven, Sammy was older so he had to play up.  Another kid, John Bonham, Jonathan Bonham [ph.], Jonathan Bonham, I forget his exact name, but the kids were too old so we couldn't, the, the bottom line is we didn't have a group of four, so we couldn't win a team trophy.  Then we started doing chess in the summertime, they said, we wanna do chess all the time.  So, even though they're out of school, and I'm out of school, and I should be traveling playing chess, I decide I wanna spend my summers, my summer with them playing chess.  And I brought 'em over to meet the Black Bear School [Black Bear School of Chess], and they're in Prospect Park [Brooklyn, New York] and so everything is linked, and the kids are just like (snaps fingers) getting good, getting good.  And so the very next year we go back and we win the national championship.
Story_ID: 493213
Speaker 1: So it was a pretty, you know, intense two years.  We had our issues, one issue was that the American Chess Foundation really didn't have a policy at the time that a teacher stays in a school the whole time; they expected you to plant the seed and leave to another school and plant a seed there, and plant a seed there.  At the time, it was logical to them, it was racist to me.  I was like, you can't do that to kids; you don't just start and not stop.  But I understand their policy now.  Now, they've actually changed their policy, and they do it the other way.  But at the time, they felt they were doing the right thing by going school to school to school, which is planting the seed for chess and then letting the school take over if they're really interested in chess.  It was my winning the nationals [National Junior High Chess Championship] with the kids and being on the front page of The New York Times and all that that showed them that if you get the kids really good you could get a lot more publicity having competitive kids than having kids who just barely know how to play and they're not really doing much.  And that changed their whole direction and they started seeding schools, started seeding teachers at schools to try to get those kids really good because of publicity, the attendant publicity would be really great for them too, and they could do a lot more, and it worked perfectly.  So that was one thing.  The, the problem for me was, when I insisted on that, they cut my funding.  So I couldn't go to the other schools, I had to, it cost me a lot of money, I had to settle on the Raging Rooks school [J.H.S. 43, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. School, New York, New York] as the school I would stay at and then just make my way.  Otherwise, you know, financially, because they didn't wanna, that was their sort of punishment, you know, well, if you're not gonna do what we say and go to all these different schools with your hours, then we, we're not gonna give you as much money, we're gonna cut your hours.  So if I was working let's say eight hours, they would cut it back to four hours, and that was a big chunk of money to lose.  Now, the logic behind that is they get their funding, I mean, when I think about it later, they get their funding based on the number of kids they have.  So if I'm in one school teaching only one group of kids, even if I taught different kids in the school, it would be more kids so they could get more money because they're impacting more kids and more schools.  Me insisting on being in one school was saying, no, you're only spending all this money that you get on let's say it's ten kids or thirteen kids, you're staying on this group, funders are not going for that, funders are like you're not really having a broad impact so you don't really need the money, money per dollar is, you know, kid per dollar, is not really an impact.  I wasn't that savvy back then.  I just knew that I wanted to teach these kids and get them really good.  Once they got on the cover of The New York Times, it became clear that the program was doing quality work, which ironically was only because I had defied them and stayed in the school.  So once that became clear, they got all this publicity and they were able to attract funders, and they, right then they gave me whatever I wanted, they said, "How many schools you wanna go to?  We'll even give you training if you want, yourself, personal training, whatever you want you can have."  'Cause it had worked out, thankfully.  If I hadn't sacrificed all that it would not have worked but, you know, you do the right thing.  So that's how the Raging Rooks, the, the challenge of the Raging Rooks came into being and we were successful.
Story_ID: 493214
Speaker 1: What happens with your game while you're training the Raging Rooks?
Speaker 2: My game slowly--it, it's, it's up and down, my game is not really shooting off very well.  It was just, it was too much, I was going to school and I was training kids and trying to be a chess player and that's a terrible formula.  So, my game suffered for a while.  I, I got stuck at one point.  And finally I got a trainer, a, a Ukrainian, Vitaly Zaltsman, V-I-T-A-L-Y, Z-A-L-T-S-M-A-N.  And, I got that trainer through the American Chess Foundation initially.  This was in '88 [1988], actually this was well before I met the Raging Rooks in, in '89 [1989], '90 [1990], '91 [1991].  I mean this was just before.  But then after I'd attend lessons with him and my game was showing a lot of promise, they cut the funding early, which didn't really endear me to them (laughter) too much.  But then I went back to him after we won the nationals [National Junior High Chess Championship], I had a little extra change and I went back to him and paid for it myself.  And I got a lot better from it, the trainer, actually having a formal trainer show you stuff and that's when I first became an international master.
Story_ID: 493215
Speaker 1: We were talking about the Raging Rooks, I also understood that you worked with a team called the Dark Knights.
Speaker 2: That was later.
Speaker 1: Was that, okay.  Fantastic.  And is this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was after we won the nationals [National Junior High Chess Championship].  That was actually the year after we won the nationals.
Speaker 1: Then you shift to the Dark Knights.  Are any of the Dark Knights Raging Rooks?
Speaker 2: No.  The Raging Rooks were at one school, Adam Clayton Powell junior high school--junior high school 43 [J.H.S. 43, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. School, New York, New York].  The Dark Knights were at another school, Mott Hall [Mott Hall School, New York, New York], and Mott Hall was just a totally different school and they called themselves the Dark Knights.  I was actually coaching both schools simultaneously for a little while.  But while my financial base was eroding at 43 with the Raging Rooks, Mott Hall, the funder, a guy named Dan Rose [Daniel Rose] who is a philanthropist, he made it possible for me to stay at Mott Hall and do a fuller program.  And so financially I was able to survive by going over to the other school.  And all my Raging Rooks kids graduated, the initial group, and we had a new corps of chess players, but it was just not the same attachment.  So I took the Raging Rooks to two more nationals, we came in fifth place in the next two nationals.  But the Mott Hall team was making it, the Mott Hall situation, the foundation [American Chess Foundation] was making it possible for me to make a living, and so I started focusing my energies on them.
Speaker 1: So can you assign some years to this development, including when you become an international master in the midst of this?
Speaker 2: I meet the Raging Rooks in eighty--I, I meet the first group of kids in '88 [1988], then I meet the Raging Rooks in '89 [1989], fall of '89 [1989].  I, I mean I take my group to the Raging Rooks, to the school, and we become the Raging Rooks with Kasaun [Kasaun Henry] and that group in '89 [1989] to '90 [1990].  And then the '90 [1990] to '91 [1991], we play the nationals in 1991, we win the nationals, we tie for first.  Then in ninety--in the fall of '91 [1991], Kasaun graduates, Sammy [Sammy Padilla] graduates, Jon [Jonathan Nock] graduate- Jon actually wasn't with the team, he had already--.  So those two graduate, and Charu [Charu Robinson] gets a scholarship to Dalton [The Dalton School], which is a topnotch private school here in New York [New York].  And so my team is decimated; I have a whole new group, new corps.  I still have, oddly enough I still had the same original three that I had from the previous school still with me.  So I'm still with that group, but now I just start with the Mott Hall group.  So then we take this group back to the nationals, and we come in fifth.  Actually we came in fifth, our best player, Brian [Dwayne Brian Watson], caught the chickenpox at the s- at the tournament, (laughter) at the tournament and so he was sick like crazy and couldn't play.  So cap- we lose, lose our best player and we come in fifth.  Then the next year, they all graduate, all of them, and I have a totally new group of kids.  And teach that group, so now we're in '92 [1992], and now the core group in the Mott Hall situation is starting to grow.  And then my whole concept for chess in the curriculum, more intense application for chess starts to build in the Mott Hall situation, this is '92 [1992].  And now '93 [1993] comes, and my game starts to flourish and I become an international master in 1993.
Story_ID: 493216
Speaker 1: So when you're working with students, is your goal to teach them to play chess just so that they can too become international grandmasters, or do you have some other purpose for teaching?
Speaker 2: I had, first of all I was not a grandmaster so I had no idea that they would be great players necessarily, I wanted them to get good, but my thing, by this time, I have, I am starting to realize the social value what I'm doing.  That it wasn't about teaching them chess.  Initially it might have been but I start recognizing that the picture is a lot bigger and that what these kids need to do is feel like they can be successful using their brains.  And every black kid is like I'm gonna be a basketball player, I'm gonna be Jordan, Michael Jordan is--.  I wanna be Michael Jordan or I'm gonna start some kind of sports thing.  And I'm actively telling them that's ridiculous like, you're not gonna do that, that's not gonna happen, you should get your education.  And I remember having a speech once and one kid looked at me and it was almost tears in eyes, he looked at me and he said, "Why are you trying to destroy my dream?"  And that made me back up and say, "All right, I'm not trying to destroy your dream, I just want you to realize that the odds are against you and that you really need to get an education so that you will balance that and you can keep your dreams just make sure that you get an education."  And that became my message.  I wanted to get them excited.  And then I would tell them, "You know, what?  You have no idea how much crap is learning, you're learning, you're learning in school and the stuff you're not learning."  And I would show them, I mean, I had situations I'd go into the school and my kids would be playing chess in the back of the room and kids were watch- reading, listening to the, listening to the radio and kids were reading the papers and the teacher was right in the front doing something that he had to do.  And I wa- and I knocked on the door and the teacher was like oh, come on in.  And I go to the back of the room sitting with my chess players, 'cause they knew I was the chess coach, sitting with my players and I said, "Why isn't there a classroom, a class going on?"  And they're like, "This is how we do all the time," and went back to playing chess.  So the kids were getting half and half education, and not really caring that's school, what's the deal, you know, some teachers they try to teach you stuff and other teachers you can hang out, they cool.  And then I, you know, that's like my, my active social conscience started kicking in, I realize.  And I told them directly, "You guys are getting shortchanged here, you're not learning about this, this, this," and I start dropping stuff on them, they're like, "Well, why don't you teach us?"  Which is like I'm not your teacher, I can't teach you all the subjects and sit here and, and teach you; you're gonna have to make sure you get this stuff.  And a couple of them were lucky enough to get into good scholastic situations, a couple of them got lost.  You know, one kid ended up in jail, one of my chess players.  Fortunately, most of them ended up in college.
Story_ID: 493217
Speaker 1: You became an international chess- international master in chess in 1993?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And it's my understanding that you're the first black international master, is that true?
Speaker 2: The first African- the first one here in the United States.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, I translate black into African American.  You're the first African American--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --international master of chess.  Is that a unique experience for you in the context of those who are playing chess at that level?  Do they treat you differently because you're black and you're--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and do you perceive it at all differently from the other black players perhaps because you're American?  Like how, how does being black and American fall into that milieu?
Speaker 2: It mattered in that being--international master is not as prestigious as international grandmaster by a long stretch.  So when I become an international master, it's no news to the rest of the world.  It gets no attention.  Chess players understand that here's this player who's pretty good, but he's an IM--we call the international master--he's an IM.  So for the brothers, it's like he's the best brother, right, that matters.  He's like that guy's the top brother, he can play, but he needs to become a grandmaster.  That's when they're gonna give us respect.  And it's funny how black people are, you know, if one of us does it, then we all did it.  So, we're not gonna get our respect until one person does it and when he does it, it's not him getting the respect, it's all of us getting the respect, so I understand that.  So I take on this mantle.  The moment I become an international master, the pressure is on to become a grandmaster, immediately.  It's like you, you can't say you arrived yet until you got to that.  So when I become an IM, the, there wasn't much hoopla, it was special for my group, it was special but it wasn't that, it wasn't that serious.
Speaker 1: And when you're playing games as a black American, do you get any flak from the players from other countries, or the players who might be white Americans?
Speaker 2: From, from other countries, noth- nothing visible that I can tell, that I recall.  In the U.S., definitely some incidents, not a lot of incidents.  Chess players, chess players are a strange group not just because they tend to be, they tend to be isolationist and not as sociable so to speak.  You know, when you spend your life studying a singular game, you know, this, this game where it's you and you're preparing to defeat others, you're not exactly like a party animal necessarily, although some are.  It's not, it's not a straight stereotype, but it's, it's somewhat insular, the game.  And so it also is weird in that what chess players understand is if you can crush 'em.  And if you can crush 'em I don't care what color you are, the cat can play, I mean, look at the moves he's dropping.  And you can't say, well, yeah, you know, they play basketball 'cause he's playing you some chess, and he's dropping moves.  So, the ones who can't beat me, and there are a lot of those 'cause now I'm an international master, there are respecters like he can play, he's a good player.  And the ones who can, however, there are still those who have this little attitude.
Story_ID: 493218
Speaker 1: So one grandmaster, name is Arthur Bisguier, B-I-S-G-U-I-E-R, he was a classic grandmaster, famous for playing against Bobby Fischer and playing back in the old days.  I was playing in a chess club, the Manhattan Chess Club, against another international master, Jay Bonin, this was just before I became an international master, but I was clearly at that level.  And Arthur Bisguier walks into the chess club, watching the two of us play, we're playing speed chess where you play very fast.  And I beat Jay a game.  Now to Jay that's not a surprise people are watching two good players, it's the Manhattan Chess Club, I go there a lot and they know I can play so the two of us are playing, it's not a shock that I'm beating Jay and he's beating me; we're going back and forth winning games.  When Bisguier walks in, sees the two of us playing, knows Jay, doesn't know me, looks at Jay and says, "You're letting this schvartze beat you?"  Now, schvartze is a Jewish, Yiddish term that means black, but essentially means nigger.  And everybody freezes and I look at him.  And he's like, what?  You know, I'm Grandmaster Arthur Bisguier.  So, I didn't know him personally but I knew it was Bisguier, he's a grandmaster, grandmasters are like, all hail to the grandmaster, for him to say that to me is, is a shock to the system.  I'm not angry, I'm hurt; this is a guy I would have re- hoped to respect my game.  He is calling me a nigger to my face in a group atmosphere, where everybody else is white, by the way, so it's a, kind of a weird situation to be in in the first place.  Jay is looking at him like he's stupid, like, what is your problem?  You know, the guy can play.  But now my reaction would be different, and he'd be very fortunate to be standing still probably, I don't know, I'm a mild mannered guy, but I would have had a more vociferous reaction than I did then when he said that.  So I'm, you know, I'm like, okay, he said that me, I can't believe this guy said this to my face.  Very fortunately, as I understood it, 'cause the only way you get people back in chess is play them, the two games we played I kicked his ass.  And the look on his face and the slumping and the slouch in his back when we played, it was palpable.  You just saw, to him it was like he had lost, I, I guess he had lost to a monkey.  I mean, that's how, you know, how could I lose?  How bad am I, how low a level am I now that I lost to this guy?  And then to do it again, and the second time I did it, I did it out of a, an equal position, which means, I had no real advantage, I just play- just beat him because I was a better player, I just outplayed him and it was like, um-hm.  So, you know, circumstances like that.  One guy, one grandmaster, I was playing a match against a Hungarian, Sofia Polgar, P-O-L-G-A-R, and we were playing a match, and I lost the first game of the match, and a Russian grandmaster, Roman Dzindzichashvili.  Whose name (laughter) is D-Z-I-N-D-Z-I-N-C-H-A-S-H-V-I-L-I [sic.], Dzindzichashvili.  He said, he was always a jokester, is the kind of guy he was, he always cracked jokes, that was his thing.  And he said, "You better not lose to her," so he's being both racist and sexist simultaneously.  "You better not lose to her, you know, in Russia we have a movie, it's called castrated black man." (Laughter) It's like, it's like, what?  (Laughter) So not only was it, you know, he, he managed to combine all of the, the, the, is, the isms in one (laughter).  And again a respected grandmaster, one of the top players in the country at the time, and it was just like, you couldn't see past your color, it's just, you couldn't do it.  So, yeah, there were a couple of incidents.
Story_ID: 493219
Speaker 1: And there was always friction, there were, it was, you would have a group of guys who just didn't see that the guy can play, what's the big deal?  Then you have a couple of guys who just felt animosity.  And then when I started getting benefits because I was African American, because people recognized that here was a potentially historical figure who could break some barriers who could bring people into the game, there were people who resented it because they were better players and they weren't getting those benefits.  But they contributed nothing to the social fabric or anything but they were like, no, why should he get it just because he's black.  And, and, and the benefits I'm talking about are being invited to prestigious tournaments, for example.  You know, there would be a, a tournament, people like to have variety and interesting people at their tournament and for them, I was not only interesting, I had been doing, I mean as a--.  Do we have to stop?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh.  I was not only, I was starting to get notoriety not only as a player, which is part of it, but because I was getting all this, all the press for the work I was doing with kids.  So that that cha- you know, that would be publicized, that was, that, when we won the nationals, the Raging Rooks won the nationals [National Junior High Chess Championship] we were on the cover of The New York Times, we were covered by everybody around the country 'cause once The New York Times did it, everybody picked up the story, the kids were mini celebrities, they wanted to make a movie about us, NHK-TV in Japan heard about us and came to do a, a story on us for Japanese television.  We were invited to London [England] to a world championship match.  I mean, it was, it was a big deal that, and, and in fact, the heading of The New York Times was 'Harlem Teenagers Checkmate a Stereotype' [John Tierney].  Big bold letters, cover of The Times.  Brian [Dwayne Brian Watson] with his Kangol hat on backwards, Charu [Charu Robinson] with his ca- his baseball cap on sideways chilling over a chessboard, just looking at the chessboard.  And, and it's like, what is this?  And these are black kids at a time when black, when black teenagers were hoodlums, straight, that was the American psyche, and here they were on the cover of The Times playing chess.  So it me- you know, it, it resonated, it mattered in this country that that's what the kind of work being done and that's what I was doing.  So, yeah, I got invitations, you know, get over it.  I'm doing good work.
Story_ID: 493220
Speaker 1: How'd you meet your wife [Michele Ashley-Johnson]?
Speaker 2: I was coaching chess at a school in Brooklyn [New York] and it was the kids who were on the chess team there were a part of her class.  And so, she would come and pick them up every so often.  And the chess coach also happened to co-teach with her that same class.  And one time we were in the chess room and I was, it was a woman, Lena [ph.] Cohen, C-O-H-E-N, and I was sitting next to Lena and the class was basically over and it was time for the kids to go back, they were second graders, and in walks this vision of loveliness that's like who is that (laughter).  And Lena caught the look in my f- my eyes and she, she, she was like "Hm?"  I said, "Oh, she's gorgeous," and she was so graceful.  And she left the room.  But at the time she was going out with someone, and I was going out with someone but she was just an impressive woman to, to see in her whole vibe.  And then I broke up with my, with the woman I was going out with, and several months later, she broke up with someone she was going out with.  And Lena, and her busybody self, remembered (laughter) and came over to me and said, "You know she's available now."  I was like, "What?"  So there was my opportunity and the rest is history.
Speaker 1: And how many children do you have?
Speaker 2: We have two children.
Speaker 1: What are their names?
Speaker 2: The oldest, the older one is Nia, N-I-A [Nia Ashley], and she's now thirteen.  And the younger one is Jayden, J-A-Y-D-E-N [Jayden Ashley], and he's now five.
Speaker 1: And do your kids play chess?
Speaker 2: They both know how to play, Nia never really took to chess as a big part of her life.  She knows how to play, she's been a part of the chess club and stuff.  She's a drama queen; she loves acting.  Jayden just insisted that I teach him how to play, and that's the way I wanted it to happen, so he's starting to play now.  He's still big into his trains, his Thomas trains.
Speaker 1: And what about your wife?  Does your wife play?
Speaker 2: She knows how to play and that's it.  She's not a competitive type person.
Speaker 1: But, has she, when you spent time dating, did your wife come and watch you play chess championships?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Does your family do that now, how does that, how does that work (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My wife learned early not to come to too many chess tournaments because if you don't play chess, I'm playing so it's not that interesting.  And she's not really, you know, into it like that.  Also it's problematic because the family wants attention from Dad, especially my daughter when she was young, when we first learned that it didn't work, she won, we wanted her to be there, we, I wanted my family to be there but it just didn't work because they wanted too much of my attention and I couldn't give it 'cause I was deep in competition, so we learned not to do that very early on.
Story_ID: 493221
Speaker 1: How does your life as a chess player work with your family life?  If you could just give us an idea of what your practice is like, do you have a schedule that you follow every day, what happens when you leave town, how intense is it, how much time does it mean that impacts your family?
Speaker 2: At this moment in time, as of 2007, right, it's late summer, 2007, I don't play chess as much as I used to.  In fact, I haven't played a serious chess tournament in four years.  Before then, I used to play all the time.  I used to travel abroad.  I went to all the European countries and played tournaments.  And that affected, that was a sacrifice on the part of my wife [Michele Ashley-Johnson] because I'd be away for two weeks at a time playing in some tournament in Holland [the Netherlands] or in Germany or France or just a whole bunch of traveling.  Not only that, I do chess commentary where I speak about chess on television and that would take me to different places, I'd end up in Moscow [Russia] in the Kremlin building [Moscow Kremlin] and in Paris [France] and London [England].  So, chess took me away from the family quite a bit.  I tried not to make it too, too many times during the, the, too many times consecutively so that I'd be at home for at least a month or so but sometimes you just couldn't control it, I'd just be traveling a lot.  And I missed the first time my daughter [Nia Ashley] crawled, which made me very sad 'cause I was away at a tournament in Bermuda.  I've missed some events because of it.  And it was tricky on my wife, at the time she was a teacher, so she was, and the times I was away it was like being a single mom, you know, and you'd have to try to figure out babysitting and all that, and then come home and, you know, you're with your daughter and, and Dad's away.  So, there were, there were a couple of years when it was really intense when I was traveling a lot.  And then I worked out where I could be at home a lot more.  But up until I became a grandmaster in '99 [1999], and even after then, but I would, I would never be away, I would always try to come back and spend a month at home, and then go away for a couple of weeks and then come back and spend a month at home, that, that kind of continuity, so my wife would get a break.  What ended up happening, 'cause it's crazy, I mean, you're just, you're in a bubble; when you go to a chess tournament you're just locked in a bubble, it's like a goldfish bowl.  And the whole world, the rest of the world doesn't matter, world events are going on and you don't care 'cause you're at a tournament and you're trying to win.  And, and so it was tricky on my wife.  I would go away, I'd come back and she'd have fifty things to tell me.  It's like, first thing, here's your daughter; and the second thing is, this happened while you were--the car, there was a crash, So and So got injured.  And you're like, I just came home from a chess tournament I'm trying to decompress (laughter) and s- all these things that she couldn't tell me while I was at the tournament 'cause it would be distracting she now got to take off, get off her shoulders.  So that was tricky.  That lasted I'd say a solid four years or so.  Then, when my son [Jayden Ashley] was born, by the time my son was born, it's already late in my career 'cause by then I'm a grandmaster and he was born in '02 [2002], I became a grandmaster in '99 [1999].  So I, and my wife had aspirations of becoming a principal.  So, in the last four years I've backed up from my chess career and given her an opportunity to do her thing.
Story_ID: 493222
Speaker 1: When did you start commentating chess matches between other people?
Speaker 2: That was early on, '94 [1994].  I had just become an international master, and I had the additional notoriety of coaching these Harlem [New York, New York] kids.  And my claim to fame with, with the Harlem kids was, here was a guy who could speak their language.  And what, and how did he present the game, right, and I presented the game in a way that kids could get; I didn't talk chess, technical chess lingo, I would break it down into sports, I would break it down into, into street analogies, into even animal analogies, I did whatever it took so the kids could get it.  I would be, it's like, you know, when you go outside and you gone have to fight and this is what happens, right, and they're like--.  So here's how you, here's how you do it: you got two armies, you can't just take out two guys because if you take out two guys, then would you do that in a fight, let's say you got to go fight somebody across the street, the guy you're gonna--what, what you're gonna do, take two guys out and they got eight?  Like, no, you not gonna do that, you're gonna make sure everybody comes to--.  That's right, so you prepare yourself, make sure all the pieces come out first and then you start the fight.  It's like yeah, that makes a lot of sense.  So (laughter) I mean, I was using, I was pulling anything I could just to make it make sense.  Two on ones, I used basketball analogies, like this guy, use two, this is how you trick him.  So the kids got what I was saying.  Unlike guys, I remember one guy trying to explain chess at a tournament to these two people who were interested, it was at a world championship match, two young, two ladies who worked at the hotel.  And he said one sentence and I knew those women would never try to play chess ever in their lives because he made it sound like calculus, which in a way it is, but if you're gonna explain it like calculus, they're not gonna be interested.  And I desperately wanted to go over to them and say, no, no, no, it's not like that, right, it's basic.  And then figure out some analogy that they were gonna make, you know, that was gonna make sense.  No, he had it like, "You know, basically it's sort of like a prophylactic measure against the attack and when you--."  I was like (gesture), I wouldn't wanna play chess after that explanation.  So, it caught o- people caught on that I could explain chess a different way and that my style would be different.
Story_ID: 493223
Speaker 1: And so, and at the same time, there was this group, the Professional Chess Association, that was starting and they wanted to put chess on TV, and they needed a young, more or less presentable guy who could explain chess to the public 'cause their dream was to put chess on TV.  And they, they knew who I was and they said could you try to do this?  And it was funny, I was in--the Kremlin [Moscow Kremlin], the first tournament they had was in Moscow [Russia] in the Kremlin building, which had never held a chess tournament, and never had any sporting event but the Kremlin was this big political building in Moscow, great history, and--.  Glasnost with, with Mikhail Gorbachev in the '80s [1980s] was, was head of Russia, who headed the Soviet Union, he had, he had this whole glasnost period [perestroika] with Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] and they were opening up the doors and then the Soviet Union had tumbled in the beginning of the '90s [1990s].  And so now the Soviet breakup had begun, and westerners could start to think about maybe dealing with the old Soviet regime.  And one of the things that we had in common was chess.  And so, Garry Kasparov, who was the world champion at the time, Kasparov, K-A-S-P-A-R-O-V, he brought chess, he had some might because he was the best player in the world and a superstar in, in the Soviet Union, so he brought chess to the authorities and said, we wanna hold this event in the Kremlin building, which is like, basically like holding chess on the floor of [U.S.] Congress.  Who's gonna do a tournament in Congress?  You know, that's how he conceptualized it.  And so they had this tournament there, and they're doing commentary for the Russian speakers, we're in Moscow after all, but there are a lot of English speakers.  So, they had headsets for everybody so that the players would play and then people would listen to the commentary through the headsets, and the commentators are off in a booth.  So Bob Rice, who is head of the Professional Chess Association says to me, "So you think you could do English speaking commentary for the English speakers?"  I said, "I could do that, you know, I'll talk about it."  So I go in a booth by myself, I got the headset on, I got the microphone, and I start talking to the audience of English speakers who were watching the match.  And I'm talking about it like I'm Howard Cosell, like commentator from way back.  I'm not, or, or like Marv Albert, right, who's more known now.  I'm not saying, "Well, folks Garry Kasparov has just made an excellent move, bishop D5 attacking Kramnik's pawn on F3 and it seems like Kramnik [Vladimir Kramnik] is having a deep head scratcher by this position."  That's not happening, that's the golf call.  Instead I'm talking like I'm straight out of Brooklyn [New York], right, but I'm, I understand that I can't use Brooklyn lingo, it's not gonna work.  But and I'm gonna get loud so now it's coming in like straight Jamaican roots.  So I'm calling the game, I'm going, "Bishop D5, what a vicious move!  Kasparov is trying to take Kramnik's head off, Kramnik looks like he's about to get punched in the face."  And that's how I'm calling it.  So the English speakers are cracking up in the audience (laughter) like what is he doing, they're laughing like crazy.  And the Russians are hearing this, and they're like, what is so funny?  'Cause they're listening to the Russian channel, what's so funny?  So Kasparov's mother, who doesn't even speak enough English to really follow the conversation, I hear later that she changes over from the boring Russian channel to the English channel 'cause the guy is acting like something crazy is going on, and little snippets that she's catching of English, plus what she understands about chess 'cause she's his mother, she's like, yeah, this guy is fun, and it transformed chess presentation, right.  And now you, you can't just be like, "Yeah, yeah, this is good, good move, Bob."  (Laughter) It's, it's, "This guy's spectacular move, Kasparov is about to kill Kramnik!"  You know, that changed the whole vibe, and now they want, everybody wanted me to do commentary and they felt like this would be the formula for putting chess on ESPN and maybe getting chess into regular television.
Speaker 2: Is chess a sport?
Speaker 1: Oh, I, well, if a sport is something that a person is trying to win so they gain some money and make a, a living and what they're trying to do is destroy the other person, then chess is a sport for sure (laughter).  If you're talking about whether or not you sweat when you're playing chess, yeah, chess is a sport too.  If there's a winner and a loser and a trophy, yeah, chess is a sport.  If you're talking about jumping up and down, maybe catching a ball or bouncing a ball and putting it in a hoop, then chess is not a sport.  But it sure as hell is a great competition between two very focused opponents trying to defeat each other.
Story_ID: 493224
Speaker 1: So you became an international grandmaster in 1999.  Can you tell us a little bit about achieving that and can you tell us about how rare it is to be an international grandmaster of chess in 1999 and what the landscape looks like today?
Speaker 2: International grandmaster is, is the Ph.D. of chess.  At the same time, there are far more Ph.D.'s than there are international grandmasters.  And of the half a billion people who play chess around the planet, there are less than a thousand international grandmasters.  So, despite its popularity, to be a grandmaster is a rare thing.  At the time there were only seven hundred of them, so it was even more of an elite group.  So to say grandmaster and chess in the same breath is just, you know, you're an international grandmaster, we call them grandmasters or GMs for short, to be a GM is a life's work.  Nowadays, young people are able to do it using computers a lot faster but even now it's rough to become a grandmaster, it takes a tremendous amount of work, a tremendous amount of knowledge, a tremendous amount of understanding.  And the percentile of chess players who are grandmasters is less than 1 percent of 1 percent, far less.  So, so it's, it was a big deal.  Now to have found a black man who was a grandmaster, well, there was none, so that made it even more special.  So the path to become a grandmaster was so topsy-turvy.  Part of my problem was that I was coaching still, that I was doing commentary now, so I was doing commentary for the biggest matches, for world championship matches, for 'Man vs. Machine' ['The Man vs. The Machine'] when the--Kasparov [Garry Kasparov] played against the computer [Deep Blue].  People wanted me--I got a CD-ROM ['Maurice Ashley Teaches Chess'], so I developed a CD-ROM for chess.  And then I, you know, I had just had a newborn [Nia Ashley] that I was trying to be a great dad to.  So I had a, this whole life in front of me that, that was taking me away from becoming a really good chess player.  So in 1998, actually it happened in 1998 that--wait, 1997, excuse me, in April of 1997, I was at a real low point in my life.  I wanted to become a grandmaster, I was still coaching, I was successful, I was making money, but I was getting nowhere as a chess player.  And every tournament I played in that could give me the chance of becoming a grandmaster, I was trying to balance everything, I was failing.  And in April of 1997 I watched Tiger Woods win the PGA championship by twelve strokes.  No, the Masters [Masters Golf Tournament, Augusta Georgia], he won the Masters by twelve strokes.  And that elated me and it depressed me simultaneously.  And I felt like that's it, I've gotta just do this now.  And I spoke to my boss at the Harlem Educational Activities Fund [Harlem Educational Activities Fund, Inc., New York, New York], where this philanthropist Dan Rose [Daniel Rose] was and I had a, a boss, Courtney Welsh was the director, Welsh is W-E-L-C-H [sic.].  She was directing the program and I said, "I really need to become a grandmaster, I can't keep doing this work."  And she said, "Ask Dan, he's got money."  I was like, "Just like that?"  She said, "Yeah, just like that; just ask him."  So I asked him and because I had won with the Dark Knights [at Mott Hall School, New York, New York] a couple of national championships [National Junior High Chess Championship], and because he had gotten notoriety and more money for his organization because of the work I had done and all that, he said, "I could do that for you.  You wanna be a grandmaster?  I'll sponsor you."  And that, wow.  And so in 1997, in September of 1997, I had dropped everything and started just following the road to become a grandmaster.  And eighteen months later, I did it.
Story_ID: 493225
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your training.  Are you playing chess every day--
Speaker 2: Every day (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) more than one time a day, are you taking the coach- coaching also for three day periods, how does that work?
Speaker 2: The sponsorship had it that I could get a coach once a week, I could, who would come for several hours to my home and train me.  I would study chess every single day, minimum six hours, more like eight, sometimes ten, every day, and go to tournaments, traveling around the world at tournaments.  I went to Budapest in Hungary; I went to Germany to play; went to France, Cannes; we play here in the big tournament in New York [New York State Open], play in July, in the U.S.; Bermuda.  And then I, just the sponsorship [from Daniel Rose] allowed me to get the training and also to afford going to these places, and to take care of my family.  So I was able to just pursue that one goal.  And I got my first, the first leg of the title, you have to get three norms to become a grandmaster.  I'd actually already achieved one back in '93 [1993], I needed two more.  And to get a norm you have to beat grandmasters and international masters, and it's rough in there.  And I got another one in Germany.  And then it took me another fourteen months after that to get the third one.
Speaker 1: The third.
Speaker 2: And I did it in New York [New York] of all places.  After all that traveling, I did it at home.
Speaker 1: And then is, and then is the title immediate?  So do you sit up, stand up from the table after your third norm and say--
Speaker 2: And I knew I had the title, yeah.  What was funny was there was this, the guy I did it against his name is Adrian Negulescu, Romanian, international master.  Adrian, Negulescu is N-E-G- Negu- N-E-G-U-L-E-S-C-U.  And he did not know that if I beat him I would become a grandmaster; he just knew we were playing a tournament game.  And the day before I played, the day--I had been winning all these games, and I, and I knew at that round that if I won my game I would become a grandmaster.  And the day before I went to that game, I was incredibly nervous, I mean, you can just imagine the nerves are building.  I'm by myself, my wife's [Michele Ashley-Johnson] not there and I'm, she had to go to a party that day and a birthday party for one of our family friends.  So, I'm at home and I'm ironing my shirt to dress to go to the tournament hall, which is in Manhattan [New York], and I can't hold the iron, I'm just like, I'm nervous and I'm having all these thoughts in my head that I don't understand.  And this main thought that's coming back to me is my [maternal] grandmother [Irma Cormack], and she had already passed in 1989, so ten years ago she had passed.  And I'm remembering the stuff that she used to say.  And one of the things she used to say was, jack of all trades; master of none.  It's one of her favorite phrases, jack of all trades; master of none.  And the stories she would tell about doing too many things and never becoming really good at one thing.  And she always said that to me and I always felt like, why are you telling me?  Like do you see--is this like a curse, like why do you keep telling me this?  And I always felt that hanging over my head when I was doing all these things.  I always would remember her saying that, like, the reason you're not any good and not gonna become a grandmaster is 'cause you're doing too much stuff.  And it was almost a conversation with her, like she was telling me, stop doing so much stuff and just focus.  But I wanted to do all those things, so it always nagged me; it was like my grandmother was nagging me from the grave, right.  And I knew it was this guilty feeling or this weird feeling like you're not ever gonna be really good at this thing if you don't give up everything else and do this.  So, that day I'm ironing and I'm hearing her voice, I'm hearing, jack of all trades; master of none.  And I always resented it as this, I resented it like she would say something bad to me, you know, it was like a leave me alone kind of thing.  And oddly on that moment I'm ironing, and I know it sounds weird, I'm thirty-three years old, I should have known better, I realize for the first time that my grandmother was saying it out of love.  It just hit me like that, like, duh.  The lady wasn't trying to curse you, she was just trying to help you, stupid.  And when it hit me, I dropped the iron and I started crying.  And just, it just poured out, I just like--missing her, realizing that's the, the power of what she was saying, and I just understood, it was like an epiphany in a moment.  And, I finished ironing, I dressed, I went to the tournament, I was still nervous.  I started playing, and I'm playing the first few moves and I get to like move fourteen, and all of a sudden, all the tension leaves my body, I'm totally calm.  I'm just relaxed and I'm sitting there and I'm thinking, you know what if I don't win today, I'm gonna win some other day; I'm gonna do this anyway.  And I just played with that spirit, that lightness of spirit.  So when the, the critical moments came when I had to do some sacrificing some men to get something else, I was just like, it's no problem and I just played the game.  And I won so easy, it was embarrassing.  It was just, the move I played to win I could have played when I was a beginner, oh, this is how I win (makes sound).  Just free flowing, it was an amazing day.  And then once I won, the smile, it was like a Kool-Aid smile, you know, it was so big and the guy, Adrian, was confused.  "Why are you so happy?"  And I said, "I just became a grandmaster."  And he was like, "What?"  (Laughter) This--stunned a little bit, congratulations, you know, he didn't realize that's what happened and it's, it's like wow, okay.  So that was a very big moment.
Story_ID: 493226
Speaker 1: How did you feel about achieving that dream that you had set up so many years before?
Speaker 2: I was thrilled beyond belief, it was a weight off my shoulder, it was, you know, crossing a fin- a marathon, you just ran a, a, a double marathon and, and finally crossed the finish line--that you weren't sure, I knew it was gonna come but when and, and to be so close to it.  And I had been close other times too and had failed, lost a critical game, only drew a game I should have won.  And I remember it, March 14th, it was Debbie's [ph.] birthday.  Later they told me they were praying for me back at the party, so I guess that helped too.  It was snowing, and I, coming from Jamaica I really have no affection for snow.  But that day coming to our home, the snow was like a winter wonderland.  It looked, it, it was coming down with the sun, with the lights, it was dark, with the lights out and it just looked like a winter wonderland and I was Alice, right.  And I'm like, I'm bouncing and I'm thinking, I cannot believe I just became a grandmaster.  How do you, you know, you cross a line like that it doesn't happen a lot in life.  And I come home and I come in the door and I'm expecting to say to my, 'cause my wife [Michele Ashley-Johnson] knows and that I, that, you know, this is what we have been aiming for all this time and all the sacrifice has been about, my daughter's [Nia Ashley] only three, right, she's only three, so she kind of knows that it's something special.  And they were home, they had came, come home from the party.  And some dummy had called them from the club and told them in advance that it had happened instead of letting me go home and tell them.  So, but it didn't matter 'cause I was just so happy, so I walk in the door and I open the door and she's looking at me and I'm looking at her and I see that she knows, and we're like--can't believe it, and we hug and kiss and my daughter is like coming in between and it's just this amazing moment and we're calling everybody.  And, and it was just, and, an impo- I couldn't sleep that night, I'm talking to everybody on the phone and, you know, we all know it's, it just happened.  And I knew it was important and black chess players knew it was important but I didn't know it would be important to America.  I mean I thought it would but I didn't know how important it would, I didn't know how the story would break.  And it broke, like boom, you know, Newsday, Newsday picked it up first, and then The New York Times picked it up, I mean, and once The New York Times picked it up then all the papers picked it up.  And then, you know, and then all the, and I was being interviewed, I was being called every day, 1010 WINS [WINS Radio, New York, New York], and WCBS [WCBS-TV, New York, New York] news in the morning called me at six o'clock, woke me up: "We wanna interview you right now before they, they do."  And when 1010 WINS call at like 6:30, and I said, "Man, you guys are calling so early."  And, and 1010 WINS was furious, like, "Who called?"  (Laughter) And I was like, "CBS."  They're like, (under breath), "Damn, those mother--."  Pissed, "Okay, we need to interview you now."  And it was an interview, after interview, after, just--my fifteen minutes of fame, you know, just ridiculous all the papers.  So it, and it mattered, you know, like, like this game that America sees as wildly esoteric and difficult, somehow a black man had mastered.  And that's dumb really, you know, like, and?  A lot of people have done this.  But not here in America they haven't and that perception mattered.
Story_ID: 493227
Speaker 1: How were you received by your Black Bear School [Black Bear School of Chess]--
Speaker 2: Woo, man, that was heaven.
Speaker 1: --colleagues?
Speaker 2: I--Pop [Willie Johnson] of course had been there the whole time and been a great supporter when I was down in the dumps.  So, I went over to his house to show the game that I had played to win, and there were a bunch of people there, a bunch of the brothers were there.  And immense pride, immense pride like, you know.  I don't know, I don't know, you know, I consider some people my inspirations, Tiger Woods is definitely one, you know, when he, when he performs you get--and especially early you get a lump in your throat, just proud.  Arthur Ashe is another for his real quiet spirit, and that he brought all the time and his contribution.  And Jackie Robinson was a huge inspiration, I mean, I didn't know him but just reading the stories, I would read the stories of the trailblazers and before I, they, they gave, you know, I understand that they were going through stuff much rougher than I went through, maybe not Tiger as much, but, you know, Jackie and Arthur.  And I remember being, and thinking about people like Zina Garrison and Lori McNeil who were the Venus Williams before Venus and Serena [Serena Williams].  And I would look to all these people as inspiration and it would always warm my heart seeing them do what they did.  'Cause, you know, you were, you just had that pride, you know, that we were doing this in fields not expected.  Also Dr. Ben Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], who is a neurosurgeon, first, first person to do a brain operation to separate, to separate siamese [conjoined] twins, who were joined at the head.  So people like that you just, you just feel so much pride, like, yeah, man.  No matter what people say, or what anyone says, we have amazing people in our race, doing amazing things.  And I'd always pay attention to that.  I know how I felt.  So, when I saw the brothers looking at me, it was like, I know how you feel (laughter).  I, I mean, but I'm the object of it now but I know what this means, man, this is like an inspiration, and you knew you were firing people up.  And you knew it wasn't gonna just be this group of Black Bears right here but all--chess players all across America.  And it turns out it wasn't just in America because the African brothers are like, yeah, we know about [HistoryMaker] Maurice Ashley and everybody was being inspired by this, you know, this simple act you could do that was your passion and your love and you wanted to do.  And, and so even for me as a token--
Story_ID: 493228
Speaker 1: I was saying that, well, at that meeting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You knew that it resonated even with African players.
Speaker 1: Right.  And but the, the thing for me at that time I was able to give Pop [Willie Johnson] the game score of the game so he has like, you know, a piece of history in his home.  And that's the moves of the game and my signature and my, my opponent's signature [Adrian Negulescu] that he has that and it meant a lot for me to be able to give him that piece of history, yeah.
Speaker 2: You say you gave him the moves of the game?
Speaker 1: Well, we write the moves down, we record the moves of the game, and you have to record them.  So each, each--it's on a score sheet, and each score sheet is a little piece of history depending on what it does and that score sheet of me doing, accomplishing that feat is like the, it's like the game ball in baseball or the football, you know, the game ball of basketball, nobody gives a ball, there's a token, something is a token and that, that was my gift to him for being so instrumental in my life.  But, yeah, it, it mattered, you know, it's, it's eight years later and I still get it from people, people who have been affected by the accomplishment.  People who have gone on to teach their kids chess.  It's funny now there's a kid, you know, I was telling you about Chico, and, and his name is Clotaire Colas, I bump into him on the train a few, a couple of years ago, and he says and it's like, "Wow, man, I haven't seen you in a long time."  And he said, "Yeah, wow."  We're laughing about high school [Brooklyn Technical High School, Brooklyn, New York] and he says to me, "You know, I have a nephew who's really pretty talented."  And, I said, "Really?"  He said, "Yeah, you know, you really should check him out, he's pretty talented, he's six years old, he's a pretty talented kid."  And I said, "Sure, I'll hang--you know, send him my way."  So I end up meeting this kid, obviously he's a little boy, he's six years old, but I can see a little twinkle in his eye.  And I've been working with him, met him a couple of times to work with him, talk with him, trying to give him some guidance, and he's incredibly talented, and I can see him becoming a grandmaster one day, and a lot sooner than I took to become a grandmaster, a more direct path.  His father [Guy Colas] plays a lot of chess with him too.  And, and I wouldn't be surprised we're talking about this kid five years now as, you know, another (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's Chico's nephew's name?
Speaker 1: Joshua, Joshua Colas.  And, it's so funny to--because I, you know, he sees me and he thinks, okay, he told his dad this, because I e-mailed his dad and I said, "I see a lot of talent in Joshua and, you know, we should keep up the hard work with him because one day he could become world champion."  And his father writes back that "Joshua laughed when he read your e-mail."  And I said, and he said, "The reason is that Joshua said, 'Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Ashley] has shown that a black man can become a grandmaster, and I intend to show that a black man can become a world champion'."  So, it's just hilarious as you take the steps, you know, that you're not, okay, you're the first but first implies second and third and more and now we actually have two more [Pontus Carlsson and Amon Simutowe] that happened this year.  So, first implies continuity, and then it implies that you'll inspire others to aim even higher.
Story_ID: 493229
Speaker 1: And to young Joshua [Joshua Colas] at eight that's like, yeah, you know, black grandmaster, it's been done, no biggie, we're gonna do that and then we're gonna do some more, right (laughter).  And, and that's what happens, we raise the ceiling, we raise the possibilities with each step.  And then you, you make the younger generation look and say, okay, that's not impossible 'cause it's been done and what I'm gonna do is what's gonna be impossible; that's what I'm aiming for.  And that, that's what it's all about for each of us to inspire others.  We're all, we're all models, we're all role models, we all inspire, we inspire our family members, and no matter what you do, I don't care if you, you work a regular nine to five [o'clock] and come home and take care of your kids, you're their inspiration, you're their role model, and you have to represent yourself as such, they look up to you.  So we're all role models.  Others are able to do it in different ways, whether it's in sports or, or in chess, or in medicine, whatever else, you, you do it in different ways.  And you set a bar and the, the younger generation will try to pass the bar so you just have to set your bar.  This is where I am, I'm not down here, I'm here, beat me.  And so it's exciting to know that there are young people being told by their parents who saw me, hey, there's a black grandmaster.  And they're going, okay, so I gotta beat that.  And to them, it's so e- it's not, it's not impossible; it's natural.  But, man, I remember when that was not natural that was, that was hard, that was not what a black man did.  Now, it's done and it's time to go even higher.
Story_ID: 493230
Speaker 1: Can you name the two new black international grandmasters?
Speaker 2: One of them is from Sweden, Pontus Carlsson, P-O-N-T-U-S, C-A-R-L-L-S-O-N [sic.], I think I'm misspelling it, I think I'm misspelling it, we have to look it up, but Pontus Carlsson.  And Amon Simutowe, from Zambia, A-M-O-N, and his last name is S-I-M-U-T-O-W-E, Amon Simutowe.  And he, oh, you know, me as the first black man so to speak, he's the first sub-Saharan to do it on the African continent 'cause they've done it in Northern Africa, where, you know, they're considered more Middle Eastern, Muslims, kind of thing.  But he's like the first brother on the African continent who's done it.  So, there's emotion.  So the three of us, they have to officially get their titles, there's something else they have to do in terms of ratings to officially get the titles, but they've completed the norms, which is considered the most important part.  So one, you know, one in 1999, and for eight years it was taking too long already I was like, chop, chop; let's get some more numbers out here.  But now it's three.  And when you do one, one means, one they could call you an oddity, a freak.  Two, it's like, hm, we don't know.  But three, it's like, okay, the door is broken down, and we're waiting for the rest of them.  So we'll expect to see quite a few more in the coming years.
Story_ID: 493231
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit now about what else you do that's related to chess.  I understand that you have a foundation and also that you might still have the Harlem Chess Center [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Neither of those exist.  I, I tried to do a Harlem Chess Center and unfortunately after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], it folded.  Mainly because a lot of money was going toward 9/11 stuff, and the nonprofits were suffering.  So chess became something that didn't happen.  I have a foundation but I haven't really made use of it the way I want to, the way I plan to in coming years.
Speaker 1: What's your plan for your foun- for the Maurice Ashley Foundation?
Speaker 2: To use chess as a springboard for success in neighborhoods, let's put it that way, neighborhoods that are underserved for chess.  And it's chess--I have a book called 'Chess for Success' ['Chess for Success: Using an Old Game to Build New Strengths in Children and Teens,' Maurice Ashley], and my idea is that chess can inspire young people to be successful.  And I've watched it in my students.  I watched the same students, the Raging Rooks and the Dark Knights, who are now graduates of Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut]; graduates of Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts]; graduates of Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]; graduates of NYU [New York University, New York, New York].  I've watched guys go on to get their Ph.D.'s.  One graduate from Harvard Business School [Boston, Massachusetts].  Kasaun Henry, who was the captain of the chess team, is now working on his Ph.D. at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  None of them chess players, but all of them chess players of life.  And they come back to me and say, "The time that we spent with you was one of the more instrumental periods in my entire life; you showed us what we could do."  And they remember the, the time like it was yesterday, it was fresh, it was, it was like a high point in their, in their lives and they're now thirty and they were thirteen then and it's like, I don't know I did anything better than that since then.  So, my goal is to spread that message and I've signed a deal now with the City of Trenton, New Jersey, to open up a Maurice Ashley chess center.  And my plan is to work it slowly and in a way that I know will have continuity.  Before I was dependent on the, on a separate organization to fund what I was doing so when they couldn't do chess and they were doing other things, they dropped chess.  My goal is never to be in that position again.  I wanna be something, I wanna have something that's self-sufficient and, and slowly grows on its own so that in a few years we'll have several Maurice Ashley chess centers around the country.  And the message will be that chess is a springboard for greatness in life.
Speaker 1: And will you have, host tournaments through that organization?
Speaker 2: It'll be more about teaching chess and having them go to chess tournaments.  I want kids to get out of the neighborhood and see what's possible out there.  That they are welcome, even if some people might turn their backs on them, most people will open their arms to any kid who is about success and about excellence.  And there are a lot of opportunities out there for our young people.  And there are a lot of kids who are not ever gonna be basketball players, or even thinking they're gonna be basketball players, but they don't know that they can be intellectually great.  They don't know how smart they are.  And when they're smart, they're told not to be smart.  And so we do have this problem in our culture right now, you know, as of 2007 of African American kids thinking it's not cool to be smart and that's, that's an epidemic really and it's also nonsense, it's garbage.  So we have to refute that notion unequivocally.  And I wanna be a piece of that, I am a piece of it, and I wanna work with others who do that.  Like Dr. Ben Carson [HistoryMaker Dr. Benjamin Carson, Sr.], for example I'm gonna be doing a, a benefit with him for his foundation, the Carson, the Carson Scholars [Carson Scholars Fund, Inc.], to raise money so that we can get some scholarships for kids in the neighborhood but it's a synergy there, a neurosurgeon and a chess player, how much, you know, how much better can you have as a marriage, intellectual giants in fields that people respect, you know, you, a neurosurgeon and an international grandmaster, what, (laughter) you know, like you're getting heavy duty when you bring that kind of energy together.  And so hopefully that synergy can help to start something and help to build something.
Story_ID: 493232
Speaker 1: Chess is, at--chess at the highest level is mentally draining.  I mean it's incredibly arduous.  The competition, the competition at that level, the difference in wins and losses are, are one move.  You, you make one mistake, you lose, one.  So you can't flag in concentration because you're going to go downhill and get squeezed.  Some of the--the best players are physically fit, every one of them.  If you're not physically fit after a few days you start to feel the drain on your system, you play chess you lose weight.  Why?  I really don't know but people walk out of chess tournaments losing ten pounds.  Your nervous system, you have to have a profoundly strong nervous system so it pays to do some kind of athletics, you work out, a lot of people bike, I do martial arts; whatever it does to give you that extra toughness when you're competing because if you're a fat slob, when you're playing, you're gonna feel it in the intensity at the board and the energy you're expending.  The mental energy that you're expending is physical, your brain is, is physical; it's a, it's a physical organ, it sits in your body and it is affected by the nutrients going through your body, the amount of energy that you have, if you're getting tired and sleepy easily because your, you know, you're getting t- just not bringing up those physical reserves, you're gonna not last over a nine-day event where you're playing the best players in the world, where one error seals your fate and could be the difference between winning the tournament, paying the rent, paying your bills, and, you know, putting food on your table.  That's what you're trying to do.  So, so chess competitions are rough.  Now, for me I, you know, I've been on both sides of the equation, they are games that I've won that have been, win a tournament, I won a couple of tournaments in Foxwoods [Foxwoods Open], where they hold--a lot of chess tournament are held in casinos, big casinos, big hotel banquet halls.  And, you know, you're, you're playing for the money.  It's not a lot of money in chess so it might be a $10,000 prize or $15,000 prize, it's not like poker for example where you could win hundreds of thousands dollars, or any of the major sports.  So to win a chess tournament is a big deal for chess players, it's a, it's, it counts a lot into, to their bank account.  And, you know, I've beaten some good players.  I became the first African American in the 157 year history of the U.S. Championship [U.S. Chess Championship] to qualify to play in the U.S. Championship.  And the way I did it was to beat the reigning U.S. champion, so--Larry Christiansen.  So that was a big moment, you know, you beat a, a U.S. champion, so that says a, a great statement about, about where I was.  And, and since, you know, I've beaten different players of, top players in the country.  Alexander Shabalov, who is the current U.S. champion, I've beaten him a couple of times.  Shabalov is S-H-A-B-A-L-O-V.  So I've had my taste of success against good players, also had tough defeats, games when I was gonna be a grandmaster if I won and end up just losing badly, or losing, it wasn't even badly, it was just this close, I made the right move, I win, I make the other move I lose and I choose the wrong move and I, and I lose.
Story_ID: 493233
Speaker 1: You know, you're sitting there at a chessboard, clock's ticking, and hours are passing, you're allowed to get up and walk around when it's not your move you will do that just to relax, just to give some blood flow to your legs, to get your brain moving a little bit, leaving the same position so your, your, your shoulders, your back's not getting to tight.  So you can walk around a little bit but by and large you're at the board focused.  Me, I actually like to get up and walk around a lot 'cause I, I hate sitting at the board and, and be tense at the board.  And you sit there and you try to stay mentally calm.  I practice some meditation with the martial arts so that your brain can just be ready and flow and you're here at the board, but sometimes your heart just starts to beat uncontrollably because you realize a critical moment's coming, you're in danger or maybe you're gonna win the game and the clock's ticking and your time is running down and you're trying to make this right move and you have six choices, and it's going that way, that way, that way, that way, which way do I go?  I win this game, I win the tournament.  I lose the game, I get nothing; I go home empty handed.  And all that work I put in is in this one moment right here, I have to make the right move.  And it's not over 'cause when I make this move, he's gonna do something and I still have to make another move and you can't predict it all because there are so many possibilities.  And you're trying to make the one that it seems like your intuition and your understanding and your experience and your calculations is telling you this is what I should do, and then maybe it's a blunder, you notice something, there's a possibility, whoa, I was about to lose the game if I played that move.  And now it's just getting in this one moment and play the right move, clock's ticking, opponent's after you, game's on the line, tournaments on the line, and you gotta make the right move.  So, yeah, it's tough, (laughter) you know, it's, it's a tough minefield to maneuver, but it's so much fun.  It's what you live for, it's what chess players live for, that moment.
Story_ID: 493234
Speaker 1: What are some of the most exciting games that you yourself have played?
Speaker 2: I mentioned the one, the--well, you know, the tournaments that I won, the one in Foxwoods [Foxwoods Open] that I won a couple times of beating--
Speaker 1: Didn't you win Foxwoods more than once in a row (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I won it twice, yeah, I won it back to back which nobody had ever done.  And I also won one in Kings Island [Kings Island Open] where I beat some of the top Russian players, Kings Island, Cincinnati [Ohio].  Won, tied for first in Bermuda also ahead of a number of players, tied with Joel Benjamin, who was a couple of times U.S. champion.  So, you know, I've won a few tournaments in my time and won some good games.  I probably have witnessed more, been a commentator for more large level exciting games.  I've, I did a commentary for the world championship match when Garry Kasparov played Viswanathan Anand, from India.  Viswanathan is V-I-S-W-A-N-A-T-H-A-N.  And wh- I did, I was the, the announcer for that and I (unclear) commentated Daniel King.  And we did that championship in the World Trade Center [New York, New York].  And game one started on September 11th.  So, when I go back and reflect on that, you know, it's kind of funny like you--September 11, 1995, of course, you know, you reflect like wow, I could have been in the building when thing- you know, stuff happened.  But we were there on the 104th floor and, and doing, I was at the hundredth floor doing commentary for this world championship match and watching the two best players in the world duke it out to try to win the title.  I was also the commentator for the Kasparov versus the machine, 'Man vs. Machine' ['The Man vs. The Machine'] matches, one and two, Kasparov the human won the first one, and the machine won the second won.  The second one got all the notoriety.
Speaker 1: The machine is Deep Blue?
Speaker 2: Deep Blue, right, Deep Blue IBM's [International Business Machines Corporation] machine that they programmed and became the first machine to defeat a world champion in a match.  And I was doing the commentary for that and being fir- front and center of humanity against the silicon monster and being able to discuss the nuances of human thought versus computer thought and what that meant for us as a race going forward, was it a threat or was it a development, a new development in our s- in, in our species.
Story_ID: 493235
Speaker 1: I've been on, you know, on the cutting edge of intellectual thinking that, that forwards the general populace thinking about these issues.  And chess is at the center of that, you know, that's what's so amazing, chess has this resonance in the, in the culture that's a measuring stick of something.  And when you can play chess, you get a different kind of respect from people, like, whoa, especially when kids can play, that's the real joy, when a kid can play chess.  I remember I had to tell this story, I was coaching at a school in Harlem [New York, New York], different school from the Raging Rooks, I forget the name of the school now, but I was teaching these kids, like third graders, right, and, of course, kids can learn chess at five or six years old, so teaching a third grader is not that special.  Except his mother came up to me and she said, with almost tears in her eyes, "Thank you so much for coaching my son."  And I'm like, I coach a lot of kids, you know, no problem, right.  She said, "You know, you don't understand, I played chess with his uncles, and he was watching us play, and he told us that he could play.  And I told him he couldn't.  And he said, 'Of course, I can.'  And he started playing with us.  And I was so shocked that my son knew how to play."  And I'm thinking, here's this mother who thinks that her son wasn't bright enough--this is a black kid, right, black mother, black kid--that her son wasn't bright enough, wasn't smart enough to play this game, and now he's showing just how bright he is, and it changed her entire vision of her son.  It's her son, she should have known her kid was smart enough.  But there's something that we do to ourselves about being smart.  And we don't teach our kids young enough.  I taught my daughter [Nia Ashley] to read when she was three 'cause I knew she could do it, I was just gonna start playing with her, and start showing her words and showing her the at family and we're gonna learn about the at words and then we're gone do the and family, we learned the and words and I was gone show it to her like that and she gone have fun doing it, and so she learned how to read.  My son [Jayden Ashley] picked up all those words when he was little.  You just show it to them, believe in the kids, they could do it.  And she didn't believe that her own son, until he had to insist and tell her otherwise, and now she has a totally different vision for her son and about her son's possibilities and about her own personal responsibility to that child.  That's the difference chess makes 'cause chess slaps you in the face.  It, it, you know, you have to ba- chess is something, it's, you don't just, you can't be stupid and play chess, the two don't add up in people's minds.  Even though I've known some stupid chess players, you know, but okay, that's different.  But to play this game you have to use your brain, you have to.  So, it has this very symbolic meaning and it has that power with our people and with, and for young people.  And somehow you teach this game, people just believe that the kids can be anything they wanna be now.  It's like, if you can play chess, you could do schoolwork, stop fronting; you know, you must be able to do this work.  And the kids are like, yeah, that's true, chess is harder than this stuff.  And then they have something to prove and that's why I think you see all these college grads come out of Harlem when 25 percent of our young men are supposed to be in jail or arrested, incarcerated, this, that and in, and in a time when only, less than 30 percent of people get college degrees, for me to take a chess team that over 50 percent of them got college degrees and others own their businesses and coming out of places like Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], it's like what is it about this game, what's the magic?
Story_ID: 493236
Speaker 1: What is it about the game?  What is the magic of chess?
Speaker 2: It insists on intellectual excellence, period.
Speaker 1: Do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It insists.  You can't, it's a, it's, it's a discipline masking as a game.  So, the kids, people say, "Well, how do you get the kids to play?"  And I say, "I put down the chessboard and I put the pieces in front of them."  It takes over after that.  They see the shapes, they see the rooks, bishop, knights, pawns, king, and they're like, queen, "Wow, what is this?  What can they do, tell me?"  I don't even have to do anything, I just put the board out, put the pieces, and they're going, "What can this do and what can this do, what--?  Okay, now I got it, time to play."  And they're hooked right there.  And now they're playing and they lose and they don't wanna lose, so they say, "Well what, how do I win?"  And I say, "Well, here's how you win, you try this strategy, you do this, also you gotta be patient, you gotta concentrate, you gotta focus, you have problems to solve, don't just put your hand out there, think about it first, look at some possibilities, just stop and think for a little while."  Kids, you know, they like to grab so first, now they have to stop and they have to look.  And then the best thing you ever see is a kid that does this and then, and you go, I got this one, you know, I got him 'cause he's doing or she, and look they're like how often have you walked into a room full of black kids, there's no noise and they're all doing this.  That's magic.  That's magic right there.  And it insists on you doing that when you play.  You can't be rowdy; if you are, then you're gonna be controlled, you know, you can be rowdy at first, you start trash talking dah, dah, dah.  Then there's a general guide in the room saying, "That's not what we do as chess players, you know, we ought to be more in control of ourselves, just cool it, cool it, play the game."  And they start to learn the etiquette, they start to go to tournaments, they start to learn what's it's about, self-control and seeing yourself a certain way and they fall into that and then they become players.  And once they're players it's over.  Then you have a forum to tell 'em whatever you want 'cause, you know, you got them, they're hooked.  So you can start telling them about other things they could do well and they believe you.  So that's the whole magic.  That's why chess has been around for fourteen hundred years.
Story_ID: 493237
Speaker 1: And will it last forever?
Speaker 2: It will--well, forever is a long time, but it's gonna be around a while.
Speaker 1: But I can see the world ending and people sitting on rocks--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --and playing chess.
Speaker 2: Yep.  I can see it too, I can see it too.  Until the human mind is so excellent that it can figure out all these computational possibilities and, and do them perfectly all the time, which is real hard, chess should be around a while.
Speaker 1: And is that the draw to computers?  I mean, I have this feeling that there's always been this development of computers and che- and the game of chess, that this competition between the human person and the computer is very important to chess players--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Computers now rule.
Speaker 1: Why does that--and, and I'm sure that there are lots of people playing on the Internet--
Speaker 2: Forget it.
Speaker 1: --all day, all night,
Speaker 2: All day, all night.  People will play chess as, as, for hours on the Internet, easily, all day, if, if you give that to them that, the, the chance.  And I can go online right now, be guaranteed that there are about five hundred folks on one website, then another five thousand on Yahoo or AOL and all that.  On the specialty website there are less people but guarantee you I get a game in the next, next three minutes.  And a game against a guy who could beat me, that's a critical point, you know.  Or a woman I'll play wome- I remember playing a woman grandmaster from Russia, just get online, seek a game, you know, chess player seeking other chess player, this ranking (makes sound) boom, go.  Two minutes later, boop, time for a game.  And, and who you're looking, who is this person, and they'll tell you their profile, and you're looking on, and I'll play somebody from Moscow [Russia] one day, and then I'll play somebody from France another day and then I'll play somebody from Japan, and, and you're just playing people from all over the world.  And sometimes I play people I don't even know where they're from, they're just some ghosts where all I have is their name, their handle.  And, and so you have that, yeah, sure, the, the Internet has, has made chess--.  It's, you know, what's it's really done?  It's made chess more popular by making it more accessible to more people and kids, maybe, if you had a talented chess player in Iowa, okay, I don't know how many people play chess in Iowa, but it ain't that many.  So now this kid is thinking I wanna play chess but there's nobody in my neighborhood who wants to play me 'cause I can beat all of them.  So I have to leave my neighborhood?  I don't have the money to leave my neighborhood, I, I don't travel that much, I can't do all that stuff.  So what do they do?  Internet chess club, play chess.com, boom.  Oh, I can play that person, that person, that person; there's thousands of options, and now they can keep developing their game.  So a young person can get that much better that much quicker because they can practice that much more because it's right there for them.
Story_ID: 493238
Speaker 1: Could you talk a little bit about 'Chess for Success' ['Chess for Success: Using an Old Game to Build New Strengths in Children and Teens,' Maurice Ashley] the book you've published, and your CD-ROM ['Maurice Ashley Teaches Chess']?
Speaker 2: 'Chess for Success' is a book that I actually never planned to write and was some- a book that was, that--.  An agent came to me and asked me would I like to be a part of a project about a book that would say how great chess is, and I thought, that's a stupid idea.  And she finally convinced me that it actually wasn't such a bad idea, that there hadn't been such a book, and that there are a lot of parents out there and administrators who might appreciate the fact that someone explained why chess is such a great game.  It took her a while, but finally I said, okay, I'll do it.  And, so I started writing the book and then my co-writer backed out, I wasn't even gonna write the book, I was just going to provide chess expertise, then the co-writer backed out and I was left having to write this book, wasn't too happy about that.  And then I started writing the book and I realized how valuable the book was (laughter).  That it was really an important subject and somebody should address why chess is such a great game for young people.  And so I did quite a bit of research and, and did the book, it's not gonna be an Amazon [Amazon.com, Inc.] bestseller list or anything but it's an important book that details for the, for the average person why they should start their kid playing chess immediately.
Speaker 1: Well, I just will mention that I went to Barnes and Noble [Barnes and Noble Booksellers, Inc.] and they said they had it when it first came out, but that there were no copies available so--
Speaker 2: That's good.
Speaker 1: --they might (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hopefully they sold enough.
Speaker 1: --they will have sold all of those copies.
Speaker 2: Right.  So that's 'Chess for Success.'
Story_ID: 493239
Speaker 1: My CD-ROM, 'Maurice Ashley Teaches Chess,' is a CD-ROM that is both a tutorial, a instructional game.  A--well, let's say it starts teaching you the basics, it has games of the masters, you can play chess against it, and it has specialty challenges that are not exactly chess challenges, but are related to chess.  So it has a, a whole bunch of different things on it.  And that was a straight bestseller, and I made good on that CD-ROM.  And it's been around now for ten years and ridiculously it still sells, which is bizarre.  It's, it's got ten year old cheesy graphics, cartoony looking stuff, terrible, I look at myself now ten years later, I'm like a baby compared to now.  But somehow I keep getting people coming up to me, "Hey, that CD-ROM is hot.  Oh, my kids love you.  Oh, they don't even think you're real; they think you're part of the game."  I say, "What?"  But, you know, it's like, it's like how, Will Smith must feel about 'Fresh Prince' ['The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air'], like oh, my goodness, I was such an idiot, but it still goes on and on (laughter) so, it was funny and kids love it.
Story_ID: 493240
Speaker 1: Do you think that chess will become more popular as a career and particularly for black now children, in the- in thirty years?
Speaker 2: Thirty years?  Thirty years, I don't know.  Thirty years, maybe.  I think the difficulty with chess--
Speaker 1: So Chico's nephew [Joshua Colas] will he be amongst several, or many black professional chess players, if he becomes world champion, of course (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, chess as a profession suffers in the United States from the fact that you have to think to play the game.  And it is not played--it is not something that you can sit in a bar and watch.  And when I say that, I don't mean to belittle anybody, it sounds that way, but I mean when people come home tired from work they generally want something that's nice and simple that they can deal with, and not something that's going to be incredibly difficult that they have to actually sit and focus on it.  So even if you speed chess up, which we do when we play speed chess, and the whole thing is over in an hour, the fact is, without the commentary being perfect so that you can understand everything that's going on, you literally can't turn the sound off and watch the game unless you're a player yourself.  You have to have a certain level of ability unlike something like basketball when you don't have to know anything, you can't play at all, right, you don't, all you know is, the ball goes in the hoop, two points, if they're out there, three points, and when they get the free throw thingies, one point, let's go.  And it's, you know, in between that is guys being incredibly athletic but that's the basic, whole gist of it.  So you can watch the game and know who's winning and you can come back what's the score, okay, so and so is winning, okay, we can turn it off or change the channel, we can come back later.  In chess, you cannot do that; it doesn't have that that same instant gratification and instant ability to assess exactly what's going on as a novice at a glance.  And that's chess' problem.  Basically everything else that's popular on TV has that.  So, will chess make it as a profession?  Only if enough people have the desire to make that happen.  It almost did it when Bobby Fischer won the world championship in 1972 [World Chess Championship, Reykjavik, Iceland].  All America--it was a huge chess boom in America, lots of people started playing, lots of people watched him on television beat the Russians, the Soviets, the big bad Soviets at their own game.  That was a historical moment and it was great for chess except Bobby Fischer quit immediately and that ruined the whole momentum that we had.  I'd be talking now as a multimillionaire superstar if Bobby Fischer had kept playing chess.  Unfortunately, he stopped and that just killed all the momentum.
Story_ID: 493241
Speaker 1: Is Josh Colas [Joshua Colas] gonna be Bobby Fischer?  If he does that, or there's some other American electrifies the imagination in such a way, then you might see chess as a profession with people making a lot of money.  Otherwise, it could be very hard for the game to, to grow out of this insular activity that some people who really like to do it do and that's chess' problem.  So will, how many black professionals we might see?  I've been sort of a lucky one because I was the first so people wanna see me, people want, people want me to come and do appearances and talk to young people and inspire them and all that.  After that, the others are really gonna have to do it based on becoming really great, great players, which I'm not, I'm a pretty good player; I'm a grandmaster, but I'm not a world champion.  So now you're gonna have to be Tiger Woods to get that kind of attention which is a different kind of level.  And so you're not, and you're not gonna see a lot of those guys, you might see one.  I can't imagine them being like two or three of them just roaming at the top, it's very hard to get there.  So, it depends, that person is gonna have a lot of charisma, that's what's gonna do it, they're gonna have to have a lot of charisma, or, you know, be a mass murderer and good at chess (laughter).  I mean, something's gotta, there'll be some other hook, you can't just be good at the game, there's gonna have to be some other hook.  It might be a sister by the way.  Darrian Robinson, who is a young, who is twelve years old, a star player, sister who I'm coaching, she has potential.  If a black woman is the star, becomes a grandmaster, that's another different kind of angle that brings a different kind of interest and a different kind of audience.  So that could be something that's done.  It's gotta be another hook, if you're gonna market it, it's gotta be another hook, it can't be straight simple; it can't be chess alone, I don't think, as much as I love the game, not everybody does.  And not everybody is gonna have the taste to love it.  So, to me it's gotta be another hook, but hopefully I'm wrong.
Story_ID: 493242
Speaker 1: When you're finished in the end, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Inspiring people, particularly kids.  Best thing in the world to do, always be an inspiration to others.  And, I've had some, some great kids, and I've inspired, planted some seeds of success in folks, and they remember that I've done that for them, and I continue to do, even the grown up ones, they're always your kids.  It's about inspiring people that's what life is, you know, inspiration, inspire, breathing air into and if you can do that to another person, you've done magic.
Speaker 1: Well, you've inspired us today.  And--
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: --we really appreciate your personal career and especially you're giving back your passion and excitement about that game to students in Harlem [New York, New York], it really makes a difference and we really appreciate it.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
