Story_ID: 531160
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Samuel Akainyah, S-A-M-U-E-L.  The last name is Akainyah, A-K-A-I-N-Y-A-H.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you forgot the L in Samuel (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, Samuel--I sure did.  And sir, do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Emmanuel [ph.] is my confirmation name, and then my ancestral middle name is Anor-Amihere, and then my spiritual day name is Kwame, so my full name is Samuel Emmanuel Kwame Anor-Amihere Akainyah, and officially on records it's just Samuel Akainyah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  How do you spell your spiritual name?
Speaker 2: Anor-Amihere--oh, Kwame, K-W-A-M-E.
Speaker 1: And the other--I mean the other name--I mean--
Speaker 2: Ancestral name.
Speaker 1: Yeah, ancestral name.
Speaker 2: Anor-Amihere, A-N-O-R, hyphen, Amihere, A-M, and then the word I, and then here, I here, H-E-R-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have any nicknames or anything?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And you know who we have the spiritual day name--to identify what tribe you come from--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so when you hear Kwame, everybody will know he is of the Akan tribe, born on Saturday.  And the Anor-Amihere is my ancestral name, the name that my father [Alfred Akainyah] had to ask permission and authorization from his father and grandfather to name me after his grandfather, and that's my grandfa- my great-grandfather's name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right; that's good, that's good to know.  So, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Kumasi, Ghana, and, and the year was 1953, September 5th.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, Kumasi was the capital of the Ashanti Empire, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of the Ashanti--absolutely, and the second capital of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I keep a dual or a triple mandate, as I would say.  I am an artist first and foremost, and I produce all the paintings that are exhibited in my gallery, so I'm an artist and an owner of the Akainyah art gallery [Akainyah Gallery] here in Chicago [Illinois].  The second occupation, I am a tenured professor of art and art history at the City Colleges of Chicago, notably Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then my pro bono civil service contribution to Ghana has been a special envoy for the Ghanaian community here in Chicago.
Story_ID: 531161
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: They're some of Julieanna's [Julieanna Richardson] favorite questions, so--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food?  Yes.  You would like to know the favorite food (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes sir.
Speaker 2: I actually have three of them, and it's a tough call for each one of them; they're ethnically flavored.  One is called peanut butter soup with fufu, and that's made with good meat--mutton, lamb; and then the second is called spinach stew with boiled yam; and then the last one is fried beans with fried plantains.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Incidentally, I'm not allowed to have any of those anymore since I have had my gallbladder removed (laughter).
Speaker 1: Really?  Can't have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I can't have any of that anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because of the rich protein and the excess oil in the food, there is no bile from the gallbladder to activate the proteins and all the peptides and so on, so I am just staying away from it.  In the process, I, I feel healthier (laughter) you know I'm a little bit less weight, you know, than before, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 531162
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Alfred Akainyah] side (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --but we always start with the mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Sabina Sekyi Yorke [Sabina Yorke].  Sabina as in S-A-B-I-N-A, Sekyi, S-E-K-Y-I, and the last name is Yorke, Y-O-R-K-E, that's English.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And, now, all right.  So, she has an English last name, is--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --is this a--just as a general piece of information, is this unusual in, in Ghana?
Speaker 2: Not unusual because my mother comes from the Fante tribe and half the Fantes were mixed with European settlers who came to the coast of Africa during the slave trade and the post-slave trade, i.e., the colonial period.  So, we have very much the same last names that some African Americans have: Coleman, Southerfield [ph.], Ashley, Yorke, Addison, Jackson, Brew, all those names (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I know one name, Johnson, comes to mind because I know there are a couple of history books written by Ghanaians named Johnson.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: J.C. DeGraft-Johnson--
Speaker 2: Correct, DeGraft-Johnson, correct.
Speaker 1: 'African Glory' ['African Glory: The Story of Vanished Negro Civilizations,' J.C. DeGraft-Johnson].  You got 'The History of Yoruba' [sic. 'The History of the Yorubas'] written by Samuel Johnson--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and I assumed Samuel Johnson was an Englishman, and you see his picture, he's not.
Speaker 2: No, no.  Yeah.  Some, like my grandfather, had your complexion and frame, so obviously he was a grandson to an Englishman, but once the, the races mixed and mixed and mixed, then you lose so much of that whole English strain.  What is left now are the red lips, the large ears, and some of us have a little bit curlier hair, as far as my mother's siblings and the like are concerned, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So that's a--okay.  So, what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's date of birth--that's something that I don't know specifically (laughter), but I know for a fact she's eighty-three years old now, and will be eighty-four this coming July 21st, and she--so we can subtract that and be able to tell.  But she was born in a small town called Saltpond in Ghana.
Speaker 1: Okay, Saltpond?
Speaker 2: Saltpond.
Speaker 1: Okay, S-A-L-T?
Speaker 2: Yes, and P-O-N-D.  It was a huge British settler town, and the name--the town derives its name because the town produced salt, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  What--are there some stories?  And how back--how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: One, two, three, three generations beyond my mother's personally, but I believe my mother will know more.  My mother is born to the parents, Thomas Itchyok [ph.], that was the name of my mother's own grandfather, and that grandfather--his father was English.  Then, my mother's mother is a lady by the name of Sarah Newman [ph.].  We don't know how much foreign blood was in her for sure, but I did know that some of her siblings were darker than me, and some of her siblings were your complexion, and so the name Newman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which is kind of yellowish for those who can't see me (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, but, but--so the name Newman and the Yorke, that's just what happened on my mother's side of my, of my family.  On my--and on that same side, my grandmother was first cousins to a lady by the name of Madam Nyaniba [Elizabeth Nyaniba].  Nyaniba is the woman who birthed Kwame Nkrumah, the first president of the country.
Speaker 1: So your mother's first cousin was--
Speaker 2: My, my grandmother was first cousins--
Speaker 1: Your grandmother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) with Madam Nyaniba, who was Kwame Nkrumah's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you are related to Kwame Nkrumah.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And he was the first president of Ghana--
Speaker 2: Of the Republic of Ghana.
Story_ID: 531163
Speaker 1: And then on my, my father's side, they were all Nzemas at the coastal part of the country, and I traced that maybe one, two, three, four, five, five generations back.
Speaker 2: Now, what is your father's full name?
Speaker 1: Alfred Augustus Anor-Sekyi, the same, A-N-O-R, A-N, not I, exactly, A-N-O-R, hyphen, Sekyi, S-E-K-Y-I.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then the last name Akainyah [Alfred Akainyah].  Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth of birth?
Speaker 1: It's 19-something; it's in the book that I brought you.  But he died in 1989, and he was eighty-four years old or eighty-three years old.
Speaker 2: So 1905?
Speaker 1: Something like that--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And was he born--oh, where was he born?
Speaker 1: He was born in a small town called Tikobo, T-I-K-O-B-O [Tikobo, Ghana], and that's in the Nzema region of the country.  Yes.  So, both his mother and father were Nzemas.
Speaker 2: Now, what is the--what is--so Nzema's an ethnic group that's on the coast?
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We actually share the Ivory Coast border there are Nzemas in Ghana and Nzemas in Ivory Coast, so the (unclear) boundaries set after the colonial era separated the, the two regions, almost like West [West Germany] and East Germany, if you will, or North [North Korea] and South Korea, where there are still Koreans and they speak the same Korean language, and that's--the Nzemas in Ivory Coast speak Nzema, the Nzemas in Ghana speak Nzema.
Speaker 2: Now, are the Nzemas related to the Ewe or the--
Speaker 1: What is Ewe?  Oh, the Ewe.
Speaker 2: Ewe--okay, I'm sorry, my pronunciation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The--I'm--sure, the Ewe group, they are in the easterly coast of Ghana; we are on the westerly coast, so we are a distance of almost maybe 240 miles to 300 miles at least, and the tribes that share the, the coast from Ghana, and then Ivory Coast here and Togo here.  So, from Ivory Coast you have the Nzemas, you have the Aowin, you have the Fantes, then you have the Ga, and then you have the Ewes, so this is how far the distance is--
Speaker 2: Okay do all those groups have related language, similar language, or, and customs, or (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, the common language is called the Akan.  We all constitute the Akan, of which the Elijah tribe is the Ashanti, but the language is so different than--some of language is very convoluted and very difficult on the tongue.  One has to live there for quite some time to really pick up the language 'cause so much is cadence, inflection, tone, and so on.  I'll give you a couple of examples.  You can have one word--let's say the word (Nzema word); (Nzema word) is a word for peanuts.  And listen to these last two: (Nzema word) is rice; (Nzema word) is death; (Nzema word) is a thief.  Still the same word, but the tone tells it (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the, the nuances are very subtle.
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And so--
Speaker 2: So, if you would don't--if you had--if you don't have a trained ear, it's gonna all sound the same to you.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, so you have (Nzema word), (Nzema word), rice; (Nzema word), peanut.  (Nzema word), death, (Nzema word), thief, you see.  And it's literally that one word and going through there.  I, I speak the Fante language, I speak the Ashanti language, and I speak the Nzema language, but I know there is moments very difficult to pick up, that's my father's--
Speaker 2: Now, do people--do outsiders create a lot of amusement in Ghana when they try to speak the language?
Speaker 1: Very much so, especially Nzemas who live abroad.  Let's say the wife is an Nzema, the man is an Nzema, and then the kids pick up the language from hearing the parents speak, but when they go back to the country, they realize that they're speaking with an accent, and we just excuse it (laughter) you know?  It's like, the way other ethnic groups might speak English in the United States.  You, you can, you can tell they are saying everything they want to say, but pronunciations are fairly different.
Speaker 2: So you could be calling a man a thief, and he thinks you're calling him a peanut.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It could be that way, yeah.  I'm constantly amused when I hear somebody like Arnold Schwarzenegger speak English or--you follow what I mean?  Yes, and that's a real good example of how the Nzema sounds when someone who's been foreign-born has to read the language.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, just tonation and, and--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --rhythm, a lot of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So much inflection and, and nasal cadence and sometimes even things that--you don't hear other tribes use -mm, it's an affirmation of that's interesting, or, um-hm, that means yes.  And it's just a sound.  Or someone is talking to you and you respond, um-hm, um-hm, I agree, I agree, you know.  And it's just how Nzemas have operated all these years.
Speaker 2: Yeah, where in English, you have to actually say, I agree.  Even if you say um-hm, somebody will ask you again to make sure that you agree.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: But you can say it there, and it's really clear; it's clear that you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It- true; universal acknowledgement, yes.  A word like (Nzema word) meaning what a surprise.  (Nzema word) is shocked.  (Nzema word), amazement; it's the same word, and it's how long the sound, and all that.
Story_ID: 531164
Speaker 1: You can trace your father's [Alfred Akainyah] history back five generations?
Speaker 2: Five generations, correct.
Speaker 1: Now, people who are--black people born in Africa--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --have--generally have the ability to trace back their ancestry a lot further than we can here--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --because of slavery, and the other--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --factors that disrupt families.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So we don't have the--this, but if you--typically--so you know five generations, but how many generations could your family come up with if you had to?
Speaker 2: Maybe about nine or ten, and it's a bit exceptional because--like my mother's [Sabina Yorke] family who were impoverished for so many years, in particular after the migrant part of that family died.  On my father's side, they have been part of the stool, which I mean, the monarchy of the Tikobo [Ghana], the Nzema part of our history and our, our town, so they rule the town.  He was what you call (Nzema word), which is like a divisional chief.  And so being a member of the royal family, or being a member of the clan means that now your history has to be narrated as part of the (unclear) scepter, or the crowning of whoever becomes the king, so, everybody knows so much about you, yes.  And then, also, for three generations or four generations, beyond my father, this gentleman had a huge coconut plantation that employed an awful lot of men from the two towns that separated their, their location, and so people were obliged to know so much about them, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Certainly if your source of employment is dependent on someone, you would know a bit more about them than they would know about you, and so on, and that's just how it occurred.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so when you look back at your family history--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --your family was associated somewhat with the British when they first arrived on the coast.
Speaker 2: Yes, because one part on my father's side was a settler, and then--on my, on my mother's side, rather--and then on my father's side, I wouldn't even say the British, but the rest of some of the European nations depended on the coconut from the plantations in our region in great part because the coconut oil was used for all kinds of stuff, confectionaries including hair products and lubricants.  In some cases, they were used in lamps for lighting before the wick and kerosene and all the rest would come of age.  This, this was what was used, and so much of that came from the coast line of Ghana.
Story_ID: 531165
Speaker 1: Well we'll talk about your father [Alfred Akainyah] first, and he became a lawyer, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, now, was he the first in his family to, to go to law school, or did he--did his father go?
Speaker 2: He was the first in the entire town of Tikobo [Ghana] to go to law school, and this did not occur because there were any mentors or any sphere of influence to be leveraged for his advantage.  What happened was that, after my father completed grade school and high school, he sought out a career in the Ghana Police Service, and he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did--I'm sorry.  Did he go to that--there's--I know there's a, there a couple of schools that are famous and written about a lot.
Speaker 2: Cor- Achimota [Achimota School] in Accra [Ghana].
Speaker 1: Achi- yeah, Achimota.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My dad did not attend Achimota, yes, because Achimota is all the way in the East, close to the Ewe Accra region, and then we were further west, close to the Ivory Coast border.  But my father got a position in the Ghana police force, and he exem- exemplified himself in the years of being there for over twelve, thirteen years, so he climbed up to become a superintendent--no, I take that back; not a superintendent, an inspector.  So, as an inspector, his responsibility was to draft the reports that would come to court for any trials, and on one occasion, he brought a report and the--during the trial, the lawyer could not read my father's writing, so the judge asked the lawyer to hurry and present him the oral arguments, and then the lawyer replied that he cannot see the writing of this stupid law- police officer.  The judge was English, the lawyer was English, and so my father approached the bench to request for the lawyer to apologize, and the judge admonished my father for coming, or having the guts to approach the bench to request for a lawyer to apologize to him.  But my father insisted that this was his country, and that he had been disrespected, and to be quite frank, I understand the quote that the judge used was that, where in the colonial territories has he heard a native apologize, I mean, request an apology from an Englishman, and that the Englishman was of the exchequer chambers, and also a distinguished graduate from a school of law.  Those words stayed in my father's head, so as he left the trial, he was ready to resign from the police force and begged his father for money so he can go to the United Kingdom to go study law.  So he took the comprehensive exams after studying for nine months, civics, English history, colonial history, English language, and general paper, or something like that.  So, he got accepted to the inns of course, in England, and he studied with unparalleled speed to come back to Ghana to practice law.  And it was this sort of a fever pitch that motivated him to participate in preparing the repatriation of Europeans going back to England so that Ghana could achieve its independence.  So he was one of the people who prepared documents, including the articles that later went into the Constitution of the Republic of Ghana.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now he, at, at some point became the chief justice of Ghana (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not a chief justice--
Speaker 1: No, he didn't?
Speaker 2: No, he became bench two, Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana] justice, second in command on the bench.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is quite a--this is a--so he's quite an accomplished man.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: And mind you, when he returned from his studies of law in England, at the time, there were two major political parties which were emerging in Ghana that were at such acrimonious loggerheads, and he could care less about loyalty to one or the other; he just presented defense trials very well on behalf of anyone who had been aggrieved--it didn't matter what tribe, or what age, or what gender.  And so this is what won him enormous respect in the country, and so he was actually appointed to the bench of the Supreme Court sooner than was anticipated.  And even--there were two other attempts that he had turned down waiting to try to incubate some wealth as a, as a lawyer before going to sit on the bench.
Speaker 1: Now, now what did his father do before him?
Speaker 2: His father was a king; he was a chief.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And he owned a little bit of their plantation, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they go back--as you said they go back to the owners of the big coconut plantation at one time, on the coast (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, in the coast of the Tikobo region.
Story_ID: 531166
Speaker 1: Do you have any memory of the independence celebration in, in Ghana?
Speaker 2: No.  I, I was too young to realize it, but f- you know, memories are sometimes so well enriched and refreshing by pictures, and people talking about that.  But, the actual independence struggle, not very much, but I was very privileged to have attended some of the early colonial schools, one of which was established by British nuns called, the Order of the Holy Paraclete, and the school was called St. Monica [St. Monica's School] in Ghana [Mampong, Ghana].  And my mother [Sabina Yorke] was the first African headmistress of that school, and so they had a junior rank, and then the boys and the girls attended that school, so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Let me go to your mother again.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so, she had a chance to go to school and become a headmistress of the school.
Speaker 2: Correct.  My mother's history is so fascinating, and I've written about that in my book.  From age one to age eight, my mother was an illiterate, and when the nuns from Britain came to Ghana--and incidentally, these nuns were in Ghana because they thought England was not safe after the First World War [World War I, WWI], so they came to Ghana; some went to India to establish missionary schools and to do missionary work.  So my mother was selected among one of those young girls to come to this newly-opened school.  So the first footwear that my mother wore was given to her by these English nuns.  But as a humble young girl from this family, she took her studies rather seriously, and so she stayed with these nuns, did grammar school, high school, and later the teachers training college [St. Monica's Teacher Training College, Mampong, Ghana].  And then she exemplified herself remarkably well, so they selected her to be a teacher, and later to become a headmistress of that school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was the first person that--was she the first one in her family to, to be educated, I guess, in one of those, in one of the colonial schools?
Speaker 2: Correct.  And her brothers later followed, but she and her, her sister, Naomi [ph.] were the first to come out of the family well-educated.  But obviously, Naomi was sickly, and so my, my mother completed throughout the entire training college and became the shining star of the family.
Story_ID: 531167
Speaker 1: Is there a story in your family about how your parents met?  Is there--do they tell a story?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's a very fascinating one because my father [Alfred Akainyah] is much older than my mother [Sabina Yorke], and my father had had an earlier marriage that did not survive, but five years or so, and they birthed a brilliant young man by the name of Lawrence B. Akainyah, who became a lawyer as well.  That's one, and then married a second lady, bore two daughters, and the lady died for complications of eclampsia.  We didn't know that that was what it was then; it was high blood pressure-related.  And her two daughters, my sisters Clara [Clara Akainyah Tenkorang] and, and Doris [Doris Akainyah].  Clara has a Ph.D. in French philosophy; Doris is at home in Ghana now, she did not go to college; the only one of us siblings who didn't.  And then married Ms. Victoria (Unclear) Akainyah [Victoria Akainyah (ph.)], and then after bearing three children, they were at loggerheads with one reason or the other, so my father met my mother on a very interesting circumstance because while my mother was headmistress for this English school [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana], she wanted the girls to exact so much pride and prodigy, and to live with the highest ethical and moral standards, complete their education, and then hopefully they will meet some successful men to marry them.  At least this was the advice that British nuns gave my mother.
Story_ID: 531168
Speaker 1: --My mother [Sabina Yorke] had been headmistress for the school [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana] for a certain number of years, and the same principles that the nuns raised her with, she intended to raise her students with, but my mother carried with her one very important advice that is from the sponsor that the nuns found to pay my mother's education.  He said that, well, maintain some morality, study very hard, and when you finish, an appropriate man will come at the right time to marry you.  So, this was my mother's advice to all these girls; some were 17, others 20, 19, 14, (unclear) several years of boarding school.  Any event, one of her most celebrated students became pregnant, and my mother dug into the facts to find out who was this gentleman who made this young girl pregnant, and incidentally, throughout the discussion, they found out this fellow was so arrogant and, and rude because he said, "What is a young man to do?"  Apparently, he had made two other ladies pregnant as well, so my mother fixed the situation.  He got--she had the authority, and I've called it the audacity, to have this young boy arrested and, and put into a cell.  My mother requested the police officers to hand over the key to her, and that she didn't want them to open him--or allow him to leave, and that she was on her way to get lunch for the police for doing a good job and finding him and arresting him.  On the way to her bungalow, my mother asked the driver to stop by the bridge, and she threw the key into the river, and the idea was that just as much as he, the culprit, had ruined this young girl's life, as reciprocity, his life should be ruined as well.  I believe, according to my mother, the driver asked my mother, "Madam, did you just throw a key?"  My mother replied, "Everything is in order."  And she got back into the car, it was a Peugeot, and then she went home.  And just as she arrived home, she checked into her friend, who was a matron at the school, her home, so that she could not be found.  So the police came looking for my mother at sunset in the evening, at night; they couldn't find her.  And the boy spent an entire night in prison--no food, no water, and urinated in his cell and that whole bit.  My mother gets a bit embarrassed when I talk about this story now, but it's important because it also showed me her discipline, and her faith, and trust in those students, and her willingness to do everything conceivably possible to protect the students.
Story_ID: 531169
Speaker 1: Finally, the boy's family, on Sunday at church, were making a complaint to somebody who was an usher, and the usher said that, "Well, there is a very brilliant lawyer in Kumasi [Ghana]; he's winning all his cases.  He's very expensive, but he has a soft heart, and take your case to him, who knows?  Maybe he might take your case for you."  That lawyer was my father [Alfred Akainyah], and this is how my father met my mother [Sabina Yorke], over a trial.  And I presume his first few questions to my mother was, "What has made your heart so heavy and so burdened, and what can I do to ease that?"  And my mother has him, or--talking about the rest of the story, but needless to say, I'm part of the by-product of why that meeting occurred (laughter), and my sister, you know.  Incidentally, the marriage did not last very long, and justifiably, as I've said to my mother on two occasions, that she was a brilliant woman, a huge heart, noble efforts and noble thoughts and vision, but she was the wrong wife for my father, and I know that as an adult now.  And just as much as my father was this brilliant man, he too was that wrong man for my mother because those two people were both visionaries.  And all my father probably wanted throughout his entire life was a woman who will be at home and incubate healthy children, keep an impeccable household, and he was ready to go out and conquer the world and bring the resources to underwrite the education.  And my mother was all the value, all the vision, everything my father would have wanted, but not a woman with a national mission of her own; she could not be at home, and that was part of the, the loggerheads that caused a rift in the marriage, and I'm aware of that.  And as I came of age to prepare to marry, I had to ask myself that question, what sort of wife did I want?  And I certainly did not want the housewife because the, the weight of the boring conversations, and what is intriguing to me must be not only my occupational pursuits, but of what manifest this woman that I would have married would have in her life, and that would be important for the state of mind of my children.  I believe so much of what I am today is not just because my father was this visionary, but so was my mother.
Story_ID: 531170
Speaker 1: When your, your parents [Sabina Yorke and Alfred Akainyah] then married--you said your pa- this was your father's third wife?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, did, did--I, I have to ask 'cause we--you know, in some West African countries, people can have more than one wife--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, did he have to get--divorce the others, or did--could he have three?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  My father was a puritanically rigid Christian, who did not adhere to any of the Muslim tenets of polygamy, or the traditional aristocratic tenets of polygamy because the Muslim tenets of, of polygamy just enabled a man to marry more than one wife, and in the traditional aristocracy, and the Nzemas, or for that matter, the entire Akan--there is a burden of production on behalf of the most affluent and most successful men to absorb the shocks of the society, so you could not, for instance, in those days, be a Michael Jordan in Ghana and be married to only one woman because you would be called selfish.  The idea is that even if you married four women, your family is still exceedingly affluent, and so we cannot have a woman working down the street who is a prostitute because there is no husband for her and no one supports her, and so we didn't have any of those societal ills in Nzema because of that.  Every woman knew she would be married, but that was the traditional aristocracy sanctioned by the monarchy, and so even if you were a very, very affluent man, in those days in Nzema, and you were married to only one woman, you will be paid a visit by people in the, in the palace, and to ask what is wrong with you--yeah.  But, that is now an erstwhile concept that has been subscribed and diminished.  Polygamy is probably about 10 percent if at best, in the Nzema region, in particular, right here.  In the days when I was coming of age, I surely knew of many families who had polygamists, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, but today, have--are those other ills present more?  I mean like prostitution and other things?  Do they exist too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There is some--there is, without a doubt, a spectacularly clear correlation between when the stakes of the economy are not in favor of certain women with limited education, limited resources, and so on and so forth.  The purveyors of the night--you see that not only in Ghana, but in Nigeria and other parts of Africa; you see it in other parts of the world as well, yeah, and--
Speaker 1: I know, yeah, there have been arguments and discussions here in this country amongst African Americans about the, the relative good or, or evil of having more than one wife or more than one spouse--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --based on what they know of African culture.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The, the only thing is that the intellectual discussions and the equipment that seems to support that is sometimes not fairly discussed because back there, it was purely an economic discussion, to make sure that if there are a hundred affluent men in a town of twenty thousand, and there are thirty women who are known to be prostitutes in the town, they would not want to incubate a second generation of prostitutes.  So, as those children are born, they would make an expectation of the sons of these affluent people to marry all those young ladies, so you'll see a man--I've known men with two wives, I've known men with four wives; I've even known some with five wives at the same time, but their advocacy for that has been, as I said, subscribed and diminished; it's, it's over with.  And during Kwame Nkrumah's time, there was actually policy in the making to do away with this concept.  Whereas it had an economic benefit, it had societal problems, including psychological and emotional for the people who did not find a, a comfortable fit with that.  The women wanted that, and there were some men who actually escaped from the township to avoid being told to marry the second woman.  Some were considered selfish, and this is all in a tribe where if indeed you were known to be very affluent and you did not absorb the shocks, i.e., marry a second or third wife, then in those days, upon your death, your face will stand upside down in your casket because it was in shame that you lived selfishly, you see?  But we, you know, we don't have those customs and traditions like that any longer, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 531171
Speaker 1: When you were raised, did you--were the traditional African customs fairly apparent to you?  I mean when you were growing up?  I mean--because, you know, here, we have a condition where we don't really know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --a lot of those-- --
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --customs, African customs, and the survival--those things that survive, we're not even aware of where they came from sometimes.
Speaker 2: Correct.  That's an excellent question.  I, I had a very different type of upbringing, and I realized that from perhaps the rest of my compatriots, my father [Alfred Akainyah] being one of the very few Ghanaians who studied law in England in those days, number one.  Number two, my mother [Sabina Yorke], being also one of the first Ghanaian women to be educated in a British-style school in Ghana [St. Monica's Teacher Training College, Mampong, Ghana].  My mother was three-quarters Fante and one quarter Nzema; my father was all a hundred percent Nzema.  So my mother's fluency in Nzema was minimal at best, but my father spoke Nzema and spoke Fante, so the communication between my father and mother was in English, but yet they were traditional purist.  And so, as I came of age, my sister and I--and even today, among my step-siblings, the communication is English, and we can still speak our native language and speak all other languages as well.  That said, my family's adherence with the English language was that it was the language of commerce, language of education, and language outside of our tribe, so we needed to have complete mastery, command, and control of it.  And then outside of school and outside of the home, we could then speak in our native language with anyone that we came across.  But we are rooted in the tribe and the culture as well because every Christmas holidays we left the city, Kumasi [Ghana], and went to our hometowns, and we spent an awful lot of time with our grandparents, and in particular with my mother's career [at St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana] and on my father's, with his career as well, and most Ghanaian families do that.  The more educated the families are, the more you find out that the children are very steeped in the culture because they pick that up from the grandparents, and this is the one wonderful value of the grandparents that allows the freedom and the state of mind for the parents actually to now be visionaries of any level that they want, and then have the security to know that the upkeep of your children is actually from someone that birthed them themselves.  You see?  Yes.
Story_ID: 531172
Speaker 1: What were the most valuable aspects of the, of the Nzema culture that you were able to--?
Speaker 2: Oh, remarkable.  First of all, let me say this.  Knowing that my mother's [Sabina Yorke] people didn't have much, and knowing that my father's [Alfred Akainyah] people owned a little bit of a coconut plantation, I was very--at a very early age, able to see the value of money and the value of--or at least the lack of it, but from both my mother and my father, I learned so much humanism.  If I have any sensitivity towards causes--education, the handicap, the elderly, or any social cause of any kind, it's because of seeing in my mother's village people who did not have much.  And sometimes in the days when I was in Ghana visiting the town [Mampong, Ghana], I used to look at some of the women who grew up with my mother, and I'm constantly reminded of asking the question, wow, what if these nuns had not come to Ghana?  And I bemoaned the answer because I know I could have been a son to any of those people, and it was not a very pretty picture.  Having said that, on my father's side of the family, I learned great ambition, and hard work ethic, and dedication.  But above and beyond that, when a person is born in the Nzema tribe, a boy or a girl, there is a special outdooring ceremony in which after twenty days, I believe, the parents now come out to tell the name of this child to the public, and then they prepare to receive the support of the public through gifts and so on and so such.  But when a male child is born, then the male--the father has to make what's called the oath of ascendency, which is an oath that every father of an Nzema tribe, if he belongs to the aristocracy, has to swear to.  And aristocracy in our tribe has to be contrasted from the meaning here in the West, which means wealth and stature and that sort of thing.  No, aristocracy over there references individuals who are strict adherents to the traditional tenets of their tribe; so they could be illiterate and they're aristocrats because of adherence to that.  So, you make this oath that you will now come in front of your father, his father, and all other males of the family, and to request their permission to name your son that you've just had after one of the distinguished members of the family.  And it is only when they approve that you, sure, you can name your son after that, that's when blessed, blessed--the celebration takes place.  But if you choose a name and they disagree, you cannot name your child after, and you certainly cannot choose a name because a name sounds pretty, or it has a wonderful iambic rhyme or something; the name has to be specific to the family and it should have relevancy to the tribe of the family.  So, I'm named Samuel [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah], that's Christian name; Emmanuel [ph.], confirmation name; Kwame, you know, spiritual name; but Anor-Amihere is my ancestral name for my father's grandfather, the great-grandfather on my end, you follow what I mean here?  Yes.  And once the man has made that oath, then there are three things he swears to: name, legacy and an estate.  So, now I'm obliged, as a result of that oath my father made, to raise me to fulfil those three things.  So, when I had a son [Samuel Akainyah II], although I live 9,000 miles across the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean] from Ghana here, I, too, had to make that oath.  When I married my wife, there is a Mrs. Akainyah [Kim Akainyah], so I've already established a name.  By the children, I've established more names.  The legacy is what I do for an occupation, and what society would remember me by, and the estate is what I do for civics, the general communal benefit of the, of the township.  So these are some of the wonderful paradigms I've picked up from the Nzema tribe.
Story_ID: 531173
Speaker 1: And in those years past, if a man lived and did not achieve, acquire, live up to the tenets of this oath, then his name could not be remembered as ancestor.  And the worst of it all, especially if you're an Nzema man and you committed some grievous crime like, instead of marrying you don't, but you're a rapist, or instead of achieving a legacy you don't, but you go to rob someone, then, here again you, you die and they turn your body in the casket upside down and bury you in the, bury you in a ceremony called (Nzema word), meaning name is extinguished.  So, they perform rights of expiation and rights of atonement to beg forgiveness from the ancestors for raising a poor child, and as such, once you come back from the cemetery, no one is to ever mention the name.  So, from that day forward, they would say, "Oh, you remember when we went to the burial of that man from Nzema?  The, the artist, you know, the one who was a professor?"  They say, "Oh yeah."  And no one would venture to say the name because they don't want the name to be possessed by the ethereal spirits around them.  And that's all part of the tenets of the aristocracy.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That seems to be like a, a widespread custom, I guess, amongst people, 'cause I've heard it from the Kipsigis--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in East Africa when they do libation.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When someone's a bad person, they never raise their name again.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: When they're gone, they're gone, and they never--they never talk about it--you never do libation for a bad person, you only do it for good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, it's, it's the exercise in rites and rites of extinction, so--.  And it is a very sad thing.  Throughout my whole life I've never seen one, but I've heard that, you know, there were a couple such in our town even before I was born, but that means--and, and the thought of it is quite an early thing for me to think that supposing I did not do the right thing, that upon my departure, that name, [HistoryMaker] Samuel Akainyah, is just extinguished, and there could be no utility to justify that.  But, you know--and (laughter) especially now that I have a son [Samuel Akainyah II], and I have given him that same name.  Now, if my great-grandfather--so he's carrying the name of a great-great-great-grandfather, and I'm raising him with those same ethical values.  He's fifteen, and I presume if you sat him down and asked him, what are those three things most endearing to your father that he expects you to--?  He would either begrudgingly or excitedly say, name, legacy, and estate.  He would just tell you that.
Story_ID: 531174
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  It depends.  I have one, two, three, I have three of them (laughter).  One was terrible; I was only age five, and (laughter)--oh, good god (laughter).  A, a neighbor of my father [Alfred Akainyah], a very affluent man, had built this huge home.  By the time they'd finished the second floor, the nuns showed a movie for the students at Sunday school.  And all the movies normally were ecclesiastically-based on Moses or David [sic. Daniel] in the lions' den or some little, little lovely childhood series like that, but this one Saturday evening they showed us a movie; it was an American movie, and in the movie a robber, bank robber had escaped police arrest, and was on top of one building to another and was parachuting, and it was so fascinating to look at that at age five or six, I believe--I think it was five.  And I thought my sister and I should experiment on this parachuting thing, and the only thing I knew close to a parachute was my father's huge umbrella.  And so I took the umbrella and coerced my sister to come with me while my mother [Sabina Yorke] was busy in the kitchen cooking, and we went next door, climbed the steps, and my sister was terrified, but I literally hit her on the butt to just join me on this whole journey.  And so after we got to the first platform, she kept screaming, "I'm scared, Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah]."  And I said, "Shh."  So, I kneeled on the rim and had her get on my back, and then I opened the umbrella and I literally jumped.  And, and then I let go of the umbrella because the thrill of coming down was so fascinating, but just halfway through, the umbrella just went up, and my whole head and face hit on the floor, and there was a break, too, so I broke a little rib.  But my sister rushed to the house crying, "Mommy, mommy, I think Kwame is dead."  My mother came out screaming and only found out that I couldn't move, and all I remember her saying is, "Don't die, Kwame, don't die."  And the next thing I remember was waking up at the hospital and the whole family, everyone was there.  I presume they thought I was going to die, but I survived it.  This was the worst of my childhood memories.  I was a bit adventurous and, and, and creative and curious about things, so I, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it was a two-story fall you were saying?
Speaker 2: They were building a three-story, but they had just built the first platform, and they were getting ready to go to the, to the third, and we jumped from the ceiling on the first floor, yeah, and (laughter) it was--I know the pain was, was unbearable because my belly felt like it was being inflated or being packed with bricks, and I was in pain for a very long time; didn't go to school for, for quite some time, so I started a little bit late, yeah, because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That was, that was--was that before you--about how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was age five.
Speaker 1: Five, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had just started school, and so I was out of school for, you know, for a good four months almost.
Story_ID: 531175
Speaker 1: And the second childhood memory--this time not really a child but I was age eleven, and that has probably shaped my state of mind even up 'til today.  Excuse me--I was age eleven, and I was in the Nyaniba Boarding School [Nyaniba Middle Boarding School; Nkroful Agricultural Senior High School, Nkroful, Ghana], which was the only such boarding school built in the country, named after Kwame Nkrumah's mother [Elizabeth Nyaniba].  We had teachers from every tribe; we were learning to speak French; taking introduction to Latin.  It was just a fantastic school.  Anyway, February 24th, 1966, the soldiers conducted a coup and over-threw the government of Kwame Nkrumah.  And I remember they came to the campus.  And I had been in this school since age eleven, and all they did was order all of us to come out and put on our shorts and our shirts.  They didn't give us room to brush our teeth or anything.  And they marched us from that part of school, a distance of maybe half-a-mile to the middle of the town near where Nkrumah's birthplace was.  And incidentally, the birthplace was not a mansion, it was just a small mud house with thatch roof, with branches, but its symbolism needed to be erased from the minds of the military.  So they had all of us eight hundred students witness this building being demolished while they were chanting names of Nkrumah is a thief, Nkrumah is this, this, and that and that.  And one sorrowful thing I remember was that there were two guardsmen in the building, one of who refused to leave the building because he said that he protects the building, and that was an order given to him by the head of state, Kwame Nkrumah himself.  And so he doesn't understand what the word, coup d'etat means, and that even Nkrumah himself does not explain to him that he's been overthrown, then in his mind, Nkrumah is still the head of state, and that he would not leave.  There were no further discussions.  The commander ordered incendiary bombs to be blasted to the building and kerosene poured, and the building was set ablaze.  It was the first time I smelled the scent of human flesh burning, do you follow?  And they didn't ask us to turn our heads, they forced us to observe this, the soldiers.  And so we saw a human body (unclear); gray, burnt, and that smell disturbed me so much that I refused to eat meat for almost four years after that--it would take a long time.  But, I did not understand the source of man's inhumanity towards the other, and for what it was worth, Nkrumah hadn't done anything wrong other than lead the country into independence from British colonial rule.  There were political dissidence taking place in the country at all times in great part because he said in England, the farmer can read the newspaper; in the United States, where he went to school in Lincoln [Lincoln University, Lincoln University, Pennsylvania], the farmer can read the newspaper.  The truck driver can stop for directions, and in Ghana the farmers did not; they were all illiterates, and Nkrumah said, "In a democracy, you should be able to at least read to exercise which votes you'd like to make."  And the children of the farmers incidentally said that, if all our children go to school, then they will not come back to the farms; they will stay in the urban centers to get executive jobs.  So who survives our plantations when we're gone?  So this is where the protest of Nkrumah came, and so it percolated throughout the entire country, and bred so much resentment, so some of these soldiers were relatives of the farmers who needed to overthrow the government.
Story_ID: 531176
Speaker 1: Oh yes, the burning of Nkrumah's [Kwame Nkrumah] birthplace, yeah, and this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, birth- exactly.  Yeah, the building was no more than the size of one and a-half times this room, and it was supposed to be living quarters for Nyaniba [Elizabeth Nyaniba] and, and Nkrumah because Nyaniba was the only s- Nkrumah was the only son Madam Nyaniba birthed.  So that building had become a tourist attraction, and people from Russia had come to put up a wonderful ceiling and glass, you know, windows, including marble columns, to protect this so that it becomes almost like a, a wonderful tourist site, if you will.  But during the coup, the soldiers saw that as a symbol of Nkrumah's presence; they wanted to erase everything that would remind them of Kwame Nkrumah.  So quite frankly, books were taken from the libraries and burned.  There is not a single diplomatic white paper, or a diplomatic cahier from the Flagstaff House [Accra, Ghana], the state house that would give you any indication of Nkrumah's reign; they were all burned.  In Accra [Ghana], Madam Fathia [Fathia Nkrumah], his wife who is Egyptian, sought refuge.  The Egyptian president then saw fit to contact the Egyptian ambassador, and sent an aircraft from Cairo, Egypt to go pick up Nkrumah and the kids and send them to Cairo; this is how they left.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, he was--his wife was the, the sister of Nasser [Gamal Abdel Nasser]?  Was it--
Speaker 2: It was, it was a relative of--
Speaker 1: Relative of Nasser?
Speaker 2: --of Nasser, Abdel Nasser, correct.
Speaker 1: He was the president then of Egypt, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, and elsewhere from the country in Accra then Nkroful [Ghana], which is where Nyaniba Boarding School [Nyaniba Middle Boarding School; Nkroful Agricultural Senior High School, Nkroful, Ghana] was built, and that's also the town that Nkrumah was born, was under attack, so our school, Nyaniba Boarding School, was surrounded by almost eighty armed soldiers, and we were not maltreated, we were not wounded, no student was beaten, we were just ordered and marched as youngsters to come from our school half a mile into the town to witness that our hero, as they saw fit, was being reduced to ashes and his home was nothing but rubble.  And in the process, we witnessed these two security men dying and--because they broke the building on top of them, and set the building ablaze.
Speaker 1: Just two, two men died.
Speaker 2: Two men, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: But throughout my whole life thus far, that was probably the worst thing I had ever seen in my whole life; it was the worst thing.
Story_ID: 531177
Speaker 1: Upon our return, my mother [Sabina Yorke] was coming from a neighboring ci- town where one of the students was in the hospital, so she arrived--and here again, my mother's courage is unprecedented.  She questioned the presence of the soldiers on the campus [of the Nyaniba Middle Boarding School; Nkroful Agricultural Senior High School, Nkroful, Ghana], and one of them looked at her and said, "What is wrong with this madam?  Does she not know that the coup has been conducted?"  And my mother's reply was, "Don't tell me any of this rubbish.  The coup took place in Accra [Ghana]; leave these students alone."  And it was then that the co-head thought our life was going to be in danger by my mother's words, but she was a woman of that sort of courage, you know?  She spoke her mind.  And finally, my mother said, "Go and tell Triple A," who conducted the coup, "that I said that he should take the soldiers out of this campus now."  The young recruits--the soldiers--did not know who Triple A was, and quite frankly, Triple A was the nickname my mother had given to this soldier when he was a student, age twelve.  He was a brilliant math student and his name was Akwasi Amankwaa Afrifa [Akwasi Afrifa], and my mother gave him a nickname Triple A, because she said, "You're going to be my little husband."  Why?  Because my father's name, Alfred Augustus Akainyah [Alfred Akainyah], also was Triple A.  And it was from that that saved the school and the students because one of the recruits literally went to the offices and called the commander from the city and says, indeed, he had never heard the term Triple A, but that is the, the commander who conducted the coup, and when he found out that my mother was headmistress of the school [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana], he ordered the soldiers to retreat immediately.  And so in spite of his evil heart to conduct a coup, he still had a soft heart for my mother as his favorite teacher, as he said, in his life, and the students of my mother.
Speaker 2: Now let me ask you to spell Triple A's name for us, and do it slowly 'cause I'm trying to (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Sure.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Akwasi, A-K-W-A-S-I, Akwasi Amankwaa, A-M-A-N-K-W-A [sic.], Amankwaa one word, Amankwaa (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And the last name is Afrifa, A-F-R-I-F-A.  Yes.  Incidentally, he and his compatriots, some of them are no longer alive because when Rawlings [Jerry Rawlings] overthrew the government, he executed them all.  You know about that, right?
Speaker 2: Right, that--yeah, that happened in the '80s [1980s], I guess when Rawlings--
Speaker 1: Correct.  He had the, the three previous heads of states, and he killed them in forty-five minutes.  He had them executed by firing squad, and--
Speaker 2: No, I did know that, that he killed the previous heads of state--
Speaker 1: Correct.
Speaker 2: --by firing squad when--in the coup, and--
Speaker 1: After, after he conducted the coup, he said that he needed to purge the country of any lingering and festering legacy of any of the military.  He did not want all the acrimony, the derisiveness; he did not want any dissidence of any kind and, and quite frankly his, his outlook injected so much fear in the country that he ruled Ghana for twenty years nonstop.  There are Ghanaians who came of age from age one to five, and they are now twenty-five or thirty, up until President Kufuor [John Kufuor] came into office.  The only president they've known is President Rawlings, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, did he have the large- the longest tenure of any Ghanaian president to date.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  In the process, we have had Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], we've had, you know, Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan], we've had Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], we've had Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] (laughter), and, and now we have Bush [President George Walker Bush], and then we're about to have another one, and some people just have only known Rawlings, and now they know Kufuor.  So, democracy is taking a solid seat in Ghana now, and I'm so delighted by that.
Story_ID: 531178
Speaker 1: So when you were growing up--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --did you have a sense of--you told me that, about the literacy motivation--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That, to tell the truth, it sounds like that's, that's like a secondary reason, not the, the principle reason for the coup (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was, it--the truth is, in Ghana itself, that is--that, that's the solid truth.  This is the operational network that prevailed in the country at that time.  Mind you, the resources of the country, natural resource, we produce the bulk of the world's bauxite minerals, smelted into aluminum for making aircrafts.  We produce manganese, we produce diamonds, we produce gold; Ghana is a very rich country, and yet it's still impoverished.  At the birth of independence, we were on the same economic development scale with Singapore and, and South Korea.  See where Singapore is (gesture), South Korea is (gesture), and we're only still here (gesture).  Agriculture, the shipment of cocoa, coconut, and so on, and foreign exchange for the country, but gold and the minerals were being controlled by migrant corporations, and the Ghana government had a share in it.  But the farmers, they actually control the land because of their plantations.  So, if one farmer had sixty people, or twenty people, or ten people working for him and he knows he's supposed to die and leave this plantation to the son, and Nkrumah's [Kwame Nkrumah] idea is that, I'm not expecting all the farmers' student to go to college, but just to be able to have basic reading and writing, so you can write a letter, or you can read the newspapers.  And so, the policy became mass education policy in the country, whereby vans and trucks would go to neighboring towns, and at night, teachers who've been teaching in the day schools would then go with these persons and teach alphabets, A-B-C-D.  But it had become so clear that the educated people drove the vans, they lived in bungalows, they had cars, they wore western clothing, they spoke English or French, their children got jobs in government, and so their, their children were beginning to question, well, why should I be in the plantation now?  You see?  And meanwhile, there was no effort on behalf of the government to explain to the people that they can still come back to the plantation if they choose, and so many of them abdicated their role of being heirs to these plantations and came into the city.  So, from 1957 up through nineteen fifty--1962, '63 [1963], the farmers' children, a whole exodus, from the villages to the cities.  And so this is where--
Speaker 1: So you, so you have like a inter-
Speaker 2: Riffs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ghana--a struggle, a class struggle going on in Ghana.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Nkrumah wrote a book on class struggle in Africa ['Class Struggle in Africa'] with that outlook as part of the--.  Yes.  And since they had representatives in the parliament, the farmers and their constituency, they then brought the acrimonious contents of these farmers into the parliament, and there were some parliamentarians who left because their vision was so clear: let's educate the masses.  And by the way, for that decade, Nkrumah turn around a country that was 74 percent illiterate, and turn it down to 69 percent literacy rate in a period of less than a decade (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he brought up literacy--he doubled the literacy of the country--more than doubled it.
Speaker 2: (Nods head) To put it mildly, yes.
Story_ID: 531179
Speaker 1: Other African countries took the cue, and to-date, and one more statistical data, in that period, he built over twenty-seven government chartered boarding schools and secondary schools, littered through the length and breadth of the country.  And one amazing paradigm he brought: every school was required to have a student population that reflected the entire demographic of the country.  So, classes were taught in English, no doubt; we studied Latin and French.  However, after classes, you can hear the Fante speaking and the Ashanti students speaking, the Ga students speaking.  So, in the process, your average Ghanaian student, graduate from those high schools spoke three of the different languages just by hearing their classmates speak it in the dormitory, in addition to French and English.  To-date, it is probably--the Ghanaians will tell the truth about this.  It's probably the only reason why our country has not seen any of the riffs of sectorial and ethnic cleavages on the--in the manner that Rwanda, Tutsi, Hutu; and the Darfur [Sudan], Janjaweed; and all the rest of it.  We--and even in Igbo, Ife, Beninian conflicts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah and in Nigeria, yes sir--
Speaker 1: We don't have that because the three of us--your camera, you the host, myself as the guest.  Now, it could be Nzema, Ashanti and Ewe; we're in the same school, but we are classmates.  How can I wage any bloodshed against my classmates?  And this is what Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was trying to advocate and, of course, hindsight is always 20/20, as has been advocated.  So, now, people see the wisdom of what he was trying to do, yeah.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But they saw him as being disruptive at the time.
Speaker 1: Of the social institutions and the prevailing traditional tenets of the time.  It, it was very much intrusive, and this was a perception.  And even to make it worse, when the farmers' children left the plantations completely, then he thought, that being the case--then all the men who were illiterate and could not work, he formed what's called the Builders [Builders Brigade] and the Farmers Brigade, and purchased huge plots of land to plant palm trees and rubber trees, and these men were, were working in the plantations and they had a salary, and the salary seemed to be better, and so the farmers thought Nkrumah was trying to nationalize farming, so that was also another--.  So, the, the, the inner currents that fulgurated enough to cause the rifts in the country were purely from the agricultural sector.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes; it was never discrimination because his covenant reflected the entire country.  You had northerners, you had Ewes, you know.
Story_ID: 531180
Speaker 1: So can you tell us like what was family life like for you on a daily basis when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: When I was growing up.  It was, it was, it was wonderful; it was, it was, it was sad in one respect because beloved head of state had been overthrown, and there was a national state of crisis, and I mean security crisis because the intellectuals among our family sat constantly to ponder about how the soldiers were able to orchestrate a coup, avoiding all these security arrangements that had been put in place in the country.
Speaker 1: Did the coup really affect your father's [Alfred Akainyah] position and what be- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct, correct; yeah, because since my father was an Nzema man and he was on the Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana], many with the bar and the bench advocated that perhaps my father would begin to steer cases against other ethnic groups in the country, and in any event, members of the Supreme Court have salary for life when they retire.  And of course, it didn't help that my father's wife, Aunt Victoria [Victoria Akainyah (ph.)], had utilized some of family resources to own two fishing trollies to employ people, and they said that was conflict of interest.  So, my father resigned from the Supreme Court to avoid all the unnecessary discussions in the media, and to dampen the morale for the Nzema judges and the Nzema lawyers.  So that was the area it affected my father.  On my mother's [Sabina Yorke] side, her name was put in the newspapers like all the other people who belonged to the Convention People's Party, which was Nkrumah's party, and it did not help it that my mother's mother was related to Kwame Nkrumah's mother [Elizabeth Nyaniba].  And so they came, almost two years later, and shut down that school where my mother was headmistress [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana], and converted the school into a secondary school [St. Monica's Secondary School, Mampong, Ghana].  But it helped my mother in some respects because she was appointed as superintendent of schools.  And initially, she had helped with putting together the curriculum for teaching in the entire boarding schools and middle schools in the country, so she was very heavily respected in spite of the fact that she was related to Nkrumah, that they needed her, in the next administration, in the ministry of education--what you call here the board of education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 531181
Speaker 1: Now, how long did the vilification of Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] last?  I mean, you know, 'cause he was, he was a great hero, Osagyefo--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and all that.  And then--so, how long did they--did the, the vilification of him last before they finally just stopped.
Speaker 2: I think there are festering and lingering vilification even today, and people may or may not admit it, but it is.  I know for a fact that in the decade in its aftermath, it was very, very high.  At the time I was leaving Ghana in 1978, '79 [1979], I recall one statistics in the Legon Observer, which is a very exclusive newspaper that took to task civil liberties issues and other things like that in the country.  One out of every one thousand Ghanaian man was an informant on governmental Ghana payroll, and I thought that was so parasitic to the political economy of the country, but it was just to sniff and keep the tide of the political system secure, and it happens to every country where the military overthrows the government.  Because their political ascendency is through military strife, they want to make sure that their insecurities and, and other things are, are, are taken care of, so they typically will recruit so many spies, and up 'til now, if you visit Ghana, you will notice that if you have discussions at a bar about fashion and food and business, people will listen, and they are enthusiastic.  The moment you will probe any political discussion, the two questions you just asked me, if there were three or four people present, they will depart very politely because they will be afraid of being negotiated as part of the visual discussion go- even if they did not contribute.
Speaker 1: Even today?  That would--
Speaker 2: I believe so.  And you can even tell from the eyes that when they go into a room, the--almost by cognitive and intuitive alertness, they will take a panoramic view of the room to see that there is absolute visual security before they take a seat.  And that is part of the outgrowth of pe-.  You've heard about soldiers coming back from war with a traumatic stress syndrome, and children who witness revolutions, they become politically meek; they don't want any participation.  One wonders, for instance, why Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] children, for instance, don't have--or have no birth children.  One, one can only speculate as to the traumas that they may have gone through with their father's death, and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, they don't have any--he doesn't have any grand- I mean there's no grandchildren (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they just had a granddaughter now [Yolanda King], but to think about the fact that they came of age quite some time ago, and by now, you would have thought two, three kids; you would have thought Martin Luther King, Jr. III, IV, V is named--you don't have all that.  And there is something to be said for what children go through when they see this kind of trauma.  And Ghana and the rest of Africa need to come to terms with that.  We do not have the wonderful human infrastructure set up in the West.  For instance, there is a Columbine tragedy [Columbine High School, Columbine, Colorado] and the country deploys over fifty psychological and psychiatric counselors to help calm the attenuated emotions and spirits of these youngsters, you follow what I mean?  We never had any of those, and with that, the country then is on perpetual alert.
Story_ID: 531182
Speaker 1: So, you travel with--I'll give you a real good example.  Just about two years ago, I was in the country with fifty very educated and professional African Americans who happened to be clients of mine, and many of them friends of mine who wanted to visit Africa, they've said it for the longest.  And I said, "Well, I'll be going but when I go, it will be a little bit of a state visit because much attention will be paid on--of--as a gratitude to my father [Alfred Akainyah], not for any prominence of mine of any kind, but it is something because of my late father."  And lo and behold, we get there, the president receives a- at the state house, I deliver a state--a press conference directly to the country, and so on and so forth.  But, throughout the period that I was in the country--now, we have eight years of a sustained democracy.  Even then, there were two secret service men deployed on our bus, everywhere we went, and there were one or two informants who we were constantly wondering, does he have any executive or presidential ambitions?  Why is he bringing very astute and affluent people?  We asked few of them, and there's a vice president of a bank, a, a judge, this--these are not the mere minions of society, and his name is Akainyah [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah], of his father's blood, he has a ghostly resemblance to Kwame Nkrumah, so what's going on?  It's an Nzema man trying to come back, and it was--they snoop so much so that I haven't taken a trip back since then; this was just in 2005.  And I knew then that this is part of the residual of the paranoia of all the coup d'etats that have taken place, yeah.  Yes.  And of course, the president was incredibly graceful.  My older brother [Lawrence B. Akainyah] helped him prepare for the bar exam, so he knew him very well and he respected my older brother.  He referred to him as a, a Ghanaian legal giant during the press conference, but my brother had the sane affection for him that with him at the helm, Ghana was going to be a, a safe and secure country because he was a gentle man, and he's now been characterized in the Ghanaian media as a gentle giant.  And I'm delighted because President Bush [President George Walker Bush] went to Ghana, said equally as much, and respected the democratic credentials of the country.  But even that, I still know that the country's citizenry, those of my age and kind, are still suffering from the legacy of the coup d'etats.  So, general alertness, a, a little bit of suspicion of anything that doesn't seem consistent with orthodoxy, and constantly asking the whys and the whats about things.  And so things are not just of surface coloration, you follow?  Yes.  But that's been the, the tide not only in Ghana, but in many African countries.  I mean, what happens if a soldier returns from Iraq; he goes through some deployment preparation and that kind of stuff, so that he can adjust to society properly.  Well, you have the whole 9 million people between Accra [Ghana] and neighboring suburbs which constitute half the country, and then the entire 20 million people in the country witness, on television, the execution of three heads of states, who all come from extended families.  So Rawlings [Jerry Rawlings] did so much damage to the spiritual ethos of the Ghanaians and, and we are still re- recalling with a whimper.
Story_ID: 531183
Speaker 1: Let me just kind of recap your school days.  Now, you--what, what was your first school?  I mean--
Speaker 2: St. Monica's--
Speaker 1: St. Monica, okay.
Speaker 2: --I.J. [St. Monica's Primary School] in, in, in Mampong, Ashanti [Ghana].  Mampong, M-A-M--
Speaker 1: N-M-A?
Speaker 2: M-A-M, Mampong, P-O-N-G (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  P-O-N-G?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, Mampong.
Speaker 2: And it's in--it's about forty-two miles north of Kumasi [Ghana].
Speaker 1: And your mother [Sabina Yorke] was the headmistress of that?
Speaker 2: No, my mother was headmistress of St. Monica's boarding school [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana].
Speaker 1: Oh, boarding--okay.
Speaker 2: The I.J. is actually acronym for infant and junior, so people from the age five, six, some even four attend that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's what you call here pre-kindergarten and kindergarten (laughter)
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, where did you go next?  What was the next one?
Speaker 2: And then from there, I went through the St. Monica's Primary School.
Speaker 1: Okay, primary.
Speaker 2: Correct.  Also in Mampong.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that takes you from first grade through (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From, from first grade through fifth or sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sixth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then, then where did you go?
Speaker 2: And then I came to Nyaniba Boarding School [Nyaniba Middle Boarding School; Nkroful Agricultural Senior High School, Nkroful, Ghana].
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: N-Y-A-N-E-B-A [sic.], Nyaniba--named after Nkrumah's mother [Elizabeth Nyaniba]--Boarding School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And, and you were there--
Speaker 2: I was there from, form one to--form four.
Speaker 1: I mean from the sixth--you were there in the sixth grade, or--
Speaker 2: Well, no, I finished the sixth grade now, so form--we call it form--middle school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, here you have eight years of grammar school, and then you have--in the U.S.  You have eight years of grammar (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, sometimes it's middle school.  It's one to six, and then middle school is--well, one to five, and middle school is six, seven and eighth, or sometimes seven, eighth, and ninth--
Speaker 2: But, but essentially, primary school is eight years here--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and then you go for four years of high school.
Speaker 1: Some--yeah; a lot of times it is, yeah.
Speaker 2: Correct.  But over there, you do six years of primary--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --at least at the time, and then you go for four years of middle school--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so it becomes ten years of complete grade school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then after that, you go to secondary school, which is what you have here as high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I went to Kwame Nkrumah Secondary School [Kumasi High School, Kumasi, Ghana].
Speaker 1: Okay, Kwame Nkrumah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay so that's your high school?
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.  And I stayed there for five years, and then I also did an additional one year of high school at a school called Kumasi Academy back in the Ashanti Region [Ghana].
Story_ID: 531184
Speaker 1: We were talking about the coup and its effect on the people of Ghana--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and upon you when you were growing up.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us was it the, the coup first, or the one--I guess Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah]--then later the coup, Jerry Rawlings.  Do these coups like drive Ghanaians out of the country, or prevent Ghanaians being educated out of the country from coming back into the country?  'Cause Chicago [Illinois], as we were saying off-camera, has a, a staggering number of educated Ghanaians here--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --that are--that can't--or that won't go back or can't go back.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now, London [England], you said, had half a million--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --Ghanaians--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --you know, and many doctors and lawyers, and all kind of people that, that you would think the country would need.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well, first, let me, let me make this comment.  While going to school, we were taking economics.  In the days of--I believe I was in form four, form five, which is like the fourth and the fifth years of high school [Kwame Nkrumah Secondary School; Kumasi High School, Kumasi, Ghana] because we have seven years of high school if you plan to go to college.  During those days, there was a wonderful economics textbook that had theories by Lord Maynard Keynes [John Maynard Keynes] from England, and in the United States the American equivalent was Paul Samuelson.  Samuelson made one comment, he said that for any developing nation that suffers a decline in its economic structure that sustains for ten years, it requires that number of ten years times two to restitute that to half of what it used to be before.  Many of the students, they read this, they knew this, so after Nkrumah's coup d'etat, up through Acheampong [Ignatius Kutu Acheampong], Afrifa [Akwasi Afrifa], that whole group, and they knew this is almost twelve, thirteen years of a decline in the economy, all they had to do was take that twelve, thirteen years times two; that was twenty-four to twenty-six years.  In their mind, that is how long it's going to take for them to see some relative development in the economy--half of what it used to be before.  We were already, age nineteen, twenty, reading this material, so we knew, plus the twenty-six years, then we will be forty-four, forty-five, beginning to see anything like that.  I left Ghana when I was twenty-five years old, I believe, and this coming September, I will be fifty-five years old, and I can almost faithfully say to you that when I went home recently, 2005, I returned thinking, I need to go visit the tombstone of Paul Samuelson to tell him, you were absolutely right, because I was now beginning to see Ghana's development, you know, progress at the level that Nkrumah left it.  You follow where I'm coming from?
Story_ID: 531185
Speaker 1: So, that academic decision resonated very well with many of those students, and so many thought, well, if you've been told the hurricane is coming and is going to ruin your home, you either start packing your precious goods to either leave and go somewhere safe and see if indeed it's ruined, or that in this case you see, do you prepare fortifications and do you have time to build the concrete bars and the fortifications?  And many chose the former, to leave, and that's just what has happened.  And, obviously, when many of them left--and then it became clear that Jerry Rawlings as a man who conducted this coup, literally had three heads of states executed, and in addition to that, there more Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana] justices executed.  So, you begin to question yourself.  If three heads of states, including three members of, distinguished members of the bench; not high court, not the district court, the Supreme Court, three Supreme Court justices and three first executives, you know.  Just, if we can let our mind wonder if Justice Souter [David Souter], Justice Breyer [Stephen Breyer] or Brennan [William J. Brennan, Jr.], or even Scalia [Antonin Scalia], or Kennedy [Anthony Kennedy] or, or any of these justices; just imagine three of them being executed with three U.S. presidents, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] and Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan]--the whole country would be in uproar.  But he did this in Ghana, and the country sat still; citizens did not bear arms and put the country on alert, and injected so much fear that for--academics thought, if they can do this to people of this high office, we better find a safe haven.  This is the principal source of why the bulk of the, of the intellectuals left the country.  Well, now the country is crying brain drain, and my reply is that from a man who is also running for president, Osafo-Marfo [Yaw Osafo-Marfo], who says, no, it's no longer brain drain, it's brain gain, because these intellectuals now can bring back into the country, you know, investments, A; B, advice; C, leverage--whatever influence.  I'm here, for instance, you know.  The fifty guests I took over to the country, they spend on an average five, six thousand dollars?  Look at that to the local economy of the area for just two weeks or so, or less than that.  Those who desire to buy a piece of property thinks things are so cheap, compared to over here.  A six, seven-bedroom home that may cost you anywhere close to a million dollars could be purchased for less than $300,000 or 400,000 or less in Ghana, and therefore, a four-bedroom house can be built for 250, you see?  People like [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes, Stevie Wonder, and all the rest, they have homes there.  What else?  But the other reason why many of them would not return also is because they found a peaceful state of mind in the political environments they've been.
Story_ID: 531186
Speaker 1: I'm constantly excited during the GhanaFest [Ghana Festival] when 25,000 Ghanaians show up, and a good 21,000 of them live in this city, and 4,000 of them will travel from Indiana, Wisconsin, and elsewhere to come for the celebration, and I have an idea that three-quarters of these people will never go back; this is, this is their home now.  You have permanent residents, citizens, each one--petitioners, including those with a, immigrant towards visas who've permeated other parts of the country and would not go back home to community to--you know.  And so the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the, and the children, too.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: They have children that are born here--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --that are--probably will never go back.
Speaker 1: Absolutely, U.S. citizens; some have never been there.  And so, and so these things have cost Ghana in terms of the human infrastructure where the purchasing power of these people have also enriched the country because as you and I speak, the number four source of foreign exchange earning into the country, Ghana, now, is the aggregate of repatriated funds into the country from these migrants who live outside of the country.  I think it's actually number three, if the government would accept it.  And you see the same thing in countries like Mexico and China (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know I, I was telling you off camera about the--an event I attended for the Ghanaian Medical Association [Ghana Medical Association]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --raising money for a hospital, a lot--and people were enthusiastically raising money amongst the Ghanaian community in Chicago [Illinois] as well as the African American community to send--
Speaker 1: To contribute.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to contribute.
Speaker 1: It must be the Saltpond Redevelopment Institute [Chicago, Illinois], I presume.
Speaker 2: It could be.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I actually think that our people should do more; they, they really should do more because by and large, you know, the country provided us this wonderful early education, and I've often said that.  And then the United States has blessed us for middle ascendency, so our first debt is to ourselves for achieving great lengths with excellence in whatever that we do, but our second debt.  So first one is human; we just--you could not just say, oh, I'm just an artist.  Be the best you can be.  Oh, I'm just a teacher.  Be the best teacher you can be; you owe that to yourself.  And then the second is, now that you are able to support your family, be charitable to the country you call home, which is here, and the country of your birth, which is there, to be charitable.  There are so many charity orientations here and, and there, and you cannot just live in this world and, and not assume a certain urgent sense of propriety and responsibility.
Story_ID: 531187
Speaker 1: Let me go back to school and I, I wanted to ask you about school.  Did you--now, from your speech, we can tell you're--you are very well educated and can use words (laughter) your words are used better--I mean you have a better use of the English language than most people I've ever talked to.  Reminds me of Armah's [Ayi Kwei Armah] writing, the style, every word (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --means something; I mean it's not, it's not any fillers--there aren't any fillers in your speech; you just--every, every word has a purpose.  But, did you get a chance to do art in school?  And when did you discover a talent for art?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not even sure if I really discovered the talent for art, but that's such a very important question.  All I know is that I was age seven or eight, and I used to look and stare with awe how my sister, younger than me by a year or so, could draw practically everything, and color it, and the envy was not a bad one, it was just awe.  And I must have been a sexist child because throughout my whole orientation I've been told, well, you have to be very busy in school, study hard because some day when your father [Alfred Akainyah] is not here, you are supposed to take care of your mother [Sabina Yorke] and your sister.  So I really did not understand why this girl who is younger than me, that I'm supposed to take care of some day in the future, can practically do something that I could not do, you see?  So I just observed her draw and so I found my own niche, and that was taking piano.  And the nuns in St. Monica's [St. Monica's Primary School, Mampong, Ghana] introduced me to the piano and they found out that I was gifted at it, so they told my mother that they would like to continue with private classes.  I compose music now because of them.  But one day at age eight, there was an art contest, or a competition, and so I decided to participate and I took the brushes and, and the paint--no pencil, nothing.  And that coloring that I did ended up being the, the piece that won the first place for the school.
Speaker 1: What did you paint?
Speaker 2: I can't even remember, but all I know is that it was, it was an art competition; it was something about nature, or a poem of some sort, so I did it.  And even my sister was amazed that I did that; she thought somebo- and--but we did it in class.  So after that, I thought, well, maybe I could do this, or--.  And the nuns said that maybe it was so boring for me, or it didn't seem, you know, like an effort, but I believe it was because I watched and observed the nuns painting, observed my sister doing it that I came, yes, one day to do the same thing.  And this is what I have done very well now, to be able to observe something and execute it to-date.  If, if you would leave and go back to Dayton [Ohio], and you called and said, "Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah], would you--I, I would like to have a portrait of myself done."  And if you didn't give me a time limit, and then in a month's time, I could send you a portrait, and with my eyes closed I could tell you the contours of your hairline, the structure of your mustache and your beard, the lining of the badge around your neck, the color of the shirt you are wearing, even the expression on your face, the logo that is on your chest because I've seen it and I saw--picture it in my mind.  And it's like that when I go to visit a city or a town, or a countryside.  I do landscapes of practically every place I've been, and I can capture it without having to look at pictures, and that's, that's one gift that these nuns, you know, helped enhance.
Story_ID: 531188
Speaker 1: What medium did you use in grade school [St. Monica's Primary School, Mampong, Ghana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Watercolor.  And I hate watercolor now (laughter).  But that's purely a, a professional reason because when I go to museums and I look at the artworks all the way from the Flemish movement, you know; the Dadaist, or the surrealist movement, all the paintings that are of relevance--now, in more recent times, cubistic pieces by Picasso [Pablo Picasso], Monet [Claude Monet], Botticelli [Sandro Botticelli], van Gogh [Vincent van Gogh], Joshua Reynolds; they are not watercolor pieces, they are oil paint (laughter), so I have made an academic decision that if I'm to survive the threshold of what is collectible and what museums respect, and so on, then it will serve no utility for me to use a medium that will fade in a hundred years, and my name will be extinguished with its lifeline, you see?  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well, you know--well, there are people like Jacob Lawrence that used watercolors--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and they seem to--they're--I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, you see, from the time of Jacob Lawrence, a wonderful invention had come of age, and that is fixatives, or varnishes, so you can spray the work to have some relative longevity, but imagine before it was discovered in the '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s], and so on and so forth.  The artist died, and the works are what they are, and if Jacob Lawrence was alive today, he would attest to the fact that he has not been able to see any watercolor of three, four hundred years old, and that's of the Flemish movement, Rubens [Peter Paul Rubens], Rembrandt, van Dyck [Anthony van Dyck], and so on, and that's with museum conservation, preservation and all that stuff as well, you see.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did you have a--
Speaker 2: Incidentally, I feel the same way about acrylics because it was invented in the early '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] as a cheaper medium for art students for self-expression so they didn't end up using expensive oils that they could not afford because a jar of oil--of, of acrylic paint the size of the coffee cup of mine, you could get it in those days for a dollar perhaps, fifty cents.  A tube of oil paint, professional pigment about this could cost you four dollars.  Now I have professional tubes I use that start anywhere from thirty to sometimes as much as $210 a tube, so ten such colors are two thousand.  And it explains why oil paints are so dramatically more expensive than water-based pigments, acrylics, gouaches, watercolor, and so on.
Story_ID: 531189
Speaker 1: Now di- was the- did you have a favorite teacher or favorite teachers or mentors in, in school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I had several.  At St. Monica's [St. Monica's Primary School, Mampong, Ghana], this lady by the name of Mrs. Martinson and Sister Monica herself, and Sister Jude [ph.]--they were all nuns who were good at art and music, and so I'm not even surprised that they actually were involved in the missionary school.  And then as I went to a Nyaniba Boarding School [Nyaniba Middle Boarding School; Nkroful Agricultural Senior High School, Nkroful, Ghana], Mr. (Unclear) was an excellent organist and a composer.  My mother [Sabina Yorke] herself can draw and paint very well, so I do not take that for granted.  And then when I went to Kwame Nkrumah Secondary School [Kumasi High School, Kumasi, Ghana], a gentleman by the name of Mr. Ewusi [ph.] was the art teacher--he's deceased now; Mr. (Unclear) is also deceased.  They were all wonderful instruments of my early education in art.  We, we were taught very early in Ghana that all children are 30 percent the blood they've inherited, all children become 30 percent the environment they are emplaced, and every individual has brought only 30 percent of themselves into this world to have as A and B--the blood and the environment, and there is only 10 percent variable.  So, teachers had a habit of, without the student's knowledge, fishing out what occupations and interest those kids' parents are, and that for the most part indicated why their sons and daughters seem to have a certain ease with certain things, and how their interests--you know, because so much of this is blood.  I give you a real good example I have constantly thrown around.  Here in the U.S., we know the famous Oprah Winfrey.  Oprah's grandfather, for practical purposes, was a minister slash educator who had a small school in the basement of a church.  Now, we know ministers and educators all talk.  A son will be a, a barber who own his own shop, and barbers cut your hair, but barbers are also constantly talking.  And now they have a daughter who is talking for a living.  We know Barack Obama's father [Barack Obama, Sr.] was the first black man from Kenya to come to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] to get a Ph.D. in mathematics [sic.].  If--with that kind of primacy, it would make sense that the son will be the first black man to enter the Harvard Law Review.  In any event, the same part of the brain that deals with music deals with law and mathematics, so the son will study law--the same part of the father's brain, you follow?  And now he's going to, without much failing, be the first black president.  So, so much of blood--and whenever we succeed, we should not take for granted the, the marginal achievements of our bloodline because they are what we are.
Story_ID: 531190
Speaker 1: I had a friend from Ghana who had his M.B.A. from Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and I recall on the evening of the toast I shared with him that, "Before I say anything, let's toast to your parents for giving you the genes."  After that presentation, he came to, to me and said, "But Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah], I'm so embarrassed.  What did you mean, my parents gave me the genes?  My father and mother didn't go to college, they were illiterates."  And I said, "Oh, but Kofi [ph.], have you forgotten?  I know what your parents did."  The father left the village, and in their town asked seven people who had homes, and behind their homes told them to kill the flowers behind their homes and this should allow him to grow peppers and tomatoes and onions and vegetables and the like, and he would take care of them and then split it with them.  And then the wife took the rest to sell in the neighborhood market so he can make a living.  So the man incubated these little farms behind these estates, and the wife sold it.  The son now gets a Kellogg [Kellogg School of Management] M.B.A. and thinks that his, his M.B.A. as a western, three alphabet is such proud achievement that has nothing to do with the primitive commerce of his father and the mother selling, and I said, "That's accounting and entrepreneurship at that level; that's your blood."  And I did not talk to him for thirty days as punishment just to have him reconcile with that whole notion and regroup and come to some common sense.  You can't take blood for granted, and that's what that was--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 531191
Speaker 1: Now, were you ever discouraged from creating art?
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or did--okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I wonder now, you, you're making good grades right in school, you're making good--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm making, I'm making excellent grades in--and particularly English, in history, in government, in economics--we call it civics--literature, later political science and all that.  This is all in, you know, high school [Kwame Nkrumah Secondary School; Kumasi High School, Kumasi, Ghana], and so--and finally it was time to choose university, and I had a special letter from the dean of the college of art [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana] because I had A with asterisk, which means with high honors in art, and the college of art wanted me to leave high school and not go to the upper high school; to come straight to the university.  And my father [Alfred Akainyah] heard about this and protested because he wanted to incubate a family dynasty in the legal profession.  To-date, we do have that family dynasty from my father as an eminent lawyer; later a Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana] justice.  My brother Lawrence [Lawrence B. Akainyah], vice president of the bar, and later African representative of the commonwealth bar.  Ernest [Ernest Akainyah], a brilliant lawyer who lives in England, just went back home.  Emma [Emma Akainyah Amakye], a law- so, he just wanted to incubate lawyers and lawyers and lawyers, and my older brother Lawrence was paid a visit by the dean of the college of art, and their speech was very brief.  He says, "Well, your family has produced enough barristers for the country, but it is with distinct honor and in our fervent professional opinion, that with your brother, or your son, Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah], our country may have an opportunity to incubate a world class artist, and we just want you to give us that opportunity."  And those words are pretty intense words coming from the dean of the college of art, with two faculty members because they graded high school end of semester completion exams to determine who goes to the college of art.  So, I already enter the college of art in Ghana, knowing that, at the back of my mind, I am some prized student that these faculty members are looking at, and therefore that mantel was on my head not to disappoint them.  So, I took art as seriously as anything else--
Story_ID: 531192
Speaker 1: Meanwhile, before going to college [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana], my older brother [Lawrence B. Akainyah] brought me four books; they were all of artists of renown, and each of these artists had two things in common: they incubated an art movement.  So united--Michelangelo for the Flemish--before then; then a book on Claude Monet for impressionism; and Pablo Picasso for cubism, then I can't remember what the other author was--the other artist.  And I read the biographies of all these artists, and I knew then that they are what they are because they each incubated an artistic movement.  I said, good god.  Herein lies the, the premise of their grandeur: they incubated an artistic movement, and each name is collaterally attached--Picasso, cubism; Monet, impressionism; you know, this, that.  So I have to give birth to an artistic movement, and that was dualism.  So that--all the way from that period--I was twenty-three, twenty-four, thinking of that, but such is the value of familiarity of knowledge and content; it, it, it is minimum to say it's inspiring or it is awesome.  It informs your imagination and, and it prompts your behavior because you now know that--you know, like they say, in the threshold of, of, of the vision, if you have not known of something, you are not guilty, but if you've known of something, you've been informed; you're put on notice, what do you do with it?  And this is how it became about.
Speaker 2: Now, what is dualism?  You mentioned that.  Now, did you develop that when you were still in Ghana, or did you--?
Speaker 1: I developed that for the most part when I was in Ghana, but didn't have a name for it, and all I knew was that I had the capacity of creating a work of art that you can turn it upside down and see a completely different image, or stand east and see one image, stand left and see another, or staring right at it, there are hidden in it another whole set of image.  And, but by the time I had put my own vision as a creative person together, in 1988 or '89 [1989], I gave it the name, dualism, as a mission to fulfill a void that existed in the United States because in my mind--and that was from an advice my father [Alfred Akainyah] gave to my brothers, and later he passed on to me--and that is: never look at a vacuum in any situation and complain that the vacuum exists.  You should ask yourself to what extent are you capable of fulfilling that vacuum.
Story_ID: 531193
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name for us?
Speaker 2: My full name is Samuel Emmanuel [ph.] Kwame Anor-Amihere Akainyah, but for short I call myself [HistoryMaker] Samuel Akainyah.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am an artist, I'm a professor and I'm a composer.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is December 14th, Monday, 2009.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the City of Chicago [Illinois], at Akainyah Gallery, 357 West Erie [Street].
Story_ID: 531194
Speaker 1: All right, now, we are trying to complete an interview that we began in June [sic. July] of 2008, and I wanted to continue by--pick up by asking you about your years in the college of art at Ghana [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana] and, and how did you--we were--I, I think we were talking about how you, you know, made the transition from the college of art in Ghana to the Art Institute of Chicago [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and so tell us that story.
Speaker 2: Good.  I met a wonderful couple in Ghana; the couple came from Chicago--David [David Mullins] and Jean Mullins.  They were in Ghana visiting a niece of theirs who was in the Peace Corps.  A small friendship struck between me and them, and while they were in the country, I believe the lady lost her purse, which contained their passports and things of that nature, so they were looking for help, and people in my family helped them secure whatever they needed to.  They had traveled to the country on what's called a charter flight, so, which meant if you missed the flight, you've missed your ticket, so the family helped them.  Well, when they returned, this friendship remained, so they wrote to me weekly or monthly, and I replied.  The following year, they extended a warm invitation for me to come and visit Chicago; I had never come to the United States before, so that was my first time visiting.  I was very impressed with the city, went to the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], the Museum of Contemporary Art [Museum of Contemporary Art Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and many, many other such places.  So, when I went back home the following year--my family even invited them as well, but sadly enough, the military overthrew the government, and since university students were protesting in Ghana at that period called the a luta days.  They shut the universities down for close to two years.
Speaker 1: Now this is what year?
Speaker 2: This is 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, with the universities shut down, the family asked if I was interested that I could come back to Chicago and go to school and complete my education.  I was already beginning to think about the School of the Art Institute for graduate school, after my undergraduate.  So, since the closure lasted very long, I decided to come for a vacation once again, but while I was here, they had me visit the School of the Art Institute, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and the Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] school of art, and so I put an application to the School of the Art Institute because it was the only college of art which was attached to a museum, and I thought for an artist, this would be total heaven, and so that's exactly what happened; I applied to the School of the Art Institute and got accepted, and that's how I transitioned to the school, and I started classes January 4th or 5th, I believe, 1979, but I came September of '78 [1978].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Had you, had you traveled abroad prior to coming to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my--I had visited England, I'd visited Rome [Italy], and obviously, my first visit here to Chicago was in 1977, yes, before coming in '78 [1978].  Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so you were--you'd been to England and to Europe, and so that's--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 531195
Speaker 1: Before we leave Ghana, tell us about who some of the, the con- the, some of the notable contemporary artists of Ghana.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There are several people, I think, that we (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.  There were obviously several professors who taught me; Professor Galliver [ph.], who taught me art history, but he was not a painter, but Professor Ablade Glover, a brilliant Ghanaian academician of art and art history, a sculptor, and so on; there was one called Professor Uncoo [ph.]; I don't even know where he is now; and then one--
Speaker 1: Can you spell some of these names for us because we--
Speaker 2: Sure, I will.  You want me to spell them now?
Speaker 1: Well, the first one you mentioned, Ablade Glover, I'm pretty sure--
Speaker 2: Ablade Glover, A-B-L-A-D-E, and Glover, it's in English, G-L-O-V-E-R; he still now owns the largest African art gallery in all of Ghana [Artists Alliance Gallery], in Accra [Ghana].  And then there was one Professor Tetteh, T-E-T-T-E-H [Edmund Tetteh]; he's deceased now, and one Professor, Professor (Unclear); he's also deceased.  But in addition to that, fortunately for me, there were two student mentors when I was in the freshman and sophomore year; they were ahead of me, like in their final year--brilliant--one was excellent at figurative work; his name is Offei-Nyarko [Benjamin Offei-Nyarko].  He later went to Rome [Italy] to do his M.F.A.; he's now a professor at the same college of art [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana] where we attended.  And then the other one is Puplampu, who was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And can you spell their names for us real quick?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Offei-Nyarko is spelled as in O-F, as in Frank, E-I, Nyarko as in N- (background noise)--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Offei-Nyarko, O-F, as in Frank, E-I, Nyarko, N-Y-A-R-K-O [sic.].  And then Puplampu, I can't remember hi- I think it's Albert Puplampu.  But the last name is P-U-P-U-L-A-M-P-U [sic.], Puplampu; we used to poke fun at him about the rhymes came of his name, Puplampu, but he was just an outstanding landscape painter; understood color very, very well.  So those two student mentors also inspired me greatly, and I was--I'm not surprised to know that they are now professors teaching.  Yeah, and so those are the, the four people that I really remember, Offei-Nyarko, Albert Puplampu, Ablade Glover, and, and the late Professor Tetteh, yes.
Story_ID: 531196
Speaker 1: Contrast for us the cultural differences, you know, coming over here.  What struck you first about coming to Chicago [Illinois] as being different from Ghana?
Speaker 2: Well, obviously, one is Ghana is in Africa, Chicago is in the United States.  Climate obviously different; one warm and hot, the other one relatively cool and, and warm during the summertime.  But there were a number of culture shocks.  I was astonished to know that even if a student had Bs and Cs, they could get accepted to college; that was quite a shock, knowing that in Ghana we had--for a population of 24 million people or so, we had only three universities, and therefore, if your grades were not really up there, you could never get accepted.  Since we graduated over 12,000 high school students a year, the university can accept only half of that.  Second culture shock, I could not believe that television stations and radio stations functioned even after 11, 12, 1, 2, 3:00 in the morning.  The fact that college students had the opportunity to work not only during the summer, but while they were in school; therefore, as an art student, I could afford my supplies here with ease because I had a part-time job here and there.  I also enjoyed some of the, the food in America was very different; hamburgers and things of that nature, fried chicken gloriously in the stores at any time, you know.  These are some of the culture shocks, yes.  I also appreciated the fact that you could go into the art studio or the college [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] 24/7 Sunday or whatever day you can work, yes.
Speaker 1: Also, I think you had mentioned off camera that, that the radio and TV stations stayed--you know, they played all night (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was the first thing I mentioned--after 11, 12:00 at night, knowing that--I used to wonder who--what's the audience at 2, 3:00 in the morning for this beautiful dance music, and it's still going on.  It's even now more prevalent because you have all these cable televisions, stations all over, 24/7 as well.
Story_ID: 531197
Speaker 1: Tell us, who were some of your helpers and mentors at the Art Institute of Chicago [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --when you started?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a number, but a few stand out.  [HistoryMaker] Ronne Hartfield; the name is spelled as in R-O-N-N-E, Hartfield, English, H-A-R-T-F-I-E- F-I-E-L-D.  She was a professor of comparative literature, an adoring woman who was almost like--so maternal to us, all the students, but a real brilliant scholar--had a bachelor's [degree], master's [degree] in comparative literature through University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  So in terms of literature, it was inspiring to have her as an instructor; I even presented a few seminars in her class.  Second was a Professor Tony Phillips, who was a professor of painting.  I learned a lot from this gentleman.  Between him and Ronne Hartfield, I owe my admission to the School of the Art Institute.  I also studied quite a bit from Professor Emilio Cruz, who was the first art professor who inspired me to give verbal picture to the historic background information from Africa.  So my real interpretation of African art into my painting--African art history, that is, came from Professor Emilio Cruz who was Cuban.
Story_ID: 531198
Speaker 1: As a young art student, who were your artistic heroes?  I mean even in the past, you know; I mean who--what--whose works, or what artist did you consider worth emulating?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's an excellent question.  Even before I came here to the United States, there were a number of artists--obviously, Michelangelo for excellent figurative treatment; you couldn't find better.  He un- really understood the human anatomy very well.  But in terms of the actual creative process, there were two artists who inspired me greatly: one was the late Claude Monet, French impressionist painter.  But even before I got caught up with impressionism as the style of landscape treatment that inspired me the most, was the human quality of Monet.  He was a man who woke up every morning at six; by eight, nine [o'clock], he already had breakfast and had started his work, and then he ended his work when the sun came down.  I learned from him how he was able to balance--in history I read all of this--how he was able to balance his work and family because as you know, creative people can sometimes take so much liberties with creative license as to when inspiration comes.  You respond to creation and then you're gone.  But he was fortunate also because his subjects were nature, so whether he liked it or not, the sun will rise and the sun will set, the flowers will be there tomorrow, so he could have the work ethic of sunrise and sunset.  But the second thing that inspired me so much about him was his humanism.  Once upon a time, the late Hoschede [Ernest Hoschede], a very wealthy merchant in France who was friends with the president of France, were all collectors of Monet's works, and his wife, Alice [Alice Hoschede], was one of Monet's favorite patrons.  So, while Monet's career was just being incubated, the Hoschedes were huge patrons and helped to grow this gentleman's career.  Then there came a point in time when the Hoschedes had come under attack by the Parisian government and they lost everything.  And it is speculated even that the late Mr. Hoschede committed suicide.  Well, without her husband, Alice was left with her children.  Monet's career had then gone up very high and Monet invited the Hoschede family to come and live with him and not pay anything.  He took care of their children and the wife 'til, 'til he died.
Story_ID: 531199
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The second artist who inspired me greatly was the late Pablo Picasso.  For him, I learned two things: that it was all right for an artist to be multidimensional.  Picasso wrote poetry, Picasso represented artists and spoke passionately about peace causes--peaceful causes in the UN [United Nations], Picasso sculpted, he did ceramics, and he did painting, you see.  And he had an unparalleled work ethic; he produced a lot of paintings.  When he died, he left behind over half a billion dollars' worth of paintings.  So, from Picasso I learned it is okay for me to be a composer, to be an author, and to be a professor, and then to be a painter, and this is what I've acquired from the two [Picasso and Claude Monet].  And finally, the other source of iconographic respect I have for Picasso is that in 1905 slash 1906, he became exposed to an amazing collection of sacred sculpture from Gabon and Cameroon, the collection titled 'Mbulu Images' [ph.].  He saw the exhibit in Europe.  He was so moved, he was quoted to have said that these were the most powerful pieces of sacred sculpture he'd ever seen.  He began charcoal sketches of all these masks, which he titled 'The Mbulu Images and Variations' [ph.] sold into private collections.  And then when he had the opportunity to do the large piece titled 'Les Demoiselles d'Avignon' [Pablo Picasso], he introduced some of those sketches into the 'Les Demoiselles d'Avignon' that's given birth to the cubistic movement, which is Africa's influence in the birth of a western art movement called cubism.  So, because of that, I now create my (unclear) images and variations as a connection to where all this came from, and I am tickled by the fact that I'm an African taking inspiration from a Spaniard who took inspiration from an African piece of sculpture, and the circle is coming all the way around.
Story_ID: 531200
Speaker 1: Now, were you influenced very much by African American artists here in, in Chicago [Illinois]?  I know that Chicago is, is the birthplace of the AfriCOBRA [African Commune of Bad Relevant Artists] movement, (Unclear), Calvin (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: Calvin Jones--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and [HistoryMaker] Jeff Donaldson--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and quite a few others.
Speaker 2: Before I came here to the United States actually, there was one brilliant African American artist, his name is Charles Biggers of recent memory.  He passed away close by three, four years ago.
Speaker 1: John Biggers [John T. Biggers] from Texas?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  He, he received a United Nations [United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)] fellowship in the days when Ghana had just come about independence, so he visited our country.  I remember he made a beautiful charcoal sketch of President Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], and a few other important luminaries in Ghana, and his charcoal sketches had fluid lines in them, almost like a broom, you know--just excellent work, and delicate.  He captured the human figure in wonderful forms, so I was inspired by his work, except that I didn't enjoy sketching nearly as much as I enjoy actually playing with paint and brushes.  But once I arrived here in Chicago, I became aware of the works of the late Romare Bearden, who was an obstructionist and an expressionist at the same time.  And then also the late Jacob Lawrence.  And I'll tell you about the two of them.  Romare Bearden took liberties with the creative process and found new ways and means of expression, and the late Jacob Lawrence was an iconographer, and someone who chronicled the history of the African American through the verbal medium--the visual medium.  So he had the series--the 'Migration Series' [Jacob Lawrence].  He had the slave- slavery series, and such notable museum subjects.  My only disappointment was that the pieces seemed to be so small (gesture) and I just wished that they were large because then--the 'Migration Series,' for instance, when I saw it into the, the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], it occupied a square footage almost the size of my gallery [Akainyah Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], and I would have loved to see him give life and breath to each piece the size of what's behind me, and I believe the enormity--it's almost like making an announcement from the sky as it is about to rain.  The thunder was not mild, it was loud, so you knew that--get ready and seek some shelter because it's about to rain.  So, I wanted the--his canvas to be that large; that's the only disappointment.  But of course I have my own handicap because my vision is not the best and I strain to enjoy his pieces.  But those two artists inspired me greatly, both Jacob Lawrence and, and Romare Bearden.
Story_ID: 531201
Speaker 1: In those days, when you first came over, was it easy to--or did you make any, any friends amongst the African American artists in the city?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  I--
Speaker 1: I mean besides [HistoryMaker] Ronne Hartfield.
Speaker 2: Oh, correct.  I'm friends with practically all the African American artists in the city, even today, from Bruce Jefferson [Bruce B. Jefferson] to, to Gerald Griffin, to Andrea Gershod [ph.], and so on, and I know these friends sometimes give me an unfair credit to something that I, I humbly and truthfully don't think I, I should or deserve the credit because I became the first artist--black, white, Asian or Latino, to open his own gallery in the City of Chicago [Illinois] because prior to that, there were gallery owners who either sold vehicles; cars, or boats, or whichever, and then they received artists' works, curated them, sold--paid the artists what they needed to, and then they kept the rest.  And so--and then of course [HistoryMaker] Richard Hunt had his own studio for his sculpture [Richard Hunt Studio, Chicago, Illinois], but in terms of an actual functioning art gallery, owned by an artist, I was the first in the city.
Speaker 1: So you were the first period (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The first; I was the--yeah, period.  I was the first artist-owned gallery to be incubated in Chicago.  So, as you know, we had a black art gallery here.  [HistoryMaker] Isobel Neal, but Isobel was not an artist, and the gallery [Isobel Neal Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] functioned very well.  It's --
Speaker 1: She was a curator and she (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  The, the gallery no longer exists, sadly, but it worked very, very well.  And then Nicole Gallery [Chicago, Illinois]; and Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith] is an art historian, and her gallery is still here, but this is artist-owned gallery.  So, what I produce here is my work, and when I opened the gallery, people were very proud and happy, but the gallery was borne out of much pain because I'd finished my studies at the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Story_ID: 531202
Speaker 1: Now I wanna go back to school first before we get into this--
Speaker 2: Surely.
Speaker 1: --and I'm gonna try to pick it up in the chronological order (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, if we go back, now you're in school [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I, I think I--what I wanna ask you next is like, what kind of work were you producing when you were in school?  I mean, you know, what kind of work were you producing?
Speaker 2: Excellent.  I was producing a, a myriad of works; some landscapes obviously, and some figurative and some abstract.  I am still humbled when I visit the homes of some of my friends who, in my student days, spent one hundred or two hundred dollars to buy a piece of art or so.  I was experimenting.  Professor Emilio Cruz was the first to tell me, "Take inspiration from the history of Africa, or the cultural anthropology of Africa, and give it a visual interpretation."  And so, so much of my cubistic--the mask piece, the figurative pieces that you see there, are all born out of that type of training.  So, it was an experimentation phase; learning about myself, discovering new means of expression and so on, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just--if I may, though--let's see.  I, I don't know if it's too early to say this, but just in looking around the room, I see--there may be more, different, I guess, expressions of your work, but I see three categories--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: One is expressions of political ideas--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and, and there are a lot of works, you know, dedicated to Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and, or other ideas like the work at St. Sabina's chapel [St. Sabina Church, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --which we need to talk about--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --later, but, and I see landscapes, lots of landscapes--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and those--if someone saw the landscapes, they wouldn't neces- not necessarily know what the mindset of the artist was, or what nationality.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: With the political ones, too, wouldn't necessarily know that you were born in Ghana looking at the idea expressions of yours--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --but, but there are the, the works that are inspired by Africa--very clearly African work; I mean there--you know, it's a (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --I mean one can really see--well, they'd see the mask and some of the abstracts that you, (unclear) have an African influence.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, let me comment on that a little bit.  Having taken the civics lesson from Mon- from Picasso [Pablo Picasso] because, as you know, Monet [Claude Monet] painted landscapes only, and his humanism and his humility inspired me.  Picasso, as I said, was an intellectual creative workhorse: sculpture, ceramics, painting, poetry, and all that.  And when it comes to my creative work, you aptly and very, very accurately characterized my first genre, the political themes.  I grew up in Ghana under the father [Alfred Akainyah] who was a Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana] justice, several siblings who themselves were lawyers, a relative who was a prime minister, so we were present at history's memorial door, and so much of the rhetoric that informed the growth of that country, we were present as youngsters to listen to.  I remember even when Ghana was experiencing its first inflation and how artwork, music, all those things were the themes of work and happiness, beautiful Ghana, and so on and so forth.  So, having been here in the United States, the historical information about the United States that brought about my presence here have become part of the creative expression that I have in my works.  And I can tell you about the headmaster's narration to me on how Francis Scott Key, for instance, wrote the U.S. anthem ['The Star Spangled Banner'] from the pain of 1812 and that war [War of 1812], and the question being asked of us, what anthem would we write?  And I've done that today.  What artwork would we create?  And I've done that today.  And then you come to the African part; I've yielded to the call of my professor.  And then nature, you see a lot of landscapes because I've seen a lot of deaths of family members; it has brought me an enormous amount of sadness, and I go to water and nature for solace, and in the process I've come up with a series of works in a bigger collection that I can talk about that later.
Story_ID: 531203
Speaker 1: When you were here at the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], did you--were you formally still developing your other skills as a musician and, and--I mean 'cause you were quite a musician too, in Ghana, right?
Speaker 2: Not, not a musician in Ghana.  While I was a young kid, the nuns who ran the school that made my mother [Sabina Yorke] headmistress, St. Monica's [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana], they, they had a lovely piano.  I played so many of the liturgical hymns, but the nuns sparked my curiosity because they could tell that I had a certain--I don't wanna call it--improvisational outlook about it, or sometimes hearing a hymn and without the, the, the music just played by ear.  And so they urged my mother that they think that I should take some private instruction in music.  But, in Ghana, nobody really made a living doing music unless you went to college to get degrees in it and came to teach.  Well, having said that, when I went to secondary school [Kwame Nkrumah Secondary School; Kumasi High School, Kumasi, Ghana], the headmaster, (Unclear), also enjoyed my ability, but I was too bashful to ever play the music in public, and so on Sundays in the afternoons from two o'clock to five, I'll be at his home and I'll play, and so on; so this man taught me literally how to compose music, and that was a skill that I kept to myself.  And since I came to the United States, it's been a pleasurable pursuit.  I, I write piano concertos with perhaps much ease than I even do painting, but it's been just to pleasure myself--just as a, as an avocation or a hobby, if you will.  But in recent times, especially given the recessionary economy, it has become necessary to diversify any source of revenue, including any source of creative expression.  So my writing and my music I'm taking equally as seriously while there is a practical halt in the sales of art, given the recessionary political climate we have now.
Story_ID: 531204
Speaker 1: Finished your B.F.A. in 1978.  Now was there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, I came in 1978, September--
Speaker 1: Oh, you finished in '81 [1981], or '82 [1982].
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981] or '82 [1982], thereabout, correct.  But I actually officially started classes [at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]--that I remember 'cause it was a very cold day, January 14th, 1979.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the cold years; the late '70s [1970s] were very cold.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) You remember that, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so I'm sorry; I just misspoke.  But '81 [1981], '82 [1982], this is about that same time you painted the famous mural ['For God So Loved The World'] that's in St. Sabina Catholic Church [St. Sabina Church, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's famous all over Chicago [Illinois]; it's appeared on the cover of the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] and the Tribune [Chicago Tribune].
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't even know that.
Speaker 1: Yes, with Father Pfleger [Michael Pfleger] standing in front of it.  That's with the hands, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no, that one is different--that was--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's not--
Speaker 2: No, that one was done by a, a priest [Fernando Arizti], I can't remember his name.  My piece ['The Last Supper to Be,' Samuel Akainyah], which is on the cover of a book on racism ['Witnesses to Racism: Personal Experiences of Racial Injustice,' ed. Lois Prebil], forwarded by Francis Cardinal George [Francis George], actually; my painting is in the chapel, and mine is of a treatment of the Last Supper, and all the disciples represent all the different ethnic groups that constitute the makeup of this city, and Jesus is painted almost muted and my, my theory is that when all of us come to the table and show the humanism and the Christ in us, Jesus will come in his full glory, and he will be clear.  And so, I will get you a copy of that book because they just published it about a month ago from the Archdiocese of Chicago [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago].  It's of stories of race relations, and the forward was done by Francis Cardinal George.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, how did that commission come about?
Speaker 2: It was not really a commission in terms of a fee structure type of thing, but all I know is that when I got accepted to the School of the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], at the time, the military was still holding on in Ghana's government, so the international banks that converted foreign exchange had been shut down, the airports had been shut down, so I could not receive any funding from home, although I'd been accepted.  Father Michael Pfleger, at St. Sabina Church, came to my rescue and he said, "Looking at your transcript, there is no reason why you should not be in school."  So, as affectionately as I speak about this, and as gratefully as I speak about this, Father Michael Pfleger offered to pay my tuition at the School of the Art Institute for a whole academic year, and demonstrable scholarship was what I needed to produce.  So, my grades were good, and in my second year, I received some scholarship from the university, number one, and number two also, so I got a little assistantship at the university, so that also helped to underwrite the rest of the education.  But I'm very grateful to Father Michael Pfleger for paying--it was $250 a month that came to me to go to the School of the Art Institute.  Well, by the end of the first year, I came to him and I said that, in the Nzema tribe where I come from in Ghana, when the person does something of goodwill for you, then you have to ask them if they have any children.  You only say thank you to that person, but you're gonna do something nice for their children.  So knowing that Father Michael Pfleger did not have any children because he was a Catholic priest, I wanted to do something to benefit the youth, and of course the chapel is where the children gather while the larger service is going on in the church.  And so I asked if they would give me that huge wall in the chapel to do a gift for the church, so that's exactly what happened to that piece, yes.
Story_ID: 531205
Speaker 1: You said--that's an interesting story--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and when you said huge, it just reminded me of something you said earlier about--it was off camera--about the size of your work.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You said--I think you mentioned that you don't see as well as--you don't like t- small things you, you can't see as well.
Speaker 2: Correct.  I have a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you paint big.
Speaker 2: Correct (laughter).  I, I hide this fact.  My vision is terrible, and I think it's from all the years of doing impressionist paintings.  When you read it in art history, seems like--well, art historians are writing these things just to sell textbooks, but I realize it's true because every impressionist painting deals with dots and strokes, and the further away you are from the piece, then it all comes together, and so over the years, it damages your eyes, that's without a doubt.  Each piece that requires dots, in so many years, will do that to you.  So, it's, it's a, a punishing mental and creative terrain to create (gesture) the small pieces, and if truth be told, that small piece behind there, next to the screen (gesture), it took practically the same amount of time to create that piece that it took to create this one (gesture), you see?
Speaker 1: Which is a very large piece.
Speaker 2: Extremely--over ten times the size.  And so I go with what is comfortable for my eyes, and so the larger pieces are.  And then the second has become an advantage for me actually, because when the works go to the museums, most people attend a major retrospective.  There are actual ropes and banners almost three feet away to, to put the audience away so they cannot touch the paintings.  So, the pieces which are most appreciated are typically ten feet to twenty feet away, and so part of working in the gallery [Akainyah Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] gives me that latitude to prepare for a museum, a retrospective.  And that's my focus now: art as scholarship, and creating the works that museums would appreciate, that's it.
Story_ID: 531206
Speaker 1: When you received your B.F.A., let's say 1982--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I guess between, around '81 [1981], '82 [1982]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you immediately opened a gallery?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I op- this is what happened.  Following my graduation [from the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], I put my entire portfolio together, and I went from one gallery after another in Michigan Avenue, Oak Street, and where the galleries were, and there was at the very least a very lukewarm interest.  The rest wanted me to have a name before coming to them, and I understood that because, you know, they did not want to invest money in incubating the career of a new artist if you've already had somebody established with some relative recognition.  And then there were others who did not understand my African pieces, which begged for interpretation and narratives.  They were not used to that as well.  And then the landscapes.  Well, they thought, well, an African painting landscapes, but nature is nature; it belongs to everyone.  So, I was so afraid that I will be caught up in America unemployed, and have wonderful training in art, so I abdicated any interest of pursuit in art totally, retired my brushes, and applied to graduate school to study international law and diplomatic history under the auspices of the graduate program of international relations at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  I had decided then to prepare myself for a diplomatic career, but the hand of fate came in because Paramount Pictures [Paramount Pictures Corporation] had come to Chicago [Illinois] to film a movie on the life of a very important African American priest by the name of [HistoryMaker] Father George Clements, who adopted a son against the wishes of Cardinal Cody [John Cody], but instead he gained the sanction and the support of the papacy of Rome [Italy]. So, while filming the movie, they were looking for artwork to decorate the set, and they used my artwork, and after they used the artwork to, to film the movie--during that time I was finishing graduate school then.  Assuming I finished in May, the next month, June, they show the movie, 'The Father Clements Story,' on television.  By July, I had received phone calls from people to now participate in an auction in Atlanta [Georgia] for the Black Arts Festival [National Black Arts Festival]; the following year an auction at Christie's in New York [New York].  Christie's in the art industry, its competitors is Sotheby's.  It would be like coming out from a school of journalism, abdicating any interest in journalism because you couldn't make it as an assignment reporter, so you choose to now go to maybe law school or medical school, and then when you come out, then someone is asking you to come participate as an assignment reporter at 'NBC Nightly News.'  And that's exactly how it felt.  So, pictures of me at Christie's looks of a green person; I mean very green, like I didn't belong here.  These are--I was recognizing names of Romare Bearden, Jacob Lawrence, and my professor Emilio Cruz.  I saw that, and my work was among them, and humbly so, and all gratitude to where the currents deserved to be.  I won the highest bid at that auction, and coming from that auction, that's when I knew that I should prepare myself to have a studio and open an art gallery because I could potentially see a career in this.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: I believe that was 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so, for seven years roughly, you weren't intensely involved in art because you really didn't think you were gonna (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I painted because I wanted to, but I put it away because there was no opportunity to show in a gallery.  And I remember one afternoon calling home and, very frustrated, and writing a lengthy letter.  And thanks to my very wise brother [Lawrence B. Akainyah] who wrote me back and said, "Remember, when Dad [Alfred Akainyah] finished law school in England, and he came home, there was nobody's law firm for him to mature into, and he just gathered the family together and told them that he was going to open a law office, and for them to tell all your friends."  And I literally copied that formula by gathering the twenty or thirty friends I'd had here, and asked each and every one of them to give me the list of ten people who do not know each other, and now the gallery [Akainyah Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] has an incredible mailing list as a result.
Story_ID: 531207
Speaker 1: Just back to 'Father Clements Story' ['The Father Clements Story'] again (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What works--what kind of works--or could you describe the works that you provided for the movie?  Now this is a movie with Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lou Gossett played the ro- excellent memory.  He played the role of [HistoryMaker] Father George Clements--
Speaker 1: Who's a Chicago [Illinois] hero--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And then Carroll O'Connor played the role of Cardinal Cody [John Cody].  And [HistoryMaker] Malcolm-Jamal Warner, then son of the Cosby [Theodore Huxtable in 'The Cosby Show'] played the role of the son that Father George Clements adopted--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and you could see a painting of a landscape of mine, a figure of a woman carrying the baby on the back who--which was in Father Clements' office.  I can't remember--there were about four, five pieces in the dining room.  I was so flattered because it was so heavily announced, "Stay tuned for the NBC premier of 'The Father Clements Story,' and they would cast a glance of Father George Clements as Lou Gossett, and the background was one of my paintings, so friends started calling, "Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah]!  We saw this painting."  It was very exciting period.  Now, I look back and realize it seem like a long time ago, yes, but that's how it all began.
Speaker 1: Yes, a big cultural event in Chicago.  I think [HistoryMaker] Jackie Taylor of--was in it as well.
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: Black Ensemble Theater [Chicago, Illinois] (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so.
Story_ID: 531208
Speaker 1: Now this period of time though, roughly, is the time--encompasses the time of the Harold Washington mayoralty here in the City of Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you had a special relationship with Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, Mayor Harold Washington, I admired him for three reasons.  Number one, his skin complexion, his political rhetoric and his physical stature reminded me of some of the men I had le- left behind in Ghana, so he looked very much like a Ghanaian man.  Sometimes we thought he was Ashanti, sometimes we thought he was Fante or Nzema, so among us Ghanaians we used to say that.  Secondly, for me on a political favor--standpoint, I grew up under men who were regional commissioners, members of parliament, and so and so; he was almost like--well, we've come to Chicago and we now know somebody like that, so I used to correspond with him.  By the time I was finishing graduate school at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], we had a meeting once, in which he said to me, "Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah], I'm getting ready to open up the city's international office, and it's going to be an office of human relations, and African relations, and so on and so forth."  So, he was looking for a person to man the Africa desk, somebody to man the Latin America desk, someone to man Asian desk.  So I even had classmates, Alejandro Betool [ph.] from Venezuela, and Medoo Malik [ph.] from India, that I was going to bring the issue up.  We met--I believe it was on Monday; I can't recall now, but assuming that I was waiting that weekend to meet with my friends so I can tell them during Thanksgiving, Harold Washington died, I think, a day or two before Thanksgiving, and--
Speaker 1: Right, 1987.
Speaker 2: Something like that; it was very sad moment because as a result, I did not even look for employment elsewhere because he wanted me and two of these people that I was going to recommend as well, to be interviewed to man these desks, and we were all graduate students in international relations.  Alejandro was specializing in international banking and political economy, Medoo Malik was doing regional studies, and I was in diplomacy and international law.  There were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's at the University of Chicago, right?
Speaker 2: Correct.  It was an M.A. in international relations, but you had international banking and political economy, which was Alex's major--one branch; they had regional specialties, another; there were strategic studies and nuclear disarmament, another; there was diplomacy and international law, another, that was my area; and so on.  So it was, it was a, a fun period but also a sad period when he died.
Story_ID: 531209
Speaker 1: When you're in class at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --studying interla- international relations--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --how--I mean do you think--well, I'm a Ghanaian studying international relations at the University of Chicago--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Is the, is the lesson--are the lessons learned universally applicable--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or are they lessons--I mean are they training--I guess what I'm really trying to say, are they training really white people to go to foreign countries to do things?  Are they really--or can you really derive something out of it yourself for your country?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I--do you understand what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Excellent question, and the answer is the following.  There is a universality about how you draft a diplomatic document.  It would not really matter if you are from South Africa or if you are from China, or if you are from the Soviet Union [Russia] or England or the United States.  So, we all knew a mission and, you know, the variables that underwrote the mission, the objectives and, and, and counter-objectives and things of that nature.  And the beautiful thing that they did was that since international relations is a, a discipline of recent vintage, it has evolved out of both political science and economics, and then law and history.  And so, there weren't a ton of textbooks, especially in diplomacy, so they used the biographies of former U.S. secretaries of states, and the heads of states, as part of the core curriculum so you would know everything about the Wilsonian foreign policy from the biography of Woodrow Wilson [President Thomas Woodrow Wilson], and from academics who observed these political decisions at that time.  We would have the same thing with the Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], you know, philosophy; or the Bush [President George Walker Bush] regime; or the Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] regime as well.  But the actual apparatus for international law--and we're talking now not just economic international law, but public international law.  If U.- a U.S. multinational corporation doing business in Ghana or, for instance, you are a U.S. multinational corporation doing business in Ethiopia or Kenya.  And as you know, there was an attack of the embassy, and many, many people died.  So, if you are a shareholder for one of these corporations, do you have your cause of action, i.e., the lawsuit against the company?  B, the government of that country, C, the organization--the tourist organization that attacked that country.  These are all things in international law that you study.  So, that same scenario could have happened in Ghana or in London [England], or in Oslo [Norway], and it will be the same legal questions.  Another example, like for instance, if one particular country has suffered draught for so many years, and member nations of the United Nations [UN] decide to offer relief for that country, what goes into that decision-making and who chooses which country?  And so on and so forth.  Those questions are all applicable, whether the country--beneficiary country has suffered draught like Ethiopia, or has suffered race purging between light-skin Tutsis and dark-skin Hutus in Rwanda, or has suffered Janjaweed and native fights in Sudan; it's the same paradigm.  So, they taught us very, very well.
Story_ID: 531210
Speaker 1: The only part that will be different is when it comes to regional questions, where I could discern from some of the textbooks that there were times when in intelligence gathering, operators might misinterpret a total fact and then bring the findings to the headquarters.  And incidentally, the, gatherer of facts is not a decider of the facts who is a senior person, who is an analyst who would look at the facts that have been gathered and make a quantifiable decision before it is now brought into the [U.S.] Senate, the Senate foreign relations committee [U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations], for instance, or the Senate intelligence committee [U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence], to now make a policy out of it.  So, to give you a good example, it is easy now to look back and some people say, "Oh, Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was a dictator who wanted to kill his political opponents."  I was age ten realizing that I was not mature enough, but I was present at history-making.  Nkrumah did not want to kill anyone; Nkrumah wanted Ghana given its resources.  Here was his own paragraph.  He said that if countries like Cuba rely only on tobacco for making good cigars, and there are countries in Europe--Switzerland and a few others that produce one or two natural resources, and they are part of the developed nations, what sense does it make for Ghana to be the producer of the strategic mineral resource, which is bauxite in Ghana, smelted into aluminum for aircrafts, and we did not have any aircrafts.  Number two, we produce manganese; we produce diamonds; we produce gold; and then timber and cocoa.  That country had no business to be poor.  So Nkrumah said to all the ministers and all the headmasters and teachers, and so on, that that which has taken other nations a century to achieve, we don't have that luxury; we need to do so in a generation.  And here came the farmers from the Ashanti Region [Ghana] who simply said, Nkrumah was encouraging every Tom, Dick and Harry to go to school, so they were losing their future staff, and so they were not going to allow their sons to come to school, and Nkrumah did not want a country of illiterates.  His biggest thing was that the years he spent in the United States, he was always excited that the farmer could pick up the newspaper and read about the price of grain, and in Ghana the farmer could not read the newspaper.  The farmer, having read the price of cocoa bean, can then go and vote, and in Ghana the farmer could not do that.  And Nkrumah said, education should be free, and should be compulsory for everyone.  So the chiefs who opposed sent their representatives to parliament to oppose Nkrumah and they opposed so much, Nkrumah was forced to put some of them in what's called preventive detention custody, so that they can develop the nation; his end was to release them.  And I apologize on his bloodline because one or two of them died in prison, and they became the basis upon which he had to be overthrown.
Story_ID: 531211
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I learned so much as a result that whoever got--and I read some of these, by the way, narrations--declassified manuscripts nonetheless, where they were part of information to teach us on diplomacy.  Who, who--a real good paradigm in which a professor once asked that, if you were, if you were beset with the following facts: country A that produced three strategic natural resources to major cash crops; B, it had a leader that was non-conformist; C, the leader had his fear of influence regionally; D, there were tribal factions in which the leader's tribe came from a minority, but there is an overwhelming larger tribe; and then, and then finally, that leader's foreign policy was inconsistent let's say to U.S. foreign policy or British foreign policy, and you are the diplomatic attache to the embassy, what will be your findings to the state department [U.S. Department of State] about this leader?  And then you had people who said, "Oh, he was a dictator"; "Oh, he needs to be overthrown"; "He needs--."  You know, and now we know that it was intelligence gathering that was flawed, and as a result of flawed intelligence, an action was taken, as is now clear, that his government was overthrown, funded by United Kingdom, U.S., and so on.  And, for me, those were errors in judgment that caused an error in a policy, and error in the funding of the overthrow.  Someone once asked me, how do I feel knowing that my country's [Ghana] government was overthrown?  People make mistakes, and the mistakes that--it's just like a, a doctor who has the intention to perform surgery to correct someone's frac- heart, and in the process something happens and then they die.  They did not intend to harm the patient.  Obviously, a cause of action for tort, America malpractice may ensue, but you do not begrudge the doctor for, for trying to, to aid the person.  However, if we later find out that the anesthesiologist gave a wrong medication--he is the anesthesiologist; you don't get angry at the hospital.  The anesthesiologist made a wrong calculation.  Instead of two CCs, gave twenty, and that anesthesiologist is that informant who was--who guarded the, the facts in error.  You, you follow what I mean?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 531212
Speaker 1: Did you have any favorite instructors at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: University of Chicago?  Oh, yeah.  I had one of them who's still there, a Professor Gidon Gottlieb, I don't know if he remembers me, but since I, I am so black and I was the only Ghanaian student, he would have to remember me.  He taught me a course in public international law.  The man was University of Cambridge [Trinity College Cambridge, Cambridge, England]-educated and Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts]-educated--a just brilliant scholar, and he knew the law very well; I enjoyed my course with him.  I also took a course in economic international law with Professor Diane Woods [sic. Diane Wood].  This is the famous Diane Woods who was one of the people being considered, and if they had not selected Justice Sotomayor [Sonia Sotomayor] for the [U.S.] Supreme Court, she was heavily being favored because she'd become a district court [sic. appellate court] judge by President Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] appointment, so I took a course or two with her.  And as a matter of fact, so much of my--the thrust of what became a paper that I did for, for, for the graduate program came from under her.  There was another professor that I enjoyed diplomatic history, I took him for two classes--Professor Gidon--no, Professor Akira Iriye.  He teaches at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] now--Akira, A-K-I-R-A, Iriye, I-R-I-Y-I-E [sic.], a brilliant scholar, East Asian studies, has authored several books, and I was inspired by his Ghanaian method of instruction.  He would come into class and, for two hours, he would lecture with no reference to any notes, and then he would ask if there was any questions before he would leave--just two straight hours.  He would give us maybe five minutes intermission.  Just taught us everything about U.S. foreign policy from 1920 up to 1945, and 1945 to the current.  He was a good, a brilliant professor.  Those three stick in my head.
Story_ID: 531213
Speaker 1: Sir, what was your thesis for your master's [degree] (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I want to call it as a, a term paper because I actually did not officially present that as a thesis, but it was the paper that brought me the most interest and the most satisfaction.  I chose to do a paper on the problems that U.S. multinationals encounter doing business in the continent of Africa, mostly A, political problems; B, security problems; C, policy--domestic policy problems; and, and then the other part was just regional tribal conflicts and, and so on.  The better part of the paper was on some recommendations on ameliorating these problems, and it was a paper I really enjoyed doing.  Like for instance, you know, in coming to the continent to do business, in my mind, it's not like the way you do business here because I'm constantly being told by friends that I know here that you don't have to like a person to do business with them; you have a product to sell, they have money to buy, it's commercial goods and services, buy and sell.  When I really realized that back there, oftentimes people want to do business with you primarily because they, they, they like you and they want to do business with you, and so you can have the best product, but if they truly do not like you, they could care less about that; I've noticed that not only in Ghana, but in many African countries.  Second, if you come to a region--and I'm not only going to use Ghana as the example, but if you go to a region and the ruling party is not like you have here, Democratic or Republican; that party could have a cleavage attached to a tribe, and so--which means you must know certain bona fides in that particular tribe--that's crucial.  And oftentimes, we miss the ball in the process from U.S. multinationals coming to do business.  Thirdly, we are regime oriented.  For instance, [HistoryMaker] President Barack Obama is in Washington, D.C.  There had to have been some foreign policy issues existing sanctioned by the U.S. Senate to ratify the articles to make a particular country, say Japan or another country, as a favored nation state.  If that was ratified under President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], when President Bush [President George Walker Bush] comes, he honors that, and then President Obama will come and honor that as well.  Until fairly recently, in many of the African countries, what happened in terms of domestic or foreign policy under your regime as a president, when I would come as the next president, it's all booted out, and these corporations would have to know all these things.  Two more very, very important things.  Oftentimes, we have an outlook in the West that as long as we're paying fair market value for whatever the product is, we're content with doing business, when in actuality, you need to take on local coloration.  So, is it individuals in the region that you will like to bring into the corporation to teach them certain areas of the company so that they can maintain a certain part of the growth of that company; or, or that you're going to take these people abroad and train them and bring them back to be expertise for--or--yeah, expertise for your company, and it's not just about that.  If you just rely on taking them abroad to train them, you would oftentimes encounter the sons and daughters of those who are in political power to take their children abroad to go and train them, so they still come back to be part of the service of the ruling regime, and when the party goes, they have to go.  So, these are all the things that I pursued in the paper and on how to fix some of these problems.
Story_ID: 531214
Speaker 1: What would be your thoughts on U.S. diplomatic relations with Ghana, you know, I guess then and now?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Have they evolved, or are they--I mean into something better, or are they, are they pretty bad?
Speaker 2: Oh, something much, much, much better.  I would say that U.S. foreign policy towards Ghana was amicable until Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was overthrown, or the months leading towards Nkrumah's overthrowing, and I would explain that.  Mind you, we were the largest producers and exporters of cocoa worldwide, and there was a point in time when Nkrumah thought that the price of the cocoa was too low and the price needed to go up--the same sort of problems you sensed in OPEC [Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries] and other places for oil.  And the U.S. and other countries were not willing to accept the increase in price.  And since Nkrumah had this sphere of influence among many of those African nations and elsewhere, that whatever the suggestions were, it would be heeded by other nations.  We now know that the countries in South America and others will receive funding from the U.S. and elsewhere to develop cocoa plantations for that matter.  So, Nkrumah, annoyed by the fact that the price of cocoa was so low, he literally kept close to at least three or four years' worth of shipment of cocoa at the harbor in Accra [Ghana] 'til--in Tema [Ghana] 'til they all got damaged, and I think they had to be torched.  So, obviously, that's thumbing your nose at a powerful nation like the United States.  That planted seeds of, of, of relationship that went disarray.  Over the years, we knew also that the people who presented political opposition against Nkrumah, those who went into prison, that became easy for Nkrumah to be characterized as a dictator, so that period also was another.  But here it is today a country has had eight years of sustained political democracy, you know, to the U.S.  I characterize it as a benevolent nation because it is now the country that has received most Ghanaians to come and continue their education here.  There are more Ghanaian lawyers and doctors practicing here than there are lawyers and doctors put together in all of Ghana, and certainly many academicians teaching in--you could not go to any major city and not find ten universities with Ghanaian academicians teaching.  I'm in a college now with two of them and many, many such universities.  So, the relationship has evolved into a much, much better international relations accord, and finally, having now recognized that we are the only country of the several hundred million people in Africa who've been recipient of three United States presidents in succession--President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], President Bush [President George Walker Bush], and President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama]; so we hope this relationship is strengthened and continues for the better.  Last week, or two weeks ago, I was at a one-year commemoration at one of the universities here, in which the [U.S.] Agency for International Development, the U.S. international outreach arm, had pledged and made possible $13 million for publishing textbooks in Ghana and to be distributed throughout not only the length and breadth of the country, but also other West African countries.  So the relationship is extremely good, and President Bush awarded the Millennium award [Millennium Challenge Account] to our country for half a billion dollars for development economics in the country.
Story_ID: 531215
Speaker 1: We were discussing off-camera the--some of the risks of, of returning to Ghana.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I don't know if you--what are your thoughts about going back?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were telling me some advice you gave Kwame Nkrumah's daughter--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --about--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, Samia [Samia Nkrumah] came here the week of September 5th; she was here on the 4th.  We, we went to, to thank the board of trustees of the Kwame Nkrumah Academy [Chicago, Illinois], which the school is named after her mother--her father, rather, and that's number one.  And also we celebrated my birthday, number two.  Number three, we met close to about a hundred Nzemas who came from this city and other cities around the United States and worldwide; they came for this gratitude, and they did for two reasons because after the overthrow of President Nkrumah, the successive ruling regimes practically put an imaginary barricade on the Nzema region--no new roads, no new schools, no new hospitals, nothing, and watched the region go into ruins.  And Nzemas who had the resources to aid the climb of the people earned the wrath of the ruling regimes.  So, now we have free democracy.  Samia was here, when she was here, like even before, before even her arrival, I met all the five presidential aspirants in Ghana, from Jacob Obetsebi-Lamptey [Jacob Otanka Obetsebi-Lamptey] to, to Nduom [Paa Kwesi Nduom], to Akufo-Addo [Nana Akufo-Addo], to Alan Kyerematen [Alan John Kyerematen], to Osafo-Marfo [Yaw Osafo-Marfo]; all of them, and they all sat in my chairs here with me.  Some asked my opinions on preparing foreign policy; others asked my opinions on other things, and on even framing the diplomatic office in Chicago [Illinois], so I was instrumental in giving all kinds of advice.  But the, but the one thing that I told them all in concert, including my cousin, that I would not do, is to leave the United States and to go to Ghana, and more importantly, to participate in the political process in Ghana.  And I'll tell you why.  Because unlike Samia--Samia was only five when her father was overthrown.  Her memory is of the gunshots at the Flagstaff House [Accra, Ghana] and the forceful eviction of her mother [Fathia Nkrumah] and her siblings--a very sad and tragic halt.  But I was eleven years old, I witnessed when a gun was put next to my mother's [Sabina Yorke] head, and a young soldier who was no more than twenty-eight years old ordering my mother about.  My mother was not pleading, but she simply told the commander to go and tell the lieutenant who had overthrown the government that the manner in which she, my mother, took care of him when he was age twelve, she's now expecting him to take care of her students [at St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana]--her 800 to 1,000 students that were, so--
Speaker 1: This is the story of Triple A, right?
Speaker 2: Triple A, correct, because my father's name was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.  You told us this the last time, right.
Speaker 2: Alfred Augustus Akainyah [Alfred Akainyah], and the soldier's name was Akwasi Amankwaa Afrifa [Akwasi Afrifa], and the man is an Ashanti.  And many Nzemas and others who do not know this story wonder why, in spite of how Afrifa participated in overthrowing Nkrumah, how I respect the man; I respect him because he saved my mother's life.  He authorized the evacuation of those soldiers who were on the campus [of the Nyaniba Middle Boarding School; Nkroful Agricultural Senior High School, Nkroful, Ghana], and they were on orders that they should take the school down if the headmaster and headmistress were not willing to deliver the roll call of the students, including their parents' addresses and so on.
Story_ID: 531216
Speaker 1: So I told my friends and Samia [Samia Nkrumah] that I realized that I'm Nzema.  When I open my mouth, I'm aware that I have my father's [Alfred Akainyah] cadence, I even have my father's diction.  But I'm also aware that of all the male members of the extended family, I'm the one that looks like Dr. Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] the most, and so I could be an instrument for A, leveraging the political climb for somebody, but also--in that process--also yielding the, the other refuge, which is the wrath and the anger of another person.  Since I do not have any political ambitions then it is better for me to stay to my mission--A, to be a world-class artist; B, to give counsel to whoever rules Ghana, or even whoever rules the United States with respect to the purest candor that they will need regarding formulation of policy, whether it is on the Ghanaian end or on American end, but directly affecting Ghana and Africa, because I know I have both the intellectual equipment and the intellectual training to be able to offer that advice.  And I'll be more than happy to be able to do so, but what I will not do is to put my children in the same state of anxiety that I experienced when I was eleven and twelve.  There are nights when I wake up at two o'clock hearing the thundering of the military trucks; there are sometimes afternoons when, if it starts to rain and there's a lightning, I, I close my ears because I do not want to hear the thunder.  I remember that incendiary bomb that was hurled at Nkrumah's birthplace [in Nkroful, Ghana] to blow the building up.  I do not attend political rallies; I like to see it from afar on television because I have witnessed people being attacked in these kinds of venues, so I, I do not want to revisit that.  The scars are still with me in great part because we did not have the beautiful thing we have here in the United States called counselors who deal with people with post-trauma, from witnessing tragedies.  I think that the whole Ghana actually need that.  this is a country of 22 million people who witnessed the political assassination of three former heads of states, all executed in less than thirty minutes, and it was exec- the execution was ordered by the ruling military leader, Rawlings, J.J. Rawlings [Jerry Rawlings].  You've never heard of this before, where a ruler overthrows a regime and then orders the assassination of every living head of state behind him in, in half-an-hour, and the whole country needs counseling to be able to deal with this.  And this is why the Ashantis do not trust the Ewes, the Ewes do not trust the Fantes, the Fantes do--.  And this kind of distrust is going on and percolating through the far reaches of so much of Africa today.
Story_ID: 531217
Speaker 1: Chicago [Illinois] has a substantial Ghanaian population.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's 24,000 Ghanaians, actually, and you see them during the f- the festive, Ghanaian Fest [Ghana Festival] that takes place during the summertime.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that is the, the only Af- we have the African Festival of the Arts.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: There's a--I think there's a Caribbean festival here [African/Caribbean International Festival of Life] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: --but, you know, I don't think there's another African country that has a festival other than the Ghanaian.
Speaker 2: Correct.  And thanks to the paramount-cy of the chiefs, all the different tribes have appointed somebody here as their tribal chief here, so there is a Ghanaian Ewe chief in Chicago, a Ghanaian Fante chief, a Ghanaian Ashanti chief; the only thing that they do not have--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, but we do not have a Ghanaian Nzema chief.  We will not appoint one, and it's the same.  And Nzemas had not even been involved in the political system since Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah] was overthrown because many of the Nzema chiefs--remember how the military regime ran many of them out of their stools, and some of them lived in the bushes, in the forest; some died there.  And, we used to have close to 2 million Nzemas in Ghana.  All told, you now have less than half a million Nzemas living in Ghana, and now there are close to 2.9 million; that's almost 3 million Nzemas in Ivory Coast.  They are in the cabinet, they are physicians; they all left because of the, the deaths that occurred.  You could find a, a family--this almost brings tears to my eyes.  You could find a family--a woman walking to the market and a young son, maybe eight years or nine years old, will say to the mother, he said, "That is such a beautiful house, but nobody is ever in it."  And the woman will say, "Don't say that, son."  And the son will say, "Why, Mom?"  She said, "Because that building belongs to your uncle."  Said, "This mansion?"  She said, "Yes."  "Well, where is your uncle?"  She said, "Don't, don't ask me."  She knows that uncle was killed--that uncle was a chief of staff, and then he was killed during the coup.  And, or better still, if she never said anything, who ask about a very successful uncle that they've never seen and the mother starts crying?  Or the aunt or the niece starts crying and there is no answer to that explanation?  So Nzemas became quiet.  And my aim now is to tell all the Nzemas that our leader was not doing anything bad; he had only three things in mind: that all Nzema men live to take care of the woman in their lives, the mothers, the sisters, the wives, the daughters; number two, that Nzema boys should go to school and study very, very hard, and then when they've made it, they should do something to benefit the community, there is nothing wrong with that type of a mission.  And so now I, I--with this school being opened in memory of Kwame Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah Academy, Chicago, Illinois], that is what attracted all the attention of all these Nzemas.  And so worldwide, the Nzemas in Australia, Japan, Ghana, England, Amsterdam [the Netherlands], Italy--they're all aware that a school has been opened in memory of Kwame Nkrumah, and they're using that as a vehicle to inspire their children to study very, very hard.
Story_ID: 531218
Speaker 1: I noticed when you said--you mentioned the three things that Osagyefo Kwame Nkrumah wanted people to do.  You said that they wanted the boys to study very hard--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But what about the girls?
Speaker 2: Well, the girls to study hard, too.  As you know, he had a daughter [Samia Nkrumah] and two sons [Sekou Nkrumah and Gamal Nkrumah]; he educated them all.  My father [Alfred Akainyah] had twelve children, he educated all of us--thirteen, actually, we lost one; and, and many, many families.  But this is the belief, a very primordial belief we have in Ghana, in Nzema, and I think many parts of Ghana as well.  That it is only a man who would take a ring to come and ask a woman's hands in marriage, and therefore we should almost always prepare the man first.  So, a family may even have four sons and four daughters, or two sons and two daughters.  If their net worth is not very much, chances are that they're going to educate the two sons first because A, they are holders of the family last name, Akainyah.  So, if I married your sister, she becomes Mrs. Akainyah; likewise, you marry my sister, she becomes Mrs. Crowe.  As a result, they educated the man first, and then--before the, the ladies.  But remember that second caveat: that we were forever owed to--on the ancestral oath of ascendency to take care of the females in our family: mothers, daughters, sisters, and so on and so forth.  So, when my older brother Lawrence [Lawrence B. Akainyah] passed way, for instance, in his will he left a ten thousand square footage estate to his wife, Nellie [ph.], and the daughters--not his son, you see.  And then the house and the cottage--left that to his sisters--two of them on that bloodline, because he was my stepmother's son.  You follow my point?  Yes.  So, we educate everyone in the school system, secondary school, primary school, middle school, and so on, including university.  But for those who the paucity of resources, the choice will be exacted to the benefit of the male because he's the holder of the family last name and has the family estate.
Story_ID: 531219
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about dualism.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And it's an interesting concept as we--even as we talk, because you seem to have a foot in Ghana, and a foot in the Unites States--
Speaker 2: Correct, correct.
Speaker 1: --even as you reside here.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: You have the flag of both on your--
Speaker 2: I wear it with pride.
Speaker 1: Yeah--on your lapel.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: But, but there's an artistic concept called dualism that you're famous for--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So tell us what, what is that?
Speaker 2: Good.  Thank you very much.  Here, I'm gleaming now; I have an opportunity to talk about this.  I studied art history so much, not only because it was required of me, but the biographies of the artists were enchanting.  What inspired Picasso [Pablo Picasso]?  What inspired Botticelli [Sandro Botticelli]?  What inspired Joshua Reynolds?  What inspired Renoir; Manet [Edouard Manet]; Toulouse-Lautrec [Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec]; and so and so forth?  And I developed a paradigm that all these artists of international stature became who they were because they were part of giant artistic movements.  Monet [Claude Monet] to impressionism; Picasso to cubism, Andre Breton to Dadaism, you know; Michelangelo to the Renaissance; this and that to Flemish, Rubens [Peter Paul Rubens] and Rembrandt; and so on and so forth.  So it dawned on me that if I'm to be reckoned, counseled and documented as part of art iconography, that I, too, would have to give birth to an artistic movement.  So having said that, the critical question then became what then will be this artistic movement?  Do I allow my creative force to come up with something accidentally, or should I create something contrived?  And so by the late 1980s, especially 1993 through 1996, it dawned on me that here I am a Ghanaian who is now a permanent resident in the United States, one the land of my birth and heritage, the other the land of my manifest destiny.  And here in the United States I learned that all the artistic movement I've studied in art history all came from Europe, you know; the impressionists, the Dadaists, the surrealists, the pointillists, you know, all of them came from Europe.  So I asked, well, what is North America's contribution to the dialogue in art history?  So, I chose to come up with an artistic expression that would always have a dualistic interpretation.  Why?  Because everything in the United States of importance is practically dual.  We have urbanites and suburbanites; essentially, we have black and we have white, all other tonal variations in the (unclear).  We have two political parties, a Republican and a Democrat, now, we have Independents.  The country even allows us to be hyphenated; we call ourselves Jewish Americans, African Americans, Irish Americans.  You don't have Jewish Japanese, Irish Japanese, African Japanese, or--you follow my point here?  Yes.  So, I needed to come up with a creative expression that would have a dual distribution, dual interpretation, would have the vitality and creative force that will sustain each and the other.
Story_ID: 531220
Speaker 1: So, throughout some of my paintings, you can stand east and see something totally different, and stand west and see something totally different; or you can take the artwork in total and turn the whole artwork upside down and read a whole 'nother interpretation out of it.  And so this is it.  I took a piece like that to Christie's titled 'Man At Work' [ph.].  And on one part, Maasai warriors were sitting down mourning the death of one of their comrades; and it was cast against a dark blue sky; and their, their clothing was red lit with a fire that they were sitting around.  Turned upside down, that black--that blue sky became the warriors with their heads, and the red clothing down became the bright sun; they were going back to the field to seek revenge, to find that lion that killed the man and, and so on.  So, even if you look at the artwork that is behind me (gesture), this piece evolved to be the official artwork for the 1996 Democratic National Convention [Chicago, Illinois] and it, it captures everything I've just said.  You will see three architectural symbols: one, the White House, source of executive authority, located on the far left of California because they have the largest legislative votes.  To the extreme right you have the [U.S.] Capitol, the source of legislative authority.  And then right in the center, you see the [U.S.] Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court is a source of judicial authority.  And on the Supreme Court, you see the flag because independence of the judiciary is really the brick and mortar of the American separation of powers.  And enshrined in that is the huge American flag, and you see the Sears Tower [Willis Tower] and the Buckingham Fountain as two iconographic images for the City of Chicago [Illinois].  When that artwork is turned upside down, all that confetti that you see pouring down on the Democratic Party, they actually become human heads, and they're all running a marathon holding and hoisting the flag up, and the idea is that we should stand up and hold America high.  Why?  Because this is the last beacon on earth.  There is no country, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], no country on earth, where you have a citizen from every country in the world in it.
Story_ID: 531221
Speaker 1: And half those people did not come here because they came on holiday; they came because they were escaping some form of political--
Speaker 2: Repression?
Speaker 1: --repression.  This is the embodiment of Emma Lazarus' wonderful statement captured at the bottom of the Statue of Liberty [New York, New York], stating, quote, "'Keep ancient lands, your storied pomp!'" And the reply: "Cries she with silent lips, 'Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free, the wretched refuse of your teeming shores.  Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!'" ['The New Colossus'].  Here comes all men and all women from all parts of the world who faced political repression.  Just as, as a recent migrant--and I call myself recent because it's under fifty years; actually thirty years, to be precise.  I came from a country--and please pardon my description this way.  A mother [Sabina Yorke] who is a superintendent of a school system, a policy-maker for education, a father [Alfred Akainyah] a former Supreme Court [Supreme Court of Ghana] justice, uncles members of parliament, and one a prime minister.  Any human being that comes from this heritage or pedigree from any country, does not leave their country to go elsewhere, nor from the United Kingdom.  I, I presume if, if, if John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] happened to be a relative, and Supreme Court Justice Marshall [Thurgood Marshall] was your father, and you had two uncles representing your community in the U.S. Senate, you would not leave the United States.  You are part of the established core; the, the iron and the bones and the flesh of that land.  So your vision will be to do what is right, to be quiet and be a silent listener to history, and rise up to fulfill an appropriate mantle prepared for by your relatives and by your own will.  But in my case, and in the cases of many, our government was overthrown by Ghanaians.  And so, with the repression then we all had to leave the country and, as I say, I'm grateful that I was given the opportunity to come here, and when I say, of my manifest destiny, I understand (gesture) the historical interpretation of manifest destiny, going westward in the American history, but manifest destiny in the spiritual sense of what you were destined to do in the country has enabled me to be able to achieve that, and this is how I celebrate this country.
Story_ID: 531222
Speaker 1: Sir, do you have a philosophy of art?
Speaker 2: A philosophy of art?  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, what is it?
Speaker 2: Yes, it's simply stated--probably the, the most brief (laughter)--the brief statement I would ever make is art as scholarship, period.  My idea is that when I put a canvas on an easel to paint, I should make a definitive statement that is important, so I don't paint anything just because it's pretty, and I don't paint anything just because someone asked me to; I paint subjects that have relevancy or pertinence, and, and so if, as I'm creating a work of art I do not see a narrative, I will not create it, and that's probably one of the reasons I do not do any still lifes.  I'm an excellent still life painter because it, it serves me absolutely no utility to paint squares and angles and oranges and vases.  It's beautiful to look at, but I'll buy a vase and put the oranges in it, but I will not paint it.  But I want to paint--if you look at this painting here to my right, this big piece, we're getting ready to loan it to the U.S. state department [U.S. Department of State] and the piece is going into the residence of the U.S. ambassador to Rome [Italy].  Now, if you look at it, you see three-quarters of the canvas is water, and then at the top is a land with the trees, and you see the reflection in the water.  Well, the former prime minister of Congo, Patrice Lumumba, you just mentioned, when the opposition overthrew his government and kidnapped him, they were going to kill him, and they put him on the back of a Land Rover truck; they blindfolded him, however.  On the way, he asked his captors that he's a prime minister for God's sake, and the least they can do is open his--take the blindfold off so he can look around, and the people said that he doesn't need to see he who is gonna kill him.  And finally--it's speculation--people said he was entombed here or there; some people said he was killed.  His actual remains was given to crocodiles--we don't know.  But what is real is that they stopped by the banks of the lagoon where I think someone was going to use the washroom, and he made the same request, to see the land that he loved so much, and he was hit in the head for asking the request again, whereupon the blindfold fell, and so someone pointed his head down.  After reading that manuscript from my brother Lawrence [Lawrence B. Akainyah] during his days in the African Bar Association, I said, well, someday I will like to give a verbal picture, or a picture, to his, his words--what it must have felt for him to look at the land he loved so much from his head being down so he would only have to see the reflection in the water.  So that's exactly what you see.  As pretty as the water looks, it is borne out of a place of pain, someone's death, and the piece is titled accordingly, 'The Last Grace' [Samuel Akainyah].  And that's his wish coming true, seeing the land he loved so much, albeit upside down.  And that's what the painting is about.  But--
Speaker 1: Your, your understanding of, of history--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --certain historical moments--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --have--actually manifest themselves in your artwork.
Speaker 2: You have put it precisely that; I'm purely informed by history, and I gave visual testimony to that history.  Even as simple as that lovely scenery of the aquatic scenery you see here?  That's--and I call that 'The Morning After' [ph.].  I had had surgery to have my gallbladder removed on the twenty-fourth floor of the hospital, Northwestern [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois].  I was overlooking Lake Michigan stooped with pain--stitches in my belly.  In the morning, this is what I witnessed of the sunrise.  It is as lighthearted as a subject you see me create--that's Lake Michigan; I brought my surgeons here to come and take a look.  At the far end there, there is a small piece of Zaire burning, and that's when the natives, the natives are burning the villages and killing each other, and so that beautiful scenery people think it's a, a sunlit sky but no, the whole landscape is burning fire, and that's the smoke you see in the background.  So these pieces are chronicling part of a history that I've read, cultural anthropology that I've read, and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 531223
Speaker 1: Akainyah Gallery [Chicago, Illinois] as a business--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) is, is--you were telling me, I think, when we started that, that art business is down in Chicago [Illinois] and elsewhere in the U.S. and it's still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, globally, globally.
Speaker 1: Globally, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There is an obvious recessionary political economy, no denying about that.  And so, I sensed that almost six years ago and our industry, art, in the gallery, is a wonderful indicator of how the economy is doing, judging the pulse.  Why?  Because nobody really needs art.  If you have a toothache, you need to see a dentist; if your marriage is sour, you need to see a counselor; if your belly is out, you need to see, you know, an internist; and if your bones are not right, you need to see the appropriate doctor.  We need homes to live in; vehicles to drive to work; clothing to wear; and so on.  Nobody really needs art; it's a pure function of the aesthetic.  Defining who you are is one element, surrounding yourself with the aesthetic that from an art therapist standpoint it adds some hormonal effect to your body about feeling good, just like listening to good music, but if you never had an album to listen to the good music, it never killed you either.  And then finally, only those who are resourceful and understanding of the currents that work in terms of value and appreciation to know that a good work of art could be bought as an investment.  So, very few people understand that aspect.  So, having not being a necessity, when the economic tights--need to tighten their belt, those things which are not a necessity seem to be the first thing people let go.  And then you can also tell the pulse of the economy; when people start buying, you can tell the economy is coming back around.  Well, six years ago, I sensed that.  Fortunately enough for me, eight, nine years ago I accepted a post as an assistant professor at one of the junior colleges; I'm now tenured there, so--
Speaker 1: This is Kennedy-King College in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Correct.  So, I earned a, I earned a full salary as a professor, and I have a wife [Kim Akainyah] who is a registered nurse, so together we're able to support our family.  That allows the gallery to be self-sustained, and I'm utilizing the space in the current economic gloom to incubate my museum project titled, 'Beyond Peace, Beyond Progress' ['Beyond Peace, Beyond Progress, Towards Global Cooperation'], which is a thirty piece museum collection of which the smallest is the piece that you've just seen here.  So, when it's fully completed--and I'm on portfolio number twenty-one; I have nine large pieces to go.  I assume in the next year and a-half, I will finish the entire collection.  If a museum does not have seventy-five thousand square footage to exhibit the pieces, they could not even be negotiating to the itinerary, and I want the collection to travel only to cities worldwide where peace accords have been concluded.  So, Oslo [Norway] for the Oslo part [Oslo Accords]; Helsinki [Finland] for the Helsinki Accords; Vienna [Austria] and Geneva [Switzerland] for Geneva Convention; London [England]; Kyoto [Japan]; Yokohama [Japan]; Rome [Italy]; San Francisco [California] for the birth of the United Nations [UN]; Washington, D.C. for the birth of Camp David [Camp David Accords], and the list goes on.  It was my aim that the collection would travel and end up here in Chicago when the Olympics of 2016 will take off.  And now that we lost that 2016, I'm hopeful by 2020, we may get it and--but I want the collection to finally end here; I want it to leave, travel all those places, and come back hopefully to the Art Institute of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], or some institution like this, from whence it all began.
Story_ID: 531224
Speaker 1: As a businessman--I mean--okay, what would be your assessment as yourself as a businessman?
Speaker 2: I'm a terrible, terrible, terrible businessman, and I say that without any trepidation.  I, I'm not interested in business at all.  That is not to say I do not like to make money.  What I'm trying to say is that in life you have to know what your strengths are, what your benign strengths are, and what your weaknesses are--what your benign weaknesses are, and then what your serious frailties--weaknesses and frailties.  And in the same process, you have to know what your greater, or--greater, or greatest strengths are.  I compose my classical music and my piano concertos quicker than I do anything else.  I write, I think, with a passion that I can't explain.  I enjoy writing, I enjoy composing.  The third gift is painting, but incidentally, painting is what I teach and what I make a living out of, so I consider myself a creative individual with a, a triple mandate: to compose, to write, and to paint, and this is it.  All others fall, you know, as benign.  So I have a nice gallery [Akainyah Gallery, Chicago, Illinois], wonderful, and I hire someone to run the gallery.  I know how many paintings I produce in a particular year, I know how many museum portfolios I want to prepare in this lifetime, but my fingers are very much on what I write and what adagio or what concerto inspires me to create what painting or what statement I write in history that I paraphrased to inspire me to create which artwork, and so on and so forth.  So, creativity is it, and then all other things fall in-between.
Story_ID: 531225
Speaker 1: Now, this gallery [Akainyah Gallery] is located in the River North area of Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: We are just one block off the path of the center of the art district.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, but this is the whole area, you're right, it's the River North.
Speaker 1: So, it's an area that--you know, it's the home to plenty of galleries--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and there have been--there've been a--there have been a few black-owned galleries here.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Nicole Gallery [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I think we mentioned off camera Nicole [HistoryMaker Nicole Smith]--
Speaker 2: We still have Nicole Gallery in the River North, and we--
Speaker 1: She's Haitian, and I think she's a curator of a lot of works, right?
Speaker 2: And including being an art historian.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: So, the two of us are the only black-owned galleries in the River North area.
Speaker 1: And there used to be [HistoryMaker] Isobel Neal and [HistoryMaker] George N'Namdi.
Speaker 2: Correct, including Griffin Gallery [Griffin Fine Art and Interior Design, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which have all left now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  But there, there are other galleries--black-owned galleries, in the Bronzeville area [Chicago, Illinois].  I know--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --Steel Life [ph.].
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Is there any association of gal- black gallery owners?  Or do you think that such a thing is necessary?
Speaker 2: It--that's an interesting question; I think it is necessary.  Anytime you, you engage in a particular vocation, be it accounting, architecture, or medicine or law, there's an obvious--Cook County medical association for African American physicians [Cook County Physicians Association]; Cook County Bar Association, for African American lawyers; there is I-NOMA [Illinois Chapter of the National Organization of Minority Architects], the organization for the African American architects.
Speaker 1: Yeah, minority architects (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And so--and incidentally, they've all held receptions here.  But it speaks to sometimes the lack of organization among artists because, as you know, many vocations rely on training, and that training necessitates--what do you call it--networking.  The artists do not rely only on training, they rely on mood--.  Three I's, as I call them: intuition, inspiration and, and imagination.  And those three things are inspired by mood, and so I think that's probably the biggest indictment against people in our vocation because you have to catch the artist in the right mood (laughter) to get him to accept to do something or the other.  And for me, I have reduced it to an art form.  So I measure who I spend time with, I measure what I eat, I measure what music I listen to, I measure what literature I read because if you protect those things very well, then your mood is always very good, and if your mood is always very good, your intuition is high, your imagination is high and your instinct is high, therefore your creativity is expressive.  And if you don't, and you hang with people who depress you, you have a depressed mood, you go through a creator's block; you don't eat the right things, you do the same thing.  But these are things that have evolved in time.  But we do need a, we do need a, a coalition of, of African American owned artist consortium of some sort--yes, we do.
Story_ID: 531226
Speaker 1: Is there a, a particular type of client that you have?  You know, 'cause I know some--the--there's a African American artist roundtable in Chicago [Illinois] and I think they--at one time they, they received a contract with the hotels, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to buy, to buy works for the lo- you know, so there different kinds of--there's the individual that wants--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So, what's--what, what clientele is yours do you think?  Or is any particular clientele predominant?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't think I have a specific demographical population set.  I do know that I've been fortunate to have some corporate patronage.  I also know I've had a few athlete and actors' patronage.  I have some in the professional circles: business, lawyers, bankers and so on.  I have people in the medical profession, nurses inclusive.  So I don't have a specific descriptive of a typical Akainyah [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah] client profile.  And I suppose the reason is because when clients come here for exhibitions, I deliver what's called a museum narrative, very much like what the doyents [sic. docents] would do in the museum.  So, the question then becomes, who is inspired by this narrative so much?  And at that point if that person happens to be a nurse, then the next question is, can I afford this piece?  Or can I afford a smaller piece?  And likewise, that person could be a football player or an actor; that person could be an engineer or a banker; a cameraman or an accountant; and so on.  So, the common thread, I was saying, will be those whose--who seem to be appreciative of the history and the narrative that follows the artwork.
Story_ID: 531227
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you this about your students.  What do you--have you had any promising students at Kennedy-King [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] in ten years?  I know there must have been some--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Who are some of them?
Speaker 2: I've, I've--I have directed students, followed students' work, tracked them and supported them, and mentored them.  They've gone through from Kennedy-King to Columbia College downtown [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]; they've gone to the School of the Art Institute [School of the Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]; they've gone to University of Illinois.  I only have one tragic such example, that is when a student was admitted to Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] by the former head of the art department, the late Ed Paschke, and the student was even lined up with scholarship and all that--all the student had to do was to show up.   And we--he never showed up and we never heard of him 'til about five years later that he'd been incarcerated.  He was the biggest disappointment because he was one of the finest art students that has gone through my hands.  I really enjoyed his work, but I don't really know what he did or what he did not do to squander away such exalted intellectual and human estates like that--I don't know.
Story_ID: 531228
Speaker 1: Have you received very many public art commissions?
Speaker 2: Well, let me put it this way.  I have created artwork for the 2001, I believe, or 2002 national calendar for Sears, Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  They transmitted the artwork into a million calendars and posters.  It, it was interesting because there was a, a contract for a very, very small fee, but I knew as an artist that for a million calendars that's a, a commercial advertisement worth the fold, and so I accepted that project, number one.  Number two, I've done official artwork for, for Allstate Insurance Company [Allstate Corporation] for what's called, 'From Whence We Came.' The piece was used for a kickoff of African American History Month [Black History Month].  I really can't remember what year; it's of recent vintage--no more than ten years, actually.  And that piece attracted close to two thousand people for its unveiling at Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois].  The late John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was there, and the current Linda Johnson [HistoryMaker Linda Johnson Rice], publisher of Ebony, was there, and so many other people.  And they, too, made it into calendars and sent copies to Henry Louis Gates [HistoryMaker Henry Louis "Skip" Gates, Jr.] and Bryant Gumbel, and a number of illustrious people, and it was al- it's always wonderful to have your work sent to people like that into their homes.  Chrysler Financial [Chrysler Financial Services], the chief corporate sponsor for the African Festival of the Arts commissioned a piece which was used to kick off three, four years ago for the African Festival of the Arts.  Let me see--I did a small piece for the BMW North America campaign for their new BMW 7 Series.  I was given the car to drive for a number of days, and then go into my studio and give a visual interpretation of what it felt driving the car.
Speaker 1: So, what did you think?
Speaker 2: I, I painted a, a beautiful scenery supposing you were on the road, and the piece was titled f- 'A View from the Passenger Window' [ph.].  So I did not assume I was the one driving it because I could not drive and take in that view, so it's a passenger in the car, which actually is what happened, because the car was too technologically advanced for me.  So I sat in the front seat while a friend drove, and we caught glimpse of this lovely scenery and I created the scenery.  The artwork was used for a national campaign.  There are three markets: St. Louis [Missouri]; I think a city in Ohio, Cincinnati, I believe; and then Chicago [Illinois].  They made several posters, so everybody who went to a BMW showroom to look at that BMW 7 got a copy of the poster, then everybody that test-drove the car got a lithograph numbered and signed, and everybody that bought, got an artist proof of the same image.  And then finally, from those who bought it, at the end of the year, one person won the original, and so it was a wonderful campaign by BMW.
Speaker 1: Well it sounds like it would have paid fairly well, I guess, too.  Did it--I mean was it a pretty good contract (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.  These are all very small, limited contracts.  And by, by saying small, that BMW contract was actually less than five thousand [dollars], yeah.  But, like I said, there is a trade-off point where if a piece is small, because it was small, except that the campaign was large because whoever would win it they would, they would, would not need a piece this big, you see.  But I've done work for British Petroleum [BP P.L.C.], Allstate, BMW, Chrysler Financial, Sears Roebuck, I've done the official artwork for the Democratic National Convention 1996 [1996 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], which is here and, and I've recently completed a piece like that for Mitchell Titus [Mitchell and Titus, LLP], which is a major architectural--a major accounting firm, African American accounting firm, yeah.  So I, I've seen, you know, the gloom and the blithe of the industry, so to speak.
Story_ID: 531229
Speaker 1: Now do you have a favorite piece of your, of your own?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite piece of my own?  I have at least six favorite pieces, but I--to be quite frank with you, I'm sitting right behind--or in front of my favorite pieces of all time.  Because having studied diplomacy, having studied the history of the United States through constitutional law in particular, I know that if a country like the United States did not exist today, the rest of the world would be in some trouble.  And let me explain by that comment.  Because earlier, I said that there is no country in the world where there is a person from every country in that country--is the United States.  There is a person here from Argentina, Bolivia, Peru, from Alaska, from--you see, from, from all of Europe, from all of Africa, from all of East Asia.  There is a person from each country, in the United States.  And half those people were escaping some form of political repression.  I'm reminded of people like Ted Koppel, who came from the United Kingdom; people like Hakeem Olajuwon from Nigeria; I'm reminded of people like, like Barbara Walters' father [Louis Edward Walters] from England; I'm reminded of people--I mean many, many people, you know.  I suppose if I left and if I stayed in Ghana, I would be a professor of art at the university, or perhaps a professor of international law at the University of Ghana law school [University of Ghana School of Law, Accra, Ghana], perhaps.  But thanks to the United States, I get to own a, a respected fine art gallery [Akainyah Gallery] in the country's third largest city [Chicago, Illinois]; I get to compose with some relative respect, coming still from obscurity; I get to still teach at the university [Kennedy-King College, Chicago, Illinois] and, and then get to write--and by the way, get to do all these things at the same time; it's not the case elsewhere.  And the former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright put it best, that this is: "The world's indispensable nation."  And so, in 1996, I entered a paragraph in The Annals of American political history [The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science] and characterized the country the leading light because its political economy example is that which other nations have copied to be successful.  In 1957, when Ghana was achieving its independence, on this GNP [gross national product] scale at the UN [United Nations] was Ghana, the Republic of Kenya, Singapore--they were all--and South Korea; they were all on there.  We know the U.S. is here (gesture), we know Japan is here, we know Singapore is here, we know South Korea is here, we know Ghana is here, we know Kenya is here, and the thing that Singapore and Japan, and the rest have in common, is how much of the political system of democracy, and the economic system of capitalism that they copied from the United States.  So, that affection is all that informed my creative process regarding this piece.  And I'm determined to not let every American know about this piece, but I want every Tom, Dick, and Harry and the rest of the world to know that if indeed--in particular African heads of states--if indeed they do want their country to succeed, they should know that politically their people are looking for a peaceful democratic process, and economically they are looking for a prosperous, capitalist economic process--political economy.  And so I'm putting the piece on the cover of my second book, titled 'Stand Our U.S.A.: Reflections from a Grateful Migrant' [ph.].
Story_ID: 531239
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Everything I would do differently--yes, but still with a caveat.  What I would have done differently, I would have stayed in the university and stayed in art, gone on to do a master's [degree] in art history, a doctorate in art history, and then become a professor of art history.  And then, in the process, just write and write and write about African art history.  I think that's the only thing because I truly, truly enjoy teaching painting and lecturing about history, so those two things together would just have made me extremely happy.  Having spent thirty years in the United States, I wish that looking at the way politics is run in Africa, I wish that if I couldn't have done that, then I would have also continued to study diplomacy to, to perhaps a doctoral level in, in which case I would have had to abdicate my interest in, in art, but my key end would be an external advisor to not only Ghana, but to African leaders on how to shape a better political system and hence to incubate a better economic system.
Story_ID: 531240
Speaker 1: I am so, so frustrated when I go to Ghana and I realize that four things are clear in my head.  This is a country that produces half of all the bauxite, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe]; half of all the bauxite produced worldwide comes from this country.  Bauxite is the mineral ore that is smelted into aluminum and that is used in making aircrafts, so present at the aviation industry was the Republic of Ghana.  That country has two civil aircrafts to its name--doesn't make sense, okay?  Having said that, all other major airlines--Delta [Delta Air Lines, Inc.], American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.]--many of them are going into Ghana, so we are not short of aircrafts coming into the country bringing Ghanaians in; a thousand Ghanaians a day, coming abroad--coming inside the country from abroad and going back.  All I'm hoping is that the government will have the sense to spend some of the money made from bauxite to buy an aircraft and at least participate in this aviation industry so that they, too, can make a million dollars a day, hence $365 million a year.  I believe if someone gave the Ghana government a bequest of 200 million as a gift from the United Kingdom or, or, or Ghana, they would consider that an immense gift, but they are sitting at a point where they can do so; they can--and it's not cutting anybody's business because there are several millions of Ghanaians living abroad; you cannot bring all of the home. Just have one aircraft to participate from London [England] to Ghana, or New York [New York] to Ghana, that's all.  Second, it's a country that not only produces this bauxite, we are the second largest producer of cocoa.  There are contractual agreements in the country that are half a century old.  When do you renew these contracts so that the country can benefit as much as the foreign entity can also benefit?  And that is also not taking place.  And finally, how can that country take in all these resources from the natural resource, right?  Sh- exports--and still have only three national universities for 22 million people, when in the City of Chicago [Illinois] have less than 4 million, we have twenty universities and colleges, so--which means you now have to make strict, stringent requirements for entrance into the university, and you have many qualified students.  To give you a real good example, I don't want to mention any names, but one of the heads of cardiology in one major hospital in Chicago here had all straight Cs and Bs and did not qualify to go to sixth form, hence did not qualify to go to the university.  Here comes America to the rescue, and when I say, God bless America, people sometimes don't understand why I make that statement.  But this gentleman is now head of cardiology in, in a hospital in Chicago but he did not qualify to go to university in Ghana.  And he was bright, but why?  Because of the paucity of opportunities, they had to raise the standards, and here you have the opportunity to be able to be what you want to be.  I have a daughter [Lauren Akainyah] who went to university with a classical music major [at Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], sings opera with a very fine cadence.  This is almost one and a-half years more to graduate, and she's decided, "Dad, I think I'm going to be a lawyer; I'm going to change my major."  She has the opportunity to do so.  In Ghana, once you begin, you can't change your, your, your major.  And my point is that there are so many civic lessons to be learned abroad, let us bring some of those lessons back into old country to benefit it, and when we take this wisdom, the old country should listen and should not always question, why are you bring these new ideas?  Yet we need the ideas.  The example of Singapore has been proven.  Singapore was on the same level with Ghana, just like South Korea.  Can Ghanaian politicians truly say they would not love to be where Singapore is, or can they really say they would not love to be where South Korea is?  Surely they would love to, but they have not taken the necessary steps to make that happen.  So, those are the things.
Story_ID: 531241
Speaker 1: You touched briefly on John Biggers [John T. Biggers]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) who studied in Ghana--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but there were others; there were, there was actually an African American enclave in Ghana at one time of artists and writers and--which included [HistoryMaker] Maya Angelou, and [HistoryMaker] Alice Windom--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There's a brother named Kofi [Karega Kofi Moyo] here in Chicago [Illinois] who got his name in Ghana who does work, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Kamal Faluke [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kamal Faluke, too; there's lots of, lots of people--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that were inspired by Ghana and Ghana's traditional culture, the Kente cloth--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --brass castings and the Adinkra symbols.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And these are all influences--Sankofa--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --image.  All those influenced African American thought about Africa--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I just wondered if the Ghanaian people are aware of the tremendous impact Ghanaian artists had on African Americans and--
Speaker 2: This was an intellectual reciprocity; they, too, had an impact on Ghanaians, too.  Kamal Faluke was an outstanding art history teacher at the university; he taught me actually, for a whole academic year, and I enjoyed his classes tremendously.  So when I came to Chicago and actually found out that he was here, I thought he was teaching in, in one of the schools and I realized he wasn't teaching any longer, and that broke my heart, but he was just utterly brilliant.  He had traveled to Egypt, other parts of Africa, and just, just a very, very respected one at the university campus.  A lady by the name of Jane [ph.], she came from Detroit [Michigan]; she was also African American--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kojo Curtis Morrow [HistoryMaker Curtis "Kojo" Morrow], who was a jeweler here and a photographer.  He was a--he also was part of a--he lived in Ghana for eleven years.
Speaker 2: Is that right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, there, there were a number, a number of them.  The Ghanaians who studied under those other universities would remember them, and, and they also helped foster Ghana's image abroad because as they came out of Ghana on holidays, they taught a great deal.  And mind you, after the coups of the 1970s and the '80s [1980s], many of them left; they went--never went back.  There is one Mr. Mitchell [ph.], who came from Detroit; he actually won the Ghana government medal because he became blind and ultimately died and was entombed in Ghana; his name is Mitchell--very handsome, very bright, very creative, very energetic, slender, and was just an amazing teacher.  And he married a Ghanaian lady, bore his children there, and he taught in Achimota [Achimota School, Accra, Ghana] first, before coming to teach in the college of art [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana].  And, those are people I still hold highly, respectably in my heart, yeah.  But I think someone ought to document their contributions to Ghana and vice versa, too.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Curtis Morrow has written a book about his eleven years in Ghana and--
Speaker 2: In Ghana?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He's a Chicagoan.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: But I just thought I'd ask you about that (unclear) the awareness of--
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah, I never met Curtis in Ghana, but I met him here--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because he's actually been in my gallery here [Akainyah Gallery, Chicago, Illinois] a number of times--very fine gentleman.  And he, at the time, was incubating Real Men Cook, that--
Speaker 1: Oh, that--that's Kofi Moyo.
Speaker 2: Kofi Moyo, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Kofi Moyo, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: And so--
Speaker 1: He lived in Ghana, too, for a while.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he's different from Curtis.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Curtis Morrow is a photographer and he does a lost-wax process--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, there is one that is living in Accra [Ghana] now, and he came from the Hyde Park area [Chicago, Illinois].  He went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], too; I can't remember his last name.
Speaker 1: Robert [ph.]--?
Speaker 2: Robert.  Yeah.  He's living in Ghana--
Speaker 1: Yeah Robert, he's a, he's a tie dye artist; he tie dyes a silk fabric--
Speaker 2: Correct, correct, correct--yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, so there's quite a, a--
Speaker 2: A number.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 531242
Speaker 1: Today, you, you are seeing a number of young ones who are going there to do one-year graduate study, or part college work and part schooling in Ghana.  My daughter went on her own with twenty of her classmates; they had a total ball--spent about a month or so there.  She was, I think, in her sophomore year--freshman year--sophomore year in college and, and so--and next year we're taking close to a hundred people on a holiday to the northern part.  We're going to Tamale [Ghana] and to the Salaga slave market [Salaga, Ghana], we're going to Kumasi [Ghana] to meet the paramount king of the Ashanti tribe; we would also meet the archbishop of Kumasi, and then we'll come down to meet the president in Accra [Ghana], and then we will spend two days going through six of these slave castles along the coast of Ghana, of which you must be on that trip.
Speaker 2: I, I, I certainly would like to go.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It's the trip to Ghana next year.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next year?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Two thousand ten [2010].
Speaker 1: Two thousand ten [2010].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What time of year?
Speaker 1: We haven't decided the time yet, but if you say you would, you would like to come, then we can make sure that you come and you film.  This thing will be very crucial, and I would like the one hundred people who are coming to be part of this footage in which--imagine this interview taking place in the Axim castle [Axim, Ghana].  Listen to this--where--I don't know if it were the Swedes or the Dutch.  They dug a tunnel a quarter of a mile into the ocean to an island so that the natives did not know that they were even going through the tunnel, but they went in there, and by the steps and so on they went down to go dig, and then men were bringing the clay out, but they usually entered the tunnel late at night.  No, not late at night, very early in the morning--four or five o'clock--before sunrise, and they did not come back.  They were fed, but they did not come back 'til around seven o'clock at night, and this went on for almost a year.  So, they thought they were digging a tunnel and going a pathway, but they didn't know it was going to an island up until they knew it was close to the island and then the, the, the settlers themselves did their part.  And that became a hiding place and a journey to take the, the slaves through.  Up until after half a century, the land caved in and they could no longer us it, but the island still exists, and this narration they should have told President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] and Michelle [Michelle Obama] that.  And I know as Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] is going, they are going to--.  Oh, they would not want Miss Oprah to break down to cry, so they will not tell her that.  But this is the history, you know.
Speaker 2: Is the story of the slave trade well-known in Ghana?  I mean do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.  This is what I'm saying, that people grew- growing up in the palace, they had no choice but to know.  Let me share this with you.  There is a whole region--because the men resisted, the settlers torched the entire region and burned down the entire coast line; this is from Benyin [Ghana], Atuabo [Ghana] and s- it was like three towns, which would be like from where, where the Water Tower [Chicago Water Tower, Chicago, Illinois] is, past the Tribune Tower [Chicago, Illinois], past the Chicago River, past the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and finally going towards Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois].  So they burned the whole settlement.  And so the men went into the interior six miles, and build their homes on stilts, and then they kept all the women and the children and the aged--the aging people in this settlement, and then during the daytime, these men will come out and farm, or go to fish, and then at night they will go to their homes.
Story_ID: 531243
Speaker 1: Today, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], I will take you to that settlement and you will see that slavery has been subscribed [TW1]and diminished--no longer slavery, but the people still feel that someday, somebody will try to come and kidnap their children and sell them, so they refuse to leave this aquatic settlement to come on main land, no matter what the government has done.  All the homes are on raffia stilts.  It still exists, you know, and I would like to be able to give this kind of historical information and, and it's, it's incred- and then also, walking into the slave castle, when you step on the ground here, you can tell it's tile, and there's concrete beneath it.  When you walk on the floor in the slave castle, it's organic.  You really don't know if it's clay or carpet, or whatever, and it's all the feces, blood, urine, and all the rest from people which, which--.  Imagine, the people were being treated like cattle, so as they were being brought in, there was toilet of about four inches, and they walked in and that's why they said that the African American has to be the, the, the, the most, the toughest human species on earth because they don't know how people would have been able to survive this.  And so he who survived all that in the, in, in the, in the castle, had to have had enormous physical strength and, and, and physical health.  And then, in addition to that, now survive three weeks to a month of crossing the Atlantic [Atlantic Ocean], drinking only sea water, having a bowl of kenkey a day, having the opportunity to come out to the deck to ease yourself only once, and the rest was containment.  No wonder the kidneys were damaged.  And we know in medical science anything, even of a learned behavior, even including drinking alcohol or, or using any narcotics.  As long as it's a learned behavior and it goes on that trespasses three generations, it becomes genetically predisposed.  So, if, if you and I--our fathers came here as slaves on the ship, and now they arrived in North America, their taste buds, after a month, is damaged, so they now had desiring for food which was salty.  So, typically, even--let me say this.  Indians who even own the 7-Elevens are so much aware of this that when they make coffee and sandwiches, if you bought a cup of coffee in my neighborhood here on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], and you say, "Sugar and cream," don't, don't say how many sugars; you just say, "Sugar and cream."  They'll just put in two sugars and some cream.  I take you to, to a similar 7-Eleven and we go on 79th Street in your car and we ask, "Coffee, cream and sugar," you will taste four times, three times that quantity of sugar and the cream, because the palate, over the years, of people taking corn and the wheat and the flour and whatever is left and, and then sugar--a ton of it--and it was not just so they can eat it; it was the way of preserving the carbohydrate pastry, and likewise the wa y of preserving the meat was through salt.  So, we ate it as ham hocks, as turkey, as everything else.  And that taste of that salt came from a month of having to drink sea water crossing the Atlantic, and then the children were born with this bloodline, and then now it's gone on and gone on.  And I constantly have to remind my wife [Kim Akainyah], I don't eat salt in my food.  When I buy food elsewhere, there may be salt, but at home I don't--there's no salt on the shelf at all because I'm trying to make sure that my children do not have that kind of inheritance 'cause high blood pressure causes atrophy to the arteries, pretty soon it affects the heart, then organs begin to fail, diabetes and, you know, renal failure, and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 531244
Speaker 1: What are some of your concerns--and we always ask, what are your concerns for the African American community today, but, you know, we need to go beyond--I guess you know beyond that, 'cause most of the African Americans don't--aren't thinking about the Ghanaian community to--or African com- I mean the Ameri- the Ghanaian American community.
Speaker 2: I have one major concern about our community here, and it's about what I perceive as black-on-black crime, and I also think that--
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: --and I also think that there could be a solution to that.  What will force me, or push me to take a revolver or a pistol and extinguish your life has to do with a, a distaste of my own life and hence a distaste of what I see in front of me, yes.  And the solution to that is creating an, an intentional intellectual and emotional enforcement to like what is in here (gesture), and hence to like you (gesture), so that I cannot cause harm to you.  During the period of the slave trade, we brought something from Africa that was so beautiful.  We called ourselves kith and kin, so we say, brother, so (Nzema word), meaning, my brother.  It was not real blood-blood like my--we have the same father and mother, but if I pinch my skin and it hurts I'm not going to pinch your skin because it's going to hurt, so I was indeed your keeper and you were my keeper; we were each other's brother's keeper.  And so during that time, if a person was hurting, even though on that ship someone was using it and they were trying to fall down, another person lifted their hands and raised them to come forward and they held, and the slight disappointment I have is the ease with which--it's a big indictment but I'll risk making it and I'll welcome the polemic comeback later.  The ease with which others might say, well, I've subscribed my existence to my own hard work and ethic, and to each his own; let the next person climb up.  That disappoints me and, and then worst of it is when the youngster in, in the community who sees his cousin or brother going to school and studying very hard and then he gets angry that you think you're better because you're going to school; that bothers me.  I will inject the following.  We have the same thing in Africa, we have the same thing in Ghana; people might call it generically the crap syndrome, but it's much more than that.  It all has to do with (unclear) as self-admiration, and self-adoration, tribal adoration, heritage, and so on.  We have a situation where you have (laughter) the same country--in the same country, in a period of ten miles square, this color, that color, and they call themselves Tutsis and Hutus, and in twenty-eight months, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe], they extinguished $240,000 of, of their--240 million--or 240,000 people of their own.  It's senseless.
Story_ID: 531245
Speaker 1: That's the same black-on-black crime.  And people just have to be taught to like who they are, and so on.  In the Nzema tribe, we used to say, every man should be able to come into the room with his hands up like this (gesture), and then when he shakes your hand, he quickly then touches his chest.  Reason being, reason being, on your right hand there should be five men of importance in your bloodline or family that you know that you can count on, and then once you leave your family, on the left there should be five male friends of relevance that you know that you can count on.  So an Nzema man is never alone; he always feels like, okay, I'm in financial crux, okay, I'll call Lawrence [Lawrence B. Akainyah], I'll call Ernest [Ernest Akainyah], I'll call--this and that.  These are actual blood--brothers, or uncles, or whatever, that you can count on.  And you have five male friends and if you take them--these names literally, you now make your oath of ascendency.  On their shoulders you thrive and you sit.  So, should death happen to me prematurely, all my wife [Kim Akainyah] has to do is to call this group of men; they call that the infrastructure, you know, the oyster.  And so after they bury me, then one of them would ask, "We know Sam [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah] left behind three children--two girls [Lauren Akainyah and Brittanie Akainyah] and a boy [Samuel Akainyah II].  How are they?"  "They're fine; they are in college."  "How much is the tuition?"  "This one is 9,000, the other one 20,029."  So these ten men split is $2,900 each, or whatever.  They pay and they took care of each other, and the rest of the tribes did not like that very much, and so the Nzemas were pillaged after the coup.  But this is how Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], (Unclear), Akainyah, (Unclear), all these Nzema giants--this is how they got themselves educated, and ten of them put money together to fund Nkrumah's political campaign, including Paa Grant [George Alfred Grant].  And we need to bring some of those things up here, you see; we need to bring some--because that's--that was all part of who we truly were, and if we went to Ghana by that slave castle in Axim [Ghana], or Nzema, I would talk about what those Nzemas were before the Europeans took them.  This orderliness is what inspired them to take some of them to Germany.  Amo, (Unclear), (Unclear)--all of them came from this--
Speaker 2: You're talking about Anton Amo [Anton Wilhelm Amo] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  Yes, they all came from--
Speaker 2: The Ghanaian who became a professor in Germany during the 18th century--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.  So, they used to say that, don't be afraid because each step you took, there were ten Nzema giants who took the same step with you.  And that kind of fortification is what we need.
Story_ID: 531253
Speaker 1: Sir, tell us something about your family today.
Speaker 2: My family in Ghana or here?
Speaker 1: Well, you--we've talked about the family in Ghana, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, you're talking about--
Speaker 1: Well, when did you meet your wife [Kim Akainyah], and tell us about that.  We haven't talked about that--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She would love this.  I met my wife when I came here to the United States, which is thirty years ago, but at the time, all I knew was that this wonderful American family that hosted me, this was one of their daughters.  Let me say this.  The couple, Jean [Jean Mullins] and David Mullins, had their own children from previous marriages, and then when they married, they were above the threshold biologically of having children, particularly the woman.  So, they thought about adoption, but the idea just came up and down, up and down, until one day, they were watching a television footage on Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], and this is something the mother told me.  And during that documentary, they remembered seeing that of the American soldiers who went to the Vietnam [Vietnam War] and Korean War, they bore children with the women from those two countries, but all the children who were half-Asian and half-Caucasian had been adopted.  But, the children born to the Asian and the black had been left there, and so the boys were becoming thugs, and the young girls were becoming prostitutes as early as age twelve, thirteen, fourteen.  And so, as we were watching this footage one day, David Mullins had a little tear in his eye and the wife noticed that, and so the wife asked him, "Are you thinking what I'm thinking?"  And he said, "Well, are you thinking what I'm thinking?"  And lo and behold, they were each thinking that, why don't we adopt one of these little girls to bring their story to a close?  My wife then was adopted at age four from Korea [South Korea], and the family adopted another daughter from Vietnam at age six--three, four years later.  So when I came here, this lovely young lady was in the later years of her high school.  I actually escorted her to a prom; I will show you a picture of that today.  And so I lived with them for year; lived at St. Sabina rectory [St. Sabina Church, Chicago, Illinois] also, for a short time.  When they lifted the ban on political activities in Ghana and I started receiving money from home, I then got my own apartment at 1036 Dearborn [Street], and we started dating when she went to school of nursing, and I decided to go on to graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and then we married shortly before we all finished school.  And now, this coming July, we would have been married, celebrating twenty-five years.  So, it's been a, a wonderful marriage, yes (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you have children.  You got a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Oh, surely; we have three children--two girls.  The first one, the second, and then the third, a son, yes.  So, Lauren [Lauren Akainyah], Brittanie [Brittanie Akainyah], and Sam III [Samuel Akainyah II].  Sam, III, globally; Sam, II in America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Correct (laughter).
Story_ID: 531254
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  When you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have three of them, and it's in the three areas of my work as composer, writer and painter.  In terms of composer, I have, in the past year, composed a three movement piece, which closes with an anthem titled, 'Stand Our U.S.A.,' subtitled, 'From a Grateful Migrant to His Nation' ['Stand Our U.S.A.: From a Grateful Migrant to His Nation' (ph.)].  I realize that we have 'America the Beautiful' as an anthem, we have 'God Bless America' as an anthem, we have 'The Star Spangled Banner' as an anthem, and so on, and anthems are normally sang at Olympics, at inaugurations, at football games, and so on.  But the true value of the anthem is always to fuel the spirit of a nation, to encourage it, and so its Olympic treatment is appropriate very much so.  But, I wanted to write an anthem on behalf of all the Ghanaians, all the Africans, and for that matter, all migrants, to say tha- we are saying thank you for being the country that allows all of us to come from foreign lands to make manifest our destiny.  So, I crafted the words: "From the skies we dwell below every nation to the call because we have a person from every country in it.  Sound the trumpets, shout the anthem, every land by every tongue," you know.  And then we go to the refrain: "To our nation's sons and daughters, outreach your arms full-length; red and white and blue our banner, stand, oh, stand our U.S.A."  That's the CD I gave you.  That's number one from my music standpoint.  And then the second part of that same musical piece is taking the second stanza of the U.S. national anthem, and writing a whole new music for the words.  "On the shore dimly seen through the mist of the deep, where the foe's haughty host in dread silence reposes.  What is that which over the towering steep as it fitfully blows half conceals, half discloses?  Now, it catches the gleam of the morning's first gleam.  'Tis the star spangled banner; long may it wave over the land of the free and the home of the brave."  And I've given a hymnal quality to this piece written in E-flat for seven instruments, and sung like a funeral dirge to honor the memory of the silent soldier, those who've bid farewell.  Who is that twenty-one-year-old who goes to fight on behalf of his country and he comes fallen?  I don't think it is enough for us just to say goodbye to that person and his memory will be remembered.  I want the words of the national anthem that this person fought for, the constitution and the flag, to be part of the farewell notes for this person.  So, I've written this piece.  It's, it's, it's a very rich piece, and evokes all that sentiment of saying farewell to somebody.  And there's a certain melancholy that shrouds my whole outlook in recent times because I've lost a brother, I've lost a sister, I've lost four friends who are American, and so I carry the aspirates with me, and some of them I did not get the opportunity to actually officially say thank you, and this is part of my way of honoring them.  So, that's my musical legacy.
Story_ID: 531255
Speaker 1: In terms of literary, when my father [Alfred Akainyah] was alive, I remember many of the lawyers who respected his understanding of jurisprudence, which is legal philosophy.  He was just a brilliant lawyer, and a brilliant judge.  And, I even remember some of his friends, Lord Denning [Alfred Denning], a former chief justice of England, comments that they had all made about him.  But there was only thing I expected of my father when--before he died, and I once said this in a letter to him that with all his brilliance and his knowledge, I would like him to pen a brief biography accounting the sources of his intellect, the sources of his ambition, and the fuel of his culture that informed his actions.  And he said, "Someday, someday, someday."  And, and yet he died without writing this book.  And it broke my heart because my argument is that 3,000, 4,000 years B.C., if, if Aristotle, if Socrates, if Plato, if Aristophanes, if Diotima [Diotima of Mantinea], if they did not leave the diatomic form, the, 'The Apology' [Plato] and 'The Republic' [Plato], what evidence really, Mr. Crowe [Larry Crowe]--what evidence would we have that the golden age, the erstwhile golden age of Greece existed?  With the intellectual Athenians and the strong, you know, athletic and Olympian Spartans and the warriors, what evidence would we have?  And how much can human memory rely on, or be relied on, you see?  So, my father didn't write this book.  So when he died, and then my older brother [Lawrence B. Akainyah] died, I made it my mission because I remember being told as a youngster who survives when we are gone?  Well, I've survived, so I'm going to make manifest that book that my father did not write, and that is the title, 'The World I Left Behind' [ph.].  And then finally, from a creative standpoint, painting, I hope that many of these paintings end up in museums--not only in the United States, but worldwide.  But true to form, my greatest painting accomplishment is in the form of the movement of dualism--that they will chronicle in the annals that okay, once Monet [Claude Monet] came about and created impressionism, Picasso [Pablo Picasso] came about and created cubism, and, humbly, Akainyah [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah] came about from Africa and entered Ghana and Africa, and black people's commentary, and input into the dialogue or the narrative in art history, and this is called dualism, and that will be my greatest contribution.  So, music, literature and, and art, and that's the anthems, the books and, and the movement, dualism.
Story_ID: 531256
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not talked about, or asked you, that you wanna raise befo- before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well, we've been talking from two, three o'clock; it's now seven o'clock, so I think you've acqui- you've, you've, you've covered quite a bit.  But if there is something there, you can come back later, you're more than welcome to it; I can't remember anything else.  I think it's fine.
Speaker 1: Well, the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered with three things.  Number one, that he was the African who did everything possible to explain Africa to the American audience because I still think that there is a huge gap and a deficit in understanding the continent.  This is not just a, a continent which is three times the size of the United States; it's not just the country Ghana that produced the most per capita of any African nation of educated people; this is not just a country or the tribe he comes from, the Nzemas, that incubated the first black Ph.D. from any European university; these kinds of things is not that important, but their--just understanding Africa, it's a big deficit, and I've been doing that since I've been here as a student.  I would like to be remembered for that, number one.  Number two, the children that I have [Lauren Akainyah, Brittanie Akainyah and Samuel Akainyah II], including the family--my wife [Kim Akainyah]--I'm trying very hard to leave back here the Nzema ethical values: name, legacy, estate.  Name, because I've married; I've bore children, they carry my father [Alfred Akainyah], my forbearers' last name, and I'm going to educate them well so that when I leave, or bid farewell to this land, they will be--what do you call it--respected human beings who'll make a contribution, civic or otherwise, to the community that they live in, and, and that they cannot just succeed just going to school, getting educated, having a career, and taking care of their families, but they have to give back to the community that made them.  And then the third, is on my own sense of philanthropy and, and, and, and commitment.  That you die an Nzema, and you go into the annals as an ancestor only if you took good care of the people immediately around you, but you also made some contribution to the community that you came from.  And it is the reason that I accepted a post to teach at Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois] to give back to the community that gave me the opportunity to thrive over time and circumstances.  I did come to Englewood [Chicago, Illinois] and Auburn Gresham [Chicago, Illinois], because this is where the Mullins family lived.  And I went to St. Sabina Church [Chicago, Illinois].  I met Michael Pfleger.  This is where I got married, and this is where all, all of it began.  So it is only fitting to come back to that school.  And next year, my aim is to open up a scholarship fund in St. Sabina Church in memory of my in-laws [Jean Mullins and David Mullins], and administered by my wife, is what our contribution is, and then also to have a, a scholarship fund in Kennedy-King College for my father's name--not mine--but to give back to the community.  So this is it (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you so much.
Speaker 2: Oh, it is my pleasure; it's been my pleasure, it's been my pleasure.
Story_ID: 531257
Speaker 1: I can't remember what, what--(laughter) well, I had just been accepted to graduate school, and--
Speaker 2: About 1979 I guess?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, '79 [1979] was undergraduate; I'm talking about graduate school, so it was like 1987 or '86 [1986], I'd just been accepted to graduate school.  So, I was going out for my final interview at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Now, that picture was taken September 1st, 1978--that I remember--with all my friends at the university of Ghana Republic Hall [Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana].  I am the only one in the blue jeans because they were sent to me as a gift by the American family [Jean Mullins and David Mullins], and it was right before I left Ghana.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: The athletic game I enjoyed very much was badminton, and it wasn't recreational; we played tournament badminton from one university to the other, one country to the other, and I was part of the university badminton team.  This is Republic Hall in the main courtyard, and this is where I played badminton.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a lovely picture of Kim [Kim Akainyah] and myself, the first outing that we ever made.  She had invited me to escort her to her high school prom, and I'd been in the country for, I believe, less than a year or so.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a portrait of the most important man in my life at the time when I was living in Ghana.  This is my older brother Lawrence B. Akainyah, he's a very distinguished lawyer and a professor of law.  I had come home with him; he picked me up from my university, we were coming home.  He had just returned from a trial in court, so I had my camera and I shot a picture of him walking towards the home.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's a portrait of my father [Alfred Akainyah] right in the center, with some very important Ghanaian men.  This was during my father's wedding to his, his step- I mean his wife, my stepmother Aunt Victoria Akainyah [ph.].  So that's my dad, the central figure in the middle.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's our home in Kumasi [Ghana], and that's Lawrence, my older brother, standing in front of his garage.
Speaker 1: That's my mother [Sabina Yorke] in the years when she was a student at St. Monica's Training College [St. Monica's Teacher Training College, Mampong, Ghana] studying to be a teacher.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is one of my happiest moments because the nuns corrupted my sister and I.  We loved pastries so much, so if they asked us to do any chores, we did; if they wanted me to play the piano, I did; whatever it took.  But on weekends, they baked cake and served us tea, so this is my sister and I in the countryside.  Even when we went to the village, we had been so accustomed to having pastries and tea even at four o'clock in the afternoon.
Speaker 2: And my love of learning began very early in life as I tried to write and read.  This was my mother, and that's me as a little child, while I was ill with my grandmother--with my grandparents but my, my mother came, and here I was writing to show my mother what I'd learned.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: Oh, I must have been less than three years old; four years maybe.  Yeah, this--we're talking probably 1959 or 1960, thereabout.
Speaker 1: This was exactly one year after I had arrived in Chicago [Illinois], still skinny, and the Ghanaian students in this city not amounting to maybe thirty, we decided to have a formal dinner, and I was delivering a speech then to the students.
Speaker 2: One of my favorite pictures.  This was the wedding ceremony between Kim and myself.  We had become Mr. and Mrs. Akainyah, and right in front of St. Sabina Church [Chicago, Illinois] where Father Michael Pfleger had just married us.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?  This is 19-
Speaker 2: This was 1987 or '86 [1986]--'87 [1987], I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is this the same?
Speaker 2: And that's a close-up of, of, of our ceremony--I mean of our, of our wedding.  We had just come out of the church and looking at many people.  That church had a wonderful architectural gothic treatment.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right there at (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hm (laughter).
Speaker 1: If I die tomorrow, Larry [Larry Crowe], this is what I'll be leaving behind--my wife and those three children.  This is my family.  My daughter Brittanie [Brittanie Akainyah] in the blue shirt, my daughter Lauren [Lauren Akainyah] in the white shirt, and my son [Samuel Akainyah II] in the striped tie.  And (unclear) the far left is the president of Kennedy-King College [Chicago, Illinois].  We were at a fundraiser for the college.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And that's all of us at home.  It's a few years back, so the two girls in the blue, and then Kim and, and myself and Sam in the multicolored shirts.
Speaker 1: In 1993, I was celebrated as the artist of the year, or so.  Marshall Fields [Marshall Field and Company], a store that I worked while I was a student, hosted a reception for me at the store, and that's my family attending then, so my son is a little one in my arms.
Speaker 2: This is Kim and myself today, Mr. and Mrs. Akainyah, yes.
Speaker 1: This is a very, very important picture.  This is where it all began.  That little girl who doesn't look too happy to the left is my mother at age eight; she's barefooted, and it shows the impoverished state of her family amid economic impoverishment, because her sister to the right is wearing white shoes, and when she outgrew the shoes, it will be passed on to my mother, and then she will get new shoes.  But this is where I learned so much humility from my mother's part of the family as much as I learned so much of my ambition from my father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: What town is this in?
Speaker 2: This is in Saltpond [Ghana].
Speaker 1: Saltpond.
Speaker 2: Yes, and you may not be able to notice it, but you notice my, yeah--
Speaker 1: This is my older brother Lawrence, as a respected lawyer and a private confidant of the king of the Ashanti tribe, Otumfuo Opoku Ware [Opoku Ware II].  My brother prepared this chief to take the bar exam and they remained friends.
Speaker 2: If you will count one, two, three, four from the left, that's my mother sitting there as one of the board of--members--board of trustees for the then Kwame Nkrumah Secondary School [Kumasi High School] in Ghana [Kumasi, Ghana].
Speaker 1: This is the all-girls St. Monica's British-style boarding school [St. Monica's School, Mampong, Ghana] established by the British nuns, and somewhere in the middle is a lady in the black and white polka-dot dress, the newly-appointed headmistress of the school, that's my mother.  And those are part of the graduating class for her, and that's part of St. Monica's.  Notice the old colonial architecture there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: We were preparing for an unveiling of a major work of art to salute the Democratic Convention [1996 Democratic National Convention] in Chicago.  That's Mr. Bowen [Charles Bowen], deputy--executive assistant to the mayor [Richard M. Daley], and [HistoryMaker] Hermene Hartman, publisher of N'DIGO.  The artwork is what's covered with the silk in the background there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Those are the executive photographs for the archives in Ghana, the official photograph of my mother as superintendent for the minister of education in Ghana, the board of education, as a superintendent.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yes, this is the official photograph, official photograph of my father with the Ghana judicial service as he's been appointed to serve on the Supreme Court of the country [Supreme Court of Ghana].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  This is during the, the prayer service right before the Democratic Convention.  They had all the different religions: Buddhist, Muslim, Christian, Apostolic, all of that.  And Al Gore came to deliver the keynote speech right before the Democratic Convention conducted in Chicago.  It was in--that's, that's my painting, the 'Leading Light' [Samuel Akainyah].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was me.  I don't know if I was age six thereabout, but I refused to go to church if I was not wearing a suit looking like my father.  And my mother says, old habits die hard.  I still love dark navy blue suits and white shirt, as much as I am even today, you know?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And I adored my sister, so here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh this is the one you tried to parachute off--
Speaker 1: Exactly, so here are the two of us (laughter).  I told you that story, didn't I?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: So that's my sister and I coming back from church service.
Speaker 2: She thought you were dead, right?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes.  "Kwame [HistoryMaker Samuel Akainyah] died, Mommy," she said.
Speaker 2: And that's the nun who educated my mother--Sister Monica.  This is the British nun who was responsible for my mother's education.
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Sister Monica.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Sure.  So, this is my mother in the middle, and those are the first batch of students for St. Monica's all-girls British-style boarding school in Ghana.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And, over here it's a picture of Kwame--yes, it's Kwame Nkrumah and the men who were all part of achieving independence for Ghana.  They've been immortalized on the country's currency, but so much of what informs my ambition and my will came from Kwame Nkrumah, the one whose head is at the top closest to the Bank of Ghana.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is called the big six.  These are the six men who were instrumental in helping to bring Ghana to an independent republic.  And Kwame Nkrumah is the one closest to the Bank of Ghana text--he's a relative.  He inspired me the most.
Speaker 1: Is Danquah [Joseph Boakye Danquah] on this?
Speaker 2: Danquah to the, to the bottom right, and Obetsebi-Lamptey [Emmanuel Obetsebi-Lamptey], including Ako-Adjei [Ebenezer Ako-Adjei] and the rest; all of them.
