Story_ID: 120902
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, and I am the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is Knowlton Atterbeary, and that is K-N-O-W-L-T-O-N, A-T-T-E-R-B-E-A-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell us anything about the origin of your name?
Speaker 2: It's difficult.  Depending on what circles one is in I should say, and the origin is British and I'm clearly not British.  My ancestry is 100 percent North American, United States based, and I can trace some of it back to some of the states, but certainly not beyond that.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in [September 18] 1946.  As you know, Philadelphia is a Quaker city, and it was very friendly to my grandparents and that's why they moved there oh in the '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a management consultant and I own and operate a professional technical services firm.  That firm is twenty-two years old and it's located in Maryland, and our principal client is the federal government and state agencies.  We are in the work force development business, the management consulting business and the information operations area.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is the date?
Speaker 2: Fifth, 2003.  Let me do that again.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in Silver Spring, Maryland and today is July 25, 2003.
Story_ID: 120903
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five 'People' Magazine-ish type questions, believe it or not, that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Alright.
Speaker 1: They only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is, I'm gonna think about this because I've got several, but the short answer is peas.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Can I do that again, 'cause I just told a lie.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright yes.  Sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I've got several.  My favorite food is beef.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a lame answer, but I'll go with it.
Speaker 1: What is it with the peas though, different kinds of peas?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite food (laughter). What's (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE) Roast beef.
Speaker 2: Roast beef, that's a good one.  I like that (unclear).
Speaker 1: Alright, now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is brown.
Speaker 1: Time of the year?
Speaker 2: Time of the year is winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And lastly, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't have a favorite phrase or saying, but I do find it somewhat spiritual in a very short phrase that I've--that one can read in the Bible and that is, and I quote "the meek shall inherit the earth."
Story_ID: 120904
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, well I am going to ask you some questions about your family.  I am going to start with your mother's side of the family and then your father's side of the family.  So I am not going to leave anyone out but I I'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Ida Marie Wright, and that is W-R-I-G-H-T.  She was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania in 1923.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was--what do you know about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace things?
Speaker 2: Well, her mother Eva Lou Haugabook was born in Albany, Georgia and I believe she was born in 1903.
Speaker 1: Now you know you have to spell that for us, Haugabook.
Speaker 2: I'm gonna have to look that up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, go on, it's on the biographical material.
Speaker 2: It on the biographical material.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was born in as I said in 1903.  Interesting enough I don't know much about her in her youth but she did go to Howard University High School in a business and clerical curriculum.  I'm a little fuzzy on the dates, but I assume that she was there when she was sixteen or seventeen years old.
Speaker 1: So in 19 teens?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kind of name is Haugabook?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I really don't know.  I've not been able to find the Haugabook family.  I do--I've just recently learned that in the year 2002 in Georgia there was a reunion of the Haugabook clan, and they came from Georgia, they came from California and they also came from the state of Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Her original home was Albany, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Albany, Georgia.  That's her place of birth.
Speaker 1: Alright, okay.  Are there any stories passed down through her side of the family about life in the nineteenth century during slavery or during reconstruction or if they were free do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have much information with regard to that side of the family.  I just know that as a child--as I said, as a child she was educated in Washington, D.C. at Howard University High School.  She met my grandfather in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and she married a Roger Wright, that's W-R-I-G-H-T.  He was born and raised in Philadelphia and became a successful funeral undertaker, and unfortunately he died in 1953, and again he didn't have any brothers or sisters, and between the two of them they had two children; my mother Ida and her sister, Miriam, who is now Miriam Turner who lives in Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you know much about your grandmother's mother, your great grandmother or her sister?
Speaker 2: I only know that my grandmother had two brothers, and as a youth I met them only a few times in the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania area, and I am really a little fuzzy on their first names.  I don't know much about that side of my family.
Speaker 1: Okay, but they were fairly well off.  Is that what you said you--? (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Well, I would assume that.  Here you have an African American woman who is born in Albany, Georgia and somehow ends up going to Howard University High School, and marries into a family that has the wherewithal to create a funeral parlor.  So unfortunately that is all I know about them.
Story_ID: 120905
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Tell us about your mother [Ida Marie Wright].  What was life like for her growing up you know in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I don't think it would be too untypical of a middle-class black family in Philadelphia during the 1930s and the 1940s.  She went to West Chester State Teachers College [West Chester, Pennsylvania] and became an educator.  Married in her early twenties to a fellow that was born in South-Columbia, South Carolina, and then of meager background, and then he went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and became a dentist.  Her family was a family that many died very young and my mother and her sister are pretty much the only two that really remain.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what's your mother's personality like?
Speaker 2: Well, as an educator she's one, very disciplined, two, very thoughtful and I'd say very concerned and committed even to this day to the wellbeing of her two children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are you very close to your mother?
Speaker 2: I'd say so, I mean it's hard you know in an interview situation it's a little difficult to define what that means, but as a child had a very warm and loving and nurturing kind of development or existence.
Story_ID: 120906
Speaker 1: Okay, let me ask about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His name was the same as mine. I happen to be a junior.  His is Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr.  He was born in Columbia, South Carolina in the month of March, actually March 7, 1921.  His mother was a slave.  His father was a slave, and that is an interesting story.  I'll come back to that, and he was pretty much raised on a farm.  He got his elementary education in the south and whatever schools were made available for blacks, but then they moved to New Jersey and he went to a boarding school through the efforts of my grandmother to get him supported to go to this boarding school, and subsequently went to a university and became a dentist.  My grandfather actually was an overseer on a plantation in South Carolina.  Below Columbia is a place called Denmark.  In Denmark it is Bamberg and there was a plantation run by a Mr. or General [Francis M.] Bamberg at the time.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that name?
Speaker 2: B-A-M-B-U-R-G [sic] I would imagine, and on that plantation my great grandfather whose name was Henry Arterbury, and let me spell that for you A-R-T-E-R-B-U-R-Y.  He worked on the plantation and having been a senior person or an older person he had some level of responsibility and as I said my grandfather worked for him in providing some oversight to other workers on the plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where he met my grandmother and she was married at the age of sixteen, and he was I would imagine probably seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories from that side of the family passed down about events on that plantation or after the Civil War, or--?
Speaker 2: The stories that have been shared with me are really stories of the life and existence of other family members.  For example, my grandmother had two other sisters.  One Portia, and the other Arnelle [ph.] and their mother was Hattie.  Her maiden name was--actually her married name was Rae, Hattie Rae and the three girls and the mother all supported themselves on the farm.
Story_ID: 120907
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what was your father [Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr.] like and you said he went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] to dental school.  Is that where --?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to high school at Bordentown Military Academy which is in New Jersey, in Bordentown, New Jersey not too far outside of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  My grandmother was able to get him into that school as a result of her persistence that he receive a quality education, an education that he couldn't receive in the Philadelphia Public School system.  As a matter of fact, the years before that she insisted, and got him admitted to I believe it is called the Henry Woods Elementary School in Philadelphia and he was the first black child to go to that school.  Nevertheless, she was a very persistent and demanding woman.  She got him in that school and with a bright education and the right development and coaching, he went on to Howard University--well actually first he went to Virginia State University [Petersburg, Virginia] to get his BS degree and then to Howard University to get a degree in dentistry.
Speaker 1: Okay now, her persistence wasn't just leveled against financial circumstances, it was also probably leveled against racial circumstances too.  Was this school like an integrated school that he ended up going to, this Bordentown Academy?
Speaker 2: Bordentown was very much--very much of a black academy.
Speaker 1: Oh, it was?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Very much so to the best of my knowledge and it is through his experience there that my father met other young men of which became long-time friends of his and subsequently mine.  I found it quite interesting that as a teenager at get-togethers in our home, we would have his music professor from that time would join us in celebrating whatever we were recognizing or anyone of his other college instructors or high school instructors I should say, and I find that to be - it's still an unusual experience because I didn't even experience that in my educational past, but she was very persistent in wanting him to have that education and they were--certainly weren't in a position where they can afford it.  That wasn't the case at all and--.
Speaker 1: It sounds like an unusual place, a black military academy and--.
Speaker 2: Well, let's not get it confused because it wasn't a military academy. It was a--it had that title and the young men dressed in military uniforms, but it wasn't affiliated with what we know today as being the [U.S.] Military system and military services.  Secondly, somewhere around 19--late 1950s early 1960s, the school was disbanded and for what reasons I am not sure, and its legacy doesn't continue.
Story_ID: 120908
Speaker 1: Tell me about growing up?  Can you give us some idea of the neighborhood you lived in?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] but I actually spent most of my formative years in Bucks County, Pennsylvania which was a rural area.  It was a--it was not an integrated area.  Actually, I was the only kid of color in my elementary school.  So for the first six years there were no other African American or black students in my school.  My father was a dentist at the time and most of the patients that he had in this community were--he had an integrated practice, out of you know very joyous, trouble free and quite frankly youth and development, and--.
Speaker 1: Reflect back and give us some ideas of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Oh, being a rural area there are lots of fields, there are lots of woods, didn't live far from a river, spent a lot of time in the river and the crick as they use to call it.  Swimming and boating and those kinds of things; well, let me say swimming and rafting, we didn't have any boats.  Did a lot of hunting, did some trapping of muskrat and beaver and those kind of things.  The school was not a challenge to me.  I don't think it was too terribly difficult.  The course offerings were fairly straight forward, I mean sciences and the mathematic and English and history and those kinds of things.  Being the only black kid in town the social outlets were somewhat limited and I spent most of my social development in Philadelphia City Proper with other family cousins and the like.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your nuclear family consists of your mother [Ida Marie Wright] and father [Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr.] and you and your--?
Speaker 2: Sister.
Speaker 1: Your sister, okay and no other relatives lived with your anything like that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, not at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you, an only family in this--is it Buck Town?
Speaker 2: Bucks County.  Actually, the town was Croydon, Pennsylvania and what happened was that my father purchased an acre of land from another black dentist who had no children who was living in that community, and actually that same black dentist, Dr. Wesley Mount sold an acre of land to my father, another acre of land to another--to a Dr. Brisbane [ph.] who was also a dentist, but never really lived in Croydon, and in addition to that there was another black physician, Dr. McGruder [ph.] who actually had two kids, that lived in that region but not in that community, and I still don't know how and why Dr. Wesley Mount with roots in the South and being educated at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] ended up in Croydon, Pennsylvania with--he had thirteen acres of land and a farm and some other things.
Story_ID: 120909
Speaker 1: So you said growing up was relatively carefree, and school was not a problem or anything?  Do you remember teachers or other students that particularly stand out in your mind now when you reflect on school?
Speaker 2: I can look back at the whole twelve years and there are really two teachers that I remember that are worth noting.  One was my first black teacher, Mrs. Harris, who taught English in tenth grade, and appeared to be very much concerned with my development and my attention to class activities and called me to the carpet on one or more occasions and I pretty much asked her "well, why are you picking on me", and for the first time a teacher told me the fact that she was really concerned that I learned as much as I could in this class and not just going through the motions.  So I will remember her.  The other was a--more of a negative experience when a--this was probably about the same period of time tenth grade, ninth grade class, it was a history class as opposed to the English class and we had a white male instructor describing things that have occurred during the Civil War and with two black males in the class and in his excitement talking about the war and its purpose and its objective used the word "nigger" as opposed to "negro" and that seemed to cause quite a stir in the classroom at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, "stir" who was "stirred" I mean you know (unclear)?
Speaker 2: The two of us were stirred and quite frankly there wasn't a lot of racial awareness in this community just to put it bluntly, so and there was not a lot of name calling, you know, I really didn't know the difference between White people until I went away to school quite frankly to college.  I mean, their ancestry, whether it Italian, German or Polish, whatever the case were, were never really exemplified or glorified.  It was kind of always in the background.  The same way with faith--whether it was--and the only thing we knew at the time was Christian and Jewish.  It was all in the background, so the only thing that was different for me was that I was a different color than everybody else and that is what I dealt with and that I was I fed on, but everybody else as far as I was concerned was pretty much the same.
Speaker 1: So, did you and the other young man say something about (unclear)?
Speaker 2: We said something to--the other fellow's name was Billy or William Elder.  I've since lost touch with him.  He was actually, he was a prominent high school athlete, and we both challenged the instructor on what he said, and claimed that he said the word that he denied, and some of the other classmates insisted that he used the derogatory term and then we took it to the school administration and he ended up getting several days of leave, and that was pretty much the end of the incident.  You know, I said something earlier and it just dawned on me when I was talking about this, but I did have a similar situation in one of the summer recreational programs, and that was probably in my fifth or sixth grade time period, and I was attending a public school summer recreation program and it was the first week, the aide reminded everybody that "tomorrow bring your bathing suits and your towels, we're going swimming", and as everybody was breaking to leave the play area and go home for the day, she called my name and wanted to speak to me and I went over and I said, you know, "what do you want", and she said "tomorrow we are all going swimming but you can't go", and I said "well what do you mean, you can't go", and she said "colored kids can't go", and I gotta tell you I had no idea what that meant until I got home.
Speaker 1: Now how old were you at the time?
Speaker 2: I think I was about nine years old, yeah that's about right, nine or somewhere around there, and this was all new to me.  I gotta tell you this was an area--a community where--that wasn't really sensitive to differences in race and culture and heritage and that kind of stuff, but nevertheless this occurred.  So I took the issue home and it just so happened at that time my father [Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr.] was ill and he was home and I brought this information to him and he immediately got out of his bed, got on the phone to the superintendent of schools, had an appointment with him the next day, early in the morning and I am here to tell you that nobody went swimming that day, nobody; and the next week when we went swimming I was included in the group and we all went and I guess to some degree integrated this pool, and that pool was in Andalusia, Pennsylvania, which is a small community between Philadelphia and Bristol, Pennsylvania.  It still exists.
Story_ID: 120910
Speaker 1: Okay, so prior to that time--so your parents [Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr. and Ida Marie Wright] really didn't discuss race with you, in terms of who you all were and what it meant to be--I guess then they would say "negro" or "colored" in the United States then, what--?
Speaker 2: No, I had--we had--I had plenty interaction with other blacks through families in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and quite frankly most of our weekends or certainly two out of the four weekends of the month we would travel to my family friends--excuse me--my parent's friends.  They were either in New Jersey or New York, and I had plenty opportunity to, you know, experience black culture, but to answer your question directly we very rarely had any conversations about the black and the white situation in the United States.  I think, needless to say both of my parents experienced it at a very active level, and as I just mentioned my father was very proactive in making sure that his kids did not have to experience the kinds of denials and the kinds of prejudices that he experienced.
Story_ID: 120911
Speaker 1: Well tell me about high school.  You went to high school at--?
Speaker 2: Went to high school in Bucks County, Pennsylvania, public high school.  It was called Delhaas [High School, Bristol, Pennsylvania].  My graduating class was about 333 students.  I graduated on a warm day in June, the fourth to be exact [June 4, 1964].  I took an academic, or what was called at that time a "college prep curriculum".  I was active and actually a varsity swimmer, a varsity football player and a varsity soccer player, and was just pretty active in student government as well.
Speaker 1: And what position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Football I was a half-back.  I was probably the lightest half-back in the entire league but I could run very quickly.
Speaker 1: Right, (simultaneous laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: I figured you had to be quick--.
Speaker 2: And as well as the track team if I didn't mention that.  Yeah, so I was pretty active in sports and somewhat active in student government, and I wouldn't say I was a real popular kid but I just kind of kept busy.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you have--what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  You know, I don't know that I had favorite subjects.  I think the things that I enjoyed doing at the time--at that time in my life--I enjoyed the sciences.  Biology was always fun and interesting and you know whether the lab work I always found that to be just imaginative, you know.  Chemistry, a little more challenging, but I found it interesting, again in the lab.  The arts and the humanities and the letters are things that never really stimulated me, not until later study, later work, but in high school it was just sciences.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how was your social life in high school?  Were there other black students there by the time you got to high school?
Speaker 2: By the time I went to high school--I left the elementary school in our community and I went to a regional high school, and in a regional high school there were certainly other blacks and other races actually, and I would just guess that the school was maybe, maybe 20 percent black overall, and then it was at the high school level where I certainly was able to expand my social circle, if it were, and interact with people I had more things in common with.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright so did they have like a prom and all that sort of thing in the school?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't attend my prom and I don't know--it probably wasn't as a result of not having a date per se, but it really had to do with my level of interest in high school at that time.  I was--it was an okay experience, but I was anxious to move on and do something that was a little more challenging, and I guess one way to rebel at the time was to not participate and I think it was probably--my last year of playing football was in eleventh grade and I started to kind of disengage when I got into the last grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120912
Speaker 1: We were talking about high school [Delhaas High School, Bristol, Pennsylvania], and you said you didn't go to your prom and you were kind of anxious to get out of high school.
Speaker 2: Well, I was.  I mean as I said, it was a--there were very few blacks in the community and by the time I've got to that age I was interested in learning much more about the world because it seemed to me at that point that I was somewhat different than everybody else, and the few people that were around me were different and I wanted to see how exactly we all fit into this whole -- this whole much larger picture.  So in the twelfth grade I started to disengage from being extremely active in student government and sports to not so active and as a part of that rebellion, decided not to participate in my prom.  As a matter of fact, I remember the date of my graduation, June 4, 1964.  I did not go back to that community until the twentieth anniversary of that graduating class.  So that was 1984.
Speaker 1: So you didn't go back to the community until for twenty years?
Speaker 2: That's correct because months after I graduated my family, including my sister they moved into the City of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  My sister had one year to go at the Philadelphia High School for Girls.  My father's [Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr.'s] office was in Philadelphia.  My mother [Ida Marie Wright] was an educator in the Philadelphia Public School system.  So that made it much more convenient for them.  It's only recently, probably in the year 2000 we finally sold that property in that community.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright, okay.  So when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, did you know exactly what you wanted to do with the rest of your life?
Speaker 2: Didn't have a clue.  Didn't have a clue.  My first instinct was to want to get a job and buy a motorcycle and work in what's called the Fairless Hills Pennsylvania Steel Mill, because that was a great job for anybody who graduated from that high school, and my father after I explained that to him, he was adamant that I was definitely not going to work.  I was going to go to college and he asked me just to pick one, he didn't really care what the criteria were, and he preferred me to go to a school that was well away from the home so I could learn how to grow up and mature on my own.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, well, what did you end up choosing?
Speaker 2: I ended up selecting Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Why Michigan State?
Speaker 2: No real reason to be really frank and honest with you.  I knew of one friend of mine in Philadelphia, a fellow by the name of Michael Ashburn who is currently an attorney on the West Coast today.  Michael went to Michigan State and I thought it was a great place to go.  The other local schools in the State of Pennsylvania I received partial scholarships to, including Howard University [Washington, D.C.] by the way, but as the family discussed it we thought it would be in my best overall interest to travel out to Michigan and go to a Big Ten [athletic conference] university.
Story_ID: 120913
Speaker 1: Okay, in 1964, now do you have a sense of the climate of the country in '64?
Speaker 2: Not as a high school student, but certainly as a college freshman in a matter of months.  In a matter of months coming from a very non-political sterile rural community into a campus [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] that has thirty-six thousand residential students from all over the United States and dozens of countries, I quickly became aware that there is a world out here and there is chaos and a lot of crisis in the world.
Speaker 1: Now that summer of 1964, the summer you graduated were one of the most I guess chaotic and--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And also active for college students everywhere in the United States.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Thousands of college students volunteered for SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and the Civil Rights Movement in Mississippi, and others worked in the North and the [1964] Democratic Convention [in Atlantic City, New Jersey] was that August with Fannie [Lou Hamer] who came and testified, the Dixiecrats [Southern Democrats] walking out of the Convention, and--did you--all that was going on as you were going to school.
Speaker 2: As I was entering school.  As a matter of fact I believe it was the month of August of 1993, my father [Knowlton R. Atterbeary, Sr.] and I participated in the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: 1963, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the year before that and that may have been--.
Speaker 1: That's a--tell us about that now, that's something that really--.
Speaker 2: Well, that may have been part of my awakening if you will, when that having to help me shape my attitudes and my behavior my last year of high school.  I mean it was a phenomenal experience certainly for somebody of my age, not even the age of seventeen.  There were more black people than I've ever seen in one place in my life.  We journeyed down from Philadelphia actually to the home of a Dr. Mitchell in Washington, D.C.  Again, Dr. Mitchell was an instructor of my father when he was in dental school at Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and you can see the picture here.  We had the same relationship with him and his instructors in high school.  Here again, his instructors in dental school, well they sheltered us, my father and I for one or two evenings and then the next day as a group we participated in the march activities.  Again, much of the message was clear but a lot of the dynamics of the group, the dynamics of the assembly and all the happenings that were going on were really overwhelming for me as they were for most people at that time, cause it was the first time we had such an assembly of people, let alone black Americans at one point at one time up to that point.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it seemed like it really meant a chance to learn a lot staying with your father's instructor, seeing the generations and involvement of different generations in this movement.  It must have had a profound impact on you.
Speaker 2: Well, it had an impact and I think what I remember primarily was the fact that they themselves reminisced and reflected on the previous 40 or 50 years of their lives in terms of what they've experienced and what they've been able to accomplish and where in fact we as a race have come to that point in time, and there was a resounding fact that the progress, while steady, had been significantly limited up to that point in 1963, and I think if I was asked that question where do we stand in 2003, I think we still got a long way to go, but there has been some progress in some areas.
Speaker 1: What were the elders that you associated with--what did they think about [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean proud, extremely positive, supportive, thought he was an extremely articulate and sincere spokesman, a great strategist, and as you know in most homes at the time, I mean Dr. King's picture hanged at the same height as the Lord Jesus Christ.
Story_ID: 120914
Speaker 1: All right, so in 1964 you arrived in East Lansing right, in Michigan?
Speaker 2: Absolutely right. I did.
Speaker 1: To Michigan State University?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it a Big Ten school, big time--a lot of black athletes at the school anyway.
Speaker 2: There were.
Speaker 1: So how did you fit in at Michigan State?
Speaker 2: I assimilated slowly.  Again, it is overwhelming.  First person I met on campus ironically was an African American brother from Detroit, Michigan, a fellow by the name of Sterling Armstrong, who happened to be a freshmen and athlete at the school.  I very quickly realized that there was safety and protection in numbers and certainly sought out the camaraderie and the friendship of as many African Americans students as I could.  I think at that time it may have been thirty-nine thousand students on campus.  No one seems to know for sure, but there may have been about five to seven hundred African American students living on campus.
Speaker 1: Had--did the black community have an organized campus life with black parties and sororities and--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Michigan State University had I guess if we can talk in terms of a spectrum, they had most of the major sororities and fraternities were represented and certainly all had been established on the campus prior to my arrival.  The campus had an extremely active political group, I forget the exact title of the group's name but "Blacks for Social Action" were the black student association I believe was the formal name, and it had relationships and activities jointly with Students for a Democratic Society the "SDS" and the other popular '60s [1960s] activist organizations, and worked or lobbied or rallied in support and on behalf of anti-Vietnam activities, war activities, civil rights activities, hunger initiatives, most of which were domestic in nature as well as some of the Pan African concerns that people were involved in at the time.
Speaker 1: Ok, 1964 is also a launch of the [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson Great Society Program.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, programs like Model Cities, [Federal] Job Corps and those kinds of things were being launched.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Were you aware of that sort of thing when you were in school?
Speaker 2: I wasn't aware of the program--ironically I wasn't aware of those programs at that time, but the impact of scholarships and student grants and those things really started to materialize in my latter years as an undergraduate and certainly in my years as a graduate student at Michigan State University, but in my latter years I can look back and see that some of the students that graduated were moving to major metropolitan areas being employed by state and city governments in some of the new housing programs and work-in-training programs, education programs and other domestic programs designed to make life better for urban America, but on the campus itself, what I was seeing directly was an increase in student aid and scholarships and fellowship dollars as a result of the new era of legislation.
Story_ID: 120915
Speaker 1: Were there any black faculty and staff that you remember that were particularly helpful to you or active on the campus?
Speaker 2: There were several.  I mean Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan] immediately upon my graduation had a black president.  His name was Dr. [Clifton R.] Wharton [Jr.], and there were a number of blacks in non-dean positions.  The one that comes to mind who was very effective and very popular was a Dr. Robert Green, and Dr. Green headed up a college of urban studies and created a network of assistants to black students, not only through educational offerings, but also in terms of mentorships and other sessions that helped students assimilate into university life, and he performed that function effectively for any number of years.  I think even subsequent to that period of time, there was and may still be a director, or maybe it is called a Regent at the university, but a--one of the board of trustees is also African American, that would be Joel Ferguson out of Lansing Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now, how deeply involved did you get in campus life in terms of the black student association or fraternities and sororities and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: I mean I got involved in both of those things and not in a leadership way but as a member and an active participant.  I joined the Omega Psi Phi Fraternity in 1996 [sic, 1966] and that would be Sigma Chapter at Michigan State University in East Lansing, Michigan, and I crossed with a line that totaled four individuals.  The active roster of the fraternity in comparison to Historically Black schools [Historically Black Colleges and Universities, HBCU] was relatively small.  I think our active roster around that time was approximately thirty, thirty-five brothers.  With regard to--and that was primarily a social and civic outlet from campus life.  The involvement in some of the student activities having to do with social issues at the time, they were limited to the Black Student Association, again as a participant and not as a member.  There was a limited amount of active rallying and traveling to other universities to provide support and participate in some of their activities as well.
Story_ID: 120916
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what academic coursework were you attracted by (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well unlike high school where I found the science curriculum to be of interest, I found the business interest more accustomed to my way of thinking and my interest while in college and I had a fairly unique undergraduate curriculum which was a combination of social science, economics and computer science.  I was introduced to computer science for the first time, and I found it somewhat fascinating that you can take mathematics and technology and wrap them together and predict conclusions to social problems, and social events which was part of my problem because everybody else on this university's [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] campus that was studying computer science was into Boolean logic and scientific equations and those kinds of things and I had no interest in that.  I really wanted to harness the power of computation and the power of mathematics and statistics and forecast and predict outcomes of things that--for social experiments primarily, and that interest quite frankly led me to a job in the Computer Institute of Social Science Research.
Speaker 1: Now that is a little later, but I just (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's at graduate school--.
Speaker 1: But--.
Speaker 2: That was before graduation.  Actually, I'm sorry that was a graduate student job.  Yeah, okay, right.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about--what was computer learning like in 1965--?
Speaker 2: 1966.
Speaker 1: You know, I know but I want you to--?
Speaker 2: Well, it was--in my case there were really two languages.  One was called FORTRAN and one was COBOL.  The FORTRAN language was the language that one started with and one gained the fundamentals of understanding the relationship between the language and the machine and understanding the basic elements of logic so you can pose "yes" and "no" and "true and false" type questions to arrive at a solution.  There was lots of lab work.  The equipment was--I won't say a vacuum tube but it was much more mechanical than it ever was or ever is today, punch cards, sorters for cards--.
Speaker 1: Computer students always had a stack of cards with them in school.
Speaker 2: Oh, well you'd wear--you'd carry your stack of cards in your shirt pocket and they--you would know that you are part of that computing fraternity.  That's exactly what they did.  The class itself was primarily mathematicians and scientists, primarily, and there weren't a lot of layers of programming instruction.  There were, you know, Basic Elementary Expert, but it was in FORTRAN and that's what it is today.  Whereas, if you look at like the applications available in the typical office environment today, these applications are written in a variety of different languages that most of us users have no clue of what they are.  We are more familiar with the application or the answer than the underlying program and logic, but FORTRAN was the language of choice.  Punch cards, mechanical computing equipment was the task of the day.  Following that--and again that was just one element of my curriculum.  The other element was economics and that's because I had this interest in business and with the computer science and the economics, and I believe the third was social science I believe and that's because my major was in that college, and I had to have that major structured in that fashion because again I did not want to pursue a computer science degree which is primarily scientific and when I explained that to the College of Social Science and the College of Business they agreed on this divisional sociology degree or course of study that ended in degree, and by the way, today, is a recognized published, legitimate degree from Michigan State University.  So I was one of the few to pioneer that.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Unknowingly, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 120917
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the social questions that you wanted to answer through computer technology?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time there were as we were talking, there was a lot of strife going on throughout the country and there needed to be formulation of policy decisions that would ultimately affect the lives of primarily people of color in cities, and the information that people needed had to do with employment, unemployment, wages, information on housing statistics which would be ownership and income numbers.  So I thought it was important to be able to attempt to assemble that kind of information in what we know today as varying databases, so researchers and analysts can go through it and help formulate positive and worthwhile recommendations that affect future policy in urban America and throughout the country.
Speaker 1: Questions of--those were the days when people, as they do now, struggle with questions about whether discrimination really exists, you know those type of challenged often by those who don't know.  Mostly by white people, but by some black folks that say there is no such thing, "We just have to work harder discrimination does not exist".  Were you intrigued by those kind of questions, I mean how--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I've probably have been more intrigued by those kinds of questions in my latter years, and I think--what I mean by that I think I was more influenced--I was more influenced by the pressures of the day and the environment of the day in the 1960s and that is as a group, as a class, as a body of people African Americans were clearly in the spotlight, African Americans were clearly voicing objection to oppression in a lot of different ways, and certainly one element of oppression is discrimination and one would see on the college campus allegations of discrimination in the classroom, in social activities, in the sports field, and I think at that time in my life I recognized it was there, but I didn't question it.  As I've gotten older, I've questioned it and I've analyzed it and I know it is there.  I see it is there, and I clearly know that I have and I currently remain a victim of it.  There is no question in mind about it and some of the study that I was talking about and some of the data it helps formulate that--it helps me formulate that vision or that position based on objective, analytical information.
Story_ID: 120918
Speaker 1: Okay. So at the Computer Institute for Social Research at the grad school [at Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] you had a chance to really work with computers and really--.
Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to do that and--but what I was most proud of during that period of time was the opportunity that presented itself to me to take young African American kids from surrounding communities in Michigan and bring them to school in what was called the Outward Bound [sic, Upward Bound] Program to bring them to school and have them exposed to computer technology.  These are kids just in twelfth grade, eleventh to twelfth grade.  Have them exposed to computer technology at their age for the very first time, and we had an opportunity--well, actually I authored a textbook of problems that was published by the university that was the text that these students would use during their summer stay at Michigan State University, and again I got a lot of pleasure and a lot of joy out of seeing these same kids keypunch their computer program on these punch cards and put it through the sorter machine and then kind of deliver it to the computer operator to run it through the computer, and come back the next day and pick up the results of their program.  That was a great experience.
Speaker 1: Ok, yeah there is a time period for a lot of kind of--they call them "Upward Bound". They called them "Outward Bound" and--.
Speaker 2: It may be "Upward Bound"; yeah that was a long time ago.
Speaker 1: They had different titles all the country.  It seemed to be a trend to try to do that and do something for the kids that didn't have a chance to be exposed to college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, again you're right.  Regardless of the title and there is still some of those things going on today in the year 2003.  Any time one can offer an opportunity to any youngster, or any adult quite frankly, but in particular to any youngster, to expose them to new things in life, new ways of living, new situations, new circumstances, can only stimulate their imagination and creativity and hopefully they'll take advantage of that opportunity and seize it and move on to do something different, or more positive.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those programs depended upon people educating black people to volunteer a time to be willing to make themselves available.
Speaker 2: That's true, that's true, and there were some student volunteer activities going on at the time and certainly as I've grown myself and members of my family continue that same practice of volunteering in our community and other communities and just sharing experiences with young kids, and in my case, and in my wife's case, my wife does it through her sorority relationships and other civic groups.  I do it primarily through my fraternity  [Omega Psi Phi] and professional associations that I belong to.
Story_ID: 120919
Speaker 1: Okay, now, now you earned your M.B.A. in 1970 from Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], right?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.
Speaker 1: Is there any story associated with that you want to tell us?
Speaker 2: Lots of hard work (laughter), I mean really that's what it boils down to.  To be really honest, I finished up my graduate degree, hadn't interviewed--excuse me, I finished up my undergraduate degree at my last exam.  Didn't spend any time interviewing because I was too worried about passing all those last finals and walked out of my last test and said, "What am I gonna do now?" And very honestly I went over to the student service center and started reading the literature and knew I wanted to pursue a career in business and started looking into the M.B.A. program and made application and got accepted.  It's no more creative than that.
Speaker 1: So you kind of liked the East Lansing [Michigan] area I guess at that point.  You sort of really fit in because you wanted to stay there go to school.
Speaker 2: I mean I can't say that I was active in East Lansing activities.  I mean I was very comfortable going to school there It's a very comfortable school to attend, the state supports it extremely well, and quite frankly most students will tell you that living in the dormitory system is quite comfortable, and it was a great place to be at that time in my life, and I had no problem staying there for a graduate degree.
Story_ID: 120920
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, you were talking about--
Speaker 2: About my tap-dancing experience in high school which I neglected to mention, but that's okay.
Speaker 1: You had a tap-dancing experience?
Speaker 2: Well, no, I just took lessons that's all.
Speaker 1: Oh, did you?
Speaker 2: Elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm willing to get that in.
Speaker 1: It makes you a well-rounded person.  Sometimes it's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I'd forgotten about it until you mentioned it quite honestly.  I totally forgot about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you take lessons from--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: I did.  Oh, no, no.  I took tap-dancing lessons for about three years.  I just wanted to get that confirmed to see if you were going to get involved.
Speaker 1: Ok, well after you get--you receive an M.B.A.  We were talking about your M.B.A. experience in--you said it was a lot of hard work basically.
Speaker 2: Well it was.  I mean at Michigan State University [East Lansing, Michigan], its program was subscribed to or populated primarily by senior military officials and senior executives from industry, primarily the big three automakers.  So we had most of the class for people with significant work experience, and--I won't say most of them, maybe half the class--then the other half were students like myself who were just moving from undergraduate to the graduate level of study with no prior work experience.  So certainly in the sense of the classroom interaction or classroom discussion, you had half the class brought a lot of real-life, frontline experience to the class problems that were presented by the instructors and the professors, and it was a real rigorous time too because the program itself and the science of business was changing from more of an art to a science, so much of our study was based in logic, was based in mathematics, computer models were being used for the first time to help predict the results of business decisions.  A business decision would be comprised of a financial component, a management component, a marketing piece and several others, and through computer modeling and simulation, you know it would spit out a result, generally a profit and loss statement as the result of a business question.  So it was a pretty interesting time, and that--for me it was quite comfortable with that, with the scientific and the technology aspect of the curriculum, but it was a lot of hard work actually and so I was married at the time, recently married at the time I should say, just married at the time and I think I told my wife at the time that if I am really going to kind of get through this in the prescribed period of time, that we need to just kind of buckle down and structure our lives so I focus on the studying and we kind of get it past and move out of East Lansing, and that's what we did.  So at that point I had very little to do with college life, very little.
Story_ID: 120921
Speaker 1: Now, while you were in graduate school you worked for the Computer Institute for Social Research [at Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan] and then in '71 [1971] when you graduated, you know you got your degree, you got a position in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: Economic Unions.
Speaker 2: I did.  I had to make some decisions.  Most of the students in the class were taking traditional, entry-level M.B.A. jobs in the early '70s [1970s] with Fortune 500 Companies.
Speaker 1: You had to be highly sought after, a young black M.B.A. in those days when people were looking for a young black man with some qualifications to fill these quotas and stuff that--.
Speaker 2: Right.  Some of that was going on but most important to me was I wasn't interested in corporate America from that perspective.  I wasn't interested in joining a Fortune 500 team.  What I was really interested in was developing and honing my entrepreneurial skills.  As you look back through my family, I've got one grandfather who was a self-employed undertaker, I have another grandfather who was a pastor, a preacher, I've got a father who was a dentist and an orthodontist, and I saw myself working for myself and being self employed, and I thought one way for me to do that and learn how businesses are really run would be to work for an organization whose purpose was to help people get in business.  So I sought out the Black Economic Union of Greater Kansas City.  I went out and I talked to a Curtis McClinton, and that's the Curtis McClinton of the Kansas City Chiefs who he and Jim Brown were very active in the formation of what Jim Brown started as the National Negro Industrial League, which was a privately funded self-help organization, but what I didn't know at the time when I interviewed in the early '70s [1970s] was that the Kansas City Chapter of the Negro Industrial League was larger than the other Chapters throughout the Country, and between the time I interviewed and the time that I returned to Kansas City to take the job, Curtis McClinton had made the decision to break away from Jim Brown's organization and set up the Kansas City operation as the Black Economic Union of Greater Kansas City.
Speaker 1: I like how you phrase that, one running back breaks away from the other.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) that's right, that's right.  The Black Economic Union of Greater Kansas City was funded by the federal OEO or the Office of Economic Opportunity.  Local money from private invest- private philanthropy money in Kansas City, and its sole purpose was to assist minorities into business.
Story_ID: 120922
Speaker 1: Now, when Jim Brown formed his Economic Union in Cleveland [Ohio] he had some of his teammates, Bobby Mitchell, Walter Beach and then Lew Alcindor, basketball player involved and quite a few others who--John Wooten, I think who was a guard for Cleveland, and you know it was a ground-breaking type of a movement in a sense, you know.  I think Jim Brown had been an apprentice for Pepsi before and learned some business skills at Pepsi-Cola, but this Kansas City group, I mean Curtis McClinton--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Curtis had a vision of economic development that really was something that was solely community based; he wanted a leverage of resources in Kansas City where he was known and respected for his business proficiency, and it didn't hurt that he was an extremely popular football player, but he was able to marshal local resources and all as well as federal resources to really make an impact on the Kansas City [Missouri] area, and I think that's what really separated him from some of the interests of Jim Brown and others.  I think Jim Brown who is well respected for the work that he has done, and others were instrumental in getting a lot of focus on the issue of economic development in inner-city areas, as a result simply of their popularity and their stature, but I think Curtis also did that but Curtis also was a practitioner and he really wanted to work on a daily basis and was deeply involved in the tactics of making this thing work in Kansas City, and as a result of that we created a community-based corporation owned by residents of a certain portion of the inner-city in Kansas City, and community residents could actually purchase shares of stock in this corporation, and the corporation had several ventures: one was a fiberglass manufacturing operation, that manufactured fiberglass bath tubs and shower stalls.  Now, today that's a common application in any home.  The problem we were having in Kansas City was (a) it was a new technology.  In the early 1970s, bath tubs were porcelain bath tubs and you had another material for the shower walls.  Well, coming to market, and that's what we were doing because we were manufacturing them and then selling them throughout the region, but coming to market with a new technology got the ire of carpenters and plumbers, both of which have very strong union representatives, and we were trying to get these products manufactured by a community-based organization in Kansas City placed in Section 8 Housing and other subsidized housing units in the city and had one real difficult time getting that done, but nevertheless we succeeded in the long run.  The other venture we had, again this is the early 1970s, we had a chain of discount gas stations and we called it Safari Oil.  We purchased the oil from--I forget who the dealer was, but it was a national company in that region and we sold only gasoline and as you'll probably remember service stations at that point in time were all full-service, alright.  So, it was--obviously this was a new concept to open up a facility that sold only gasoline.  It didn't provide you any motor oil, it didn't wash your windshield--only sold gasoline, and what do we see in this country today?  That's all we see: self-service gas stations.
Speaker 1: Were their stations self-service?
Speaker 2: The stations were not self-service, they were--rather at the time we called them full-service.  A person would pump the gas for you, but that was the only product sold and then we were able to do that because we had many of the mainline oil companies removing their service stations from inner-city locations.  So we had properties that were easier to acquire from an economic standpoint, easy to renovate--the tanks were in the ground and all the technology was in place--and we were able to do that.
Story_ID: 120923
Speaker 1: This is a point of history. That was during the time of the [1973] gas crisis, gas shortage--.
Speaker 2: Right before, right before, a good question, immediately before, immediately before.
Speaker 1: And the speeds were reduced to fifty miles an hour, fifty-five miles an hour.
Speaker 2: Fifty-five miles per hour, that's right.
Speaker 1: The country--there as a big crisis going on.
Speaker 2: That was also the time when gasoline was selling at that time for about thirty-five, thirty-six cents a gallon.
Speaker 1: And then it broke.
Speaker 2: Exactly, before the oil crisis and it may have exceeded a dollar shortly after that, a gallon, and today in terms of perspective, gas prices do fluctuate up and down on the international market place, but gas is roughly around a $1.40, $1.50 a gallon today, and here we were selling it below $0.36 gallon.  So there were two of the operations, the fiberglass manufacturing facility, chain of discount gas stations and the third, and again, let's keep this in perspective, we had two instant printing operations.  Instant printing, and like in today you know, there really is no such thing as instant printing.  Every office, every business has a copy machine based on xerography, and at a push or a button you get color copies whenever you want it, but in the early 1970s that was a not a common technology.  So we had actually two locations that had offset printing and xerography capability for business and other purposes; but, these were all community-owned businesses that the owners of the community shared in stock ownership.
Speaker 1: Now what was the instant printing outfit called?
Speaker 2: Rapid Press, Rapid--appropriately named, right?
Speaker 1: I only remember one from those days something called "Sir Speedy" I think was one of the first, then Instant Printing came along.
Speaker 2: Well, Sir Speedy--we actually in doing some of the feasibility testing and modeling, we patterned some of our marketing strategy after PIP Press.  Pip Press at the time.
Speaker 1: Based on Instant Printing?
Speaker 2: That's it, exactly.  I don't know if they are still in existence, but that was--not only had we modeled our strategy after one of the models, but it was also our main competition at the time.  Now I left, probably about twelve or--twelve months after all of these things were in place and running and the community ownership application took place, but the last time I looked back to that aspect of Kansas City, they were--and that was some time ago--they were running well and doing well.
Speaker 1: Okay, were many of the other ball players with the Kansas City Chiefs [Kansas City, Missouri] involved in this stuff?
Speaker 2: No, not really, not really.  Again, Curtis [McClinton] had a certain dynamic and a certain leadership style that was fast-paced, was deliberate and there really wasn't room at the table for any other big people.
Speaker 1: Did you ever meet his father, [HM] Curtis McClinton, Sr.?
Speaker 2: I don't think I have.  I did not.
Speaker 1: We interviewed him in Wichita [Kansas], but he's an entrepreneur even now, I mean he's always--he was a State Senator and he is still quite an entrepreneur today at ninety years old.
Speaker 2: I'm sure he might be, because Curtis, Curtis was an extremely competent and an accomplished person to have as a son.
Story_ID: 120924
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Alright, so when you moved from Kansas City [Missouri] where did you go?  Went to--.
Speaker 1: We came to--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Makro International.
Speaker 1: That's right.  I felt after --after about two years in Kansas City it was time for me to come back east where I was raised, where I was educated, if you call Michigan the east, and get back closer to my family which was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So a firm called "Makro International" or "Makro Systems" at the time recruited me out of Kansas City and my wife and I moved to Silver Spring, Maryland and Makro Systems was a young, upstart management consulting firm focusing on the U.S. Department of Labor and what was known at that time as the Department of Health, Education and Welfare as their primary customers, and I was brought on when Makro had approximately fifteen employees and we were working out of several apartments in a large apartment building in downtown Silver Spring.  I came on as a Staff Consultant.  I was immediately assigned to the accounts with the U.S. Department of Labor.  My initial projects evolved around information systems and technology, and it was my job to act as the middle person between computer scientists on one end, and end users at the other end, and I was brought into help facilitate communication between those two groups.  I understood technology, I understood what technology could do, but at the same time I understood program management requirements, program operation requirements, information needs of managers; so I helped facilitate that work.  Now I did that for several years on one national information system, and as a result of the accomplishments on that project the owners of the company felt it appropriate to continually promote me, and one thing led to another and even though my wife and I moved back to Silver Spring or Washington [DC] to get closer to my family which was in Philadelphia, things were moving so quickly here in Washington, we never really got that opportunity, and within a few years I became a Vice President of Makro Systems, and shortly thereafter several individuals got together and we acquired the company; and I think that was about 19--19--roughly around 1980 I believe.
Story_ID: 120925
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1981. That's when you started KRA Corporation?
Speaker 2: Well, there are two different business lines there and I need to keep them separate.  While several people acquired Makro Systems in 1980, shortly thereafter I did start KRA Corporation, and with any upstart and new-start business, while I started KRA up, I also maintained my working relationship at Makro until I fully divested myself--myself of--my interest in Makro some years later.
Speaker 1: So when did KRA Corp.--what does KRA Corporation do?
Speaker 2: We do a variety of things.  Over the last twenty-two years our capability--we have grown and certainly our capabilities have expanded.  Our three lines of business begin with our largest group which is our workforce development group where we are responsible for developing training programs and operating training programs for youth and adult individuals that are in the workforce.  Our job focuses on vocational training.  We are interested in increasing the readiness of young people, as well as adults, in securing employment and retaining employment for longer periods of time than folks who don't participate in some of our training schools.  Our second line of business is what we call management consulting, and that is where we basically provide solutions to customer problems that usually revolve around some domestic policy issue, maybe housing related, health related, substance abuse prevention, education, mental health, but they represent that the social disciplines that our staff have capability in. And the last is what we call our information operations group, where we manage information for customers.  We run--at this point, we run as many as eleven clearing houses and resource centers for primarily the federal government.  So if you as a citizen or a consumer have an interest in issues having to do with the American Disabilities Act [ADA, Americans with Disabilities Act], when you call that 800 number you are actually calling one of our offices and speaking to some of our employees who are trained and skilled in providing that kind of information, and our clearing houses cover not only that subject, but issues of minority health, some environmental issues, workforce training skill standards, wide variety of disciplines.
Story_ID: 120926
Speaker 1: Now that's quite a job.  I mean just from someone who - if you are working in city government today or even, you know, the last thirty-seven years, if you work in city government at all and are involved in job training programs, the regulations change quickly.  I mean they seem to change a lot.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: CETA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], for instance in the 1970s there was a new telephone book of regulations every six month as an officer.  Somebody had to be responsible for trying to figure this stuff out.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you would be the type of organization that would help people interpret what the guidelines are (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: CETA was really the first attempt to take all of the individual categorical programs and consolidate--Federal categorical programs--and consolidate them into one unified training program for in-school youth, out-of-school youth and a variety of other groupings.  It was our job to one, help formulate, not the legislation, but formulate and design the program that supported that legislation.  In other cases we've been retained, our services have been retained to actually take that information, that knowledge and conduct training sessions and training seminars throughout the country for community-based organizations, city government, state governments so they in turn can implement the programs.  Other elements of that business line within this company is to work with the individual grantees of funds, helping them develop their organizational status, work with their boards of directors in terms of their roles and responsibility as a board, work with their executive development-excuse me--executive director and senior leadership to help design and craft a program that will meet the required Federal training objectives.  So you are right.  Those kinds of telephone-book regulations are--were in existence at the time.  I think what you'll find however, and particularly with the legislation that is going through Congress right now, you'll find a much more streamlined set of guidelines and standards.  Most of the training today is performance-based.  So the federal government is expecting the state governments to achieve a certain level of proficiency and accomplishment as they use these federal funds.  In turn, the state government, when they contract to organizations like KRA Corporation, they are expecting us in our performance-based contract to deliver what we promise, and again it is all performance-based.  We've come a long way from categorical programs with no accountability to programs that are now designed by local workforce investment boards, which is a combination of educators, employers, youth councils and coalitions all in that community that can help craft and design training to meet the needs, not only of the young people or the dislocated workers, whatever it may be in that community, but meet the needs of employers in that community.  'Cause after all that's what it is all about.  Training is only effective if the trainee gets a job, and that is a good job with long duration and good wages.
Story_ID: 120927
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when you started--when you started KRA it is right when the [President Ronald] Reagan administration launched its--basically the downsizing of most of the social service programs.  It was also a time of a big job crisis in the United States too.
Speaker 2: And also a job of record-breaking inflation.  So you know you look at any small business, you know some of the real challenges of a small business are access to capital, access to talent, and credibility in the market place.  So when you are starting a new organization and you are going to the bank and you know, operating money is 18 and 22 percent interest, it's really, really tough to survive in those kind of times.  So you really have to figure out a way to kind of get by with--do more with less as we say today, and that was a real challenge at that time, but there was at the federal government a real shift in policy.  We were cranking up on one side in terms of our military operations.  There was conversely a decline in funding for social service projects.  So they were very, very lean years for the company and what we did, we shifted from working with primarily civilian agencies to working with the Department of Defense on some of their social--social and personnel issues.  For example, one of our first contracts at KRA was with the United States Navy to establish a counseling service or counseling facility on the campus of the Annapolis [Maryland]--
Speaker 1: U.S. Naval Academy [United States Naval Academy].
Speaker 2: U.S. Naval Academy, excuse me, and we did that, started out with I believe it was six part-time counselors and we operated that for several months or a year and based on that success we asked to expand our location to Fort George Meade which is also in Maryland, and we grew those two programs over a period six years to about twenty-odd social workers and licensed clinical social workers who were providing emergency counseling services to active and retired military and their family, and I think those are the kinds of things that's helped us along early on.  Today we don't do any defense work at all.  We just don't have quite frankly--don't have the real capabilities in that area as it relates to the more sophisticated military of today.
Story_ID: 120928
Speaker 1: Now what's the scope of activities of KRA today?  I know you've got--you're working with Job Corps.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I think the real focus--the major focus of the company [KRA Corporation] today is working with young adults and working with kids in a vocational training setting.  We operate Job Corps centers in the United States.  The Job Corps program is a forty-year program with the U.S. Department of Labor.  It's designed to train young kids between the ages of sixteen and twenty-four, give them a vocation training, give them academic training, and expose them to another level of social development. For example, in one of the schools that we run in Oneonta, New York, the Oneonta Job Corps Academy, we've got 370 students, roughly half of who are female, the other half are male.  Most of them are from the five boroughs in New York City.  They stay with us.  It is a residential setting.  They stay with us 24/7.  Usually the average duration is about ten, eleven months.  When they leave the Academy, they are certified in a vocation.  We offer thirteen different vocational tracks.  They are certified in one of those vocations.  If they come to us without a high school degree, they leave us with a high school degree or with an equivalent, and we place them in employment preferably in their home area, and we follow up on them for a period of up to twelve months after they leave the academy, and most of our students obtain employment at a wage rate higher than individuals who haven't had that Job Corps experience, and clearly most of them are employed on an average longer than those who don't participate with us.  So it is a national program and we are really, really interested in expanding what we are doing there and combining it with some of the other work we are doing internationally.  For example, in South Africa we've been working for the last three years with various non-profit or non-governmental organizations in South Africa that are primarily youth-service providers, and through the auspices of the U.S. federal government, we've created some electronic media and a website that the thirty thousand youth-servicing agencies throughout the country can use to gain information on designing programs differently and more effectively.  Youth can access some of this information to look for training opportunities, job opportunities and those kinds of things.  So our goal in South Africa in the next eighteen months is to create some residential training schools, and we hope to have our first one opened before this calendar year [2004] is opened and several more as I said in the next year or so ahead of us.
Story_ID: 120929
Speaker 1: Now I know you have a--yet you have an operation in Pretoria [South Africa]--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pretoria is our office location, located there because that's where our clients' offices are located.  We also have staff stationed in Johannesburg [South Africa], a much larger area, and that's only been for about a three-year period.  The schools that we opened from a--I think the first school we opened is probably gonna to be in the Johannesburg area.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any peculiar challenges working in South Africa that you don't find here?  Any particular challenges?
Speaker 2: It's a different world.  So there are lots of challenges in there.  They are new every day.  I think the biggest challenge for me was (a) don't think because you're an American that you are going to be widely accepted; (b) don't think you are going to be widely accepted because you are an African American and (c) be prepared to meet substantial resistance in the social service community if your company is a for-profit company.  Now, I think I summarized those pretty well, because they are the kind of issues we face every day.
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there a general trend to think that because you are a for-profit you're somehow gobbling up not-for-profit resources or something or you're some kind of a predatory organization, or something.  Is that--?
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, I think that's the general sense.  Today in South Africa, most of the--most of the non-profit or non-governmental organizational leadership stems from a political orientation that is not necessarily accustomed to working with profit organizations.  Democracy is relatively new, only in the last five years, and competition in the marketplace is something that has not been favorable historically to the mainstream of South Africa which is black South Africa.  So when you bring the profit motive to bear, it's something that's only been experienced in a negative context, and we're dealing with that, we're working with that.  We have a what's called a "Black Empowerment for Profit Partner" in South Africa, and I think together we're both learning ways in which we can serve the community of South Africa, not only better, but in a way where we are recognized as being good corporate citizens.
Story_ID: 120930
Speaker 1: Likewise in this country I suppose most of--most activities--many people would think that the kinds of activities that you all are engaged in would be directly a part of the government rather than you know, franchised out, to or given out to a for profit.  They would think of government agencies of doing a lot of the things that you are doing.
Speaker 2: Well that's true and the government has for many, many years, and recently under the [Ronald] Reagan administration, somewhat under the [Bill] Clinton administration and again under the current or [George W.] Bush administration, the government is very active in outsourcing what is referred to as "not inherently governmental functions".  Those functions that are purely not governmental, or to say it another way, those functions that are more commercial.  The government is outsourcing those to industry, and it's a very, very large program; and you'd really be surprised at the number of things that the government--that you think the government is doing but actually private contractors are performing on their behalf, and it's, it's a multiple-billion-dollar industry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I suspect that you'll, you'll see the same in countries--in developing countries for sure.  Clearly as South Africa has gained its independence and control over its economy, it has taken many of the parastatals like the phone company, for example, and it's no longer a state monopoly, it is now bid out to private industry and private industry is now running it under the regulation of the state.
Speaker 1: Government agencies even under the [Bill] Clinton administration were--government programs were under the charge to produce measurable results now.  That wasn't always the case, sometimes he would say "how can you measure this or that", but now they are trying to measure say the effectiveness of something like a miracle, how you measure the effectiveness of a Vista Volunteer or a Peace Corps Volunteer.  What do they actually change when they go into a community?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, I think it's mandatory.  It's absolutely mandatory that you have--that the federal government have some objective way of holding all of their contractors accountable.  There's gotta be a way to measure the outcomes that are specified in that contractual relationship.  That's easy to say if you've got a contractor that's manufacturing widgets.  You can inspect the widgets.  If there are no defects it passes, and that is a good thing.  It is much more difficult when you are measuring the services for social service programs.  In the training area for example, where we are very active, both at the federal and the state level. We get measured on such things as the amount of time an individual is actively achieving in a certain portion of a training program, the amount of time it takes to graduate and individual in a component of the training program, the average cost of providing training to an individual from inception to graduation, and the measures that I think are the most important that is, what is the graduating wage that that individual is achieving and what's the duration of employment post training, and these are measures that the government looks to us--information the government gets from us as much as twelve months after an individual is out of one of our training programs.  So I think it's of the utmost importance that both government agencies and contractors working for government agencies are held to some level of accountability for their responsibility in spending tax payers' dollars, and I support that fully.
Story_ID: 120931
Speaker 1: Okay, now this is an answer--this crossed my mind as I listened.  During the '70s [1970s], I guess early '70s, a Samuel S. Yette or Yette, Yette or Yette, Y-E-T-T-E was a professor at Howard University [Washington, DC] in journalism wrote a book called "The Choice, the Issue of Blacks Surviving in America", and in the book he--there was a stinging critique of the [Lyndon B.] Johnson --the Great Society Programs (unclear).  One that really got stung was Job Corps and he talked about all the money spent on Job Corps and he said the result was a lot of young black men were trained to--they were put in situation when--for instance Litton Industries [Milwaukee, Wisconsin], they were putting together parts for Litton Industries on an assembly line.  When the project was over Litton wouldn't hire them.  In fact Litton was using them to assemble, pimp gadets for Litton basically, which Litton had a big government contract, you know, with the Defense Department [US Department of Defense] for different things, and I don't know, I mean that sort of thing I guess was a problem in the past that could be solved by the kind of things that you are doing now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I'm not familiar with the book and certainly in all programs where they are talking training programs and what have you, there are certain things that run in conflict to the proposed good of the program, but the Job Corps program is in fact the most expensive federal training program in existence, and it's only survived forty years because it is without a doubt the most effective manpower-training program that this country has.  For every dollar that the federal government spends to train a young boy or a young girl, that boy or that girl returns to the treasury $2.02.  So from an economic standpoint, it is a win-win.  It's a win for the disadvantaged kid that gets enrolled in the program, and it's a win for the taxpayers who make that investment in that kid. The program today in 2003 is replete with statistics and reporting requirements so that the federal government can be held responsible for the spending of that money.  The federal government can tell you where every enrollee is at any point in their involvement in the program.  By the same token, they're are holding the contractor like KRA Corporation responsible to make sure that we are progressing students through that program as we have contractually bound to do.
Speaker 1: Now, what vocation do most of the graduate--I guess is there a vocation that's--I guess is there one vocation that has more Job Corps graduates than any other, I means in terms of the whole, I mean the Job Corps scene?
Speaker 2: I can't answer that question.  I can tell you that throughout the 118 [Job Corps] centers throughout the country that there is wide variety of vocations, but the important thing to remember now is that the vocations at any center are the vocations that lead to jobs that are in demand in those communities.  Alright?  So we for example, I think I mentioned earlier, we have approximately thirteen different vocations.  It's not so important what those vocations are, but it is important to understand that each of those vocations is determined after one analyzes the various labor market information, sits with local employers, sits with junior college representatives, sits with the local school boards to determine what are the demand occupations in that community that these kids are going to return to, and that's what constitutes a vocation.  Now, on our New York campus again, for example, we've got two automobile repair and maintenance vocations that result in certifications.  We've got a painting vocation; we've got a computer science vocation; another is a secretarial track; another is a home-health aide track.  So you can see that they cover the various sectors in the economy.
Story_ID: 120932
Speaker 1: Sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: They're really no different, quite frankly, they are no different than the same concerns that I had while I was in school, absolutely no different, and quite frankly, they are really no different than the black community that happens to reside in South Africa.  There is a very complex global economy that surrounds us all and the one thing that all of us have to do is to learn how to participate in that in some way, if for nothing else to establish a level of income, and a level--in order that one can support one's family.  I think education, training and development is probably the critical investment that need be made--
Story_ID: 120933
Speaker 1: Okay, I was asking about some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today, and you were saying they are not much different from what they were in the past, or the hopes and concerns that you have for South Africa?
Speaker 2: No, they are the same.  We've got to continue to make an investment in training and development of young people.  We gotta continue to make an investment in development of individuals so they can support families at a very comfortable level, and that's really what it all boils down to, and we've got to learn how to take a better advantage of existing educational opportunities that are available to us through the public system or any other system that may be available.  That's kind of one element or one track and that is just be prepared.  Another thing is to be aware and one has to be aware of those things that control their destiny, and what I'm really alluding to is one has to be aware of what's going on around them from a political perspective, and politics is very frightening to most people, cause most people don't understand it, but if you kind of look at politics from the standpoint that you've got a representative, you've got to make sure that that representative represents you and represents you in the areas in which you are interested in.  If you do nothing else but that, you'll do yourself justice in getting represented, and I think the third area aside from being prepared through education, being prepared through some level of involvement in the political system, I think the third area is maybe what I've talked about earlier, and that is--I just forgot it.
Story_ID: 120934
Speaker 1: The kind of work you do involves research and statistics and information management on such a deep level.  What do you read every day?
Speaker 2: Ah!
Speaker 1: What important--what are the essential things that you--?
Speaker 2: I thought you were going to ask me what--did I do all that stuff?  I don't all of that, no not at all.  First of all, my daily responsibilities have to do with the strategic direction of the company [KRA Corporation], and it's my job to make sure that we're moving in a path that is going to continue to place us in the center or ahead of the marketplace tomorrow.  So what I read every day tend to be business journals, and one doesn't read journals anymore because they are so voluminous, one can just skim them, but I look at primarily business journals and one or two newspapers, one being the the Washington Post, the other being the Wall Street Journal, and maybe occasionally the [New York] Times, and I never have a chance to read them all, but again all I am trying to do is select key bits of information to continue to validate and help me predict where the marketplaces we have interest in are going.  That's my primary interest.
Story_ID: 120935
Speaker 1: Okay.  When you look back on all that you've accomplished, and you are still relatively young here, what do you consider is your legacy?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I'm--my legacy hopefully just being a, you know, hoping I've been a good father and a good husband.  That's about it, nothing more complicated.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there anything that you would do differently if you could do it again?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think there are probably a lot of things, a lot of decisions that I've made that at the time some of which I would have hoped I'd have an opportunity to rescind them and do them differently, but I think overall, I'm extremely happy where KRA [Corporation] is today.  I'm really proud of our accomplishments, and I'm really proud that we've had such a profound impact on the lives of so many people, whether directly through our training programs or indirectly through some of the federal policy--we've provided data that the federal government managers could use to formulate things that were good for people of color in urban areas and in rural areas around the country.  I feel good about that.  I would not have done anything different to get to those kinds of points.
Story_ID: 120936
Speaker 1: Well thank you. One last question and we always ask this.  Similar to legacy, but not quite the same, but sir, when this is all over and which I hope is a long time from now, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I'd like to be remembered as a successful businessman that conducted all his activities with integrity and purpose.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Sir.
Speaker 2: You're welcome!
Story_ID: 120937
Speaker 1: Well this is a picture of my family in 1993, December to be in fact, and from the left or on the left is my wife Rosalind.  I am in the center.  My daughter is in the lower part, her name is Vanessa, and my son is Knowlton III.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great, and now I want to go to the button from the (unclear)
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Look at that outfit (laugher).  That is--that is a picture of me when I was employed by the Black Economic Union of Greater Kansas City.  This was a Minority Business Expo that we were conducting in Kansas City, Missouri.  It was one of the first expositions of minority businesses done in that city, and I was at the time the Marketing Director for the - for the Black Economic Union and I had a fairly significant responsibility in putting on that Conference.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and then here's another--this one with the "4" on it here.
Speaker 1: That's in 1964.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  '64, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's alright.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tight shot on the photo and then I'll pull back.
Speaker 1: Alright, this is a picture of - this is a picture of my high school graduation picture in 1964 at or from Delhaas High School in Bucks County, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: You would have been a senior when I started in high school.  You had a great generation because all my friends were seniors when I started in high school.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Where did you--.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me at a social event about 1980 in Maryland actually.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, anything else?  What are we looking for, and we're ready now?  Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of President [Bill] Clinton and myself in 1996.  I believe the occasion had to do with the inauguration of the African American Leadership Forum in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That's fine, perfect. Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: This is a picture at our twentieth corporate--I'm going to start over.  This is a photograph of our team that operates the Office of Minority Health Resource Center on behalf of the U.S. federal government.  This team has been in place for more than nine years, and I am recognizing their performance as being one of the more positive and exceptional teams in the company, and this is about two years ago which would make it the year 2001.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ok, very good, next.
Speaker 1: At the same celebration there are two key employees, Chris Roar [ph.] and Saundra Wilson that are being recognized for their exemplary performance, and this was also in 2001 in Washington, D.C. on the ship called "the Odyssey".
Story_ID: 120938
Speaker 1: This is a picture of KRA receiving an award from the Food and Nutrition Service in I believe it was about 1998 for our exemplary technical skills having to do with the analysis of research information for that customer.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay.
Speaker 1: One more here.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Did you do these?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is our official family portrait taken in 1993 starting with my daughter Vanessa Elaine on the left.  I'm in the center, my wife Rosalind Elaine and my son Knowlton III.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Very good.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much!
