Story_ID: 493407
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Neculai Burghelea.  Observing is Elyse Emery [ph.].  Ma'am, could you state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen is my professional name, my maiden name B-I-L-L-I-E, A-L-L-E-N, but I was christened Wilhelmina Louise Allen after the Queen Wilhelmina, of course.  And I have a letter that my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] wrote to her mother [Ella Wimbush] when I was born describing me at my birth.  In which she called me Billie before I even left the hospital, so I never had a chance, and then I thought that's not a bad name, Billie Allen, looks good in block print.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: January 13, 1925, in Richmond, Virginia, the capitol of the Confederacy (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is true, and ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I work in theater as an actor, a director, and film, you know, the whole gamut.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date, this some kind of test?
Speaker 1: It sounds like it doesn't it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) This--today's date is May 16, 19--no, 2007.  May 16, 2007, and it's the first Monday after Friday the 13th.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Which is a lucky number.  I was born on Friday the 13th and good things happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we, are we, we're in New York [New York] and your (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're in New York, in the heart of downtown, Midtown they call this.  At our home on 340 West 57th Street on the seventeenth floor.  And I've been living here about twenty-seven years, and before that my husband [Luther Henderson] lived here thirty years, so it'd be about fifty years in this same old apartment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which is home.
Story_ID: 493408
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that they require me to ask as a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the first question is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is it?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends, in the spring it's asparagus, in the winter it's Yankee bean soup with meatballs, and in the summer, of course, it's sherbet.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Is there, is there a favorite wit- is that three or four?
Speaker 2: Well that's three.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I have a fourth, everybody loves ice cream.  I really like ice cream a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now I'm gonna--oh, oh a second question, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, royal blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's kind of a wonderful deep rich, complicated, complex color, and it brings life to me.  I have some in my bedroom, you know, accents in royal blue.  Whenever I wear something royal blue, oh I just feel so great.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall, the fall is my favorite, it's kind of melancholy and I love the color of leaves.  And I like the crispness of the air for walking.  And it's just melancholy, and it makes me feel happy, I'm happy to be sad, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  I love the beach.  I like swimming in the ocean, pretty good swimmer.  And my favorite beach is St. Martin's, we spend a lot of time there, and I filmed part of the Romare Bearden film there at his studio in St. Martin.  And I've just liked being there.  I like the ambiance and the people, especially the food.
Story_ID: 493409
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please.
Speaker 2: Mamie Wimbush Allen, M-A-M-I-E, W-I-M-B-U-S-H, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well I have it written there on your questionnaire and don't remember exactly.  January 20th, I don't remember, it's written down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But January 20th.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Greenville, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side?  And first of all how back can--how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Well just over there in the living room there's a wonderful picture, photograph of four generations of women in my family.  I wasn't born yet, it's my sister [LaMae Allen], our mother, our grandmother [Ella Wimbush], and great-grandmother, and all of those women finished Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], and our great-grandmother was in the first graduating class at Spelman.  I have all those diplomas upstairs in my storeroom, and it's just remarkable and wonderful.  I have also, I have my parents' wedding certificate with the beautiful blue ribbon.  And they've been so well preserved over the years.  I know that the missionaries who founded Spelman College, Mrs. Packard [Sophia B. Packard] and some other people, oh the Rockefellers funded it at first.  They had this school for women of color, colored women, slaves, and I had some notebooks that were lost in the hurricane.  But they taught them the science of homemaking, bluing and bleaching, and how hot to get the iron, and how to make gravy and things like that.  And then later as it grew from Spelman Seminary to a very well-known and accredited college, of course now it's one of the top five sisters.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And, my mother's father was a minister, Reverend C.C. Wimbush.  And they were all around there with the King family that went back and back.  I loved going to Atlanta [Georgia].  We lived in Richmond, Virginia because my father founded an insurance company in Richmond.  The Southern Aid Life Insurance Company [Southern Aid and Insurance Company, Richmond, Virginia], he was an accountant.  And it was very exciting actually, that part was very exciting.  Because the first banker, woman banker in America, black or white or green, Maggie Lena Walker, she was on the cover of Legacy magazine because she was the first woman banker, he was her accountant.  It started with her dime savings among her friends or some little club that they had and grew into banking.  And then she founded her own bank [St. Luke Penny Savings Bank, Richmond, Virginia].  I'm very excited about her because you wouldn't imagine that in the in the capital of the Confederacy that there would be black people who lived the way she did.  You know, big stone house with art deco furnishings.  And that was the first time I ever saw a bidet, playing hide and go seek with her granddaughter when she came to visit from Chicago [Illinois].  And I, he--and I came across this very interesting bathroom with all these things that I never seen before.  And they explained to me, the big girls explained to me it was a bidet.  And I was about eight, but you would never expect for that to be a part of my knowledge, things that I would know about, you just never know, one never knows.
Story_ID: 493410
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen]--now there's a story, you said that your great-great-grandmother--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Had been a slave?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And are--did she pass down stories of what it was like during slavery (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: Was she a little girl during slavery or was she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they, they--I've forgotten the name of the family in Atlanta [Georgia], but they were the Coca-Cola [The Coca-Cola Company] people.  She was their midwife for a long time.  And that family that goes back--they, those women were what I call liberated.  I come from four generations of liberated women.  And we--they didn't burn their bras they just advanced in education.  And advanced, and in knowledge, and they said, "That's what you need to do Billie [HistoryMaker Billie Allen], get your education, travel."  Then if you see--be able to take care of yourself.  Then if you see somebody you want to marry then you'll be about ready then but never mingle your money, don't co-mingle your money.  You know, you can put a little bit in the pot, but you always have your bank account, your own savings and be ready for any emergency that you might have so you take care of yourself.  And I thought, oh no I wanna be like those other women, you know, that, you know, and ask their husbands for money and so forth.  And, you know, it's--but they were right, of course, they were right.  And they didn't think we should spend too much time getting manicures.  My mother said, "There are two kinds of women in the world Billie, there're doers, and there are thinkers, now which do you wanna be?  You decide."  She was, she was militant.  One of her proteges was James Jackson [James E. Jackson, Jr.], who was a teenager in Richmond, Virginia.  He later became editor-in-chief of The Daily Worker [sic. The Worker] here in New York [New York].  But when he was nineteen he was organizing the tobacco workers in Richmond, which didn't sit well as you can imagine with those tobacco owners.  But she'd take me to his rallies, and she'd take--the legend was, if you wanted to date one of the Allen girls first you have to picket something.  Picket something with the old lady, you know.  Picket the A&P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company], picket something with the old lady then she'll invite you to her house, maybe, for some cocoa.
Story_ID: 493411
Speaker 1: Now was your mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] like an early member of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, oh yes and she, she was like the mentor to Gloster Current [Gloster B. Current].  And the Church of the Master, was that Jimmy--and we--the NAACP was a great part of my social life.  As a matter of fact because we went to the national conventions every year.  And, you know, that's where my social life was.  I met other people my age, teenagers or children or whatever it was, and we kept in touch, and it was like a network.  No matter where you went, you knew somebody.  But we were made aware of the issues and the struggle and my mother, she said, "You are no breath- you are no better than the least of your brethren.  And you may not look down, you may bring them up."
Speaker 1: Now what--is there a story behind how she became the--not that it's unnatural, but a lot of people aren't activist?  Is there a story that--behind her activism (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I think that--it seems to me those women were born in what we call struggle.  And they were aware of that--this is what we have to do this is why we are put here.  And this is what we have to do.  And you may be privileged 'cause your folks could read and went to college, but you have to share that.  You have to share that.  I don't know what incident in her life but I think it was just handed down.  I know that it's a set--Atlanta [Georgia] was a very, very progressive city at that time.  A lot of black-owned businesses, I mean, and homes and very enterprising.  And they always bragged about that as a matter of fact, they said, "Oh well in Atlanta we owned everything."  In Atlanta we had our pharmacists and so forth.  And I thought that everybody had a black woman doctor if they wanted one because my birth was attended by a black woman doctor, Marie Jeanette Jones, we called her Dr. Janie.  Can you imagine that, in 1925?  It was amazing because of when I came through New York [New York] to work in the theater, I was doing improvisation.  So I decided that my character wanted to be a doctor so, we--when we were being critiqued, the improvisation.  This woman who was white she said, "Why couldn't you be something reasonable like a nurse or a secretary?"  So she said, "There are no black doctors, there are no Negro doctors," then.  And then I had to give her a little history lesson right there on the spot, you know.  And tell her about Doctor Marie Jeanette Jones, who got her medical degree at Tufts [sic.] and practiced in Richmond, Virginia, with her husband who was also an M.D., Dr. Miles B. Jones.  They practiced in tandem from that big stone mansion in the middle of town.  And we were well attended (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's, that's--
Speaker 2: I think that was a decided advantage in my life because I never lacked for women heroes or black heroes.  And you see during that time there were no hotels where Paul Robeson and Roland Hayes, Marian Anderson, and all these people could stay when they came.  When they did these concerts with--my mother belonged to this club called the treble clef music and book lovers club.  And they met the first Thursday of every month, and these women would prepare a reading or piano solo or they would present Langston Hughes.  Give him a book party, and he'd talk about this new book he had just written.  Or Muriel Ryan [ph.] would come there, and that's where I met [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham and this is what they would do because they wanted to keep abreast of everything.  And they wanted the children to appreciate our heritage and appreciate--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --our lives.
Story_ID: 493412
Speaker 1: Can you give us your--now what did your mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] do for a living?
Speaker 2: She was a teacher.
Speaker 1: Teacher, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she loved it.  She's a dedicated teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, she teach in the Richmond [Virginia] public schools?
Speaker 2: Richmond public schools, but every summer she would come to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] to do graduate work.  That was her vacation.  She loved studying and she--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She would do that and then, I could join her after I went to camp.  I went to camp and she was--and but when her classes were over I'd come up, we'd come up and spend a couple of weeks and see New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Now I wanna talk about that later, but--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but, now was her mother [Ella Wimbush] a teacher as well?  Or were all the generations teachers (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, let's--no.  Her mother was a--she finished--she took a nursing course at Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] at first before she got her certificate.  Her certificate in education, and so she was a teacher and also a nurse.  And that was Grandma Mandy--Grandma Ella, the original, was a slave.  We don't know exactly where she was from, but I'm sure that we're gonna find out.  We're working on it.
Story_ID: 493413
Speaker 1: Let me (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --really get formally into your father.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And I wanna ask for his full name and for you to spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father's name was William Roswell Allen [William Allen]. William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, Roswell, R-O-S-W-E-L-L, Allen, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Well, really you'll have it on your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Won't you just give us, get us close to it.
Speaker 2: April 9th, something like 1918, no it couldn't be 1918.  I was born in 1925, it'd have to be before that, and I wasn't the first child.  I guess nineteen--no it had to be 18-something.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I'm thinking yeah.
Speaker 2: I could get that for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, now how old was he when you were born?  Was he in his thirties or was he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What, when I was born?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, they never told you their age, and I guess I could figure it out.  If I knew--if I could remember what year he was born.  But he was a young man, reasonably young man, very active.  Like to play--my parents played tennis, and they played doubles with other couples.  And they used to win trophies, and he was a Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America] leader, and he took us camping, those people loved camping, they thought that was so refreshing.  I hated it.
Speaker 1: So I'll ask you about that a little later.  We'll talk about this more a little later, but I just wanted, I wanted to get like his (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he went to--my father--
Speaker 1: Well, no--well what did you know about his ancestors first before we start talking about him?
Speaker 2: Well his mother--Grandma Jones [Mary Willie Jones] was his mother, and her name was--I just wrote it down.
Speaker 1: Well, does the family have a long history in Richmond [Virginia], were they there back in the (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Georgia, no.  These--
Speaker 1: No, they're from Georgia, okay.
Speaker 2: Were all from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay now, where, where was he born then, where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born, I think in Greenville [Georgia] too.
Speaker 1: Greenville?
Speaker 2: And, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, Grandma Jones, his mother was the domestic and she--we figured--my sister [LaMae Allen] and I figured that she must have been from Madagascar originally.  Because we deduced that she used certain seasonings in everything, like nutmeg and exotic things, we felt.  But his mother, I think, fell in love with this very well-known family, the Allens, with one of the Allen boys.  And I have his name written over there too and, of course, my father was born to her out of wedlock.   And his father [Roswell Allen] was one of the Allens, very aristocratic family, much expectation.  His mother, Grandma Jones, the one that I'm talking about, was--she was tiny very tiny, and very wiry, restless.  Brilliant woman who did the crossword puzzle every day.  That's what she did, the crossword puzzle, and for gifts we'd give her mathematic workbooks or a book of puzzles, any kind of mathematic puzzles and she could do them.  And that was her recreation.
Speaker 1: Why did you suspect that she was from Madagascar?
Speaker 2: Because she used these--she had certain features, very keen features.  And she was very, very chocolate.  The color of a raisin, you know, and she--we deduced, it nobody told us.  My sister and I the detectives decided that nobody else's family had all this seasoning that we had.  And that's 'cause Grandma Jones when she cooked--so we traced it to Madagascar.
Speaker 1: Now where did she say she was from?
Speaker 2: She never said.
Speaker 1: Never said, okay.
Speaker 2: Never said to us.  She was very proud of her son, my father, who went to Clark University [Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College, Atlanta, Georgia], and took the business course.
Story_ID: 493414
Speaker 1: So he [Allen's father, William Allen] majored in business, and--?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So okay, and did he have any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Siblings?
Speaker 1: No, well, no, reflections about growing up?  And--
Speaker 2: No, they just didn't talk about it.  To my knowledge.  I would have remembered.  Because I was one of those nosy kids who remembered everything about everybody.  You know, especially if there were things you didn't want me to remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, are there any--what are some of the--now Atlanta [Georgia] had a thriving black business district and a lot of the people felt insulated from the more hostile white community that surrounded them (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --but--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I remember there were some people that use to visit from Atlanta, the Driskells, they were in the beauty business.  And there were people who had owned their own drugstores, and just generally entrepreneurial.  We would visit Atlanta once a year, and Montezuma [Georgia], because some of my mother's [Mamie Wimbush Allen] classmates from when she was in Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia], and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] brothers lived in these places.  And so we all--they became uncles, and we'd go to visit.  And there would be no hotels when they would be driving from the South to the North.  They had to stay with friends, and so we got to meet them.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--so well do you meet a lot of interesting people I guess?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Oh, yes.  There were--I remember one of them was a dentist.  The Allens were also a long line of dentists, kind of rose, the way I understand it.  And one came to visit us and had a bulldog with a gold inlaid tooth.  Yes, he--this bulldog had a tiny--a miniature bulldog had--I'll never forget them, you know.  We thought them rather strange.
Speaker 1: I'd think so.  So, now is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but I have a photograph of them, courting on Hampton's [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] campus.  It's in my bedroom, and it's charming and beautiful.  And you could see the reticence in the woman, and you know he's dressed for spring in a bowler hat and carries an umbrella.  And she has a beautiful bodice top with a kind of a balloon long skirt, little pleats at the top and a white band around the waist.  And she is very demure, and you could just see this kind of spring awakening going on with them.  I think they must have met on the campus.  I think she might have maybe at--in Atlanta.  Maybe at some party or something.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long was it before they got married?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, I would imagine shortly because my sister [LaMae Allen] was born six years before I was.  I was born in 1925 and of course they had to be married, so that brings us to 1918, 1919 (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Around about 1919.
Speaker 2: I have their wedding announcement upstairs in a scrapbook.  I just remembered it, it was during the war, and the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  And they had friends in Cincinnati [Ohio], and I think my father was either stationed there or coming through there--they got married in Cincinnati.  And had this beautiful still well-preserved wedding announcement, I'm just thinking about it.
Speaker 1: So your father was in the war (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Second World War.
Speaker 1: Second, no, this is the first.
Speaker 2: No, First World War [World War I, WWI].
Speaker 1: First World War, yeah, so they were married in Cincinnati, and he was in the First World War, did he serve overseas?
Speaker 2: I think he did, I think that was where he got Wilhelmina, Wilhelmina.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Queen Wilhelmina, and yes, he had lots to talk about.
Story_ID: 493415
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Mamie Wimbush Allen and William Allen] personalities, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother--everybody says so, and also I'm noticing that I have become my mother.  And the things I didn't like about her, that she slept with a lot of books and papers.  I sleep with a lot of books and papers and that, you know, she had this kind of energy you never did want to go for a stroll with her because she never strolled.  She always either ran, galloped or skipped or walked too fast.  And talked too fast, moved too fast and think too fast and I longed to be different but I've ended up.
Speaker 1: Okay just like--oh okay.
Speaker 2: And it's not such a bad deal after all.
Speaker 1: Oh, and what was your father's personality like?
Speaker 2: He was more methodical, a mathematician kind of, you know, and he was--he really didn't like conflict.  You know, he would acquiesce or walk around it or go around it.  And he was a lot of fun, he liked fishing.  He and his buddies would go fishing in the Rappahannock River, in the Chesapeake Bay at least two Saturdays a month, and the guys would come down from Washington [D.C.].  Oh, they'd come back with tubs of fish and tubs of striped bass, what we know as striped bass they called rockfish.  And there would be all of this wonderful fresh fish, and we couldn't use all of that.  And so we'd be going around the neighborhood, and I think about this all the time when I'm paying eighteen dollars a pound.
Story_ID: 493416
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right, what is it?
Speaker 2: I've--my most vivid memory is writing on the wall.  I loved to write on the wall.  I loved to draw pictures on the wall.  I got all kinds of spankings and reprimands, but it was something about writing on the wall that I was just simply compelled to do.  And I remember being sent in for a nap and cousin Corrine [ph.], Corrine was a friend of some cousin from North Carolina.  We called everybody who helped us work for us, cousin or aunt, to give them a place in our family.  Cousin Corrine put me in for a nap, and I remember standing up in that crib and taking a crayon and making a complete circle, and it was so beautiful, it was so beautiful.  And I got so excited that I yelled for her to come and look at it, of course when she saw it I got a spanking, and I remembered that. I also remember my brother and I, he's about a year younger than I am, and we were like twins, like the Katzenjammer Kids.  And one day we ran away, we decided to run away, and we were just gonna run away.  Just away, no special place, just run away.  So we did, we walked and walked and walked, we're about I guess five and six.  And finally we got tired and, and I said, "Ed [Edward Allen] you know what, you see those guys in the blue, blue and white car, they will take us home."  They know where everybody lives, of course, they were the Richmond [Virginia] police.  And they did they took us home, and we got another spanking.
Speaker 1: You decided to run away home to somebo- someplace else (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, have an adventure.  We hadn't intended to stay long, wanted to get back for dinner.
Story_ID: 493417
Speaker 1: You've got an older sister and then you've got an older brother (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she's about five years older than I, and she had to babysit us for a lot, you know, a lot.
Speaker 1: What, what's her name?
Speaker 2: LaMae [LaMae Allen].
Speaker 1: And your brother?
Speaker 2: Edward [Edward Allen].
Speaker 1: Okay, is that--and then that's there's you?  And then is that it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm in the center, it's the three of us.
Speaker 1: You're in the center, and then you have other--okay, oh you're in the middle, okay yeah right.  Okay, so your brother's the youngest?
Speaker 2: LaMae died about five years ago; she lived in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  She died about five years ago, but we're in touch with her children and her progeny.  And the other thing I remember, a little later, was that I loved to play in my mother's [Mamie Wimbush Allen] closet.  Because she loved beautiful clothes she had a woman who sewed for her, Mrs. Boatwright was her name.  And Mrs. Boatwright was from Savannah, Georgia, and had gone to a very special institute that taught tailoring and dressmaking.  And you could show Mrs. Boatwright a picture of a gown or dress or a suit in the newspaper or magazine, and she would study it.  And then put newspaper, brown paper on the floor, and measure you, and cut a pattern.  And measure you again and then when she perfected the brown paper pattern, she would cut a muslin pattern out of muslin and paste it together, that's the loose stitching.  She'd fit that on you so that she'd have everything just right and then she would cut the fabric.  And then, it was extraordinary, just extraord- then my mother had all these beautiful clothes.  My friends called her a clotheshorse with a Ph.D.  And I just loved it because I aspired to use all these clothing someday when I grow up.  The minute she'd get in the car and I'd hear the door slam, I'd go in her closet.  And I'd take out all of her things, put them on her bed, adjust her vanity mirror, the three-way mirror.  And I'd put on her hats and her gloves and her shoes and her dinner gowns and practice in front of the mirror, sitting down and conversing with people.
Speaker 1: Now were you old enough to fit those clothes at that time or?
Speaker 2: No, they were dragging.  I mean I was a little girl, a little girl.  And you know I think the oldest that I did this was about eight or nine.  I'm sure she must have known about it because I--when, when I'd hear the car door slam, and then her voice would ring out, "Oh, hello," to some neighbor.  I'd say, oh dear, I have to get them all back and then stick 'em in the bottom of the closet.  And at some later time, when I had more time I'd hang them up.  But it was an invaluable experience exactly because eventually I--when I would go to receptions and travel in Europe and so forth.  People say to me, "How do you know what to do?"  Well, then I remembered, well I've practiced all this, I know.
Story_ID: 493418
Speaker 1: When did your family move from Atlanta [Georgia] to Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well they moved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is before you were born, I know.
Speaker 2: Before I was born yes.  Yes, my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] and father [William Allen] moved to Richmond--I think my sister [LaMae Allen] was born in Atlanta, and then my father got this big business opportunity in Richmond.  And so my mother got a job teaching in Richmond, and he came to work with that insurance company [Southern Aid and Insurance Company, Richmond, Virginia].  And this is before I was born.  So I guess my sister was born, yes I think she was born in Atlanta.  And of course in those days you left your kids with grandma.  Then you and they--she stayed with grandma while I was born.
Speaker 1: It's done these days too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I think they leave them for a long time with grandma nowadays.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, grandma was there.  They don't make grandmas like they used to.  I know I'm not the grandma that my grandma was, you know.
Speaker 1: All right, now so when you--when your family moved to Richmond did they live in the same neighborhood the whole time or did they move around some for a while?
Speaker 2: You know they lived next door to Dr. Janie [Marie Jeanette Jones], midtown, downtown on 3rd Street, and then they found the little house that they liked in the West End [Richmond, Virginia].  And it was a modest home but it was always charming, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So is that where you grew up?
Speaker 2: That's where I grew up.
Speaker 1: And you call it the West End of Richmond?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so okay, so is that the--that's the name of that thing.
Speaker 2: The West End had many beautiful parks and playgrounds.  Also, one of my earliest memories is waking up in the summertime and not finding any parent home.  They had gone out to play tennis.  So, and I couldn't go anywhere because my hair was all sticking up when I woke up, and I needed to wait for her to come home so I could be presentable.  And that's how I learned to comb my own hair because I didn't want to wait.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you had internalized the value that your hair should be combed before you leave the house?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh yes.
Story_ID: 493419
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in the West End [Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Well, at those times we didn't have refrigerators.  So it's the iceman, and with a horse, horse drawn cart.  And he would come and measure ice and cut it precisely and put it in your icebox in your kitchen or back porch.  And that milkman clip-clopping with the horse drawn, and the bottles banging against each other in the morning when he'd put the bottles out at our door that--those sounds.  Also the sounds of the traffic, I use to lie in bed and listen to the sounds of the traffic.  And I could tell by the characteristic of the sound, it was a cold day or a hot day or a rainy day.  You know, just listening to the sound of the traffic.  And we used to--there's a park that, that spring water from this artesian well.  And we drank only spring water so we'd go to this park and fill up many five-gallon jugs of water.  And while we were there we'd have a drink of fresh spring water right from the spring.  And I could smell the grass, especially, it was just newly cut.  And the lawnmowers going in the summertime everybody cutting their grass and cutting their hedges and those smells.  And cooking, the smell of cooking the--people made bread in those days and pound cakes.  I love pound cake, but I think that--and the children playing.  You could--you knew when to get up from your nap because everybody else was up, but you could hear them playing on the playground.  Or in the backyard next to yours or wherever.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you sound, it sounds as if the way you describe yourself you were a pretty active little girl.  A lot of imagination and busy (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Very busy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so what were the things that you were most interested in when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, growing up I always thought about scenes and plays, scenes on a stage.
Speaker 1: Now had you been to a stage play as a little girl?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] used to take me to the theater.  Take us, she'd bring us to New York [New York] to see things with the Washington [Washington Opera].  And the San Carlo Opera Company, which is a traveling opera company, very old, would--had a season in Richmond, Virginia, and she took me to the opera.  She didn't take the other children, they didn't want to go, I wanted to go.  So she'd take me to the opera but and so I would imagine scenes.   And I remember as a little girl taking jacks, my jacks and ball to church with me because I would put the hymnal in my lap and make scenes with the jacks.  You know, these people go that way.  And yeah, stage and choreograph and make things happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And there was a place that I used to call my private place in this beautiful park and every time I came to this place.  I--when I was a child I'd imagined a wedding in the summer.  And everybody has on picture hats and, and beautiful gowns, and there's a waterfall, and I was just always staging weddings there.  You know, and we did what--one violin solo and all that.
Speaker 1: Now was it--do you remember the first play you ever saw?
Speaker 2: I guess the first play I ever saw was probably at the high school, you know, at the high school, and they probably did something.  No, there was a place in Richmond called the True Reformer Hall [True Reformer Building].  I haven't thought about this in decades, and they put on plays there and musicals.  And musicals, extravaganzas they called them, and I remember one was called 'Over the Rainbow,' you know.  There were all these songs about spring and over the rainbow and people dancing.  And I was always very interested in that, that I--also I liked watching fish swim in formation.   You know, schools of fish they--because it was wonderful choreography and looking at the water and the ripples, you know, that really.
Speaker 1: Where did you see them?
Speaker 2: At the Rappahannock River.
Speaker 1: Rappahannock?
Speaker 2: There was a summer place down on the Rappahannock River, and we'd go out on the pier and lean over.  You know, that's when you could see the fish swimming by and changing directions.  It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, I didn't know the Rappahannock was that clear, it's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was muddy.
Speaker 1: It's muddy but you could still see the fish?
Speaker 2: It was muddy, but you can see it, and tadpoles.
Story_ID: 493420
Speaker 1: Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: I started school; I started school early.  We went to--my brother [Edward Allen] and I went to preschool at an Episcopal church.  And Mrs. Brown [ph.] was our teacher, it was like a kindergarten, and we pasted pictures and we learned our alphabets which we already knew and we learned to read. And she was a sweet pudding shaped lady, you know, she had this pudding body that was very soft, you know.  And if you hurt yourself she'd take you onto her lap or something.  My mother was bony, but she was pudding, Mrs. Brown, Ophelia Brown [ph.] was her name.  And they--we would have organized games and things like that.  We just started this, but we started first grade, my mother had taught most of my, our teachers in normal school.  And apparently she was a very exacting teacher.  And so we felt that the teachers really had it in for us, we had to be perfect.  "Oh Mrs. Allen [Mamie Wimbush Allen], she thinks her kids are so smart, look at this, she just made a mistake."
Speaker 1: So they would (laughter)?
Speaker 2: "She just made a mistake, look you see this mistake [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen just made, when her mother sees that?"  That kind of thing, you know.  So that was kind of unfortunate.
Speaker 1: Well what was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Randolph.
Speaker 1: Randolph (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Randolph Street School [Randolph School, Richmond, Virginia] was our first school.  And--
Speaker 1: Randolph Street School?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Then my brother and I went to a experimental school called Elba School [Richmond, Virginia], and there, they let you choose a lot of the things that you wanted to do.  Mrs. Thompson [Ethel Thompson Overby], I remember, was the principal there.  And--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds like a Montessori school or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well they tried to model it, you know.  It was a little more permissive than the publ- than other schools, it was a public school but experimental.
Speaker 1: Now did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: Yes, well I liked math in the early years, later I didn't.  But, and I loved reading I wanted to read everything, reading, and we had to write stories, I liked that, writing stories.  I liked the teachers, you know, depends on who was teaching.  I had a favorite teacher, the first grade, her name was Mrs. Munford [ph.].  And she was very, very well put together.  She always made up and dressed.  And she always had a surprised look on her face, she would, she'd raise her eyebrows constantly, and she had, she--I think rehearsed this melodious voice you know.  She'd give it a ripple or two, she was hilarious, but I loved Mrs. Munford.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you get a chance to be involved in any theater in grade school?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember the first play, there was a woman in Richmond [Virginia] who had come to live in Richmond, and she taught elocution.  She'd been in a Broadway play I just happened to remember called 'Run, Little Children' [Hall Johnson], and so we all took elocution lessons with Mrs. Madam Fannie Belle De Knight.  I don't know how I remember that woman's name and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) De Knight?
Speaker 2: De Knight, yes and I remember she looked like old draperies, you know, and but we had a good time.  And the first play I was ever in I remember I had one line.  I don't know how old I was, very young, like four or three or something.  I had one line, "What time is it?"  I was a rabbit or something I think.  "What time is it," and I waited, and I waited, and I waited and I waited and it was getting late and I was getting sleepy.  So finally everybody is looking at me, and I noticed it was time for me to say my line.  And I said, "What time it is."  And everybody laughed, and I was very embarrassed.
Speaker 1: You didn't do it intentionally then, did you do it intentionally?
Speaker 2: No, I was trying to remember it was just such a shock that now it's my turn, everybody's looking at me, and I said, "What time it is."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Mrs. De Knight would put on plays, and she did one I remember called, 'Cinderella,' now I remember what I said in that play.  I said, "Sift the cinders Cinderella, you're nothing but a cinder sifter."   Don't ask how I remember that but (laughter), but I remember that I thought it was stupid actually.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what role did you play?
Speaker 2: I played one of the sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay, one of the evil stepsisters?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, all right.  Now this is when, in grade school or in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes grade school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Grade school, okay.
Story_ID: 493421
Speaker 1: Now was music a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes we all took piano, we all had piano lessons once a week.  My piano teacher was named Mr. Preston Johnson [ph.], and we would go around to Mr. Johnson's house.  First when we were very young, he came to our house and gave us lessons.  Then as we got older, say about eight, we walked around to Mr. Johnson's house.  And on the way to Mr. Johnson's house I would save a penny and buy a big ball of bubblegum because I could.  And I'd arrive at this lesson smelling of this pink bubblegum which you could smell it a mile away.  And I would be trying to chew the candy off the gum to get it just right.  So I would keep it under my tongue, keep it quiet, and all of sudden in the middle of the lesson I'd start chewing this gum.  He'd say, "All right Billie [HistoryMaker Billie Allen], give me your gum, you can't manage it anymore give it to me."  And he would take in his dirty hand, and he'd put it on top of his dusty piano and I never wanted it anymore because he never dusted his house, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so all your siblings [LaMae Allen and Edward Allen] took piano lessons, did you learn how to play the piano fairly well?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Did you sing as well?  And--
Speaker 2: No, and we had piano recitals, you know you'd get up and play your little piece.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Philippa Schuyler?
Speaker 2: Um-hm?
Speaker 1: Do you remember Philippa Schuyler?
Speaker 2: Philippa Schuyler wrecked my life.  Philippa Schuyler was this prodigy, George Schuyler's [George Schuyler] daughter.  And he was a journalist, and her mother [Josephine Cogdell] was Russian I think, and Philippa Schuyler was just about five years old.  And she came to my town, Richmond, Virginia, to do this concert and she was all dressed up like Shirley Temple.  And she came mopping on to the stage with those bobbing curls, and she played this song that she composed called 'The Cockroach' ['The Cockroach Ballet'] or something.  And everybody thought she was so smart, everybody thought she was so cute, and her mother had her on a special diet.  She never ate things with gravies or sauces and things like that, she ate steak tartare and raw vegetables.  She was about five or six I mean I actually hated her because now my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] wants me to eat raw vegetables you understand.  And leave the ham out the collards, and oh please, Philippa didn't eat candy, my mother thought well if we did all this maybe we'd be smart or something.  She wrecked my life, but I forgave her.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right yeah that--she was a famous (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Philippa Duke Schuyler.
Speaker 1: Yeah Philippa Duke Schuyler right, famous child prodigy, there's a book about her now.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I think I have one, too.
Story_ID: 493422
Speaker 1: Yeah I wondered now was church a big deal, I mean were you really involved (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, oh yes.  My mother's father [C.C. Wimbush] was a minister, and we went to church.  Very active, we went to Sunday school and stayed for church.  And my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] had a tapestry bag, pocketbook, it was a big one, and she put cookies in the bag.  So if we got restless, she'd hand out these cookies, you know, keep you quiet, she believed that food would calm you down.  If we were shopping and getting restless or incorrigible she'd give us something to eat, you know (laughter).  It was really nice, but she thought it would work, and it did most of the time.  We went to church we participated in the plays.  And we went to Sunday school and got those little Sunday school cards with--they were painted.  You know, with blue skies, and Jesus was always white with a pageboy and a long white beard.  And except for Easter when they started crucifying him and that made me cry, but it was so brutal I just couldn't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're saying they were acted out in church, oh okay?
Speaker 2: No but I mean you'd hear those stories and people--Marian Anderson, "They nailed him to the cross," and he didn't say a mumbling word and we thought, oh god.  And they thought that was so wonderful and I--it just really upset me.
Speaker 1: Did you--oh I don't know if I should ask you to answer, but did you feel that sometimes that the Jesus they nailed to the cross was a kind of stand-in for black people?
Speaker 2: No, I just thought they took this good man who was doing good all over the world, and because they didn't like him they just nailed him to the cross.  And I knew about being lynched when I got older.  I knew about lynchings, and I knew about being tarred and feathered, but nailing to the cross with a crown of thorns sticking into your--that, that was tough going, you know, that upset me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was the radio a big deal?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we had a Philco radio in the living room and on Sunday we'd watch 'Gang Busters' and something else.  And you didn't just listen to the radio you looked at the radio.  You looked directly into the radio to be able to hear better or something, "Mama, she keeps moving in front of me," somebody would say.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) From the radio?
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's supposed to interrupt your hearing.
Speaker 1: That's good, that's good.
Speaker 2: But those were good days.  And we'd hear Jack Benny on Sunday and then Rochester [Eddie "Rochester" Anderson] but then there was one they never--'Amos 'n' Andy' was not a thing we were supposed to adore, you know.
Speaker 1: You know, you're the second person this week that's told me that.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Amos 'n' Andy' was out of the question.
Speaker 1: Was it--you know was there--
Speaker 2: It wasn't funny, it was stereotypical, and you weren't permitted to laugh.  And the point of it is it was funny, it was funny.  So we used to sneak and listen to it because the situations with Kingfish and Sapphire [Kingfish Stevens and Sapphire Stevens], they were marvelous situations, and it was funny.
Story_ID: 493423
Speaker 1: Okay so did you have any black stars that you particularly idolized in those days?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say, I didn't idolize them, I liked them, I was always very critical.  Very--paying much attention, and that's what we liked to do.  My friends, we liked to sit and say, "She should have done that," you know, "Did you like her hair?  What is she doing?"   But yes, I liked--Lena Horne was always gorgeous but she was so perfect you--she just wasn't real, you know.  How could I ever look like that, who wants--and yes, yes, I really loved Marian Anderson.  I loved her voice, I loved the way she looked, I loved her demeanor.  I loved her intellect about what she was singing, and I really liked her a lot.  I mean, I, if I had a crush, you know, it would be on Marian Anderson.  Or it would be on--I didn't like Dorothy Dandridge a lot because of the roles.  It had nothing to do with her, nothing necessarily to do with her.  But I never asked people for autographs, never you know, I was just like, you stay on the screen, and I'll stay in my seat, and that's gonna be our relationship (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, were there actresses in--black people didn't get in a lot of major movies in those days but were there what about the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh Bette Davis and all that bunch, well she was a camp, we loved Bette Davis 'cause she was always melodramatic.  And I remember going to a Joan Crawford or something, and she was on a deck, and she had on a white chiffon dress.  And she sniffing brandy in a brandy snifter and her hair was blowing, and she was sniffing brandy, and I went home, I had a brandy snifter with a turtle in it.  I took the turtle out, and I washed out the brandy snifter, and I had saved a little, tiny little bottle of brandy, locked my door.  Put the brandy in the--(laughter) and I sat there sniffing the brandy and so fast asleep woke up the next morning in all my clothes, you know.  But, I didn't admire them so much, but they were fun.  I liked the adventure, I didn't like cowboys, my brother [Edward Allen] did, but people dying on horses, I didn't like that.  I liked musicals and other things, dramas.
Story_ID: 493424
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite movie from those days?  You would have been a teenager when 'Gone with the-' you were a teenager when 'Gone with the Wind' came out (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes 'Gone with the Wind,' everybody--
Speaker 1: And 'Wizard of Oz' ['The Wizard of Oz']?
Speaker 2: Oh 'Gone with the Wind' was it, oh, everybody's saving their money.  People called you on the phone, they said, "Hey Billie [HistoryMaker Billie Allen], you got show fare?"  That's a quarter, twenty-five cents, I said, "Yeah, you?"  "Yeah, well let's go, we're going to see "'Gone with the Wind.'"  "What, let me ask my mom [Mamie Wimbush Allen] first, you know."  They had 'Gone with the Wind' skirts that were very full, and they had--
Speaker 1: Now it must have been a big deal in Richmond [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: It was a big deal in Richmond.
Speaker 1: The capital of the Confederacy.
Speaker 2: And not only that, but that staircase scene was shot at the Jefferson Hotel in Richmond.  And that beautiful staircase, which is very beautiful.  And it was and--but even then you know I didn't get really involved in her dilemma (laughter).  Because I think, you know, she's gonna be all right, I know she's gonna be all right.  It's just, this is her film, she stars--whatever.  You know, her folks can get her out of this.  My folks can't get me out of much.  But, so it--there was always this thing between me, you know.
Speaker 1: Now how did the black community react to that, the big 'Gone with the Wind' craze in Richmond?
Speaker 2: With Hattie McDaniel?  Well, they were ashamed.  I was--you see my mother had talked about this.  I wasn't ashamed, I looked at it from a different way because don't forget my grandmother [Mary Willie Jones] had been a midwife, my father's mother.  And we had--my mother always had people helping her, either living with us or helping her.  And we had to have utmost respect, and we were taught that that is their profession, and they do it well.  I--my mother said, "I don't do it well.  I teach.  They clean and cook.  They can do that better than I can.  I can teach better than they can, and that is how it is, but that's their profession and this is mine."  So I didn't feel--I felt that Hattie McDaniel had a pivotal role to play with these people, you know.  And--now Butterfly McQueen, that was another story.  With this little squeaky voice and this kind of show of lack of birthing a baby.  Everybody remembers that line, "I don't know nothing about birthing no baby," that kind of hit me, that hit me.
Speaker 1: Well, she actually got hit in the movie.  By, Scarlett [Scarlett O'Hara] actually slaps her (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, she slapped her you were right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yup.
Speaker 2: She literally got hit.  I didn't admire those--that role.  I would never want to aspire to that role.  I would never want to aspire to Hattie McDaniel's role either.  I--nor Joan Crawford, nor Bette Davis.  I mean, you know, those eccentric women who behaved in a certain way and in spite of that I was always looking for my role, what, what I liked.
Story_ID: 493425
Speaker 1: What high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: Went to, I went to Armstrong High School [Richmond, Virginia].
Speaker 1: Armstrong High School, okay. That's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Named after ol' General Armstrong [Samuel Chapman Armstrong].
Speaker 1: Okay, Armstrong High School.  Now, at Armstrong High School, had you come up with a life aspiration or a goal or career idea yet?
Speaker 2: Well I always knew I really did--I said that I was going to be a pediatrician.  That was acceptable.  But I knew I wanted to be in theater.  And I never thought of myself as an actress per se.  I was struck dumb by the ballet, and the ballet companies used to come to this huge theater that we'd pass walking home from school, when I was in high school.  And in the springtime they'd be out at rehearsal, they'd be taking a break.  Because when I went to see the ballet, I was very much interested.  The music was beautiful, the costumes, you know, and what you could express with movement and I was taken by that.  But I was thinking not that there are no black people doing this but they look so beautiful, and I'm not beautiful, so you know that's how I looked at it.  And then one day I was passing by the stage door, the deck, and they were all out there, and they were ugly.  I mean they were so homely people, so I said, "Hey I can do that."  And I made up my mind, I can do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you take dance lessons?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Did you start in high school?
Speaker 2: No, I started before high school.  And they had this little dancing teacher in Richmond [Virginia].  She was all right, Maxine Ferrara [ph.].  But I couldn't wait to come to New York [New York] to study.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's what I did.
Speaker 1: So how old were you when you started taking dance?
Speaker 2: Well I started when I was about eleven.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Richmond.  But then when I started in New York when I was about fifteen, but I really--the physical, you know, I enjoyed that.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what activates were you involved in high school?  Were you in clubs and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Richmond?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Richmond, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, the Girl Scouts [Girl Scouts of the United States of America], which I hated.  I thought they were stupid; they made potholes, and they had this little test about tying ropes and things like that.  And they loved camping, I hated camping, but I had to do it 'cause my family camped.  And I always wanted to just go to a hotel, you know.  Go someplace and go to a hotel, and swim in the swimming pool.  And not go to camp and swim with the tadpoles, in the Rappahannock [Rappahannock River] or something like that.  But this is what I did, my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] said, it built character to take cold showers, and cook outside, you know, over the campfire.  I must agree, but I couldn't wait never to do it again.  I think though that--and I have, I liked to do Indian beadwork on the loom when I was in camp.  I still have some of the pieces, necklaces, and my sister [LaMae Allen] was a counselor.  And she always complained to my mother, "Oh mama, Billie's [HistoryMaker Billie Allen] the worst camper here, she's so embarrassing.  She doesn't want to play softball."  I'd say, "No, not in the hot sun, it doesn't make sense."  "She doesn't want to swim, not with tadpoles that doesn't make sense either.  And she just wants to sit under a tree and read all day and decide how she's going to entertain us at night, you know, at the campfire."  And I thought that was enough, you know.
Speaker 1: So how would you entertain them at night?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I'd do a dance or something, you know.
Speaker 1: So you'd do a dance, or would you read poetry, or do a dramatic (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I thought do a dance or read something, or think of a skit.  They had skits, and I'd, maybe with two other girls I would direct the skit that we would do, you know, something like that.
Story_ID: 493426
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in high school [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were fortunate in our high school.  I realized later, of course because the--our teachers were scholars for the most part.  They had gone to just Ivy League colleges, and they couldn't get a job anywhere else.  Our Latin teacher for instance, he was a very fine teacher.  His name was Leviticus Carney [ph.] of all things, and he was strictly Ivy League, and expected the best from us.  And our teachers expected the best from us because they thought that we were capable.  And they had been--they brought us the best in education for the most part.  There's some duds in there that didn't know what they were talking about, but we knew that, the students knew that, you know.  But the history department and the math and the science.  And I loved biology and I just--the teachers were very, very fine.  Of a high caliber, who knew you could do the work.
Speaker 1: Now those are the days, I believe, when the State of Virginia would pay the tuition of blacks that wanted to go to graduate school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They did.
Speaker 1: To go to another state but--
Speaker 2: They did pay tuition.  As a matter of fact, Alice Jackson [Alice Jackson Stuart] was the first test case.  And she was a friend of my mother's [Mamie Wimbush Allen].  And the sister of James Jackson [James E. Jackson, Jr.], who was organizing the tobacco.  Alice recently--and I kept in touch with her for all those years, but she was the first test case.  So they paid for you to go out of state rather than to go to the graduate school.  So that was fine.
Speaker 1: So that's why a lot of the black teachers from what I understand came (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Back with Ph.D.s and master's degrees from prestigious northern schools.
Speaker 2: Yes, so we were fortunate to receive this, and in many ways, you know, when I meet--when I was a teenager especially even now I meet people.  New Yorkers, people living in the North: "Oh poor child.  You had such a poor awful--oh you're so downgraded, blah, blah."  I said, yeah, you know.  We didn't sit on the bus often, we were taught to walk across town.
Story_ID: 493427
Speaker 1: But one day I did--I was going to a Girl Scout [Girl Scouts of the United States of America] meeting and my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] called me to say that she couldn't drive me.  She was late coming from school she had a meeting.  And I was to take the street car for the first time, I was about twelve.  She--I knew where to go and so forth.  But I was preoccupied 'cause I was gonna pass this test and get a merit badge, another one to put on my thing.  And I sat down on the streetcar looking at--reading this book and preparing for this test.  And I noticed the streetcar wasn't moving, and I realized that everybody was looking at me.  Then the conductor comes, he says, "Don't you know you're not supposed to sitting beside a white woman."  And I thought oh god.  And I was so embarrassed, so I kept--I looked down you know, kept looking at my book.  Then I snuck a look over to the person who had her hands in her lap.  And I looked up, and I said to him, "Is she white, she looks like my Uncle George [George Wimbush]?"  'Cause I had an Uncle George, who looked like he was white, and he had these hands with veins in them.  And I had to save my face, and this is the way I've always saved my face all my life, you know.
Speaker 2: That's pretty clever (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, that just what I've done.  That's my weapon, but the black people were very embarrassed, and the white people were very impatient and disgusted and embarrassed.  So I got off at the next stop and walked.  But, so that was--well I didn't feel--it was all right with me the way I handled it.  And I felt all right getting to my meeting and passing my test and getting my merit badge.  And I figured, this is what you have to do, you have to be prepared.
Speaker 2: Now, now were you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was frightening though, when the conductor approached me I was really frightened, 'cause I didn't know if I was gonna get killed or arrested or what.
Speaker 2: So things you'd read about or heard about became--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, and I knew about this.  I knew about that--
Speaker 2: --manifest in that.
Speaker 1: But growing up in Richmond [Virginia] though was not, was--we got a lot of support from your family, and your church, and your community.  And everybody took care of everybody else's children, I mean, and looked after you.  It was a much more cohesive time because we had to hang together because our lives were so dependent on each other.  And when things--when we began to travel, we began to--and then the segregation laws were lifted and you could eat downtown, man, you couldn't find your friends (laughter).  We used to go to each other's houses as children and teenagers, to parties on Friday night or Saturday night.  Somebody's mother would bake a cake we'd all go there, and it was, it was fine.
Story_ID: 493428
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite subject in school other than--
Speaker 2: Favorite subject in school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I liked biology, and I really loved geometry for some strange reason.  And I think I liked my geometry teacher.  She was young, she used to take me to the ballet.  And then she had a boyfriend, and I would go with them, to--they would take me to the ballet.  And for me to go to the ballet with this young couple who were in love, oh that was just springtime.  It just, you know, you couldn't get in touch with me on any level.  It was just floating, and I liked her very much.  And there were so many teachers that I liked.  We went, I went to my fiftieth anniversary.  A reunion, my brother [Edward Allen] and I went, we had a grand time (laughter), and some of the old teachers were there, believe it or not.  We were--but I wouldn't go again, fiftieth--that was enough.
Speaker 1: Now, did you run for class office or anything like that in high school [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia]?  Did you, you know, run for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I was in the plays.  I was in the plays, and I was in the glee club.  We had an a capella choir that won all kinds of awards.  And I did that, and we learned the Gilbert and Sullivan [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan] canon practically.
Speaker 1: Of all the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, and I liked that.  I was absorbed in that, but I was interested in being the secretary and keeping records.  And keeping charge of money, and, you know, I supported other people but that's not what I wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Now, so when you were a senior in high school on the verge of graduation what were your plans, what did you plan to do?
Speaker 2: What, where did I plan to go?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what did you plan to do and what did you, where did you plan to go?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew I had to go to college.  I wanted to go to further study dance.  I really thought I wanted to go to Bennington [Bennington College], in Vermont [Bennington, Vermont].  It was the Depression [Great Depression], it was very expensive.  And I was very young, you know, like sixteen.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you--what year did you graduate?
Speaker 2: Forty-one [1941].
Speaker 1: Forty-one [1941], okay.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 493429
Speaker 1: I was young and, you know.  I went to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia].  They had a dance group that traveled, and a wonderful art department.  I'm still in touch with my high school buddies, my Sunday school buddies, my high school buddies and my college buddies.  We keep in touch, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what was life like at Hampton?  Who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, beauty, very beautiful setting right on the Chesapeake Bay.  And I don't know, I had a--I lived in the dormitory with, we had two adjoining rooms at the end of the hall.  It was like a suite, and everybody seemed to wanna hang out there.  It's very funny, I have always, my whole family, we like to go to bed early, we get sleepy, you know, after a certain point of the day it's curtains, really.  And I didn't like these people falling asleep on my bed and so forth 'cause I was sleepy.  And, but I met a lot of interesting women, I'm still in touch with a lot of them.  The Poussaints, and there's this wonderful woman, a girl student from Brownsville, Texas.  And that's where I learned about the Brownsville Raid and about Texas.  And her mother had a pharmacy, and this woman was an only child and she had a lot of money all the time.  She married one of the Poussaints, and they came and they lived in New York [New York].  And when the mother came to visit, oh boy, she just couldn't stand the squalor of a New York apartment, so she bought her a brownstone.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Like that, so we all moved to the brownstone, we became a co-op.  But--and I got to visit, you know, other students and that was wonderful, seeing how other people lived in other cities and--
Speaker 2: And did, did you have a favorite teacher or mentor at Hampton?
Speaker 1: Well it's very interesting because, one of my mentees, Thulani Davis, who now works in theater in New York, she's a writer, her mother was one of my mentors at Hampton.  This whole group of Davis boys who were writing, Arthur Paul [Arthur P. Davis], and Collin [sic. Collis H. Davis, Jr.].  And they were writers and artists, and it was wonderful.
Speaker 2: Now, now what's Mrs. Davis's name?  Thulani's mother?
Speaker 1: Thulani's mother's named Billie [Willie Barbour Davis].  She was married I think to, I think her father's name was Collin [sic. Collis Davis, Sr.].  And they were, the Davis, the Davis boys, the Davis men, they were smart.  The other thing that I remember is the Tuskegee Airmen.  They were--and I see now that they're honoring them finally and at last at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: So some of the Tuskegee Airmen had come back and, you know, started to go to Hampton?
Speaker 1: Well they were dating people we knew, my older sister [LaMae Allen] and, you know, they were, they were handsome.  And accomplished and--
Speaker 2: Okay.  So your sister was dating one?
Speaker 1: My sister.
Speaker 2: Okay, now--so in Hampton, did you take visual art too at Hampton?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And pottery, I loved pottery, you know, creating things.  And with clay I loved that.  And they had a wonderful art department.  Bearden [Romare Bearden] taught there for a while and, but I didn't participate in that so much 'cause I was with a dance group and we had to work.
Story_ID: 493430
Speaker 1: And I remember [at Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] I had a West Indian boyfriend from St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], and I liked him because he was smart, and we had a lot of things to talk about.  In high school [Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia], my boyfriend's name was Jimmy Drew [ph.].  And he, he was so black that he had this bluish tint to his skin, that I thought was absolutely gorgeous, 'cause it was different and gorgeous.  And he was a physics major, and we spent a lot of time with astronomy, and he use to write me letters on birch bark that he peeled from the birch bark, birch tree.  And I got excited, I mean I liked that.
Speaker 2: It was unusual.
Speaker 1: Yes, and he was an Eagle Scout.  I didn't so much appreciate being an Eagle Scout because it meant other things to me, you know.  Following regime, regime, regimented.  But he was a nice guy, we kept in touch for a while.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Then you were talking about the West Indian boyfriend from--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, there was--
Speaker 2: St. Thomas, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, my aunt said, "oh do you think you should--you planning to marry?"  I said, "I'm not thinking about getting married, Aunt Emma [ph.], I never want to get married, what do you mean, talking about marrying."  And she said, "You don't know what those children, you know, you go to visit them, you know, they'll put you in a pot."  I said, "Oh, that is so ignorant, that is so ignorant."  So when I got to do 'Raisin in the Sun' ['A Raisin in the Sun,' Lorraine Hansberry] on Broadway and Mama [Lena Younger] was talking about this African student [Joseph Asagai], I thought about this whole thing.  And that's what I was able to use, and because she was halfway kidding but she said it.  And we kept in touch, but I liked him because he was enterprising, and he was smart, and not so slick.
Speaker 2: Okay, what was his name?
Speaker 1: Edwin Bertrand [ph.], he became superintendent of schools in Charlotte Amalie at St. Thomas.  We used to talk about St. Thomas all the time.
Speaker 2: Okay,
Speaker 1: And, but I was disappointed in the dance group because they were doing folk dances for the most part.  We did a couple of modern dances.  Moten, one of the Moten family, was teaching, she'd been, I think she'd been to Bennington [Bennington College, Bennington, Vermont].  And we did this dance I remember it was wonderful with drums called 'Middle Passage' [ph.] about the slave ships.
Speaker 2: It wasn't [HistoryMaker] Etta Moten Barnett?  It wasn't Etta Moten Barnett I guess?
Speaker 1: No, no, no I know Etta Moten Barnett, I played Etta Moten Barnett's daughter in a play up at Westport [Connecticut] then I became an actor.
Story_ID: 493431
Speaker 1: Anything else about Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], before we get you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not really.  I loved the church.  The spirituals, the--that kind of wonderful, wonderful music.   And (laughter) I was thinking about the church, I was thinking about Agnes [ph.].  Agnes was one of my dormmates.  And she was very, very, very quiet, and we never heard anything about her boyfriends or anything about--and one day we looked around and Agnes was pregnant.  That was a surprise to everybody, Agnes, my god, how did--well apparently.  She said, "Oh, no, no, no, no, no, I got pregnant in the church."  She used to meet this boy in the church (laughter).  So when you mentioned church I thought about Agnes.  And we all really cracked up, you know.
Speaker 1: Well you never know (laughter).  So, so what were your plans after, you know, you were heading towards graduation.  Graduating young I guess, for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't graduate, I stayed two years.
Speaker 1: Oh you stayed two years?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I came to New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: To work in theater.  To study more fully.
Speaker 1: Well, you were what, nineteen?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about eighteen.
Speaker 1: Nineteen years old, eighteen, nineteen?  So what, did that decision upset your parents [Mamie Wimbush Allen and William Allen]?
Speaker 2: No, because I told them I'd finish here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And because they knew how passionate I was, my mother did.  And I mean, I was just focused, just focused.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: So what I did was to get a job.  I got a job, and I felt that, I felt so compelled, you know, to do this.  And took responsibility, and hardly had any kind of support, you know.  Nobody said, "Oh that's wonderful," everybody said, "Are you crazy?"  (Laughter) I said, well, so I had a rich inner life that I'd get by with, you know, what I was thinking I was going to do.  I just kept focused.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were your activities when you got here to New York?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well I had a sister [LaMae Allen] who was living here, she was working at the Bell Telephone Laboratories [Bell Laboratories].  It was during the war, the Second World War [World War II, WWII].  And I had a ballet class at ten o'clock every morning, five days a week.  For which you had to be fit, ready, and I was determined that I was going to be, you know, a top technician.  I was just determined, and became a top technician.  A lot of kids get started early.  Also, while I was here--I was never--I always had a job.  I had a job (laughter), I had a job, I had so many funny jobs.  But I had a job at Colonel Steinberg's [ph.] office at 101 Park Avenue.  And I was a receptionist, and he had, I think he had designed the curtain to Radio City Music Hall [New York, New York], and that was his claim to fame.  And he just thought that was so special.  And the reason I took the job it was 'cause I was allowed to have my ballet class every morning come after class.  And if I got an audition I could take my lunch, use that as my lunch hour and go to an audition.  And pretty soon I had a job in a show.  And I went to the American Negro Theatre and watched things up there.  And my sister lived down--first we lived on Convent Avenue with friends of my parents.  And then she moved to the West Village [New York, New York] to Bedford Street, and she was married.  So I was left in Convent without her, but I was living with a family.  And I met a lot of interesting people.
Story_ID: 493432
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who are some of the people that were around here on the art scene in those days in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well first of all, Judge Watson's [James S. Watson], Barbara Watson [Barbara M. Watson] and James Watson [James Lopez Watson].  Barbara was a lawyer whose father was the first municipal judge.  They were, he was Jamaican, and Barbara started the first black model agency.  Branford Models [Branford Modeling Agency], and I was the ingenue.  I, you know, was the--then I got a job with the agency, exercising.  Teaching exercising, having an exercise class to keep the models in shape.  And was very surprised when it worked 'cause I'd never done that (laughter).  I thought it should work, and I was getting paid.  And so I lived with the Watsons for a while, and I met so many interesting people, Nkrumah [Kwame Nkrumah], you know, that, it was just an interesting, interesting time.  And there's this place called Lucky's Rendezvous on St. Nicholas Avenue [New York, New York].  I was their early crowd.  So your buddies would come in town, come to New York.  And you'd go to hear Billie Holiday somewhere or, or have dinner and stop by Lucky's for a sandwich.  Now at the same time, Luther Henderson was going to Lucky's.  I didn't know him, and he was with the late crowd, but we kept missing each other.  He's the man I later married, and we kept missing each other.  But, and there was Romare Bearden, and his mother Bessye Bearden was a big newspaper columnist with I think the Pittsburgh Courier [New Pittsburgh Courier].  And, I mean you just met all these people.  And Alain Locke lived down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], and we used to go sit on the stoop and listen to him lecture.  He would just have the most amazing evenings doing that.  And once a month I would go with some of my classmates from ballet school to the Russian Tea Room [New York, New York].  And we'd have the same thing, borscht, tea in a glass, that's all we could afford, with a little meat thing.  And we take that, and we could watch, you know, all the big ballet stars, and go to Lewisohn Stadium to hear concerts, that was free.  And, but I always got to go.  I mean somebody was always giving away free tickets somewhere, so I always got to go to the opera, to the theater, and participating.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were, you were, well learning and participating and just checking things out?
Speaker 2: Yes, I got little encouragement because it seemed like a foolhardy thing to do, you know, from logical people.
Speaker 1: Now did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My brother [Edward Allen] said, "Look you'll probably be a starving artist, and I'm not going to feed you okay."  I said, "That's a deal," (laughter).  And so now his children are, they've become writers and filmmakers and I am their mentor.
Story_ID: 493433
Speaker 1: Now did you know Sidney Poitier when he had the barbecue shop [Ribs in the Ruff, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, Sidney and Harry [HistoryMaker Harry Belafonte].  Harry used to date Marguerite [Marguerite Byrd Belafonte], his first wife, when she was in Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] when I was there.  So I knew him when he was in the [U.S.] Navy and dated Marguerite I'd met him.  And then I saw him again when he was dating Julie [Julie Robinson], I was going to classes at [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham's school.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was your impression of Harry Belafonte in those days?  Did you--as a sailor did he seem like he was gonna ever be a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, yes.  We did this play, written, it's called 'Head of the Family' and it was done at the Westport County theater [Westport County Playhouse], in Westport [Connecticut].  This summer George Norford was the playwright, and that's, Etta Moten [HistoryMaker Etta Moten Barnett] played my mother and Fred O'Neal [Frederick O'Neal], my father.  Rosetta LeNoire was a neighbor, nosy neighbor, and Harry Belafonte played my brother.  And George Brock Peters [Brock Peters], he was then another name, played my boyfriend.  Avon Long was in it, he was the maestro of the opera company, the one who wanted to be an opera singer and the father, of course, this--it was a comedy.  Wonderful, wonderful.  And we expected more from George Norford, but he was one of those executives swept up by Westinghouse [Westinghouse Broadcasting Company].  He got swallowed up in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: So he didn't do a lot of writing after that.  And then, so I would dance in concerts at the YMHA [Young Men's Hebrew Association], and all around, and do benefits.  And every while--do a show every once in a while.  And one, I--my show closed I've forgotten what show maybe, 'My Darling Aida' ['My Darlin' Aida,' Charles Friedman], a big musical based on 'Aida' [Giuseppe Verdi] the opera.  And it closed because I guess it wasn't good, but there I met Tanya Holmes.  And she was talking about doing 'My Fair Lady' [Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe], and all these.  And everybody said. "Honey that's not gonna work.  How is that gonna work?"  (Laughter) It's a lifetime, but we did this play at Westport theater, and it was just filled with all these wonderful people.  And that's how I got to know him and Harry, oh, and at night, you know, he would say, "Oh I have something to eat over my place."  So we'd go to his cabin where--to eat 'cause he were always hungry, and of course he had to sing 'cause he was, you know, he'd use us for his built in audience.  And that was that was an interesting part because can he sing or can't he sing?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, Sidney Poitier had a barbecue place that we've seen him talking before that he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes we knew, and we knew, you know, it was Harry and Sidney, Sidney and Harry.  So then Harry was acting, Sidney was singing, and you got to meet these people.
Speaker 1: Did you know [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee?
Speaker 2: Yes I saw them.  I used to see them at the old Schomburg library [Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, New York, New York].  And I saw their first Broadway play called 'Jeb' [Robert Ardrey].  It was so hilarious because it took place in the South.  And Ruby was affecting a southern accent, and Ossie makes his entrance and Ruby looked up and said, "Where have you been, Jeb?"  And I thought, what (laughter) that was so funny to me, but she's a gorgeous actress, a wonderful actor.  And I admire her work so, and we all knew each other.  But one day I was--my show closed and I was, I wanted to take my parents [Mamie Wimbush Allen and William Allen] Christmas gifts cause I was going to Richmond [Virginia] for Christmas.  So I go to Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.] to get a job.  I just wanted a simple job wrapping gifts.  Now anything that requires precision like wrapping or bed making that's not something I do well even now, but I was going to learn.  And I was going to do this, but I dressed like an executive because I thought that'd be a good idea and so they gave me an executive job.  In charge of special order carpeting for the customer, I was the customer liaison and these people had ordered.  "Oh, I ordered this carpeting for my house," and out in Great Neck [New York] and for the bat mitzvah, and getting married.  "And I still haven't gotten it, and what is happening?"  And this weeping and gnashing, and I liked it 'cause I had my own office.   Two girls in Brooklyn [New York] working under me, they knew their alphabet, I didn't.  They could file things, and I did the calling.  I also called my agent.
Story_ID: 493434
Speaker 1: I also got a call from this black filmmaker named Bill Alexander [William D. Alexander], who said he wanted me to act in this film, and I said, "But I'm not an actor, I'm a dancer."  And he said, "No, everybody tells me that you would perfect."  Well, what, no you don't have to audition.  He said, "I got to make this film before, I think, the first of the year," and I had something to do with taxes or alimony or something.   And he had to make this film, so I thought, oh, how much do I make?  He said, "Seventy-five [dollars] for a day."  I said, "Wow," you know, oh yeah, 'cause I was about making seventy [dollars] a week or something like that.  So I decided to do it.  And I said, but you must know, here's, here's the deal.  I didn't have an agent 'cause he called me direct.  I didn't know about agents so much.  I said, "I will do it, but you have to pay me each day after we shoot, seventy-five dollars.  And the day you don't pay me is the day you don't see me again the next day, it's finished."  That's what we agreed to.  So who was in the film?  Jimmy Edwards [sic. Jimmy Wright] and Della Reese [sic.], a lot of people in this film.  It was called 'Souls of Sin.'  Well, it ended up in a warehouse in Tyler, Texas.  It was stored away somewhere, and I thought, nobody's ever gonna see this film.  Oh, I kept my job at Macy's [R.H. Macy and Co.; Macy's, Inc.] because my friends punched me in every day at the time clock.  And I went over on my lunch hour and made a lot of noise so everybody'd see me.  And then they'd punch me in for overtime, and I split my salary with them, I gave the half my salary.  And so I had half my salary from Macy's plus seventy-five dollars a day from film.  So I was rich when I went home, and my nieces who became filmmakers when they finished Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Brown [Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island] were living in California.  This is years after they went to see these, this black film festival.  They started screaming, "That's Aunt Billie [HistoryMaker Billie Allen], oh my god, that's Aunt Billie."  And they got on the phone, well this turned out to be a big cult thing, that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What's the name of the film again?
Speaker 1: 'Souls of Sin.'
Speaker 2: 'Souls of Sin.'
Speaker 1: Jimmy Edwards, you know who else was in it?  What the name of--he's a filmmaker now.  Carter, Terry Carter, Terry Carter [sic.].  I think that is, well he's in it, and it was hilarious.  I never--I was always afraid to look at it, 'cause I hadn't studied yet.  I was just doing it, and I think I was the only one that really got paid.  The other people are interested in honing their craft and being, having a film.  I was not an actor, I was not honing any craft.  I was in debt (laughter) but it worked out.  And it got me interested, then as a dancer, Elia Kazan came to see me dance in some show I was in, and auditioned me for 'Camino Real,' Tennessee Williams' play.  Eli Wallach was--so I did all these things, improvisations with Eli Wallach, and I mean I was learning a lot and I didn't mind.
Speaker 2: Now about what year was this, this is about what year?  Are the--like 'Souls of Sin.'  What, about what year was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm trying to think--
Speaker 2: Can you--
Speaker 1: Before children, it was before children.
Speaker 2: Yeah 'cause you left Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], was it '44 [1944] or so?
Speaker 1: No, this was like the late '50s [sic.].
Speaker 2: Oh this late, we've already gotten late '50s [1950s].  Now, we're in the late '50s [1950s] now, yeah?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Story_ID: 493435
Speaker 1: When did you study with Lee Strasberg?
Speaker 2: I, this is what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So Elia Kazan called me up, and he said, "Well Billie [HistoryMaker Billie Allen], you know, there's a part of Esmea- the role is Esmerelda."  And I'd gotten very interested in acting.  But I still had my shows during, at night.  And he said, "I'm not going to use you in the film because I'm gonna use some ingenue from Actors Studio [The Actors Studio, New York, New York].  But I would like you to study, I've arranged for you to study with Lee Strasberg, and you're going to become a wonderful actor."  I said, "Thank you very much."  He could tell by my eyes I had no intention, so he go a little more intense.  He said, "Mrs. Hansen [ph.]," his secretary, "is waiting for you in the office," now.  So I realized that I had to go, I could not not go.  So I went, and I worked with Lee for eight years.  Whenever I was free, wasn't working in town.  And that was the beginning of serious acting.  I felt that coming from the discipline of dance made it much easier for me in many ways.  But all right, I studied with Lee and blah, blah.  Meanwhile, I'd gotten married.
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I wanna go back to that for a minute, what do you think was the most important thing you learned from Lee Strasberg?
Speaker 2: The most important thing I learned from Lee Strasberg is that I have everything I need right here, and all I have to do is know how to access it.  And I heard a lot about, you know, the German expressionistic theater and about the Brecht ensemble [Berliner Ensemble] and was able to go to Berlin [Germany] to see the Brecht theater.  And to see them do 'Mother Courage' ['Mother Courage and Her Children,' Bertolt Brecht] because I had heard this from Lee.  And so when I was offered a job going to Berlin I said, "Only if you get me tickets will I go."  And they said, "All right," and so they got me a ticket to East Berlin [Germany].  And I went, and the other thing is that I saw all these actors in my group, in my class who were physically locked, you know.  I wasn't physically locked.  I was--
Speaker 1: It's because of the dancing training, you think?
Speaker 2: That's because of that, yes.  You know, because we have a certain freedom, about our bodies, and so forth, that helps a lot.  But then I learned how to access my emotional life, and walk out on a limb.  And I challenged them a lot because, well because I thought they mumbled, and it's--you got to know what you're saying and so forth.
Speaker 1: Now did you know some of the other people in that--well by that time some of the big names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Marilyn Monroe was in my class, [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones.  And oh, just lots of people came and went and I, you know, we just all knew each other, we all helped each other.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever do anything with the Negro Ensemble Company [NEC], did you?
Speaker 2: No, I worked--when they were forming the Negro Ensemble was when we were doing 'A Raisin in the Sun' [Lorraine Hansberry] on Broadway.  And I was pregnant when they cast the show.  They didn't know if they wanted me they waited.  I said, "You all cast 'cause I'm gonna stay home and nurse," you know, I'm not rushing.  And anyway then I went by, and I understudied for Beneatha [Beneatha Younger].  And met [HistoryMaker] Douglas Turner Ward and all those guys, and they were forming this company.  And in a way I, you know, was part of them thinking about it, but I, by this time I had two children [Duane Grant, Jr. and Carolyn Grant].  I lived in Long Island [New York], and I don't know how I was able to keep some kind of career going, but I was.
Story_ID: 493436
Speaker 1: When did you get married?  Now we have pictures of your wedding?  But what year was it when you got married?
Speaker 2: Wedding?
Speaker 1: Yeah, when did you get married?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think, that was like 1950, '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so also by this time.  When I had the first child [Duane Grant, Jr.] that's when--that was in '59 [1959], '59 [1959], no, '55 [1955].  That's the first child, and yes.  So the first call I got when I got back from the hospital was from my agent.  Talking about 'The Phil Silvers Show,' and I decided to go because I could get back into my pencil skirt, you know.  I had done all my exercises, I could get my skirt on, so I went.  Not expecting to be hired necessarily, but to meet these people and see what--well I got hired.  I stayed what, seven years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Seven years, that's--
Speaker 2: As a WAC [Women's Army Corps], you know, off and on.  No contract.
Speaker 1: So you were off and on different times, okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, but it a wonderful experience and I learned a lot.  It was like a real graduate course.  And so then from there things just--
Speaker 1: Now there was another black person on the show too right?
Speaker 2: Terry Carter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He played one of the one of the soldiers under Sergeant Bilko [Ernest G. Bilko] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  He lives in Scandinavia now, and I bumped into him in New York [New York] at a memorial for [HistoryMaker] Katherine Dunham.  And oh, we had a good laugh, it's very funny.  He's doing very well I think.
Speaker 1: Are there some good stories in that show from those--from doing a comedy show live like that are there--do you have any funny stories?
Speaker 2: Oh yes we, oh yes.  Well 'The Phil Silvers Show,' we had all those comics, on the break they would go to Florida.  In the wintertime they'd go to Florida and play some club or casino or something.  And usually they'd meet these women, and they always promised to make them a television star and put them on the show.  So after the break we all knew that these women, some of them wanted to.  So this year they brought this woman back, and we welcomed them and all that.  And Nat Hiken, who was directing, he's very serious, he said, "Listen, honey, what's your name again?"  And, "That's right, Mary, well, look you stand over there by the files, file cabinet.  And when Phil," Phil Silvers' name was Ernie Bilko, "when Phil comes in you say, 'Hi Ernie.'  You know, and then you turn, take a file out and go this way out the door."  That's--oh she was so excited, so we went rolling, rolling, rolling in front of the camera.  And everybody is on cue, and everything is popping and popping and everything is happening.  And the door opens and Phil comes in, and she looks up and she says, "Hi Phil."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I said, "Yeah, Ernie, hello," but--oh cut, cut, cut he's screaming cut.  So he said, "Honey, we're going to do this again, now when Phil comes in don't look at him, that's your job."  But, you know, we would all go (laughter), and they were always playing jokes on each other.  It was like everything I've ever learned about timing, about timing, and the way building a comic scene, telling a joke and the payoff, that's where I learned it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They were good at that, Phil Silvers was a master of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh he was funny, and I would be laughing with some of the situations, you know.
Speaker 1: So they played jokes on each other on the--
Speaker 2: Yes, oh there was--nothing was safe, you know, sitting in the chair, eating, nothing everything was loaded, bugged, yet it was an interesting time.
Speaker 1: And I often got the impression that sometimes they were doing, they were doing something they weren't supposed to.  And he would--sometimes a trick was played on him, he'd just over talk people.
Speaker 2: That's right, he did, he did he was funny, but that show about the Benedict Arnold dance and they were selling tickets, let bygones be bygones, now that was funny.  I really enjoyed that, and I learned from that to not to be judgmental and to go and find out.
Speaker 1: Okay, in what sense though?
Speaker 2: Well I didn't know what I was gonna do with a bunch of comics, I was a serious actor (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, and it all worked out.  Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I learned a lot is what I did.
Story_ID: 493437
Speaker 1: Sergeant Bilko [Ernest G. Bilko] ran for, you know, from '56 [1956] over the course of seven years, you said?
Speaker 2: Yes, but I was always working at something else (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Doing other shows, there were those Sunday morning shows, 'Lamp Unto My Feet.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: With some message, some religious message or wonderful message for people.  And I did all of that, and it was wonderful.  I worked on a soap for a while.
Speaker 1: Which one was it?
Speaker 2: 'The Edge of Night.'
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes.
Speaker 1: That's pushing it, (laughter) 'The Edge of Night.'
Speaker 2: 'The Edge of Night,' oh it was a riot.  I mean, I was doing a lot of commercials during those days.  And I was sitting, and my kids [Duane Grant, Jr. and Carolyn Grant] were at school one day.  And I was sitting in my living room; talking to a friend, I said, "You know what I really need, I need a soap."  Because I'm an early person, and it would be agreeable with my children's schedule if I did a soap.  Within thirty minutes, the phone rang in the kitchen.  "Hello, [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen please?"  "Well yes."  "This is Ruth Levine [ph.] from (unclear).  Listen, Billie, you know, we do this, blah, blah, and there's a wonderful part.  You'd be so good, would you be interested?"  I said, "Ruth, I certainly will," I could hardly imagine this I just said that's what I need.  "I certainly would," I said, "listen when is the audition?"  I'm, you know, I was getting excited.  She said, "Oh no, I'm offering you the part."  I said, "Well I'm certainly interested," and she said, "Well you can come and pick up the script because we can--we need you."  The casting needs to see you, and blah blah, wardrobe.  And I was bowled over backwards.  But then I begin to realize that this is how my life operates, you know, that when I need something I get it.
Speaker 1: So how did you, I mean what kind of role did you have?  Did you have a pretty I mean, good role, you must have been--were you the first black figure in one of those soap operas?
Speaker 2: Well I don't think it was the first, but I don't really know.  But Vinie Burrows and I did the first commercial the first black soap commercial, I think it was Oxydol or something, Oxydol.  And I had never paid attention to commercials because there were black people on commercials, so you know they didn't have anything to do with me.  I use whatever soap I used, and went to this audition and these people are dead serious and I thought what's all this looking so serious, you know.  And I said to them all these men sitting around the board table, gray men with gray suits and, you know, looking gray and serious.  I said, you know, "Okay I'm gonna sell your soap, you know, relax."  And I thought it's odd that they would be so serious but then when will the checks started coming in, I got serious.  Because it was like an unexpected Christmas, I didn't know anything about this.  As a matter of fact I think the Amsterdam [New York Amsterdam News] published--oh isn't always wonderful about Billie Allen she has two soap commercials, Oxydol and Tide or something.  Well, Madison Avenue went crazy because you're not supposed to do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Rival soap companies.
Speaker 2: But I didn't know that.  Nobody told me, I didn't know, I couldn't figure it out.  Well, they went crazy, the phone never stopped ringing so we finally--and that's when I learned.  But then I did others, and it was, it was magical.  I never thought I was working.
Story_ID: 493438
Speaker 1: How long did the role last in 'The Edge of Night'?
Speaker 2: I don't know really how long but for a little while.  I played the wife of a detective on the police department, the lead was the captain, something, and during this time--oh and the wife, Mrs. Chandler [Ada Chandler] was my name, I was head of an adoption agency.  And the captain's wife wanted a baby, and it was up to me to yay or nay the deal.  Well, the big thing on 'Edge of Night' was they invited us to lunch and dinner at their home, in the evening.  And everybody was--they said, "We've never had a mixed dinner on this show before."  I said, "What do you mean, peas and carrots, what's mixed?"  You know, I mean it was very strange.  It was, and it was, what is she going to wear and they kept putting me in these things and then the star said, "Oh no well she can't look too nice."  And Herbert Davis [Herb Davis] was playing my husband [Luke Chandler].  And we got a lot of press in soap news or something.  They came out to my house and we did a--and that was good, but they made such a fuss.  So he finally said that the staff thought I looked too good.  I'm only a social worker.  I explained to them that I know a lot of social workers, and that they dress, they have to, they're all professionals, you know.  And that sometimes even their social life.  And they wear suits and tailored things, and jewelry and et cetera.  Well, they kept fussing and trying on--so finally Herb Davis said, "Look I don't care what you put [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen in, she's gonna look beautiful."  So I mean it's a lost cause.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She'll do all right, you know.  I said, "Well yeah I mean we don't have to be glamorous."  But it was like, it was like this is the big thing.  That was--and it was the--I thought well here I go again, you know.  Kathleen Collins, a playwright whose plays I enjoyed doing always.  She wrote a play about "The first of the first of the first of the coloreds who always do things," you know, everybody's claiming to be the first Negro Ph.D., whatever.
Story_ID: 493439
Speaker 1: We didn't really discuss 'Blues for Mister Charlie' [James Baldwin], I guess we needed to talk about that.
Speaker 2: 'Blues for Mister Charlie' was done by The Actors Studio Theatre.  And Burgess Meredith was directing it, yes, and by this time I was doing work at Actors Studio [The Actors Studio, New York, New York], and so they called me and there again I'd cover for Diana Sands.  And I played one of the townspeople.  And it was during the civil rights struggle when those three voter registration guys were killed in Sunflower County [sic. Neshoba County, Mississippi].  And Goodman [Andrew Goodman], Schwerner [Michael Schwerner], and Washington?
Speaker 1: Schwerner, yeah Goodman, and Chaney [James Chaney], Chaney and Schwerner yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Goodman, Schwerner--Goodman, Chaney and Schwerner.
Speaker 1: Right, now that this--just to pause for a second.  This is, James Baldwin got this play together pretty fast because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh they got it really--
Speaker 1: --they were just killed that spring.
Speaker 2: Yes, it was about Emmett Till.
Speaker 1: Spring of--
Speaker 2: Yes, he got it together really fast.  And it was just the atmosphere outside the theater industry, it was tense.  I mean it was so tense that we want sure that we were going to be attacked on the stage.
Speaker 1: I think there's an interracial love scene in it, right?
Speaker 2: There's an interracial love scene.  And there was white talent and black talent.  And always, you know, hurling insults and fighting, and always, you know, and it was just--it was a very exciting time.  But there was one scene that was very, very controversial and very spirited, and I wore sneakers in case I had to run.  You know, some people in the audience kind of wanted to participate (laughter), to participate, but yeah.
Speaker 1: The people that came to see it were mostly supportive, right, they weren't against it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yes but others came, other people, people came out of curiosity.  And it was a very strong play actually Al Freeman [Al Freeman, Jr.], Diana Sands, Al Freeman was (laughter) he's such a superb actor, and the whole cast.
Speaker 1: And Diana Sands was something too, she was really.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes and Jimmy Baldwin.  Now don't forget that same year we have 'Dutchman,' with, LeRoi Jones he was then, Baraka [Amiri Baraka], he is now.
Story_ID: 493440
Speaker 1: 'Funnyhouse of a Negro' with Adrienne Kennedy was all the same year and some really strong work was sparked by that incident; by those two incidents.
Speaker 2: Now what was--give us some little insight in to what 'Funnyhouse of a Negro' was about?  What was 'Funnyhouse of the Negro' about?
Speaker 1: 'Funnyhouse of the Negro,' it's very simple actually, completely surrealistic, nonlinear, it all happens inside this young woman's head.  Very poetic, she has been--she's having a breakdown.  She's having a breakdown, she can't reconcile her parts, who she is.  The other characters are parts of her.  Queen Victoria, the Duchess of Habsburg [Carlota of Mexico], Patrice Lumumba, and Jesus.  Now sounds like an odd mix for a party, but it works because here she is, she just doesn't know where her place is, and the language is so gorgeous.  She's in her bed in a small room she has on the Upper West Side [New York, New York] in a brownstone.  And eccentric, she's a librarian maybe at City College [City College of New York, New York, New York], and copies Edith Sitwell's poetry, imitations of Edith Sitwell.  And has this boyfriend, Raymond, quasi-boyfriend, and she can't reconcile her parents' divorce.  She can't--she just doesn't know who she is.  Am I black, am I white, what?  So she calls out in a nightmare to Queen Victoria, and they play scenes together.  And Queen Victoria and the Duchess of Habsburg, you know, who is--that movie 'Juarez,' and we had that wonderful scene in Mexico?  Well, that's Carlota, the Duchess of Habsburg who's husband was going to take over from Benito Juarez.  Anyway, so she, in playing this character--because Adrienne Kennedy the playwright, herself lived in the movies.  And she did a lot of transfer in movies, she became and they became, and it's so beautiful because it's drawn.  And it's so--it's violent in a way because--then there's Lumumba who plays her hero.  Patrice Lumumba the warrior, later this statesman who was assassinated.
Speaker 2: In 1961, yeah.
Speaker 1: And he also morphs into her father.  And they are using the same language as the other characters are, but they're telling her, when you deny your roots that's a big mistake, you die.  Which is true, you know, don't water your roots, if you're plants, you die, or people.  So they have this battle right there, and their hair is coming out, you know, their hair, they're tossing their hair out, just grabbing it and pulling it out.
Story_ID: 493441
Speaker 1: Who was having this battle with the hair?
Speaker 2: The characters, Patrice Lumumba and Jesus, my hair is falling out, that was the theme.  And that's bringing--yes it's stripping you, and you know, when your hair falls you're gonna die, it's death.  And the mother's running around screaming, "Black man, black man, I never should've let a black man put his hands on me.  The wild black beast raped me, and now my head is shining," well that's symbolic, people think that she was white, and he was black.  No, it's a woman who's very dissatisfied in her marriage.  She said, "I should've not married a black man, I should've married Adam Clayton Powell or Prince Charles or somebody," you know, kids hear this from their mothers who think they married beneath them.  And I, this is the way I interpreted my interpretation because over the years when I did it, I--Michael Kahn directed it when I performed in it ['Funnyhouse of a Negro,' Adrienne Kennedy].  I did the role of Sarah, who was going through this.  And actually it was my catharsis for life because I had to closely examine my relationship to my religion, my family, and my deep beliefs.  And it, so it resonated a great deal.  I was at first impatient with this girl Sarah, but as I dug deeper and deeper and deeper, because Adrienne Kennedy also followed it up with an autobiography, 'People Who Led to My Plays,' in which she talks about how she happened to write them.  Now when I first received the script initially, this prose goes on, and it's wonderful.  But I mean it's, you know, it just goes on and on and on.  And then I got to one line, "My mother went to school in Atlanta [Georgia]."  I said, that's who it is; that's who it is.  Some daughter of some Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] grad that my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen] went to school in Atlanta.  So that was my first key, my first key to understanding this and what was expected from her, what she'd expect of herself.  And the society in which she lived.  And it's, it is a powerful play she--and I enjoy it because she's so concise.  You cannot transpose words or ideas because it is so precise.  For instance, she says, "My father, he loved his mother, he watched her rise at dawn, go to the big house to work 'til dusk, 'til she died."  No, "Rise at dawn, kill a chicken for him to eat for breakfast then go to the big house to work 'til dusk, 'til she died."  Now there's a whole act of the conventional play, you know, we see her scrubbing the floor and wringing the chicken.  She simply uses words, and you get it, you get it.  But it had been difficult for audiences because I felt it needed illuminating that the audience can't possibly understand unless we understand.  Or put some understanding to it to make it understandable.  So I called that illuminating it, and when I got to direct it forty years, forty-two years later.  I had forty-two years to think about this.  I felt satisfied.
Story_ID: 493442
Speaker 1: Now you appeared in 'Route 66,' 'Mr. Broadway.'  And some of the shows, I mean, I don't know, we don't know all of them, 'The Nurses,' you know?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, that was a television show.
Speaker 1: Yes, you did several of those, right?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I--people said I worked all the time.  I didn't experience--I never felt like I worked all the time, but I certainly had some opportunities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so up through the, you know, well all through the '60s [1960s] you had parts in these shows here.  Did you live here in New York [New York] all the whole time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I lived in Long Island [New York].
Speaker 1: Long Island, okay.
Speaker 2: Raising two children [Duane Grant, Jr. and Carolyn Grant].  And, yeah I lived with a recalcitrant husband [Duane Grant, Sr.] who was an engineer and didn't understand, you know, what I was doing a whole lot.  But, you know, the woman dances on the fence.  You know, 'cause you're responsible for the dinner, the lunch, and the homework, the laundry and then you've got a career out there somewhere.  And so making this work was a very interesting dance.  A very interesting adjustment, you know, and it's only now that when I really look at it I say, I must have been out of my mind (laughter).  But I was that passionate about what I was doing and the children were too.
Speaker 1: Okay, now '69 [1969] you were in 'A Teaspoon Every Four Hours' [Jackie Mason and Mike Mortman] on Broadway right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh wow yeah, that's not something that I like to remember.  [HistoryMaker] James Earl Jones was doing 'Great White Hope' ['The Great White Hope,' Howard Sackler] on 52nd Street.  And he called me up 'cause he was in Lee Strasberg's class, and we became friends.  He said, "I got this part in 'The Great White Hope,' and we're going to do it down at the Arena theater [Arena Stage] in Washington [D.C.] first.  And then we're bringing it into Broadway," and he said, "I think you'd be good.  It's a small part but it's a very good part," and I knew, I had read it.  And I really wanted to do this, but I couldn't leave town because my kids were going through the--it was spring--through their SSATs [Secondary School Admissions Test] and so forth and whatnot.  It was just a bad time, so I had to turn it down.  In the meanwhile I was getting a divorce, and I had to make a way, so this agent called me and she said, "Listen there's a part in this Jackie Mason play."  I said, "No, no, no, and no," but I was coaching everybody else who went up for the part, I had all of these people I was coaching, earning money coaching.  And she said, "Well they want to see you."  And I said, she said, "Please go," blah, blah, blah, blah you never know.  I go, they hire me, and, of course, I don't want to do--and we had--it was terrible, the play was terrible.  It was so terribly constructed and so forth and whatnot, but I could improvise.  So then he walked off the stage in the middle of a sentence, I could fix it.  I could improvise, and so every time I got--I asked the agent who was negotiating, I told her what I wanted.  She said, "Come on, they are not gonna pay that much."  I said, "I don't really care, ask them, this is what I want."  Oh she couldn't ask, so every once in a while I'd give my notice, and they said, "Oh no, we want you to stay."  And I would just get a little bit more money.  I really meant to leave.  But I decided I would only pay her commission on what she had negotiated, not what I had negotiated.  So I was able to do that and hang in there.  Now we did ninety-nine previews, they knew that the minute it opened was the minute it was going to close, but he has this following that, of course, you wouldn't believe.  I mean these people come out for Jackie Mason, and he would just say, "Oh this is boring," right in the middle of something.  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he sort of sabotaged his own show?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: He sort of sabotaged his own show?
Speaker 2: Well, no, it was badly written, it wasn't going anywhere.  But it was his Broadway vehicle.  It was a book, instead of jokes it had a story.  And his son was interested in my daughter and when he comes over to talk about this mistake and blah, blah, blah, he falls for the mother, me.  And, you know, that was silly but--so every day we had a new script, you know, every day, they were trying to fix it.  And one day I was on the Long Island railway [Long Island Rail Road] coming in to do the show.  And these little women, Long Island women running up and down, "Oh conductor, conductor how long is this train going to be detained here?  I have tickets to see--to a matinee."  And I'm sitting up here, I'm gonna be on stage in this matinee.  And, you know, and there's the headlight man who has to turn on the theater.  And there're all these people, technicians and actors, and we're just looking at these people.  So we finally get into Penn Station [Pennsylvania Station, New York, New York].  And I have to run onto the stage in my street clothes and no makeup to make my cue.  Because we were in such a state of improvisation that nobody, my understudy, didn't know what to do 'cause I hardly knew what to do.  You'd walk in and they'd say, "We're doing the green," so okay you take out a few pieces of the green script from the green shopping bag.  And you'd say, "Oh yeah that's where that happens, okay."
Speaker 1: So they color-coded the scripts to make sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you would keep them--
Speaker 2: It was a challenge.
Story_ID: 493443
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-three [1973], now tell us about the founding of the Frank Silvera Workshop [Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop] firm.
Speaker 2: Frank Silvera Workshop--was playwrights, for playwrights.
Speaker 1: Tell us about Frank Silvera, he's an interesting character (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Frank Silvera was a wonderful actor.  I first saw him, his work, in 'Anna Lucasta' [Philip Yordan].  He played--I think Hilda Simms was the actor, she played 'Anna Lucasta.'  And Frank played her father.  It was a wonderful, wonderful role, and a very--he was just a great actor.  Who knew about theater, who knew about technique, who knew about structure.  And also he could play many roles.  Because he was--he could be Mexican, he could be Italian, he could be Latino, he could be black, he could be white, he could be anything.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was in movies playing everybody.
Speaker 2: In the films he was, nobody knew what he was particularly.  They did, but they didn't deal with it, so.
Speaker 1: In his background he--I think he has some Puerto Rican background and black background, black American.
Speaker 2: Well yes, I just knew him from 'Anna Lucasta,' and the theater uptown, he's a part of that.  And--
Speaker 1: Well the goal of the free (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Garland, Garland Thompson [Garland Lee Thompson, Sr.], a playwright, decided to--well he started this playwrights' conference.  This playwriting workshop.  This Frank Silvera Writers' Workshop, which we met every Monday night.  Monday is the dark night in theaters.  Met every Monday night and read a new play.  [HistoryMaker] Lloyd Richards was very much involved in critiquing and being a dramaturge.  And furnished a professional cast, I directed a lot of the readings, participated in some of the reading.  And was one of the founding members, we work very hard, it was wonderful, it was just such a necessary step to move plays ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean what plays came out of the workshop?
Speaker 2: Oh many had came, at this moment I can't think of--many did though.
Speaker 1: And did you write one yourself?
Speaker 2: No, I don't write plays.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So you were a founding member but you didn't, okay the founders didn't necessarily write plays they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No we, we were--we helped find people to participate, to Lloyd Richards, people in theater, and to keep it going.
Speaker 1: Okay,
Speaker 2: But Morgan Freeman was also a founder and actor.  Morgan Freeman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) 'Cause it says here Clayton--
Speaker 2: And Clayton Riley.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Clayton Riley.
Speaker 2: Who was a critic, as you know.
Story_ID: 493444
Speaker 1: Seventy-eight [1978] you were in 'The Wiz,' right?  You were in 'The Wiz' in 1978 it says here.
Speaker 2: Oh that was just a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just a--
Speaker 2: --a film.
Speaker 1: --film of the movie.
Speaker 2: I filmed 'The Wiz,' and it was just a little part, you know, in the opening, but I enjoyed doing it.  It was fun, they're still showing it, and every once in a while I get a $3.26 check.
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you--now you have a lot of--you're in the Eddie Murphy movie, you're in 'Winter Kills,' a lot of different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Winter Kills' was kind of a cult thing.  And all these people had cameos or something, and I knew one of the people involved in producing it and we all went out to Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] and made this film.  And I remember I played a surly--either nurse or receptionist or something.
Speaker 1: Okay,
Speaker 2: I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  What about 'Losing Ground,' now this is a movie?
Speaker 2: 'Losing Ground' was the film written by a wonderful young African American writer, Kathleen Collins.  I directed her play 'The Brothers' [Kathleen Collins] which was done at the Women's Project when it was on 46th Street at The American Place Theatre [New York, New York].  And she's such a wonderful writer, she has such a fresh point of view.  And then she wrote a film 'Losing Ground,' Seret Scott starred in it, I think she played a philosophy professor at City University [City University of New York, New York, New York] who was trying to find her passion.  And we all participated, it was like a co-op deal.  You're either pressing costumes, stealing costumes, you know, or--we all did everything.  And I played her mother, they shot a lot of the scenes up in my Harlem [New York, New York] apartment.  Up in Graham Court [New York, New York], and it was really fun to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you have a place in Graham Court?
Speaker 2: Yes, my son [Duane Scott, Jr.] lives there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, 'cause Graham Court's a historic (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, really historic.
Speaker 1: --building there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It's the twin building (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I used--
Speaker 1: --of the building that John Lennon lived in.
Speaker 2: Yes!
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: I used to visit it when I was a little girl with my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen].  And that was one of my secrets, when I get grown I wanna live in Graham Court, and I'm gonna be in New York [New York] in theater.
Story_ID: 493445
Speaker 1: All right, 1987 you were in Eddie Murphy's 'Raw' ['Eddie Murphy Raw'], you had a skit in that?  Now, what did you play in that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well it's so funny because I'm trying to remember how I got it, but it was something interesting.  Anyway, I played his aunt or somebody, we were in the kitchen cooking I think a Thanksgiving dinner it that's the way the whole film opens.  And it was about six seconds and maybe two minutes.  It was fun though.  Oh I'm beginning to remember, Robert Townsend.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Robert Townsend was directing that segment, and we're friends and he called me up.  And that's how I got to do it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Townsend's a good man, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a wonderful writer and actor.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, and '91 [1991] you're in the episode of Judge West, all right.  No, you played Judge West in an episode of 'Law and Order.'
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Law and Order,' okay.
Speaker 2: Everybody--that's a staple in New York [New York], you know, it's like being a waitress or some- you know, everybody has an episode of 'Law and Order.'
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Law.
Speaker 2: Everybody's been in 'Law and Order.'  I enjoyed it very much.
Speaker 1: It's filmed right here in New York?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 493446
Speaker 1: It says here in 1999 you became a member of the Tony Awards [Antoinette Perry Award for Excellence in Theatre] nominating board.
Speaker 2: Yes, I--this woman who was already on the Tony Awards committee called me, and she said, "I'm gonna recommend you for nominator, what do you think?  You'd be really good," and I thought about it, 'cause you have to commit for three years.  And, and I said, "Well yeah.  I think so," and I was very interested because I had met Antoinette Perry's daughter.  Luther [Luther Henderson] and I traveled to Colorado Springs [Colorado], which is up the mountain from Denver [Colorado], way up.  Where they settled when they went across the country in covered wagons--so Elaine Perry was her name.  And we were going to work on a musical theater trivial pursuit.  You know, with questions about the musical theater because she was a director, stage manager and so forth.  So it was quite an experience being in the old house and seeing this part of the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what, let's see.
Speaker 2: So I've been there ever since, now I'm working on the administration committee.  And I look upon this as my duty to the theater community.  My giving back, it's like being on jury duty, you know.
Speaker 1: Let's see, now in 2002 you and your husband Luther Henderson won Pioneer Awards at the AUDELCO [Audience Development Committee, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  That was wonderful.
Speaker 1: VIV Awards [AUDELCO Recognition Awards for Excellence in Black Theatre], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's in 2002 (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, we support the AUDELCOs, and it's always fun.  And he and I did some shows together, musicals, and so forth.  And it was nice to have--to be honored by the AUDELCOs.
Speaker 1: All right, now it's a wonderful organization (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Supports theater in the black community.
Story_ID: 493447
Speaker 1: When you make appearances in these movies, over time do you get residuals for these movies (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Do they still keep coming?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.   Yes, I think 'The Phil Silvers Show' finally stopped.  I think over a period of time, and I'm telling you sometimes the checks were $6.23, but sometimes they're much more.
Speaker 1: Okay, there's a steady trickle of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, so if you're in something for so--young people today that are wandering like how do you earn a living as an actor?
Speaker 2: Oh, I well, I'll tell young people who want to know today, all of us have always--most of us, Luther [Luther Henderson] never did he only wrote music.  And how he maintained himself, well that's what he did.  And, but I was either teaching at Nassau Community College [Garden City, New York], or in the beginning I had many jobs.  I was a buyer for an import-export company buying printing presses, who knows.  And lots of things like that, but I learned to just to stay in the scene.  That is, don't wander off on the sides, to stay in the scene and at least think about each opportunity.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have to stay prepared and ready.  And let people know that you're around.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  You know, and sometimes you say no like a two-year-old when you should've said yes and vice versa, but it works out.
Speaker 1: Are there any parts that you were offered that you said no that you wish you, you'd have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  Oh yes.  And you said oh well.  But then the one thing that I really know, and this is what I live by, and that is, I'm not in charge of anything.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I'm thinking (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not really in charge, and so I have to listen, and I have to understand and I have to be ready to respond and receive.  You don't go with the flow necessarily, but it's really not my ultimate decision.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so, now is, was there ever a role that you, is there ever a role that you took that you were sorry you took?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, I didn't really like the Jackie Mason play ['A Teaspoon Every Four Hours,' Jackie Mason and Mike Mortman].  I wasn't sorry I took it.  It wasn't a disgrace.  I didn't really like it though, I wish I could've done 'The Great White Hope' [Howard Sackler].  But I just couldn't leave town at that time.  And, no, I try not to do anything that is embarrassing or something I don't want to do or something that really I can't do.  I don't want to miscast myself, I don't believe I can do everything.  This instrument can only play what's written for it.
Speaker 1: Now, well you've got a variety of things, you've done comedy. You have been in Shakespeare [William Shakespeare] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --productions and--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, but there are things that I don't do.  And when I see it I think about the poor director, you know, if I said, "Oh I want to do this."  I think--and I don't want to be miscast.  That's not a very pleasant situation.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what are some things that you really don't do?  That you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What do I want to do?
Speaker 1: No, what you really don't do well?
Speaker 2: Don't do?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that you--I figured I'd ask since we raised the (laughter)--
Speaker 2: I don't do windows anymore.  But I'm think--I don't know, I don't know, there're certain things.  I really got tired of playing women of easy virtue.  You know it always boils down to, oh well she's a prostitute.  I really--please, I mean I got tired of that, you know.
Speaker 1: And that's a, you know, [HistoryMaker] Donald Bogle has a theory about roles that black men and women are typecast into and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I don't have to be--play Coretta King [Coretta Scott King], or Rachel Robinson, or Sojourner Truth.  But I do not want to be, only because they're not well written or thought of, you know.  Sometimes they're so gratuitous, and there's no structural reason for that choice.
Story_ID: 493448
Speaker 1: Now what are you working on currently (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm working on a new play with Bridgette Wimberly.  Bridgette wrote 'Saint Lucy's Eyes.'  That was her first play, and I directed it at the Women's Project [Women's Project Theater, New York, New York] and the Cherry Lane Theatre [New York, New York] and at the Alliance [Alliance Theatre] in Atlanta [Georgia].  I was--I felt privileged and very pleased that I could mentor this brand new playwright.  And I included her and every step of the process because she hadn't come up through theater.  And I wanted her to understand and to be able to go and write other plays.  She was a very, she is a very unusual person.  And I--she's kind of, you know, sphinxlike and I kept saying there's something going on here.  There's something going on here.  But it turns out that Bridgette is a biochemistry graduate who had done extensive cancer research at Columbia Presbyterian [New York-Presbyterian Hospital, New York, New York] and Sloan Kettering [Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York].  She started writing poetry became a play, and here we are.  And now she's writing a play about Charles Drew [Charles R. Drew].  Dr. Charles Drew, who discovered the blood bank and separation, separating the platelets from the plasma.  And, therefore, being able to have a blood bank.  I'm particularly interested because I knew Dr. Drew.  And it's a love story.  She calls it 'The Separation of Blood' [Bridgette Wimberly] so we find out about him through these--his relationship with his wife and his children.  And it's going to become a wonderful play, and working with her on that.  And she has a new play 'Seven Sisters' [Bridgette Wimberly], which she's gonna do a reading soon.  And I understand and I really enjoy mentoring and helping the new playwrights.  And actors too, but helping playwrights realize it and championing them and guiding them and seeing to it, I enjoy that.  Because I enjoy sharing anything I know, all my knowledge with anybody who will listen and use it because it is my pleasure and my continuance, my legacy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I'm always mentoring a few people.  I, I put it this way I wish I had had a [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen when I came to New York [New York].  And so that's what I do, people come to New York, people find me and I help them.  Whatever, find a place to live, blah, blah get a job, blah, blah so forth and whatnot, you know, prepare them for auditions or whatever, whatever it is that I can do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And all they have to do is give it back to somebody else.  I mean, hopefully.  I can't--there's no contract, but I enjoy this.
Story_ID: 493449
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community in New York [New York] and in the country today?
Speaker 2: Well, here at the ripe old age of eighty-two I have a lot of hope and a lot of excitement about that.  About life and about possibilities.  I think we're living in very exciting times, and marvelous things are happening.  And it is a time for us to stand up and be counted, to stand up and be counted and support each other.  And support things that are going to help us as a people, to go where we want to go, where we have to go, where we're prepared to go.  And to prepare for the next generation.  So I see in Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], Barack right now in the scene, very exciting, very exciting.  I mean you--politics has taken a new turn, I mean a new turn, and I am here to witness it, and I am grateful.
Story_ID: 493450
Speaker 1: When you look back on everything you have done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: What would I do differently?  I'll tell you what I would do differently.  I would enjoy it more.
Speaker 1: So you think that you were too intense when you started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well yes, you know, you know.  I don't think I was too intense, but I'm prepared to enjoy it more next time around, and I will be around again, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, I hope so (laughter).
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And likewise when you look back at everything you've done to this point then what today would you say is your legacy?
Speaker 2: My participating in things that have really mattered to the country and to our people, to my people.  And to participate in the continuance of the struggle, of the struggle.  And on another level, to be in it, and it's just an amazing feeling.  And goals, and just when you think, oh goodness we all become so complacent, and what am I going to do and blah, blah.  Then up pops a whole new challenge, a whole new horizon.
Story_ID: 493451
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family a little bit, you mentioned your daughter [Carolyn Grant]?  And we have pictures of her christening, can you tell us about her and about your husband too, your late husband?
Speaker 2: Yeah well yes, yes I have a daughter and a son [Duane Grant, Jr.].  My son finished Howard University [Washington, D.C.] in music, and he has a music preparation company which prepares scores.  That means, you know, the composer or the arranger, orchestrator, you know, sketches out the scores, and he prepares them, binds them, proofs them and presents them.  He worked with my husband Luther [Luther Henderson] for years when he came out of Howard, that's where the got his grounding, his training for doing this.  He was prepared too, and now he's branching out and he's going into other things, creative things about--that concern the leadership abilities and grooming people for that.  And my daughter, she's very interested in architecture, she was working for a firm.  She really didn't have enough health insurance.  She has--she has a daughter that needs health insurance.  She thought about it very seriously, she decided she would ask Nordstrom's [Nordstrom] department store in Florida.  And they said, "Oh we don't have a person to design our windows," 'cause she'd done all the windows in Winter Park, in Winter Park, Florida.  "And we hire from within," so she said, "Oh well then, all right then, give me a job from within with health insurance, and I'll eventually do the windows."  She made up her mind just like that, and now she is top of her game.  She is--I never thought of her as being--advising people, women what to wear.  And to spend all this money on these expensive clothes, and put them together.  I mean she was a ragamuffin, and you say to yourself, who is this?  And it is very interesting because people say to what do you owe your great ability to do this.  To outsell everybody in this store on any day?  She said, "To my home training and to my mother."  She said, "I don't push people, I want to help them, and I'm genuine about that, and it pays off."
Speaker 1: Okay, now is there anything that we have not discussed that we need to raise now and talk about before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: Well you asked something about Luther, Luther (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, right.
Speaker 2: And our collaboration.  We, it's very interesting because we had been platonic buddies and good friends for maybe thirty years.  We were all married to somebody else, never, never thinking of joining because we were married to somebody else.  And one day we were both free, you know, the sensible thing would--and well, when I first got divorced [from Duane Grant, Sr.] he said, "Maybe we should get married."  And I said, "Oh no, I just got unmarried, and I'm never getting married again thank you very much."  And he married somebody else [Steffi Henderson], and she passed, and that was like eight years or something.  And I went to hear his daughter Melanie [Melanie Henderson] sing down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York].  I promised I would come, one of those places with no address, you have to figure it out.  Four doors to the left of the purple door, or something.  And he was there, he had just flown in also to hear her sing.  He said, "Well let's have dinner. Why don't you call me?"  I said, "No, no call me and we'll see."  And we did, and then we began seeing each other differently, we were both free, and we decided to get married to amalgamate, and it's been wonderful to marry your very good friend.  You have no illusions, nothing to hide behind, you know, this is my very good friend, never gonna do me in.  I know that she's never--I'm never gonna do her in, he's never gonna do me in.  You know we have best interests at heart for each other and ourselves, and it's a wonderful, a whole wonderful side of life that I really enjoyed, I'm so glad we decided to do this.  He passed not too long ago, and I was happy to be able to take him through that period of his life because I'm able to do this.  And because it meant a lot to me to be able to do this, to give this and to see him safe home.
Story_ID: 493452
Speaker 1: My last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as I am, as I am.  What do I mean by that?  As a person with a vision and the energy and the daring to look into it and make it happen.  As an adventurer who is also interested in bringing other people along on my journey or joining their journey to make things happen.  And always expecting the best and always receiving the best because I expect the best and I give the best.
Story_ID: 493453
Speaker 1: I'm about three years old then, maybe a little older 'cause it looks like I've lost my front teeth.  It looks like the steps of 220 South Randolph [220 South Randolph Street, Richmond, Virginia], but I look like I think I'm awfully cute (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's in the dressing room of the Van Dam Theatre [New York, New York] when I was doing a Reginald Rose play called 'Black Monday.'  Diana Sands and I played sisters, and it was a day that the school is being integrated, and my son, I fear for his life going to that school.  It's so funny because it started off with these people running down the aisle with placards, "Nigger go home, nigger go home."  And my housekeeper at the time, Lena Weekly [ph.], we called her Aunt Lena she got very upset.  "Wait a minute, wait a minute.  What are you saying?"  Oh, she took charge of the audience.  "Where is Mrs. Grant [HistoryMaker Billie Allen], what is this nigger go home, are you talking to me?"  Oh, it was a riot she was so--and, I--it nerved me a bit.
Speaker 1: That's a scene from 'Black Monday,' the Reginald Rose play I was just talking about, and I'm consoling my son.  And telling him that the first day in his integrated school is not gonna be so bad and that God will take care of him.  I can't think of his name, but he was a very fine actor.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I think that was a publicity shot they did a story on me.  When I was in this play, the same play 'Black Monday,' and this was running down the steps into my dressing room which is always downstairs underneath the ground somewhere.
Speaker 1: Think of his name.  There I am out front of the Van Dam Theatre, which is in the West Village [New York, New York].  I think that's about 1964, '65 [1965] talking to the director.  And that was quite an experience because it was right at the peak of the Civil Rights Movement, and we were all so, so charged.
Speaker 2: Oh, there's the Sergeant Bilko [Ernest G. Bilko] show, you remember Phil Silvers had this wonderful television series 'You'll Never Get Rich' ['The Phil Silvers Show'].  Ned Hiken, the director, was an absolute genius, and I was a WAC [Women's Army Corps] on that show for seven years.  I took it because it was my first job after I delivered my first child [Duane Grant, Jr.].  And I could put skirt--I could get into my pencil skirt, my very slim skirt.  So I said, "Wow yes," so I stayed for seven years off and on.  Being there I learned a lot about timing and about comedy and it was just a wonderful experience.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's a dance team that I belonged to, Alan and Angel.  I called myself Angel, and I had met this guy who had this wonderful dance team that was compared to Marge [Marge Champion] and Gower Champion.  And he was looking for a balletic trained dancer to join his team.  I had just met him, we were walking across 125th street, and as we passed the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York], he said to me, "Oh here's the guy I want you to meet."  And he introduced me to some guy named Mr. Schiffman, Mr. Frank Schiffman.  And I said a polite hello, I didn't know who he was, he was the owner of the Apollo.  And he said, "Alan [Alan Dixon], when are you gonna bring me something," and Alan said, "Oh this is my new partner.  And we're going out of town but we should be able to bring you something about six weeks."  And then he said to me, "You're my new partner."  We got busy and prepared this fantastic dance act, it opened up with the Jimmie Lunceford band, and I got a rave review in Variety.
Speaker 2: Oh, this is my four generations of women in my family.  This photograph is one of my prize possessions.  We see my sister LaMae [LaMae Allen], seated.  We see our mother, Mamie Wimbush Allen, standing behind her.  And there's our grandmother [sic. great-grandmother] sitting on the right, her name is Amanda Williams [ph.] on the right, on the right, that's the other one.
Speaker 1: This is--okay?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And then there's great-grandma [sic. grandmother] Ella Wimbush, who's sitting on the left, and all of these women finished Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  Grandma Ella Wimbush was in the first graduating class at Spelman.  And she first got a certificate in nursing and then in 18--that was in 1885, on May 8th, and then later in 1887 she got a Spelman Seminary certificate for working education.  Seated on the right, our grandmother, Amanda Williams, received a diploma from Spelman College in 1863, it was Spelman Seminary then [sic.].  And our mother Mamie Wimbush Allen who's standing up, finished and has a wonderful diploma from 1918.  And there's LaMae my sister who went to Spelman in 1935.  This is--these women, you're talking about liberated woman, they really fortified me in my life.  When people in New York [New York] toss me around a little too much and are a little too unkind, I come home.  And I look at the women in my family who do not take tea for fever.  And I say, "Well, these people got a nerve, they don't know who they're fooling with, do they."
Speaker 1: Well there I am in my famous afro style, oh I thought that I was hot.  Now play I think this is the style I wore in--let's see.  What was the name of it--anyway I just loved it, I loved all of that hair, this thick hair.  And, of course, you know, some of my relatives went crazy but I just thought I was hot.
Story_ID: 493454
Speaker 1: Oh, there I am at the Berkshire Theatre Festival, the summer of '68 [1968] or '69 [1969] working with this whole bunch from Yale School of Drama [New Haven, Connecticut].  We did what was called a journey into Shakespeare [William Shakespeare].  Gordon Rogoff wrote and directed us.  It was a wonderful summer and we, we just had such a good time together and I learned a lot.  And I remember I opened with a sonnet: "New plays and maidenheads are near akin, much followed both, for both much money given if they stand sound and well," ['The Two Noble Kinsmen,' John Fletcher and William Shakespeare]  (laughter).
Speaker 2: There I am with this wonderful actor Jimmy Edwards, who's menacing me in this off-Broadway play.  Of course, you know, I was always playing innocent it seems to me.  And it's always some city slicker, and it's wonderful to see this old picture again.
Speaker 1: Bert Andrews, a very famous photographer of theater, who's no longer with us now, but this is one of the last photos that he did of me.  And it's just such a wonderful and alive picture, I just love looking at it, he was so talented.  And his book 'On the Great Black Way' [sic. 'In the Shadow of the Great White Way: Images from the Black Theatre,' Bert Andrews and Paul Carter Harrison] was just a wonderful photo book about all the people, all the black people working on Broadway and what was all about.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: Well there's a composite that I shot about in 1947 for modeling and commercials.  And I remember that strapless lace gown that--well actually it's a cocktail dress that Mrs. Boatwright, a woman who sewed for my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen], made for me.  And course, the high kicks were, you know, suggesting something, and sitting in that butterfly chair is saying, hire me I'll sell you product.  That's funny (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, there we are doing a bit of leaping around the beach in Switzerland, Jimmy Hunt, wonderful dancer.  We were dancing with a company then, Claude Marchant, and there was this photographer Armin Haab from Basel, Switzerland, who took these wonderful pictures.  I had more of them but somebody stole them.
Speaker 1: Oh, there we are in a film, a scene from a film, 'Black Like Me,' starring James Whitmore.  And we were in this bar or this club in Washington, D.C. where they hired up the whole club for the night and all the people in it.  This very handsome actor I've forgotten who he was.  But oh yes the club was called the Colt 65 or Colt 60, what's the--Colt 75?
Speaker 2: Colt 45 [ph.].
Speaker 1: Forty-five, it was called Colt 45, and it was hilarious because they had this rock band or this big, loud band.  And the floor was shaking, and all these people would come up and ask me to dance, and they were strangers. I mean, and I realized that if I dance with one I'd have to dance with all of them.  And this handsome actor who was so good looking we flew on the same plane, he sat next to me.  And I didn't know he was terribly afraid of airplanes, and during the takeoff and landing he hid behind my back, just buried his head like a kid.
Speaker 2: There we are at our first child's christening, Duane Grant, Duane Harper Grant Jr. [Duane Grant, Jr.], and there's mommy sitting down holding him.  Well, this baby was so big he couldn't wear his christening dress.  So I had to go out and buy him a little suit to wear and everybody was disappointed.  And there're his grandparents and my father [William Allen] way over on the right, there is Mrs. Mordecai Johnson [Anna Gardner Johnson].  And Todd Duncan standing up in the back.  Todd Duncan did the first Porgy, you know, in 'Porgy and Bess' [George Gershwin].
Speaker 1: Is that Todd right there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This is Mrs. Mordecai Johnson?
Speaker 2: With the hat, the hat right in front of her.  With the white hat, yes.  And Todd Duncan brought water from the River Jordan to be christened.  Oh yes, a very dramatic affair, and there's mommy feeling so proud.
Speaker 1: And there I am again, oh I remember this, 'Black Like Me,' this was a publicity shot that they used.  And a very good photographer, yes, you could almost hear the sound coming out of my mouth.
Speaker 2: Oh, it's a photograph of the beginning of the Women's Project [Women's Project Theater, New York, New York].  We were the committee, we gave this wonderful fundraising event at Pat Kaufman, who is the second from the right.  At her loft on West Broadway, and we called it a chili cookout.  Let's look, all the way to my left is Julia Miles, the founder.  And then there's me, and then there's Gail Kriegel, a playwright.  And Pat Kaufman, a playwright.  And Elizabeth [Liz Diamond], who is now working at Yale and two theaters in New York [New York], a wonderful artistic director.
Speaker 1: Well, there I am about twelve years old in this wonderful costume for my dancing class recital seated on the floor of the living room at my parents' house at 220 South Randolph Street [Richmond, Virginia].  Yes, with that little pre-adolescent grin on my face.  Those were wonderful days, wonderful days.
Speaker 2: There I am with my photograph ready to hit the streets and get a job.  [HistoryMaker] Billie Allen, it says SAG-AFTRA [Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists], Equity [Actors' Equity Association], actress, singer, dancing.  Height, 5'4", though I am 5'3", and weight, 118 [pounds], never see that again, size eight.  I remember taking this on the beach.  Everybody was wearing miniskirts.  And that is about as mini as I was going to get.
Speaker 1: There we are in 'Take a Giant Step' [Louis Peterson] at the theater on East 73rd Street in New York.  There I'm sitting in a bar with Lou Gossett [HistoryMaker Louis Cameron Gossett, Jr.], and standing behind him is Godfrey Cambridge, and Lincoln Kilpatrick, we had a wonderful company.  It was such a pleasure to work with them, and Lou Peterson [Louis Peterson] wrote this fantastic play about the coming of age of a young boy looking for himself.  And we just enjoyed doing it at the Jan Hus theater [Jan Hus Playhouse, New York, New York].
Story_ID: 493455
Speaker 1: There I am, graduate, 1941, Armstrong High School, Richmond, Virginia, yes, we thought our class was the best.  I was also a member of the glee club, we had an a capella choir that went all over the state winning prizes because we were the best, that's why.
Speaker 2: 'Funnyhouse of a Negro' by Adrienne Kennedy, there I am playing Sarah, the lead, and Ellen Holly was playing the Duchess of Habsburg [Carlota of Mexico].  This wonderful play was a groundbreaking event.  Completely surrealistic and absolutely mystifying, but it changed lives.  And certainly informed the future of American theater.
Speaker 1: This was an announcement of my coming interview at the Hatch-Billops Archives [Camille Billops and James V. Hatch Archives].  It was photographed by my son [Duane Grant, Jr.] on the terrace here at 340 West 57th Street [New York, New York] in about 1984.  Yes, I always like this 'cause my son took it, and I love being amongst my flowers.  This is our living room, Luther [Luther Henderson] and I are being feted by all of my children.  It's my birthday, I think it must've been my seventieth birthday.  And I remember I didn't have time to get dressed in that heat. They just stormed in from their planes from L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and all over the country, and there I stand in my bare feet.  It was such a loving day.  Oh, we had such a wonderful time.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken on January 1, in 2007, in Albany [New York] at the inauguration of our new lieutenant governor, [HistoryMaker] David A. Paterson, who is my godson, and I was tickled, tickled, tickled as you can see.
Speaker 1: Oh, here I am a home here, at 340 with one of my favorite relatives, Reina Bundy [ph.], who has her own label and paradigm.  And we're just having a good time, everybody else is in the living room, and there's a little spot of blue there I used to have a blue wall just that color.  I came to my senses and got rid of it.
Speaker 2: It's royal blue though (laughter).
Speaker 1: There I am in 'Four Saints in Three Acts' by Virgil Thomson, that wonderful, wonderful opera.  We're at the Empire Theatre, 42nd Street in New York [New York].  [HistoryMaker] Ruben Santiago-Hudson, great actor, found this in a trunk down in the basement of that theater when they were doing 'Jelly's Last Jam' [George C. Wolfe], which my husband wrote the music for, and gave it to Luther for his birthday.
Speaker 2: That--this is my mother [Mamie Wimbush Allen], one of our favorite photographs, she's all dressed up in a beautiful coat as you can see with the fur collar and a lovely hat.  We the children refer to it as mama in the hat.  The photo and the hat I just love this picture because she looks so soft and loving, and it looks just like I remember her.
Speaker 1: And there is our dad William Roswell Allen [William Allen] in the First World War [World War I, WWII] looking spiffy in his uniform.  Look at those eyes, yes.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my father's grandmother Mrs. Pughley, Helen Pughley [ph.], she was such a fine woman, we loved her, she would come and visit.  (Laughter) This is a picture of her husband, of my father's grandfather.  He really looks like a rough and ready Wild West bronco riding person, doesn't he?  And those piercing, piercing eyes.  My brother [Edward Allen] has those eyes.
Speaker 1: He does (laughter).
Speaker 2: These are my husband Luther's parents.  There is Helen Black Henderson [sic. Florence Black Henderson] and Luther Henderson [Luther Henderson, Sr.], the first Luther Henderson, Luther Lincoln Henderson I might add.  They're a very interesting couple, they're from Missouri.  They were living in Missouri, they homeschooled their children.  When Luther's older sister Thelma [Thelma Henderson] became eligible for high school, they brought her to New York, and she tested and was accepted into Hunter High [Hunter College High School, New York, New York].  So they just picked up and moved.  They just picked up and moved from Missouri to New York and became low-paying public school teachers.  The Hendersons used to--with another couple they formed a quartet and they sang in the summertime at Chautauquas all over New York State, Upstate New York.  They had this wonderful quartet and they sang the old songs and reveries, amazing.  Luther's father used to recite from Langston Hughes every time they had company, which embarrassed him when he was a little boy.  Handsome couple.
Speaker 1: There we are on our wedding day.  We got married in--at the wonderful church near the Citicorp building [601 Lexington Avenue, New York, New York], St. Peter's [St. Peter's Church, New York, New York].  Reverend Gensel [John G. Gensel] performed the ceremony, February 6, 1980.  And all of our children were there, and friends.  We got married promptly, this photograph was taken by Bert Andrews, wonderful photographer.  He said he's never met a bride who was so punctual because I was ready, and this wedding was gonna be on time.  And as we drove off to the reception there were dozens of people just getting to the church. Too bad, you missed it.
