Story_ID: 36137
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is our mentor, Dixon Summerville.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: I am Chalmers Archer, Jr. and what else did you--?
Speaker 1: Oh yes, could you spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Oh, first name, Chalmers, C-H-A-L-M-E-R-S, last name Archer, A-R-C-H-E-R, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a middle name at all?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.  I do have junior, that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: 21, April 1928.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Tchula, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: Yes, Tchula, T-C-H-U-L-A and Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right.  And sir, what is your occupation and your title?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired professor, full professor.
Speaker 1: And a professor of what?
Speaker 2: Counseling.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you taught at--?
Speaker 2: I taught not too many courses but I did teach at Tuskegee for ten years and about twenty years here in NOVA, Northern Virginia Community College.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you're also, you were a member of the special forces in the army, right?  You were--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I am.  I consider myself still long into the Special Forces.  I happen to be one of the first in the United States after the Second World War.  Not black, but the first period.  I usually try to make a distinction there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were one of the first soldiers to be involved in Special Forces, period?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: The date is the 12 of July, '12--2012.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Manassas, Virginia.
Story_ID: 36138
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now before we go into depth there are five lightweight questions we always ask as kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do, fish, fried fish and any kind of vegetable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, black.
Speaker 1: All right.  Sir, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think I do.  I've been thinking about that a many a year.  I think I settle on spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because coming from the--well I'll leave that alone.
Speaker 1: Well you can finish your sentence (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well coming from the farm you see a lot of growth during the spring and I loved it.  It was wonderful for me as a child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well this may sound different but it's at home, my father's farm.  Unless I couldn't get home during, when vacation time was, that's where I was at home.  That's my favorite point in Lexington, Mississippi's in papa's farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do.  Let's get with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 36139
Speaker 1: All right.  So I'm going to ask about your family history now.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side but we'll do it separately so we don't get them mixed up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Eva R. Archer.
Speaker 1: Can you--what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name, I don't know.  She never told us.  I do not know.  I don't think--
Speaker 1: So did you know any of her people at all?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Her mother, Ms. Lucy Palm, her stepfather, Mr. Palm, we all--used to always call him Mr. Palm, that's her stepfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you don't know what her--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she doesn't know her father.  She didn't know her father at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never knew--I've never known.
Speaker 1: What would you guess?  Could you guess based on how old she was when you were born?
Speaker 2: I never tried to figure it out because she didn't want us to know her age.  That was a quirk she had and so we abide by it so I don't know how old she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't.  Oh, I know how old she was when she passed.  She was eighty-seven.
Speaker 1: And when was that?
Speaker 2: That I blocked out of my mind.  I hate I'm treating you like this but I blocked that out of my mind of all of my close relatives, the dates and so on when they passed, when they left me.
Speaker 1: Was it in the 70s [1970s] or 80s [1980s] or--?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: Was it in the 70s [1970s] or 80s [1980s] or--?
Speaker 2: In the 80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: In the 80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Correction, in the 70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay, so--all right.  So that would, yeah that would put her back in eight--19th century you know she was born in the 1890s I guess if that was the case, yeah.  Well what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: On my mother's side?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Only that she grew up in Lexington, Mississippi and she grew up in the home of a white family which was strange there in Lexington in a way.  But her mother was the cook and so she grew up and she would always tell us that she didn't know there was a difference between the black and the white until school opened.  And she went to the school that I did, it was Ambrose Vocational and of course the white went to Lexington High School.
Story_ID: 36140
Speaker 1: So she wasn't aware of race until she went to school you say?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: So she was, she lived kind of an isolated existence?
Speaker 2: Yes she [Eva R. Archer] did.  She was.  She was a lot, completely isolated and we decided--they had to have made a point of her not knowing there was a big difference or a difference between the white and the black.  I thought it was strange but I, I'll take back that because that happened quite a bit, you know people that lived, live-in and I don't know if they kept it a secret or not like they did with my mom, but they did for her.  So she's the only one in the family that was a little tolerant of, with white people you know.  So she was.  I guess she couldn't help it.  She grew up with them until time for school and she didn't know the difference in that kind of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So are there any stories about her ancestors, her--well you said her mother was a cook right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, her mother was a cook but her mother, her grand--my grandmother, great grandmother is the one that took care of me but not too much, not too long.  That's the one that you have the picture up there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was known as Suma for friends and family, S-U-M-A, Suma.  But her name was Ms. Redmond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know where, we don't know where you know where she took that name from, from whom.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Suma Redmond?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And now she was born--now this is your great grandmother?
Speaker 2: That's my great grandmother, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is your mother's grandmother?
Speaker 2: That's my mother's--yeah, oh yes, that's my--that's right.  That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was born during slavery then right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She's a former slave.  She's--
Speaker 1: Was she born in Lexington as well?
Speaker 2: Tchula.
Speaker 1: She was born in Tchula.
Speaker 2: She was in Tchula.
Speaker 1: Now did she have any stories that she passed down or any stories about her that were passed down in the family about slavery?
Speaker 2: No, she--no, not to me.  I was a little too young for that to remember the value of it, knowing the value of you know remembering those if she told any.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--and what about your grandmother?  She was a cook and her name was Palm, you said her last name was Palm?
Speaker 2: Yes.  She was a cook.  She was later a Palm, later on.
Speaker 1: What was her first name?
Speaker 2: Lucy.
Speaker 1: Lucy, okay.
Speaker 2: Ms. Lucy Palm.
Speaker 1: And you don't know what her name was before that, before Palm?
Speaker 2: No, I do not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did she have any stories--she was born then I guess not too far after slavery and--
Speaker 2: No, not far at all after slavery.  But she--I wasn't associated with her like the rest of the siblings.  They probably, she probably told them but not me.  I was the oldest and I wasn't associated with her like the rest of them, my sisters and brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So there are no--are there any incidents in the family that your mother talked about from growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: You mean before she married my dad you mean?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Not really.  I understand that--no, not any.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did you know what the R stands for in her name, her middle name, R?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  She never told us and I don't think it was anything but an initial, I think that's the way it was, Eva R. Archer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36141
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Eva R. Archer] went to--she finished school right in--?
Speaker 2: You mean college?
Speaker 1: Well I know she went to college but she finished school in Tchula or--
Speaker 2: Lexington.
Speaker 1: --Lexington?
Speaker 2: In Lexington, yeah the same school that I attended, Ambrose Vocational High School.
Speaker 1: Ambrose--
Speaker 2: --Vocational--
Speaker 1: --Vocational High School.
Speaker 2: --High School, yeah.  And the only difference when I attended it had twelve years and when she was going it was only eleven and they increased it one more year by the time it got to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they had twelve years when you were--
Speaker 2: When I graduated.
Speaker 1: They only had eleven when she was there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was eleven when she was going.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have any idea of why they only went to eleven?
Speaker 2: It was the wishes of the powers to be, white controlled and they really set the schools up so that the people could work in the field, have more time in the field.  Not so much in Lexington Vocational School as the one that I attended in Tchula.  For a short time my mother taught there and I went to school with her you know during the day, no one to keep me at that time.  Yeah, so I went to school.  I think I was four years old and five years old, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--oh, at that time the school was only six months, the one that I attended, only six months out of the year.
Speaker 1: So you think it was the same when your mother went to school?
Speaker 2: I would think so.  But my mother was teaching there and it was only six months and that's when I went to school with her you know.  She was a teacher there.
Speaker 1: This is the school in--
Speaker 2: In Tchula.
Speaker 1: In Tchula, okay.
Speaker 2: And it wasn't really in Tchula and I wasn't really born in the area of Tchula and I was not born in the Delta.  I was born in the hills.  The division was walking distance, a few steps really.  The Place was on a hill out of the Delta.
Speaker 1: So you were born on The Place, right?
Speaker 2: On The Place, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, The Place, for those who are watching this who don't understand what that is--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: --that's a--The Place for those who are listening to this and don't know what we're talking about--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --The Place is the home that you grew up in, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And it was a multi-unit place.  It had more than one house and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --farm, barn.
Speaker 2: It did have more than one barn.  After the what would we call it Reconstruction, it was black controlled and there were about five or six houses and it was all Archer family, extended family and a few friends on The Place there.  But it was almost like a little settlement there, yeah.  You didn't have a store though.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Place I was talking about.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We'll get back to it.  I just wanted to make reference to it here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now your mother she went to Ambrose Vocational High School but she only went to the 11th grade.  So we know she went to college so how did--did she graduate from, I mean where did she go to graduate from high school or did she graduate in college or what
Speaker 2: Yeah, she graduated from high school and, which was 11th grade and then she went to something like a two year college that was provided there for black people.  And she graduated there and then she started teaching.
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of this college, do you know?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  I do not know the name of the college that she attended but it was in Meridian, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And she graduated there two years and she began to teach and attend college during the summer.  And one story she tells about her education, she said it took sixty years for her to finish up and she had a master's in library science.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Mississippi State.
Story_ID: 36142
Speaker 1: And when we went back with the book ["Growing up Black in Rural Mississippi"] they made a hero out of her [Eva R. Archer]. They were glad you know with the book and my mom and we were very close.  And the book came out, we went all over the state and the Delta and the Hills, Jackson [Mississippi] and so on and so forth.  But Tchula [Mississippi], they wouldn't allow the book reading, book signing there in Tchula.  They wouldn't permit it.
Speaker 2: Now this is when you wrote your book?
Speaker 1: When I wrote my book, yeah.
Speaker 2: They wouldn't permit a book signing in Tchula?
Speaker 1: No, they wouldn't permit a book signing.
Speaker 2: And what year is this when--?
Speaker 1: What--oh boy.  What year was that book written--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I got it here.  Let's see.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I'll just take a look here and see, 1992?
Speaker 1: That sounds right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '92 [1992] yeah.
Speaker 2: So they wouldn't allow you to have a book signing in Tchula?
Speaker 1: Um-um, they wouldn't allow the people to have it, yeah.  But in Lexington I was a hero because Lexington is in the hills and Tchula was always a mean place, it always was.  My dad [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] tells me as far back as he can remember it was a mean terrible place and I guess it's in, is until now I suppose.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 1: Then that's Tchula.  Lexington is a notch better.
Story_ID: 36143
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well I'm going to ask you some more about Tchula [Mississippi] in a minute but can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: His full name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Same as mine, Chalmers Archer, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and well you don't have to spell it, that's all right.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know but my brother knows and I can get that to you if you want me to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you're going to leave me a phone number aren't you?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, I definitely--
Speaker 1: You have a guess about his birth date at all?
Speaker 2: Any, if I may say, any question that you have I'll find out the answer and call you.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you think he was born in the 1890s you think?
Speaker 2: I suppose so cause he was born free.  His mother was not, my grandmother was not of course but he was, born free.
Speaker 1: How old was he when he passed away?
Speaker 2: Same as my--eighty seven.
Speaker 1: Eighty-seven?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And when did he pass, do you know?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I blocked all that out.  I really did.  I don't know but if you--want me to find out, I'll find out from my brother.  He knows.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just the opposite from me.  I blotted it out and he makes it a matter of record.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: For me.
Speaker 1: So was your father born in Tchula or near Lexington [Mississippi] or--?
Speaker 2: At Mount Olive, Mississippi which was the Hills.  Neither one, that's neither Tchula or Lexington, it's between, literally between Tchula and Lexington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born in Mount Olive and it's very near The Place, not too far.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what do you know about your father's ancestors, how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Only that what's in the book and that's Grandma Catherine, she's mixed and--
Speaker 1: Now what do you mean by mixed?
Speaker 2: She's half white.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was her father white?
Speaker 2: Yes, her father was white.  But her husband was--
Speaker 1: Now was Catherine your Grandmother--
Speaker 2: Yeah, her name was--
Speaker 1: --Catherine now she was, was she born during slavery or afterwards?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah she was born during slavery, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was her father the slave master?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story behind, did she tell, are there any stories passed down about those--?
Speaker 2: Wait, wait, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about those days when she was in slavery and you know--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  None reached us though.  Papa didn't tell us about--two steps backwards.  We were discussing that recently, my family.  My father wouldn't talk about it.  I guess he felt shamed of it.  I don't know.  You can't apologize, you can't make who your parents are but my father was the most intelligent person I have ever met.  And maybe everybody in here would say that about their father but mine was really a bright person and he only went to the eighth grade, but intelligence, I kind of separate that from education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very bright, extremely bright.
Story_ID: 36144
Speaker 1: Now from what I understand your father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] had a story he told you about his father that--
Speaker 2: About his father?
Speaker 1: Yes, during slavery, right?  Is that true?  I think it's in the book ["Growing up Black in Rural Mississippi"] right about--
Speaker 2: I've forgotten it then.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: It's something my father told me then probably.
Speaker 1: Yeah, about his father during slavery, about his--the master took him for a walk and--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, and had him beat up for no reason at all.
Speaker 1: Well tell the story.  Tell the story.
Speaker 2: I don't know it too well.  I don't remember it too well I'd better say.  But he took him for a walk and beat him up and said this is to prove that I am the, still the master you know.  And that's all I know about it.  And my dad told me and I put it in the book.  I think it's in the book.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's in the book.
Speaker 2: Is it in the book?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's in the book and this is--
Speaker 2: I never would have thought of that again in my life.  And--cause I, I've never read the book.  I never read it you know since I wrote it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So your grandfather was twelve I think when that happened, right?
Speaker 2: He was what?
Speaker 1: Twelve years old.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Yeah, that's right.  Um-hmm, you got a good memory.
Speaker 1: Well I just read the book.  I read parts of the book that's all.  But the point was to teach him who the boss was cause he hadn't done anything wrong.
Speaker 2: No he hadn't done a thing wrong.  That's something that my father always mentioned, stressed I should say that, had not done anything at all wrong, at all.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That just happened, way it was.  I mean I should say, I guess, yeah.
Story_ID: 36145
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well now what other stories did your father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] tell you about growing up?
Speaker 2: My father, one story that--my dad would often tell things that were stories you know.  He said that each summer they would paint their feet black from soot from the chimney you know because they didn't have any shoes.  I don't know whether that was a joke and he never told us whether it was or not, but that's what he told us that each summer.  But I don't know if that's, that was a joke or not because all kids in--from the farm like even like in my generation went barefoot you know and enjoyed going barefoot during the spring.  So I don't know if he was pulling our leg or not.  I just don't know, he never told us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's the only--that's not the only story he told us that we don't know whether it's--some of them were ghost stories and stuff.  He's good at it.  He's good at everything though.
Speaker 1: Can you remember--
Speaker 2: He's like you.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Can you remember a ghost story?
Speaker 2: Yes, he told us so many.  But one was that he had an A model Ford and coming from Tchula [Mississippi] going up on The Place and something got in the car, he couldn't see it.  It weighted the car down and it went to the gate.  They had a gate you know before you go to The Place and it opened the door and got out and they never did see anything.  Mama [Eva R. Archer]--he was recently married.  That's--and another one was that they were going to see a sick person.  Her name was Eva Land which is our cousin and they saw her standing on a stump and very near to where she lived.  And soon as--when they drove all the way to the house she had passed away.  And how was she out there on that stump, nobody knows.  And I don't know whether these ghost stories are true or not, but he would tell us.  He never told us.  And there was a twinkle in his eye but he never would tell us.
Story_ID: 36146
Speaker 1: He told a lot of things that we know though are jokes, though.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did he have a favorite joke that he told?
Speaker 1: Oh, I shouldn't have said jokes.  I meant like those stories.
Speaker 2: Stories, yeah, is there a favorite one that you have, that you--?
Speaker 1: I think the favorite one was about the painting his feet and he would tell about the people wherever they were, black people after freedom, they would take mud and build a house and the chimneys--have you ever seen one of those houses?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: No, you haven't seen it?  Since you were in Mississippi, I thought maybe you had seen one.  They make the chimney out of wood, I mean twigs about this size you know and no one has--but they had shutters.  That was--wherever they were, that's--they didn't have any land that they could cut timber from some they had, make it out of the soil.  And he said it was warm in there unless you were sleeping on, you know on the ground, yeah.  He never slept in one but you know he had friends that did have them, yeah.
Speaker 2: So this is after slavery?
Speaker 1: After slavery, right after slavery.  Pretty close to slavery, yeah.
Speaker 2: The people would make their own homes out of--
Speaker 1: Their own homes, yeah.
Speaker 2: --out of sticks and mud?
Speaker 1: Sticks and mud, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I've only, I only saw, in (unclear) I only saw one of those houses so they actually did exist.  They did exist made out of the woods and twigs and you know the chimney and all the cooking was done on the fireplace, you know, hoe cakes they called them and--you ever heard of hoe cakes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: H-o-e, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Hoe cakes, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the hoe cakes would cook there--
Speaker 2: Why did they call them hoe cakes?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I don't know why they would call them hoe cakes.
Speaker 2: I had heard once that they, you cooked them on a hoe or something--
Speaker 1: Oh that's right.
Speaker 2: Was that it?
Speaker 1: That is absolutely true.  They would take a brick in the field and make a small fire and the hoe, you know you, you've seen the hoes have you?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and they'd bake the bread, break the bread on the hoes and eat it and keep on working and called them hoe cakes.  But that, seemed like it should be different from on the fireplace but they still called them hoe cakes.  So I guess that's, I guess transferred to that I guess.
Speaker 2: I guess.  So--
Speaker 1: I guess a different (unclear).  But--
Speaker 2: Are they made out of corn or what?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Are they made out of corn or what?
Speaker 1: What, the hoe cakes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, flour.  They involved flour--
Speaker 2: Oh, wheat flour?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, it involved flour and they would make them--I've seen many hoe cakes and eaten many hoe cakes, yeah.  Mostly as a demonstration you know they'd show us about kind of how they were made and so on and so forth in school yeah, and after school too.  I don't know why after school now, I don't remember.  But they taught us in school about hoe cakes.  I never would have thought of it again though, until you mentioned it.
Story_ID: 36147
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this.  Is there a story about how your family starting living on The Place?
Speaker 2: On The Place?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, after freedom they rented that whole place up there and stayed there until someone bought it.  My father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] said he really stayed there so long until his--he kind of felt like it was his, you know in a sense.  And all at once when the new person took over they wanted my mama to go in the field too and so papa went to Lexington [Mississippi] so they moved to Lexington the same day.  And I don't know if they left the same day but he would always say we got out of there quick you know and they came to Lexington--
Speaker 1: Well let me--
Speaker 2: --and applied for--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I don't want to go too far into that story yet.  I wanted to explore how they got The Place, how they--
Speaker 2: How they got The Place?
Speaker 1: Yeah, whose place was it in the first place?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Yes, I do.  It's a guy by the name of Nixon in Tchula.  Nixon, his name is--and of course in those days it was Mr. Nixon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know his first name.  He owned The Place and then he sold it to a person by the name of Bogue.  How you spell it, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Nixon family now they go all the way back to Reconstruction days?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All the way back to Reconstruction days.
Speaker 1: They were the owners?
Speaker 2: They were the owners.  He was the owner.
Speaker 1: Now were the Nixons as far as you know and I don't know if you would know but--
Speaker 2: No, I wasn't born.
Speaker 1: --if you think about it, I mean you may have heard the story.  Did, were the Nixons actually related to any of your people?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Or were they (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Not as we know.  Not as I know.  Nixon now is white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  No.
Speaker 1: So there weren't any, any of his--none of your people were offspring of his?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He just owned that, that whole place and it's a huge place.  It was a huge place.  I was born there so I remember how it was before and grew up and so on and so forth.  But we couldn't find any marks there my brother and I, any what you call them, you know from any of the houses or--?
Speaker 1: Landmarks or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, mark, yeah what you call them?
Speaker 1: Landmarks.
Speaker 2: Landmarks, no landmarks there, yeah.
Speaker 1: But let me, okay so the, so your family started renting The Place right after slavery?
Speaker 2: Right after slavery and papa said they could stay there and stayed there so long until it felt like they owned it.  But they paid the rent.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's almost seventy years?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's almost seventy years I guess, right?
Speaker 2: I guess so.
Speaker 1: Close to it, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they were there for about seventy years.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I guess he would feel like that.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  And he went in the army and came out and went back to The Place.
Story_ID: 36148
Speaker 1: Now did you know your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't know him.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know anyone but a grandmother [Lucy Palm], a great grandmother [Dina Suma Redmond] and a grandmother.  And now all of that was on my mother's side which I always thought was different because my mother [Eva R. Archer] was quite a bit younger than my father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] and I didn't know any of the--well father was the youngest so I guess that's the reason I didn't know any of his people at all you know like mother or father or anything like that.  They were all gone when I came along.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't know your grandmother Catherine or--
Speaker 2: No, um-um, I didn't know any of them.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now your dad like served at World War I, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And can you tell us about how he got you know, his story of World War I?
Speaker 2: He told me one story, said they did indeed use gas and he said he saw people just dead all--like I saw it in Laos.  You know people that's completely dead, stacked almost like logs and he was fortunate enough not to you know be harmed.  But he saw it, you know.  And it's--
Speaker 1: I guess I should probably go back a little bit further.  Now he went to the eighth grade right, in--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he went to eighth--
Speaker 1: And he went to school there in Tchula?
Speaker 2: He went to eight--uh-huh.  No, Rose Hill.
Speaker 1: Rose Hill, okay.
Speaker 2: Rose Hill, yeah.  No, he went to--did I say Rose Hill?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It should have been Mount Olive.  He went to Mount Olive and he had some wonderful teachers and that--those are stories that he did tell, that the teachers were excellent instructors, teachers or whatever you want to call them.  And all of the students were older because they had to spend most of the, a lot of time in the fields you know. Even if the, even if they rented you know had control.  I'm just trying to think of one story that told us but I--if it comes back to me I, I'll tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I can't think of it right now.
Speaker 1: I know one story that's in the book is your father going to Mound Bayou to hear Booker T. Washington [Booker Taliaferro Washington, African-American educator, author and orator] speak.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he told, he said he did and people clamoring to touch him.  He said he got a chance to touch his cloak or whatever they wore at those, in those days.  Tuskegee was always the college that I was going to and I went to Tuskegee, yeah.  They had a lot of what criticism about having [W.E.B] Dubois you know big discussions one way.  Booker T. Washington said drop down your, you know dipper where you are and just do the best you can, you know and Dubois didn't go along with that at all.  So they had that--you may have read that someplace since it was in the South.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Where were you born?
Speaker 1: Dayton, Ohio.
Speaker 2: Dayton, Ohio yeah, you told me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I read about it.
Speaker 2: You told me that.
Speaker 1: I think it was as cotton exposition of 1895 I think where he first said that--
Speaker 2: And you remember that?
Speaker 1: I remember from reading it.  I don't remember, I wasn't--
Speaker 2: No, I mean--that's what I meant.
Speaker 1: But he gave the same speech at Mound Bayou I guess and your father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] heard him talk about that same thing, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Cast down your buckets where you are--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And did your father agree with him?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to like to go to his home at Tuskegee and you know you could just feel the history there.  We was always on Booker T. Washington's side because we were the alumni of Tuskegee, you know.  We, the group that I would run with and so on and that's what I'm speaking of, you know.   Actually it's only three universities in the world, that's Tuskegee, Tuskegee and Tuskegee, yeah that's the way everybody thinks about that school I think.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: All the alumni, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all the alumni, I mean.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I think in the book you said your father didn't agree with Booker T. Washington about casting down his bucket?
Speaker 2: He didn't?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what you wrote.  But--
Speaker 2: Oh, if I wrote it, my dad told me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 36149
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hmm and I don't, you know might not remember what--he told me so much and my dad, one story that he used to tell me, I said well papa, how did you, how in the world can you solve that algebra problem in your head?  He said I can see it.  I can see the signs, I can see all of it and I can compute you know and come up with an answer.  I can see it.  I just always wondered how he--oh he said it's like it's on a blackboard, you know or whiteboard either one.  And he say he could just see the whole problem and he could solve it.  But I separate that from intelligence though.  Maybe it's not, maybe that was intelligence, I don't know.  Yeah, but he was quite a man.  He was quite a man, somewhat short in stature.  His picture is in there though isn't it?  You've seen his picture, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he, when he was in the war, World War I, he--
Speaker 1: World War I.
Speaker 2: --didn't he serve as a clerk or something or did--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  He served as a clerk and then we found out later that he got to be first sergeant.  Let's see, he went up through the ranks and up and he ended up as a captain you know.
Speaker 2: Oh did he?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Of course it was segregated.  I was in the service when they integrated.  I used to know the date.  It was about 1947 I guess.  I don't know, but anyway I was in the service at the time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So your father was in the war from like, well I guess during the duration of World War I, I guess, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: 1914 to 1917 or 1918?
Speaker 1: Yeah, until the war was over in 1918.
Speaker 2: Now did he talk about what happened after the war when he came back to Mississippi because I've heard so many stories of the soldiers coming back and bad things happening to some of the soldiers that came back from the war?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  One story he told is on the trains they put some kind of blinds so when they were going south you know they put some blinds on the windows and so they wouldn't see that they were black, you know.  And at Camp Shelby, he was at Camp Shelby for a while and he said it was absolute--they didn't even give them food.  Said they had--this is after the war.  I guess he was dis--no he was discharged someplace else but anyway he was there for a while and they didn't give them any food and they had to go and either swipe some chickens and cook them or else if they had money they bought them you know.  But if they didn't rather than starve they would swipe some chicken or a hog because there were people that could do anything.  Some people could cook, some people could butcher a hog and that's the only way they survived at Camp Shelby, Mississippi.
Speaker 2: This is coming back?
Speaker 1: No, they were there--they were back--the only thing I don't understand is they were at Camp Shelby which is close to where The Place was, was about sixty miles now I don't know if that's close or not.  It was about--
Speaker 2: Now is this when he first started in the war?
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: Or when they were coming back?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to distinguish that it was after the war.
Speaker 2: After the war.
Speaker 1: After the war, after they were home.  And then they shipped them, some kind of way they got back to New Jersey for discharge so I don't know.  I don't understand that too well.  Maybe I don't understand the story too well anyway.  But he was discharged at New Jersey.
Story_ID: 36150
Speaker 1: He [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] served in France right?  Did he go to France?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he stayed, he was in France.  That picture was taken in France.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he was a first sergeant then.  I always wondered why he didn't stay in but for the duration.  The duration for us was always 20 years.  But he said he wanted to get back so he could protect his mother.  His father was dead and so on and so forth and the best, he could and he did, came back and took care of his mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he wanted to come back--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Grandma Casson.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he wanted to come back to The Place or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he wanted to come back to The Place where his mother was.
Speaker 1: Now did he have any stories about the war he shared with you?
Speaker 2: About--?
Speaker 1: Other than the gas story.  I know you told about the mustard gas story.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he have any other stories about how he was able to become a clerk?
Speaker 2: No, but I can understand it though because I kind of did most of that (unclear) and I was first sergeant and sergeant major.  But see, but he was commissioned you know and you can go up to all of that and you learn it all and you qualify to do a lot more as you go along, you know if you're bright.  I wasn't bright enough.
Speaker 1: Well there's another factor here too that, and that's the reason why I'm asking this story is because the other factor is racism that you're not going to just move up the ladder if you're black.  There's going to be some obstacles and opposition.  So did he talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, only thing that--the whole unit was black but the officers were white.  But he got the, he did commissioned though.  You had a few you know, a few black commissioned officers.  But generally all of the officers were white generally, yeah.
Speaker 1: So he didn't talk about how he became a captain?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't.  He didn't tell us for a long time and he had told my mother [Eva R. Archer] and so on.  And had pictures of the unit but they got burned up.  Our house got burned about three years ago and they got burned.
Speaker 1: Now do you know the outfit that he was in, what the name of it was?
Speaker 2: The name of--?
Speaker 1: Of his unit?
Speaker 2: No, I don't but put that on the question.  I think my brother does.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's kind of the historian of his--unofficially for me to help me out because I do some of the writing you know and he--so if you make it a question I'll find out for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, well you're an excellent writer.  I read the book but you know the--I just don't--
Speaker 2: Oh you read the whole book?
Speaker 1: I read about half of--
Speaker 2: You read some of it huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  I just got it last night so--
Speaker 2: That--
Speaker 1: But let me--
Speaker 2: That's one of our writings.
Story_ID: 36151
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this, is there a story about how your parents met?  How did they meet?
Speaker 2: A cousin of mama's [Eva R. Archer] friend, they insisted that, a couple of cousins, women, that wanted to meet papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] and it was love at first sight type.  And they were wonderful parents, they really were.  And we always knew we were going to college and all went to Howard University but me.  I went to Tuskegee.  And I wanted to go to Tuskegee [University] because I wanted to kind of follow in my father's footsteps which was an innovative farmer.  And so, but I wanted to go to Tuskegee and get a degree and then I could come back and still do what papa had been doing without going to school you know and earn enough to get married you know and so on and so forth and make a living I should say.  But--
Speaker 1: Can you name your brothers and sisters for us in order?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest right?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: And who comes next?
Speaker 2: Hermione, H-E-R-M-I-O-N-E, Yvonne, Y-V-O-N-N-E and the next is Francis Pierce and then, who's next, Evelyn, Evelyn Doris Archer and the youngest is Vernon, Vernon Granbury Archer, he's the youngest.  It was six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one was stillborn, it would have been seven.  Yeah, but it was six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I hope I named six.  Did I for--?
Speaker 1: Did you?  I think you got one left.  I got, that's--
Speaker 2: Who did I leave out, let's see?  Let's see, me, Hermione, Francis, Evelyn, Vernon.  How many is that?
Speaker 1: That's five.
Speaker 2: Did you have one sister that passed away?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Evelyn and--oh Hermione.  Did I give you two sisters?
Speaker 2: Hermione and Evelyn and it's four guys.  So there was me, Francis, who else (unclear) the rest of my sisters and brothers?
Speaker 1: Don't you keep secrets?
Speaker 2: Let me see Francis, it--but it was six of us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And you're the oldest right?
Speaker 2: Boy, if one of them, if I left out one and they found out about it, I'm in trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to pause--
Speaker 2: But I can put it on stress.  I'm stressful, you all giving me so much stress.  (Laughter).
Story_ID: 36152
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: No, I was telling about somebody living upstairs up there and once in a while they miss something out of the refrigerator downstairs and make noise upstairs.  And she said if I keep telling that big tale, if it is a tale, said she's not going to come back anymore.  So I had to stop.  But I think when my mother [Eva R. Archer] was coming--comes to see me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now you forgot a brother named Ansalem.
Speaker 2: Ansalem, yeah.  Ansalem.  That's my brother who was my running brother.  He and I are the ones that went up to The Place you know after I had grown up.  We just wanted to get the feel of it.  He had never, he was not born there.  Only I and my sister were born there, that's all, just two.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this.  Did your father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] ever talk about what he would really like to do if he could you know--?
Speaker 2: With what?
Speaker 1: Your father was a very intelligent man.
Speaker 2: Very intelligent.
Speaker 1: Rose to the rank of captain in the army during--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --World War I, during a tough time when there weren't a lot of black soldiers rising to that rank, especially coming from enlisted man all the way to captain.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's for certain.
Speaker 1: So did he talk about, I know he came back to The Place and did farming.  Did he want to do something else?  Did he have any other ambition that he wanted to do that he wasn't able to do?
Speaker 2: He, in Tchula [Mississippi] he started a business that was a, like a restaurant you know and undoubtedly, he never did he give us an answer why he let it go.  I think he wanted to be closer to his family which was twelve, about, not that far, about six miles from Tchula.  So I think that's the reason that he let that go.  But he claimed my mother was a wonderful cook and he says he taught my mother how to cook.  But I don't know whether that's a joke or not but I lean on the side of it being a joke because I don't know how he started a restaurant because papa couldn't cook.  Maybe that's why it went out of business.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Did your mother help him?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He said that he taught her, that's what he claimed.
Speaker 1: Her mother [Lucy Palm] was a cook, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, a great one.  She learned from yeah, she learned from her mother I think.  Not officially but I'm certain she learned from her mother.  And it was a cooking family because my grandmother's sisters, two of them, yeah two of them and they both were cooks, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Were they--about when did he start the restaurant in terms of--I mean were you in, you still, were you still a little boy when he started the restaurant or--?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't see it.  That was before, I think that was before mama, before they married.  The restaurant--
Speaker 1: Oh, before--
Speaker 2: --was before they married, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you know when they got married?
Speaker 2: One year and a half before I came along and I was born in 1928, so '27 [1927].
Story_ID: 36153
Speaker 1: Okay, married in '27 [1927].  Now when you think about your parents' [Eva R. Archer and Chalmers Archer, Sr.] talents and their personalities and their looks and their dispositions, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Who I take after?
Speaker 1: I hope I took, I hope I take after both.  They were wonderful parents and they never had to take us--you know in those days people take switches to you, you know.  They never had to take it to us because papa didn't even have to raise his voice and we'd do a jump you know.  And if anything that was personal for adults, they kept it away from us.  They'd never argue or anything.  They were wonderful parents and we were born going to college and I picked mine out as soon as I was a little boy.  But I don't know how they picked Howard, all went to Howard, all five of them.
Speaker 2: So they told you when you were little, you were going to college?
Speaker 1: Only--it wasn't actually told, we just knew we were going to college, all of us.  And one of the engines for me going in--engine we were going--that I joined the service to help get them through Howard [University] first which they all did, all but one.  One didn't graduate, she got married you know.  But the rest of them graduated from Howard.  And I didn't graduate from anything until after twenty years and things came so much, so much easier as an older person.  Boy, I just breezed through it you know.  It made a difference you know after twenty years in the army, really made a difference. I don't think it was intelligence, I think it was experience you know.
Story_ID: 36154
Speaker 1: Well tell us about The Place.  What are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of The Place?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: No smells because the houses were far enough apart and they had outhouses then.  But the smells were like spring.  But the sound was the birds, birds all around and of course you could hear the moos of the cows and whatever, I've forgotten what mules do.  But we had a few mules too and we had an old shack there but the back of it were the mules.  And you would hear them, you know those were the sounds but the birds were the things that stood out.  And somebody, didn't you mention honey today?  We had a bee, beehives too but my uncle took care of them.  My dad [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] didn't do that.  And bees made sounds, that, I remember that as a child.  It would--if I heard bees now it would bring back, you know and the same with the birds.  And that's why I have birds out back there.
Story_ID: 36155
Speaker 1: Let me interject a second here.  Now how many buildings were on The Place?
Speaker 2: I would have to count them; one, two, three, four, five, about seven.
Speaker 1: About seven, okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's all--
Speaker 1: And your--
Speaker 2: --all family and extended family.
Speaker 1: Yeah, your uncles, your Uncle Perry lived in the biggest place right?
Speaker 2: Yeah in the big house you know from slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was a house that came all the way from the slavery days?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's a house that was there during slavery you're saying?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of them were built during slavery.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.  I don't know about Uncle Nick's because he was a carpenter and he did a lot of building and he had twelve kids, I guess he had to build but yeah, seven, maybe eight.  Maybe eight because Cornelius built a--yeah, eight, one I left out.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your Uncle Perry, he was a minister right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was the pastor of what was the name of his church?
Speaker 2: What was the name of--?
Speaker 1: His church?
Speaker 2: Oh.  I don't think Uncle Nick--Uncle Perry had a church during my time because the wife that he married the second time, he saw her in church one day and he said I'm going to marry her.  He married her and he never went back in the pulpit again.  (Laughter).  But she was beautiful, the nicest person in the world too.  But she was beautiful and she died about eight or nine, about seven years ago give or take a couple of years, yeah.  And he didn't go back into the pulpit.  But he did marry my mama [Eva R. Archer] and papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] and so I guess he could still marry I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know what you call that, can officiate at, as a minister still, yeah.  But he never went back to preach after that ever.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it was your Uncle Perry lived in the big house.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Then your Uncle Nick who was a blacksmith and a--
Speaker 2: Blacksmith and carpenter.
Speaker 1: Carpenter, yeah.
Speaker 2: Jack of all trades and he did them all well too, yeah, was a good farmer.  Papa was the expert but Uncle Nick was, seemed like he made--well he had so many, so much help though all the kids you know.  And he's quite a farmer too but papa was considered the expert you know.  An innovative farmer I called him, yeah.
Story_ID: 36156
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I might have got mixed up there.  Did I finish whatever we were talking about?
Speaker 1: Oh well I was asking you about the sights and sounds--
Speaker 2: Oh, and I got on all of that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, sights and sounds and smells of growing up.  And you were talking about the birds and--
Speaker 2: The birds and the bees. (BRIEF INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: So sights and sounds and smells.  You were talking about the birds and the cows and the farm?
Speaker 2: And the bees.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the bees.
Speaker 2: And the chicken, the rooster in the morning.  Well now that would really bring back--the rooster would you know crow in the morning but actually would wake us up.  If people like you, you know from the city you wouldn't believe, it's hard to believe that the rooster would wake you up in the morning but they actually woke us up in the morning.  And now this is not the sounds of--but there were a lot of deer on papa's [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] place and they used to come to look in the window.  That would bring back you know my childhood.
Speaker 1: So they would come up--I'm sorry.  They would come up to the house and look in the window?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hmm.  They did it up until not too long ago, little bit before the house burned you know.  They'd come up and look in the window and were not afraid either.  One thing, they knew we were not going to harm them I think, yeah.  I killed one rabbit, this is a story of mine.  I killed one rabbit with a .22 which I still have here now, .22 rifle.  And I said I would never kill another anything if I could help it in my life.  And I never killed another animal at all.  That was a lesson for me.
Speaker 1: Why?  What happened?
Speaker 2: Just to see something dead like that you know to kill--and I killed it.  And rabbits, there are plenty rabbits on papa's place now, I'm certain.  And then rabbits and squirrels and of course they didn't make any noise you know but squirrels and the creek, papa has three creeks on his place.  But there are two of them they run together you know.  One, two, three, he has three creeks--
Speaker 1: Did you have--
Speaker 2: --and poisonous snakes in them.  Huh?
Speaker 1: I just wondered if you had names for the creeks?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Did you have names for the creeks?  Were they, did they have names?
Speaker 2: The ones on papa's place, no.  They were just small creeks you know, but the one in the back on papa's, what we call the back Black Forty or whatever, just made that up I guess, was a Black Creek.  It was big.  It's wide as this house but the others were small.  But they had a lot of poisonous snake, moccasins.  My brother and I, we were talking about it yesterday how many poisonous snakes up and down those creeks and dry land too.  But what other sounds?
Speaker 1: Sights?
Speaker 2: I said the mules.  I don't know how they sound now, I've forgotten.  But we had two mules.  Another story, I think it's in the book too that somebody burned our barn down and burned the mule up.  And one mule they didn't get out before we could get him out, you know.
Speaker 1: Now you had two mules that--
Speaker 2: Is that?
Speaker 1: I know you named several in the book but the favorite mule was a mule named Old Tom.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about him.  Now why was he special?
Speaker 2: Was it Old Tom?
Speaker 1: I believe so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Anyway--
Speaker 1: Old Tom and Jane.
Speaker 2: --one was named Queen and one was named King.
Speaker 1: One was named Jane.  Oh Queen and King, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And maybe Tom too, I don't know, long time ago.  But one got burned up.  But my point is about the one that got burned I'll never forget that smell as long as I live.  It was mule flesh so it must be much--a lot worse if it had been a person you know, but somebody burned that down.  We know who it was but couldn't prove it.
Story_ID: 36157
Speaker 1: Who was it?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Who was it or who do you suspect?
Speaker 2: I don't know the name of the person but papa did, he knew.  He never did tell us.  But papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] had a little altercation with a person and he came back and burned the bridge down--I mean barn down.
Speaker 1: Now is this a white person?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a white person.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Was that in the book ["Growing up Black in Rural Mississippi"] or did you see that?
Speaker 1: I didn't see it in the book.
Speaker 2: I think it's in the book, yeah.
Speaker 1: So about how old were you when that happened do you--?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Was I?  I'd say I was about eight or nine, maybe ten, cause I was--something like that, yeah somewhere in there like that.
Speaker 1: So did your father have to pay for the barn after--?
Speaker 2: No, he had insurance and he didn't have to pay for it.  And he bought that--the land that papa bought was from the Farm Security Administration and it required to have insurance you know until it's paid for.  Undoubtedly it wasn't paid for.
Speaker 1: So this is--
Speaker 2: No, I know it wasn't cause I helped pay for it later on.  Huh?
Speaker 1: This is not on The Place, right?
Speaker 2: This is on The Place.
Speaker 1: This is on The Place?
Speaker 2: This is on The Place.  That's the only place that--yeah.  No, no, no that was not on the Place, that's in Lexington.  In Lexington, I'm glad you corrected me on that, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's what I thought yeah because--
Speaker 2: It was in Lexington because when Papa rebuilt the barn he built it about three times as far as you know from the house as the original one was because of the smell you know.  But he moved it down in the woods a little bit, yeah.
Story_ID: 36158
Speaker 1: Well let me ask you this before we get to the story on how you all lost The Place.  The name of your book is "Growing Up Black in Mississippi".  And what is the difference between growing up black in Mississippi and growing up white in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know about the white people.  I don't know but I know how the blacks were, how we were you know.  I know that, well I never thought about that.  But one good example is I had to walk by the white school and another half a mile to the black school and that was a difference.  And that white school was, had a swimming pool, it had a library which we didn't have.  It had a well equipped school you know like science room and so on and so forth so it was quite a difference, a stark difference between the schools, just talking about the schools now.  Yeah it was a big difference.  Yeah.  They had good teachers but we had better.  We had fine teachers, we had wonderful teachers and most of them had gone to Alcorn Mississippi.  Have you--
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Alcorn College I mean, which I never visited, one of the colleges, few colleges I haven't visited in Mississippi is Alcorn.  But most people went to Alcorn in that day.  It was the first land grant college which was reasonable for tuition you know so most of them went there.  But--
Speaker 1: That's A-L-C-O-R-N, right?
Speaker 2: Alcorn, A-L-C-O-R-N, yeah.  Alcorn, Alcorn Mississippi, I mean Alcorn College, yeah.  I never visited that college but most--the rest of the colleges I made it a point at Tuskegee [University] to get a chance to recruit and I went to the black colleges and the people wanted to go to get masters and Tuskegee has doctorates now.  It didn't have them when I was there.  It had the doctorate, doctor of veterinary medicine and a couple in engineering but now they have everyday, what I call everyday doctorates at Tuskegee now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were telling us about what the difference in growing up in black--growing up black in Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't really know, don't really know the difference.
Speaker 1: Well I know when you were growing up and probably is still that way today that the majority of the people that live in Mississippi are black people.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: That's one of the, only two states in the Union had that distinction, South Carolina and Mississippi.  But in Mississippi, did you have any black elected officials when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: At that time, oh no.  But now we do.  We have--and it's, you hit it right on the head as it's more black so just about all of the key positions like the mayors and so on and forth are black now.  And police you know police, what you call--
Speaker 1: But when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh when I was growing up?  No, I didn't have any.
Speaker 1: We're talking about when you were growing up, your story.  We're talking about your story growing up in--yeah.
Speaker 2: No, we don't--we didn't have any, none period, none whatsoever and a long ways from it too, yeah.
Story_ID: 36159
Speaker 1: What sort of rights did you have say when you went into town, when you went into Tchula or Lexington [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: What you say about it?
Speaker 1: What kind of rights did you have when you went into town?
Speaker 2: When you went into town?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: None period, that's it.  No rights, none.  There were none.  Matter of fact if you went in a store to buy something when they finally got around to you if you gave them say a twenty dollar bill, they would hold it like this just until they got to the cash register then they would put it in the cash register then.  But I guess that was a way of insulting us.  But they didn't always do that.  But I've--I did see it done though, they didn't want to like if it came out of your hand they just--but they wouldn't refuse it.  They never refused a twenty dollar bill.  I sold vegetables and I raised vegetables and I hate to brag but I'm good at it, raising them, I'm really good at it.  And every since I was, all my life I was doing that and so I should know more about them but I saw them but I didn't see them.  I didn't pay any attention to them other than what I had to do you know.  I would take greens and put them in bunches and take them up town and sell them, make good money too which maybe about five, six, seven dollars a day and that was a lot of money then.  If you think about it that's what seventy years ago before I went in the army, that's a long time ago and the dollar was worth more, a lot more than it does now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, how much say in those days how much was a loaf of bread?
Speaker 2: Nickel.  Now that's as far back as I can remember and it started going up.  I don't know what it costs now but--
Speaker 1: Pay three dollars now but--
Speaker 2: Is it really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Have I ever bought any bread?  I don't know.  Have I ever bought any bread?
Speaker 2: Well that's, yeah I just wanted to make the point that the difference in the price.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  I understood.  But three cent for a stamp and it had slot machines then, penny slot machines in the store and Joe DiMaggio, the one--was that you looking at the picture of Joe, he had slot machines in that store and penny, penny slot machine.
Speaker 2: Now this is, you're talking about Joe Maggio's store, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah, that store, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's in Lexington or--?
Speaker 1: No, no, no that's Tchula.
Speaker 2: Tchula, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's Tchula.
Speaker 2: Joe, not DiMaggio, but just Maggio, right?
Speaker 1: Maggio, I guess yeah.
Speaker 2: Did you all call him Joe DiMaggio or did you call him just--?
Speaker 1: I don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right but his name was Joe Maggio.  I saw, I mean I saw the sign on one of your pictures.
Speaker 1: Oh you did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we saw it.
Speaker 1: I don't know, you were forced to call him Mr. too you know, if they were white.  I refused to a few times and I got my rifle boy and had a big shoot out and papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] had to send me to Detroit for--but that's the end of the book.
Story_ID: 36160
Speaker 1: Well we don't want to jump that far ahead but that's pretty--yeah we got to talk about that.  But, so now tell us about school.  Now where did you start school?
Speaker 2: Where did I start the school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, where did you start?
Speaker 2: At Rose Hill.  At Rose Hill is where I started the school.  I guess it's Rose Hill, yeah Rose Hill.  And I went to the sixth grade there.  My mother taught there and I went with her and then I went to Ambrose Vocational High School the rest of--
Speaker 1: And where was Ambrose?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she taught there and I went with her.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, where is Ambrose?
Speaker 2: I think I went to the sixth grade. Huh?
Speaker 1: Where is Ambrose at?
Speaker 2: Ambrose is in Lexington [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's the one my mother went to and most of the people that taught there most of them, not all, went to Ambrose.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went all the way to graduation at Ambrose?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 36161
Speaker 1: All right.  We were talking about school so tell, now did you have a favorite subject at Rose Hill?
Speaker 2: At Rose Hill, no.  I was only, I started there at five years, four years old and I think I went there about seven years old.  And science was always my favorite subject everywhere though but I don't think I had anything to do with science at Rose Hill until I got to Ambrose and science was my favorite subject.
Speaker 1: So you started school at four years old.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, let me try that again.  I went with my mother [Eva R. Archer] at four years old and you know I went to school with her.  I wasn't--
Speaker 1: So you weren't a student?
Speaker 2: --a bad boy so I just sat there, yeah.  But I was at school though, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you learn how to read early?
Speaker 2: Young.  I could read before I went, I could read.  But mama and papa taught me at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you could already read before you were four?
Speaker 2: I think so, might have been five you know, four or five.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But before I went to school.
Speaker 1: Was your mother your teacher at Rose Hill?
Speaker 2: No, she never taught me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was in the school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of your teachers in those days?
Speaker 2: Any of my teachers what?
Speaker 1: Yeah, do you have any memories of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I remember my teachers.  You mean the ones at Rose Hill?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we're starting off at grade school or whatever going up, we're going up chronologically.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, so we'll--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Ms. Ethel Speed, Ms. Mildred Taylor and mama, of course mama didn't teach me but she was at the school. Those are the three people at the school at that Rose Hill School yeah those were the three.  And Ms. Speed was the principal at that school yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I know one thing I was really happy to be able to go to school boy with my mom, you know yeah.  That's all I remember about Rose Hill other than those benches were hard boy.  They got hard before you know the day was over.  And it was a Rosen Hall School.  Have you heard the Rosen Hall School?
Speaker 1: Rosenwald, yeah.
Speaker 2: Rosenwald?
Speaker 1: Julius Rosenwald Fund.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He improved that school.  Papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] and them started it you know and they--Rosen, what is his name Rosenwald?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Julius Rosenwald.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a Jewish person and he what would you call it, revamped it--
Speaker 1: Remodeled it.
Speaker 2: --and made a--put heat in it and so on and so forth and the benches and we had some people on The Place that could do most anything.  And he made a chalkboard for us I think.  But we had carpenters there on The Place and not restricted to The Place.  You know people still lived not on The Place you know and they were carpenters and tent smiths and black people could anything.  Somebody could do anything that you needed done, yeah.  And, but I stayed there until about seventh grade, about--no it wasn't seventh grade, about sixth grade I guess and then went to Ambrose Vocational High School.  But that was because we--papa bought land you know, FHA [U.S. Federal Housing Administration] in Lexington [Mississippi].
Story_ID: 36162
Speaker 1: Now what you were saying earlier is that the landlord at The Place, the Nixon, Mr. Nixon I guess--
Speaker 2: Nixon, yeah.
Speaker 1: --he sold the land to another white man.
Speaker 2: That's right, named Bogue, how to spell it I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bogue--
Speaker 1: And so and this man Bogue wanted your mother [Eva R. Archer] to do farm work.
Speaker 2: Yeah, wanted her to do farm work and papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.], he got out of there and the rest of them followed him, Uncle Nick, Uncle Perry.  Uncle Perry came a little later but Uncle Nick and papa, they left right away.  Uncle Nick had--here's a story.  Uncle Nick had a beautiful orchard and he did something to that orchard it didn't last but one year, it died.  I don't know how he killed it but he didn't want to leave it for the white people you know and he didn't, yeah.  Papa had a smaller one and I don't know what papa did but the story was around Uncle Nick you know how he had a great big one you know and he did away with those, that orchard.
Speaker 1: What kind of fruits did you grow on--?
Speaker 2: Uncle Nick?
Speaker 1: Well no, all of you.
Speaker 2: All of us?
Speaker 1: What kind of fruit did you all grow?
Speaker 2: Everything.  That's stressing it too much.  You mean in the orchard?  Apples and pears and peaches and that's about all in the orchard I guess.  After papa, we lost papa, my mother raised an orchard, it was out a picture book.  Of course my brother helped her a little bit but she did it mostly.  They had a little tractor you know and what else the pears, apples, plums--plums and I was shocked.  I didn't think mama could do that or would do it but she did and that's about all in the orchard itself, yeah, plums, pears, apples oh, and peaches.  That was the major fruit.
Speaker 1: Now did you all grow cotton for--?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yeah, cotton, I should have brought you some pictures of papa's crops.  Papa--
Speaker 1: Was that the major crop?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was it the major crop?
Speaker 2: Is that a major crop?
Speaker 1: Was that the major crop that your father--?
Speaker 2: Yes, that was the major crop.  That was the major crop and then corn and then later on beans got in there a little bit but still it was cotton until after papa had stopped farming because it became--only big time people you know could make a go of farming and papa only had 150 acres where he could farm and it just wasn't enough.  So he started renting it, instead.  He tried raising cattle first but that didn't work because the minimum pay which papa was for it but it ruined him.  It was too much to pay for it himself and I was in the army.  But I was making a payment on The Place.  I don't think it was paid for then.  It couldn't have been if I was making a payment a month.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so when your parents moved they moved to--
Speaker 2: Lexington.
Speaker 1: Lexington.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They moved to a place called Balance Due, right?
Speaker 2: Oh no, now--
Speaker 1: Was that it?
Speaker 2: Does it say that in the book?  That's wrong.
Speaker 1: Is it wrong?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about Balance Due?
Speaker 2: Oh, Balance Due was a place that was owned by one person, one white person in Lexington and it didn't make a difference how much they paid on houses it was always a balance due so that's why they picked up a name, Balance Due.  But eventually people did purchase some of the houses, I mean paid for it, paid for them you know.  But at first it was balance due regardless and they never paid for them you know.
Speaker 1: So you could live in a place all your life and never pay for it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  That's the way it was going but no, we never lived in Balance Due, never did no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36163
Speaker 1: Yeah, but it was one year, almost two before papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] got into the FHA [U.S. Federal Housing Administration] though, farm.  So that was rough and that was during the depression too.
Speaker 2: Now it was, from what I read in the book it was tough for him to, it wasn't easy to get involved in the FHA program, right?
Speaker 1: No.  He was a veteran.  He, they would count, in those days they would count how much help you had and they would say yeah, you can make a go of it if you got six boys.  I guess picked that out of there, six guys.  But papa didn't have too much of a hard time as a veteran.  They gave him you know priority.  He was the only veteran around there, yeah because I was the only one that was able to--big enough, large enough or whatever to do help out on the farm.  The others were--cause a sister was next you know and she was in school and she's a girl I mean and in school too.  And Francis the next, was the boy and he was too small.  So papa was fortunate to be a veteran so he was able to get, you know priority or what you call it when they give you--well anyway they gave him preference for the FHA Farm Security Administration.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 36164
Speaker 1: So the family is now in Lexington [Mississippi] and well tell us about high school.  Did you have a, you said you liked science in high school?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, science was my favorite subject.  And my science teacher's name was Ms. Wade.  I can't remember her first name and she became a principal of the school for a short time.  But anyway she wanted me to stay in science but I was, I took science for one year at Tuskegee [University].  Right, I think right after the time that the airmen, the Tuskegee Airmen--the war was over though.  The war was over.  I went to Tuskegee in 1945 I think.  I went the next year after that picture we were looking at, I think I graduated high school in 1945 I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went there in '46 [1946] then.
Speaker 1: Well let's, tell us about the end of, I mean when you were in high school you thought you were going on to college and spend--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I knew I was going to college.  And I knew I was going to Tuskegee and the other children thought they knew they were going to Howard [University].
Speaker 1: Now did you make good grades?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Top, valedictorian high school, summa cum laude for, at Tuskegee, all the way through.
Speaker 1: I mean, well in high school.  I'm talking about--
Speaker 2: Oh, in high school now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was valedictorian.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now--
Speaker 2: I was big man on the campus and the youngest of high school.  Yeah, I--
Speaker 1: What were you involved in, in high school?
Speaker 2: Not much, only on the farm.  See, I hurried home as quickly as I could.  In high school I played football, started to playing football but I couldn't do both and help out my dad like I wanted to so I quit and I you know helped my dad more.  And I didn't, wasn't involved in anything other than the farm.  And I loved it, you know that's, I still love it the farm.  And this is a story.  At Tuskegee when I was working there for ten years, I went out in the back, cleared it off and grew a picture garden there and I have pictures of it because I just liked farming.  I still like farming.  I'm still a farmer too, a good one too.  I tell you what though, I didn't learn as much about the big picture of the farming as I did with the truck farming you know like watermelons and beans and so on and so forth because I was either in school or working in my crop.  Papa let me do the truck farming you know, yeah cause I loved it so much.
Story_ID: 36165
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any other stories about students or teachers in high school before I get you out of high school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I had my homeroom teacher snowed.  She thought I was a great guy you know.  I wasn't, but I did all right.  I finished--I think I earned my valedictorian but she thought I was better than that even, a Ms. Ambrose.  And she didn't want me to go into science.  She was a history teacher and she wanted me to go in to teach history.  I think it was history.  And Professor Townsend wanted me to go into English.  They thought I was a pretty good student but I wasn't the best.
Speaker 1: Now was Ms. Ambrose related to the founder of the school or--?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yeah.  I don't know if he was the founder but think it's named after him later on yeah, since he was the first principal and so on and so forth.
Speaker 1: Did you know him?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Not well.  Not well because he passed and got a new principal and I knew him better than I did--there was a story behind that though.  I never was a bad student at all but I took a hammer and hit the principal's son in the head with it and knocked him out.  And he expelled--he what do you call that when they make you go home?
Speaker 1: Suspended you or something or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And mama [Eva R. Archer] went down the next day and I was back in school the following day.
Speaker 1: Well what happened?  Why did you hit him in the head with a hammer?
Speaker 2: A fight.  I thought I could get away with it I guess.  I should have known better than to hit the principal's son though.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what you were fighting about?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know and we became the best of friends, became best of friends out of that and were kind of friends after--before that because we swapped comic books you know.  In those days it was hard to get comic, a comic book and if I got one we, you know we swapped them and not just the two of us there was a gang that would try to get--and then swapped them.  And there were never, incidentally there was never a black character in the comic books in those days, Captain Marvel and The Katzenjammer Kids but never a black character in the comic books.
Speaker 1: Now did you ever go to the movies or--?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to the movie much because I didn't want to go, it was segregated and I went only a few times.  And the first movie I saw, I didn't know what a movie was right?  My aunt took me and it was "Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs" that was the first one.  And it must have been about '46 [1946], oh before then.  But anyway I didn't like the idea of going upstairs you know so I didn't go back anymore until I, papa sent me to Detroit for a summer after I got in that gunfight.
Story_ID: 36166
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: I'm glad I didn't kill anybody.  I wouldn't be here.
Speaker 1: Well tell us about that.  Now what happened?  What was that about?
Speaker 2: They had a gang there called the Alley Cats.
Speaker 1: Now these are, this is a--?
Speaker 2: White.
Speaker 1: White gang, okay.
Speaker 2: White gang, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is in Lexington?
Speaker 2: In Lexington, oh yeah.  This was way in Lexington.
Speaker 1: And you were how old?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: I had been there for oh, I don't know how many years, ten or twelve, fifteen.
Speaker 1: How old were you then?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  I finished high school.  Hmm, I was about 15, 16 at the most at the outside.
Speaker 1: Had you finished school yet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I finished--
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is just right after you finished high school?
Speaker 2: Right after I finished high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And then I went from there to Tuskegee [University] for one year. I did well too at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But I want to go back to the fight with the Alley Cats, what happened with that?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know what reason I got into with--they got into it with--why they got mad at me, I don't remember why.  But anyway we had a gunfight and then papa put me on a train and sent me to Detroit [Michigan] for the summer.  And when I came back I went to Tuskegee and I stayed there for nine months and then I came back and then I went to service.
Speaker 1: So you did that really fast.  (Laughter).  I mean for a big incident you really covered that fast, so can we go--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I hate to talk about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know you (unclear).
Speaker 2: But that's all right.  That's all right.  I'll talk about it.
Speaker 1: Well yeah, well what happened?  It says these guys are Alley Cats, it's a white gang.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they got upset at me about something.  I don't know what--
Speaker 1: Well where were you at?  I'm sorry, well where were you?  Were you in, on the white side of town or were you at home or at school or what?  Where were you?
Speaker 2: No.  I never went on the white side of town unless I was taking some vegetables, no other reason ever.  I didn't like to go over there.  But I would take vegetables you know.  I guess I was on the black side because the bridge kind of separated the black from--no, there were some white on this side.  But anyway it was the black side of town, black side.  And they would come over there and they would come down to where we would be swimming in papa's creek where the creeks go together and the holes would be deep enough to swim in and they would shoot at us you know and you could hear the bullets coming by us you know and I remember, I was writing about that the other day.  I figured that, how naive I was.  I figured that if--well they were shooting over our head you know and--but we shot back you know and like scared them to death and then they said they were going to kill us or something.
Story_ID: 36167
Speaker 1: So it was a group of black student--I mean black teenagers, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And the last one of us died in that group a month or so.  His name was Baby Dude Samuel and he died recently.  And he was next best shot to me.  It's--we don't want to talk about the army yet though do we?
Speaker 1: No, we're trying to figure out this fight.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So did they come riding up in a car and shoot at you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Oh, you mean how they got over there?  I guess they did.  As I always say, I expect they did.  They must have come over there and they--
Speaker 1: But when they shot at you they were on foot?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't shoot at us really, they were really shooting over our head really.  And yeah, they were on foot and they--
Speaker 1: Now was it a regular practice for you to bring your gun to the swimming, I mean to the--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, any time we went--I liked to practice shooting and I ended up being one of the best in that part of the army.  I got back home and thought I'd give a demonstration, couldn't hit anything.  I got nervous you know and, but anyway I was good, one of the best, one of the best in the army.
Speaker 1: Okay, well before--
Speaker 2: But I never shot for--
Speaker 1: Before I get you to the army I'm still trying to figure out this fight with the Alley Cats and--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --your father sending you to Detroit.  So after they--so they shoot at you and you all shoot back.
Speaker 2: I shot back.
Speaker 1: You shot back.  You're the only one that shot back?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess I'm the only one that shot back, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I, so I shot back.
Speaker 1: So you all were in the creek?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You and some other black teenagers were in the creek?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baby Dude, Kramer, there were four, five of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was the only one that had the rifle and I still have that rifle in the closet in there now, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you shot at them and--
Speaker 2: I used to--
Speaker 1: --they shot, they kept shooting?
Speaker 2: No, they left.  They left.  They left, I shot over their heads and I think they saw how it felt, the bullets coming right by them and not hit--I didn't want to him them either, didn't want to hit them either.  And the next train to, next two or three days I guess, maybe the next day I was gone to Detroit.
Speaker 1: Now did they send somebody to your father's house trying to find you?
Speaker 2: Um-um.
Speaker 1: Or how did your father--
Speaker 2: No they never did.
Speaker 1: I mean what was the--
Speaker 2: I must have told my dad about it.  But anyway, yeah I must have and--
Speaker 1: So nobody came looking for you or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Um-um, no nobody came looking for me that I can remember now.  I don't know.  I would have remembered that if they was coming looking for me.
Speaker 1: So you had relatives in Detroit that you stayed with?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  That was a good summer too.  I enjoyed it.  I had never been to a city.  We, only thing we had for transportation was the truck so far as I could--got was an old truck.  Far as I got was Jackson from home you know and Greenwood and back down to Tchula [Mississippi] and so on and so forth.  We had an old tractor and a truck was all we had.
Story_ID: 36168
Speaker 1: So let me ask you about Detroit [Michigan].  Now--
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: --you said this is your first time in a major city right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the first time in a major city.
Speaker 1: So what did you do all summer in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think I went to Canada but I'm not certain so if anybody ask me if I ever been to Canada, I say I'm not certain because I don't know whether I went--it's right across the river you know.  But I went to Bell Island, that's the first one of those things that I'd ever gone to. I really enjoyed that back and forth.  And they made a big to-do over me.  You know I was the littlest and all of their children were grown you know and so I had a wonderful time.  It was only three months.  But I got a job shining shoes.  That's the only thing I could find fairly quickly you know and I did well.  Whatever, of course whatever I tried to do, I did the best I could.  And, but going to Bell Island and--oh, I also, I went from shining shoes to pressing clothes.  They taught me, I was the only young boy there, young person there and they taught me how to press clothes and how to clean clothes.  I thought I, said I just might want to be a, have, start a business you know some day.  But that never materialized, but--
Speaker 1: Now who did you stay with, your--?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Who did you stay with in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Oh, my cousins.  They were my cousins but they were like my father's sisters.  They were cousins so--in those days though people were close you know, sisters and brothers.  Two steps backwards, it was twelve people in my father's family and two of them were adopted and adopted in those days mean they just took them in you know and made certain, and made no distinction between the one they took in and their natural born ones you know.  One got drowned and they never did get over that the people in papa's family, immediate family.  He talked about that.  He's just like you, he didn't talk much.  (Laughter).  She claims I don't talk much.
Speaker 1: So did you get a chance to experience any of the entertainment in Detroit?
Speaker 2: Um-um.
Speaker 1: No?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I don't think so.  I don't remember.  Oh, I had been to Chicago [Illinois], you know maybe I went to Chicago later and a lot of entertainment.  I think that was later though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: I think all your brothers and sisters moved to Chicago at one point, right?  So well, so you spent a summer in Detroit and you came back to--and went to Tuskegee [University], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, almost kept going.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Almost.
Story_ID: 36169
Speaker 1: So you didn't really stay long in Lexington [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Tuskegee [University].  And then--
Speaker 1: Now were they, as far as you know were they looking for you, for the shooting?
Speaker 2: No.  They never, I don't think so.  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Did your father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] talk about it at all about what--
Speaker 2: Um-um, no he didn't.
Speaker 1: --what happened, I mean the--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Nobody missed you in town?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Nobody missed you in Lexington?
Speaker 2: I guess they did because I was--I'm certain they did.  But I got criticized every, seemed like every time I had a book signing for that book ["Growing up Black in Rural Mississippi"], they said well what happened next?  You stopped in the middle of nothing, you know without saying anymore and guilty.  I just went to Detroit [Michigan] and then in the book, yeah.  I couldn't, I guess I couldn't think of anything else to write.  It took me a year to write the book or maybe longer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at Tuskegee, what were your impressions of Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Tuskegee?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Only three universities in the world, Tuskegee, Tuskegee and Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: This is 1945.
Speaker 2: I'm so--I love it just as much now as I did seventy-five years ago.
Speaker 1: This is 1945.
Speaker 2: 1945 had to be 1945.
Speaker 1: Fall.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Oh, I was there not too long ago and I got lost.  Boy, it's a little city now.  The president that was there was good at raising money and so on you know.  And Tuskegee has really grown.  I was offered a vice presidency at Hampton [University], the president there, I worked for him at Tuskegee for ten, the ten years you know.  If he had offered me a job when he first went I would have gone.  But after ten years he come up and asked me to come.  I had too much you know invested here [Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 1: Okay, well--
Speaker 2: --met people like her and so on, you know.
Speaker 1: Well we want to go talk about your--you were at Tuskegee for a year, for--until when you started?
Speaker 2: Yeah, one year and then went, oh I went in the service next see for twenty years.
Speaker 1: All right, well we want to talk about Tuskegee first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then talk about the service okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So who was at Tuskegee when you were there and what did you like about Tuskegee, what was going on there, how did you do?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did well.  I did real well but I only was there a year you know.  But I did real well.  Didn't go long enough to like valedictorian, of course you don't have that in college.  But you know, but I did well.  I was a B student I think for that one year.
Speaker 1: And did you decide on a major?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I was just taking the preliminaries like you would do at a two year college you know, English and math and--no--yeah, and math and those courses, the preliminary courses at Tuskegee, yeah.  But I stayed there a year and then I went in service.  But you said don't go in the service yet, huh?
Speaker 1: Not until you finish Tuskegee.  I mean I had some questions about it.
Speaker 2: Go right ahead.  Go, I certainly will answer about Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36170
Speaker 1: So who were some of your classmates?  Who were some of your teachers?  Did you have any, do you remember any of them or--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I remember some, C.G. Gomillion (phonetic), a national figure.  Took me under, his name was Dr. C.G. Gomillion, under his wing and he was the one that stopped the (unclear) at Tuskegee Town.  See, you had Tuskegee Town and Tuskegee University, Institute at the time I was there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he filed a famous lawsuit right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: He filed a lawsuit that--
Speaker 2: He did.  Oh you know about it?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's Tuskegee--CG Gomillion.  He came all the way here to visit me.  He thought I had some potential when he--he was wrong.
Speaker 1: So he was one of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my advisor.  All the--oh, no this was after I went back this next time, the next time.  I got ahead of myself.  He--I didn't know--no, it might have been the first time, I don't know that I met CG Gomillion.  No--
Speaker 1: Well he was there when you were there the first time.
Speaker 2: Oh well yeah he was there.  He was there but I don't think I knew him.  I don't think so.  But when I went back the next time I knew him quite well and he took me under his wing you know advisor, mentor.  He was my mentor.  He self-directed, self--he just did that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So as a freshman did you pledge a fraternity or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Did you pledge a fraternity?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  I did not.  I was going to pledge Q [Omega Psi Phi fraternity] because my kid brother is a Q.  But I said shoot, I don't want this.  I don't need this and I let it go.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now were you impressed by the Tuskegee, the museum?
Speaker 2: In the new building?
Speaker 1: No, the museum where they have the works of George Washington Carver?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Oh yes, quite impressed, quite impressed.  And to hear his voice, they had his voice on a wire, let's see, tape recorder and wire recorder, on a wire recorder and you could listen to his voice and I was impressed with that.  And I kind of wanted to follow something science and even more after I learned more about George Washington Carver.  I wanted to do something in agriculture, follow in my father's [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] footsteps somewhat.  That's what I wanted to do but I didn't reach for that.  But I changed my mind, yeah.
Story_ID: 36171
Speaker 1: Why did you end up leaving school to join the army?  What happened?
Speaker 2: What school, which school?
Speaker 1: Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: And going in the service?
Speaker 1: Yeah, why did you do that?
Speaker 2: Because two reasons:  once--the GI bill.  I was only going to stay three years and stayed 20, almost 23--22, stayed twenty-two years.  And--but we were having a hard time putting four kids through Howard University and that was a regular paycheck for me you know.  And I wanted to get all the kids through college, that's the second reason.  But the--
Speaker 1: Okay, so your brothers and sisters are coming behind you though?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah they were behind me.
Speaker 1: So you were the only one in school in the beginning, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the only one.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Only one in school--
Speaker 1: So your sister went on to Howard and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was in Howard in economics.  She's the only bright one in the family, the siblings.
Speaker 1: Well the rest of them went to Howard too, right?  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, they all went to Howard.
Speaker 1: But they weren't that bright?
Speaker 2: But she was the only bright one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's real smart.  Yeah, she took after my dad [Chalmers Archer, Sr.].
Speaker 1: So you joined the army in what '46 [1946], was that--?
Speaker 2: '46 [1946], yeah how did you know, '46 [1946].  Boy you, yeah 1946.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: June.
Speaker 1: Now you, from the book, it seems you joined the army air corps right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, United States Army--I was in the air force, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--oh, wait a minute now.  We're missing something.  I don't want to slip past this but at Tuskegee you were saying that the Tuskegee Airmen were still on campus when you were in school.
Speaker 2: I think.  I'm not certain about that.
Speaker 1: You didn't meet them?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you weren't sure of that.
Speaker 2: I worked for one the ten years I was there.  I worked with one for the ten years that I was there.
Speaker 1: In the air force?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.  I really messed that up.
Speaker 1: Later on, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But we're talking about when you--
Speaker 2: What we're talking about now?
Speaker 1: 1946, we're talking about 1946.
Speaker 2: Oh 1946?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So did you, were you inspired to go into the air force because the Tuskegee Airmen had been on campus or what?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know about the, I didn't know about them.  But later on in retrospect that--I found out they were there the same time I was.
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to just kind of just ask--
Speaker 2: But the war was over.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the war was over in '45 [1945] right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But did you read the papers in those days?  Did you read, I mean did you all get "The Defender" or something at home or any of the newspapers?
Speaker 2: Did I read--?
Speaker 1: When you were growing up, yeah did you get the papers, newspapers?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  My dad took the--yeah and I took the one out of Chicago [Illinois].  My dad took that one for me.  What was it?
Speaker 1: "The Defender".
Speaker 2: Yeah, "The Defender," uh-huh, yeah.  We got that but we also got the regular one from-"Commercial Appeal".  "Commercial Appeal," he took the Commercial Appeal.
Speaker 1: In Memphis [Tennessee], yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it was out of Memphis wasn't it?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Commercial Appeal".  Yeah, I read the--we all read a lot.  My dad--
Story_ID: 36172
Speaker 1: All right.  But you didn't know anything about the Tuskegee Airmen?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.  I didn't know anything about the Tuskegee--but I saw some young commissioned officers that I was very impressed.  I didn't know they were Tuskegee Airmen though.  But they were young and sharp and the girls were crazy about them so I'll never forget them.  But I didn't know, I don't guess they were called Tuskegee Airmen at the time, I don't know.
Speaker 1: May not--you're right, they might not have been.
Speaker 2: I don't think so, yeah.  I don't know why I decided, I was probably there--I guess for looking at the years and the war was over and they were wearing their caps down.  They were sharp though boy, I tell you, they were sharp.  They were sharp.  I understand then the movie wasn't what you would expect but they were sharp.  What was the commanding officer's name?  Benjamin O. Davis, Jr. [first African American graduate from West Point Military Academy].  He went to NOVA [Northern Virginia Community College] but he was just taking courses you know and he died about what, five years ago, five or six years ago maybe longer, little longer than that, yeah.  I noticed that he was in the Tuskegee's alumni paper, what you call it, the magazine the same time I was.  So--and I brought ne for you all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So all right, so you joined the army I mean the U.S. Army Air Corps in 1946.
Speaker 2: Six--um-hmm, June.
Speaker 1: Now the, was the army still segregated then right?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was in there when they integrated.  I was in the air force though, United States Army Air Force, you got that right.  I was in the United States Air Force.  I had an interesting story if I may.  It's still 1945 and the Air Force sent me kind of on a mission, it was fourteen of us and that's when I got missions.  I didn't even know what missions were.  Now this is the air force.  They sent me to the Philippines and the president of the Philippines said he didn't want anymore black people in his country and at the same time there were black people that had taverns, barbers and everything there.  But I decided this--his name was [Manuel] Roxas, President Roxas and it was 1947, '48 [1948] around that time and I was in the Philippines.  They sent me on the mission there to take some medicine and I had been trained as a medic and he said he didn't want anymore black people in, any black people in his country.  I think that the reason he said that is because he thought MacArthur [General Douglas MacArthur] and Truman [President Harry S. Truman, 33rd president of the United States], I think Truman was president then and they--it was fashionable to not like black people.  And, but he got us out of the Philippines overnight but they sent us to Okinawa.  The picture of those guys are in the book.  I didn't have anything about--I don't know if I did or not.  But Roxas got us out of there and I thought that was quite a story that a president of a country you know threw us out of the country.  I don't know what I'd do now.  I was a kid then you know.  I don't know what I'd do now.
Story_ID: 36173
Speaker 1: He wouldn't be able to do it now.  He wouldn't be able to say don't bring the black people you know.  I mean he'd just have to accept the army or not.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So well I didn't want to skip past the, your training, your basic training in the army.  This is a segregated army so people watching this want to know what the difference was in those days in terms of being trained in the army to what it is now.  So could you tell us about your basic training and what happened, you know?
Speaker 2: My basic training was in the air force.
Speaker 1: And where was it?  Where did you have to go and how were you trained?
Speaker 2: Lackland, Lackland Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: That's in Texas, right?
Speaker 2: That's in Texas, yeah.  We had some rough training though.  The officers were white but the sergeants were black.  I got a picture of my basic training class somewhere.  I don't know where it is though. I jumped around there but, so I didn't mean to do that.  But something, just something I thought of.
Speaker 1: That's okay but we have to go back to--we always go back to what we were talking about so we don't lose it.  I mean 1945 at Lackland, being trained.
Speaker 2: Lackland, yeah we--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's where you had your basic training?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So this is a segregated army, this is an all black unit.
Speaker 2: All black unit.
Speaker 1: How were you treated?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: How were you treated in Lackland?
Speaker 2: Oh fine.
Speaker 1: Well now it was rough as could be but it was fair, it was all right and for, especially for that day, yeah.  One guy killed himself.  It was, he wasn't used to it I don't guess and he killed himself with a blank cause we didn't have any live ammo and he took it and put it against his head and killed himself.  I was wondering how he knew that would kill himself.  I didn't know it.  His name was Green, I don't remember his first name.  His name was Green.  I can't--he--I remember a few people's names I mean guys that took training with me, Charles Figures.  But the point, that's not the point I should be thinking about.  I can't remember the sergeants and the white officers, I don't remember them, their names I mean.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But you got through basic training okay and then--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: You got through basic training okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got through basic training fine.
Story_ID: 36174
Speaker 1: Then you were--now how did you decide to become a medic?  How did that happen?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know why.  I don't know what--oh, I was interested in science and I thought that would be, because--incidentally at, I guess it was back in--I was in the army then.  But anyway I was NCOIC [Non-Commissioned Officer In Charge] of a laboratory and I went to what do you call it--anyway, advanced training and so on and so forth, a lot of training as a medic.  I don't know why I decided to do that other than I was interested in science, yeah.  I don't know what I did around right in there.  After Lackland [Air Force Base] I don't know where I went unless I went, unless they sent me right after that, pretty soon after that to the Philippines, yeah I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when they sent us to Okinawa it was right after the war and if I may say, in Okinawa at that time, I hope I'm not jumping about but in Okinawa the people were bone skeletons I'm trying to say.  It's was just strewn all out.  Of course I wasn't in it and see the war was over but the grave registration hadn't been there to clean it up you know and find out who the people were and so on and so forth.  It's off limits and I climbed through the war, through the wire and went all through there.  It's a wonder I wasn't killed with duds, unexploded ammunition left from the Second World War.
Story_ID: 36175
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now in 1952--well tell us about the integration of the army first of all.  You were there when [Harry] Truman--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --integrated the armed forces with--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can't remember the date though.
Speaker 1: It was in 1948.
Speaker 2: '58 [1958]?
Speaker 1: '48 [1948].
Speaker 2: '48 [1948]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was it like and you know did it happen smoothly where you were?
Speaker 2: What I remember about it most of all we didn't work for about a year or so because they didn't have anywhere to put us, the blacks, the black people.  We were at Chanute Air Force Base in Illinois.  I don't know where that fit in there though but--
Speaker 1: So in sixty--in '48 [1948] you were in Chanute when they integrated the service?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think.
Speaker 1: Down in Rantoul [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And Chanute field I think it was about '48 [1948].  I'm not certain if it was '48 [1948] or not.  I had a forty, a '49 [1949] Mercury.  Yeah, it's about '48 [1948].  And what war was going on then?
Speaker 1: The Korean.
Speaker 2: You remember?
Speaker 1: Korean War.
Speaker 2: I mean you do you know about it?  I know you don't remember.
Speaker 1: Yes, the Korean War.
Speaker 2: The Korean War wasn't it?  From Chanute though, they did find something for us to do.  We went back to Lackland, I think it was Lackland and we were evacuating injured out of--which war was it, Korea?
Speaker 1: Yes, Korean War.
Speaker 2: Korean War.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Out of Korea.  Yeah, that was in the 40s [1940s], still in the 40s [1940s], '46 [1946].  So that's mighty quick, I--I don't know if that's, I don't know if that's--
Speaker 1: Well I know Truman signed the order in 1948.
Story_ID: 36176
Speaker 1: I want you to just tell us about your experience of--
Speaker 2: You mean of the integration?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay, so hold on one second.
Speaker 2: The only thing I--
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, okay.  All right, yeah tell us about your experience during the integration process.
Speaker 2: My experience they could not find a job for us because they didn't want to mix us for--I guess, so we just didn't do anything for about a year or so.  And, but the worst part about it, I did a lot of fighting, personal fighting.  You know fighting because they would use such slurs and so on and so forth and matter of fact I lost a lot of the fights but I fought anyway and I think that was the first time I got my nose broken.  But--
Speaker 1: This was with the white soldiers?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, yeah definitely with the white soldiers.  And some of them was the best of friends.  You know I mean they were, even if it wasn't genuine it was--we got along well.  But some of them were not.  Boy, they were just mean.
Speaker 1: They stayed that way?
Speaker 2: No, it changed.  It changed, oh man did it change, changed a lot, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now were you still a medic in '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was a medic because I was an assistant to the commander really but I still was a medic because I had the training you know.  And yeah integration was--I think I was at Chanute at that time at the integration, I'm certain.  I'm not certain, not really but I think I was at Chanute Field and that's in Illinois.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that was what I remember most that they couldn't find a job then for us because I guess they thought that we'd fight too much you know, riots and stuff.
Speaker 1: Were there riots and--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not at Chanute?
Speaker 2: There was none, not with us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you hear about other conflicts?
Speaker 2: Not in the army I didn't, no, none.  Not I the military I should say.  That's--navy, I mean that's the air force and all of them.  I didn't hear about any.
Speaker 1: Well it's mostly just fist fights and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess individual fights and, yeah.  And--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Because we just wasn't going to take them using those slur words you know and we would start the fights I guess, yeah.  But I know I got my nose broken.  (Laughter).  But I also got, I think I got my nose broken three times.  One time was a parachute jump and right there, my nose.
Story_ID: 36177
Speaker 1: Now tell me in, I guess in--now what rank were you when they integrated?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: I was when they integrated I was probably a tech sergeant.  I was probably a tech sergeant.  I went up fast through the enlisted rank, real fast.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a tech sergeant by then.
Speaker 2: About.
Speaker 1: And, well tell us about, now it says here in 1952 when you were twenty-four years old that you began your first six months at the Psychological Warfare Center at Fort Bragg.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That's where I learned about exactly about, not the (unclear) but about Special Forces.  And I don't know if I knew what it was even called but--I don't know why I was so interested in it.  Maybe it was because the mission from the Philippines you know that probably I decided that, the reason I was so interested.  And they had not done any complete training so I got into one of the you know first classes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: But I had to go through jump school first.  I had to go through jump school and transfer to transportability.  That's how low that, those big ships and things inside of the planes, trucks and things you know and tanks, yeah.  But that's how--are we at Special Forces now or--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We're in Special Forces, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now can you--
Speaker 2: It was one year long.  Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just wanted to explain before it gets--what is Special Forces?
Speaker 2: Special Forces is a good example, is what the president sent the guy out to, the SEALs [United States Navy's Sea, Air and Land teams].  We actually trained the SEALs first, their first training, we trained them all but the water because they know more about the water, underwater and so on.  And we trained ourselves with the underwater and I didn't like it anyway.  I don't like that big water anyway.  But anyway, we--everything is classified.  When we went on missions, we had diplomatic immunity.  We thought of ourselves as many what are those people named that represent the countries in another country?
Speaker 1: Ambassadors.
Speaker 2: Ambassadors.
Story_ID: 36178
Speaker 1: We considered ourselves young, I mean many ambassadors since we had diplomatic immunity and we wore civilian clothes and everything was secret.  And it doesn't seem like it's quite as secret as it used to.  But it might be, I don't know.  I don't know what they do now.  But it--you are a spy and you could be executed too if you were captured.  And we lost--I lost a good friend in those days.  He went on a mission and he didn't come back.  It--I was looking at his picture the other day.  I was either looking at his picture or some reading about him.
Speaker 2: You lost him in the--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a friend of mine and he went on a mission.  I've forgotten where he went but he didn't come back you know, they killed him you know.
Speaker 2: Was this, where did he go?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Can you tell us where he went?
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Can you tell us where he went or where he--?
Speaker 1: No.  No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You're not supposed to, no.  I don't know where he went.  If I thought for a little while I would know, I would remember cause we wasn't going to too many places then.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I thought they would have sent me to Africa but they didn't.  They sent me to somewhere else you know which is--worked out fine because I was behind the lines you know.  There's a whole army between me and anything would happen to me.
Speaker 2: So the Special Forces, the U.S. Special Forces can be any of the armed services involved in doing secret missions for the government, is that what it is?
Speaker 1: Are there other people you mean?
Speaker 2: Yeah, other, I mean the air force, the army, navy--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --marines?
Speaker 1: Since my day they started.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: At, in my day it was only us--
Speaker 2: Just the navy?
Speaker 1: --you know operating.  But--
Speaker 2: Just the air force or just the--
Speaker 1: No, no, no I was in the army then.
Speaker 2: Just the army, okay.
Speaker 1: I was in the army, yeah.
Speaker 2: It hadn't--it was the U.S. Army Air Corps but it hadn't become the air force yet is what you're saying?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well I was--when I was in the air force in '48 [1948], was it '48 [1948]?  But anyway I was in the air force when it changed to the air force instead of United States Army Air Force.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It couldn't have been '48 [1948] could it?
Speaker 2: I think that's kind of early but--
Speaker 1: No, I don't think so.
Speaker 2: I think it's too early but, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I was in there when they painted all the air force green, everything was green, blue.  Everything was blue, they painted everything blue and by that time I was back in the army.  I was back in the states and I went to school and I got out of the air force and went into the army.
Speaker 2: Okay that's, so that's early in the--so you were in the army when you were in the Special Forces training?
Speaker 1: Yeah, oh yeah I was in the army.
Speaker 2: '52 [1952] so you were part of the army then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was in the army, definitely in the army because only the army had the Special Forces at that time that, yeah I think they, we were the only ones at that time.  But quickly you got a--that was the Navy SEALs for the president wasn't it?
Story_ID: 36179
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay, so you were, were you trained to be a trainer or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was trained to be a trainer absolutely and, yeah.  And Eisenhower [Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower, 34th president of the United States], republican of course, but I respect him because he okayed my first mission, President Eisenhower.
Speaker 1: And what was your first mission?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Sir, what was your first mission?
Speaker 2: My first mission?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Well where we went was Vietnam.  That wasn't the first mission but that was the first hot one.  And the first guy killed in Vietnam was in--I mentioned that to you a little while ago didn't I?  No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: No.  Now Vietnam--
Speaker 2: Maybe I was talking to someone else.
Speaker 1: --now we're jumping about nine years, well about seven years ahead here.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'd better let you ask the question hadn't I?
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: I don't know why I get--
Speaker 1: So just kind of tell us now you went to--how long of a training did you have for Special Forces?
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: One year, okay.
Speaker 2: One year plus, plus three months, plus three months and then six months for medical training.  I had already been to medical school but--
Speaker 1: Okay, so six months of medical training.
Speaker 2: Yeah, six months of medical at Fort Sam, Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: If you want that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's fine, yeah all the details are what--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  At Fort Sam, Houston, Texas and they set up a school just for us.  And when I retired there I noticed in my records said I was a medical, assistant you know, assistant--not a medical, medic anymore but assistant medical, assistant physician or something like that, anyways on my 214 you know.  Because we had to deliver babies all that, everything and--but now I understand they have real doctors, full fledged doctors in the Special Forces but they didn't have that in my day, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you didn't--
Speaker 2: It's an interesting day huh?
Speaker 1: Okay oh, go ahead.
Speaker 2: I just said it's an interesting day behind the lines and living off of the woods, I mean off your ingenuity eating all kinds of stuff, snakes, ant, whatever we could find.   Of course you don't have mess halls out there you know in the woods and you're out there for two or three months at a time.
Speaker 1: So you'd have to eat those creatures sir for that long a period of time, three months?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but we had money and every time we came to a village you know we would buy or acquire unless it's in Laos we would buy what do you call them water buffalo and they'd butcher them and we'd have pretty good food.  And that's in Laos now.
Speaker 1: Okay, yes.  Yes sir, let me go back because we were just trying to get you through the training so this would have been about 1950--
Speaker 2: Oh we're still getting in, we're still through the training, Special Forces training?
Speaker 1: --'53 [1953] or '54 [1954] is where we should be right now.  So--
Speaker 2: '54 [1954]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we're talking about the Special Forces training?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You said you just, you had training for a year and then another six months of medical training.  Then--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah six months--
Story_ID: 36180
Speaker 1: Then what comes next?  That's where we're at now whatever comes next.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know, I think I came back to Fort Bragg.  Fort Bragg is our headquarters and I think that I went on a mission to Thailand maybe.  And you know there's no war or nothing there, it's just Eisenhower really believed in the what do you call these things that you play and you hit them and all of them go down?
Speaker 1: Dominoes.
Speaker 2: The dominoes, he really believed in the domino effect you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so he sent us to countries where nothing was going on like Thailand and I can't think of another one where it wasn't hot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think that what you're referring to as the domino effect, you're referring to is the idea that if one--
Speaker 2: Wait, I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the idea they were talking about the domino theory is the idea they had during the cold war that if one country became a communist country it would knock down all the rest of the countries.
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And that it would spread like dominos.
Speaker 2: You know more about it than I did and I was right in the middle of it.
Speaker 1: No, I'm just explaining it a little better, that's all for--
Speaker 2: Very good.
Speaker 1: That's all.  But you hit it on the head, that's what it was a domino effect is what they were trying to stop.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you went to Thailand and other Southeast Asian countries then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let me see, we went to Thailand, back to Okinawa [Japan].  Of course we you know we had that, that was in our control until they gave it back to Japan recently not too recently but recently.  Where else did we go, did I go?  Thailand, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, I guess that's all.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now this is 19, we're talking about the period of 1954 or so.  Now the French had just lost Vietnam to the Viet Cong [National Liberation Front or Liberation Army, political group and army in South Vietnam and Cambodia], right?  I mean they--I mean half of it they lost.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the northern part was controlled by the Viet Cong and the Ho Chi Minh and the South Vietnam was controlled by American Allies and it supposedly had a government, independent government under--
Speaker 2: In Vietnam?
Speaker 1: Yeah, a prince or something that somebody--or a president but I know that they were supposed to be independent.  But Vietnam, the fear was that Vietnam was going to become communist too, right after the fall of the French in '54 [1954].
Speaker 2: In '54 [1954]?  Boy you know your history don't you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the French lost at--you heard of Dien Bien Phu, right, that--?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, where the French lost.
Story_ID: 36181
Speaker 1: By the way, I was, I always say I was the first guy to step forward in the country of Vietnam you know sent by [Dwight D.] Eisenhower.  And the reason I say that, my name is A, you know, but I wasn't really the first.  My boss was the first one and we stayed there for a while and had some trouble with the Viet Cong and one guy was killed and one was injured.  And I saved the one that was injured and that's when they first had stopped putting tourniquets on people but he had lost his hand and I did put a tourniquet on it and it saved his life.  His name is Rouper, Lester Rouper and the person, the first guy killed was Captain [Harry Griffith] Cramer [Jr.].  He died in my arms and his daughter came all the way down from New York--from California, no New York I guess to see me, to thank me for trying to save his life.  But he was dead, he was good as dead.
Speaker 2: Now that's Captain Cramer?
Speaker 1: Captain Cramer, yeah.  Half of his head was blown off.
Speaker 2: So what, well you can't, I don't know if you can tell what you all were doing or not but--
Speaker 1: I probably can.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Go ahead and ask me.
Speaker 2: Sir, what were you all doing?
Speaker 1: Oh, what we were doing in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What we were doing in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Yes, right where you got--
Speaker 1: Well we were trying to prevent the domino effect and we were supposed to be kind of like multipliers.  In other words what we had learned over a point of a year we had to train them to do the same thing in about three months.  So in other words we were--I was supposed to train the medics in weapons, that's my backup.  That's my second you know specialty I'm trying to say and I think it was a good idea to teach them how to teach others, you know and make it a multiplier.  That's my word but I don't know what we used to call it in those days.  But we did train medics, we trained weapons people and communication people and they were supposed to go and train some more and I call it the multiplier in fact but I've forgotten what we called it you know officially.  So I think the Viet Cong got word of it and we got hit and we lost a few people, mostly Vietnamese though.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is in 1957 when you--?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 1957.  I can remember that to be exact, that was 1957.
Story_ID: 36182
Speaker 1: Now I know the public was told I think later on in, by the Kennedy [John Fitzgerald "Jack" Kennedy, 35th president of the United States] administration that we had U.S. advisors in Vietnam but they--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But they never mentioned any fighting.  But--
Speaker 2: I have the cap of the Viet--cap right here that Kennedy gave us in '62 [1962]?  Wait, did you say '62 [1962]?  Let me--
Speaker 1: I think that's about right, in the early 60s [1960s] I know that was the word you know when he was in a press conference he said that they have--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --advisors in Vietnam, the U.S. had, there were U.S. advisors with no fighting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, now we had some advisors over there and we were there.  We were not ever advisors though.  I don't know about now but we were never advisors though.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they didn't talk about what you all were doing there at all, it was top secret I guess.
Speaker 2: Oh they didn't huh?
Speaker 1: We just told--they told the public there were advisors there, U.S. advisors but there was no army person, no army--
Speaker 2: Oh they didn't make any--
Speaker 1: --no fighting going on you know, with--no U.S. forces involved in fighting.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, oh yeah we weren't supposed to.
Speaker 1: Just advising, yeah.
Speaker 2: We were?  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but the reality is different from what actually was said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So fifty--now did you receive any type of a citation for that--?
Speaker 2: I didn't--would you believe I never got anything anywhere in my twenty years, I mean medals?  And I could still get them but too late now.
Speaker 1: What, they never issued a citation or you never got the medals?  Which one--?
Speaker 2: I never got the citation.  I never did.  Let me make a quick-- (BRIEF PAUSE)
Speaker 1: All right, so you never received a citation for any of this active--?
Speaker 2: No, I never--not one.
Speaker 1: In the Vietnam--?
Speaker 2: Nothing but good conduct and you know, those kind and that's different.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now so you were there during the beginning of the war though right?
Speaker 2: The first day.
Speaker 1: First, okay.
Speaker 2: The first day, first hour and someone gave me a book the other day of the last people there and they gave me the book because I was the first one there.  Oh no, they gave me the book that--it's on the floor over there--
Speaker 1: So what--
Speaker 2: --that they left.  Huh?
Speaker 1: So the war officially kind of--it really wasn't a declared war.  What was it?  It was never really declared so--
Speaker 2: No, it never was declared I don't believe.
Speaker 1: No.  So, but it started up about--when did it really start since you were there?  What do you or what was the start of it?  Tell us about the start of it.
Speaker 2: The start of the war?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The start of the war was that I guess they heard that we were there and they hit us.  They hit us mean they, you know--we had quite a few Vietnamese with us and we lost Captain Cramer and Rouper lost his hand and a lot of Vietnamese were injured and that was the first of the war.
Speaker 1: So this is 1957--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --but the U.S.--
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: --the government denied being involved in the war though until--
Speaker 2: Yeah I know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so now how long were you in Vietnam?
Speaker 2: Six months.
Speaker 1: So you came back in '57 [1957] too or--?
Speaker 2: No, I was only there once.  You know all the fighting that the people had later on, I missed all of that.  I wasn't in it.  I was at the beginning but I never did go back and if I had gone back it would have been--I would have been part of the hot war you know fighting and they didn't send me back to Vietnam.  I went on other missions.
Story_ID: 36183
Speaker 1: All right, 1967 you ended your tour in Vietnam and you came back to the states.  Now did you, is '67 [1967] when you left the army actually?  Did you actually leave the army then?
Speaker 2: Oh no.  No, I did not.  I didn't leave the army at all.  I--wait, you thought I went to Tuskegee?
Speaker 1: No, I haven't got to the Tuskegee yet but--
Speaker 2: Oh okay, yeah.  No.
Speaker 1: We're talking about 1967 and it says here that you were involved in a protest at Mississippi Valley State [University]?
Speaker 2: Oh, in '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: Yes, was that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, wasn't it?  I'm really talking to myself then, yeah cause I got out of the service in '67 [1967] or maybe '66 [1966] yeah.  Boy, everything is bubbling up in my head there.  Yeah, and so I joined the civil rights effort but not to, not what I call the big one but I started to participate in civil rights protests that was going on in Mississippi.  And we were put in jail.  The president, his name was White.  I've forgotten his first name, put us in jail and the parents wouldn't take that.  And of course we got out of there that same evening.  But President White, it killed him because he thought we should have stayed there over night and it was an infamous jail and it still is, although now its, it has a different warren.  I think they call them warren, don't they, the people in charge of prisons?
Speaker 1: The warden?
Speaker 2: Warden, yeah is black now.  At the time he was a white fellow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this wasn't Parchment Farm was it?
Speaker 2: No, no it wasn't Parchment.
Speaker 1: It was just a bad jail, a bad one, bad jails.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was just a bad place to be.
Speaker 1: Now, so what were you all protesting about?
Speaker 2: Let me give a little background on that.  I really didn't know what was going on too well.  And being an older person I was kind of appointed as the leader and what they, the young people got together and asked me to do, I did it you know.  And I didn't know what we was protesting to tell the truth, but I know now it was in general you know bad treatments and not being able to vote and all of the things that the protest was for there and in Alabama also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were saying that when you got back you, your--you were concerned that the people in your region didn't have the right to vote, right?
Speaker 2: In--
Speaker 1: If they registered to vote they'd have to tell how many bubbles are in a bar of soap or something?
Speaker 2: In a particular bar of soap.  Papa would always tell that because it was so ridiculous to know how many bubbles in a, any bar of soap and that's what they asked him.  And back to the protests we were just--I was just catching on really about what was going on because I was just getting out of service and I didn't really know what was the root of what was going on, yeah.
Story_ID: 36184
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so--now what, where were you when Dr. King [Martin Luther King, Jr., Baptist minister and social activist] was killed?  Do you remember--?
Speaker 2: When who was killed?
Speaker 1: When Dr. King and was assassinated.  Do you remember what you were doing--
Speaker 2: On yes.
Speaker 1: --on that day?
Speaker 2: Yes, nothing extraordinary.  I just happened to be in my mother's [Eva R. Archer] living room and it came over the TV so I wasn't doing anything extraordinary.  I was sitting down, just sitting down there and he and I would have been the same age, about.  About the same age, yeah and that's what I thought of.  I said poor man you know, I didn't know the significance of it at that point in my life you know.  Didn't know what was going on as well as I should have.  Matter of fact when I came back, I think this was the time I came back, I didn't know of the outstanding people like Dr. King.  I didn't know about them even really.  I didn't know them but at Mississippi Valley [State University] I learned a bit and slowly I did gain the significance of the civil rights movement and so on and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when it hit me though I was really, I would like to say if I may, I was really proud of the young people that they were marching.  Now this wasn't the major one.  This is one in Mississippi at home where they were protesting, marching and it was a mini of what was going on in Alabama.  And I was really proud of them.  They were young folks at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you remember the students were shot in Jackson State in 1970, I think it was?  There were students shot in Jackson State in a--
Speaker 2: Was it '72 [1972]?
Speaker 1: No, 1970.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes I--yes.  I was still at home.  I had not gone away to college yet, away to college.  I was attending at Mississippi Valley to review academics you know from what it really was, it set--two steps backwards I had not taken a class in 20 maybe 22 years.  So I wanted to get back in the swing of things and I was going to Mississippi Valley and one of my favorite institutions though still but I intended to finish at Tuskegee since there are only three institutions in the world.
Speaker 1: Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: That's Tuskegee, Tuskegee and Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 36185
Speaker 1: Right.  Well tell us about how you got to Tuskegee [Institute].  You decided to go there in--?
Speaker 2: Which time, first time?
Speaker 1: Well yeah first time?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: The first time my mother put me on the train--
Speaker 1: Oh, no, no you talked about hat already the last time.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm talking about when you got back into the 70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Oh when I went?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I attended Saints College which was a two year institution, graduated and I brought my certificate to show you all.  But I graduated and at that time I think that was '68 [1968], I'm not really certain and I went back to Tuskegee and stayed through my degrees, couple of degrees and stayed as a faculty member.  They hired me as a faculty member.
Speaker 1: Yeah well that's after, yeah that's after--
Speaker 2: My graduation.
Speaker 1: --pretty long time.  Yeah, pretty long time.  What was your major at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: My major?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My major was counseling for masters, for bachelors was sociology.  And I left there and went to Auburn University.  I didn't leave there, my boss would let me go if I needed to go during the day and I went in the evening.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were teaching at Tuskegee when you were going to Auburn--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --to get your--it's right down the road right from--?
Speaker 2: I should say I was an administrator.  I only taught one course and we had to do that to keep our faculty status.  But as a teacher I, well I was a counselor.  I hesitate when I say counselor because that's so minor to be a counselor for the young people like that and when I had gone to school so much as, you know for a counselor.  That's just--but that's what I was, a counselor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Academic counselor.
Speaker 1: Okay and you taught counseling too is that--?
Speaker 2: I taught one class of counseling, yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 36186
Speaker 1: Now who were some of the people at Tuskegee [Institute] when you were there that you remember?
Speaker 2: Some of the people was Herbert Carter, Colonel, Lieutenant Colonel Herbert Carter.  He was a Tuskegee Airman.  And in those days they didn't speak of Tuskegee Airmen at all.  Colonel Carter came by to see me not too long ago and he said you know they didn't mention of the--I said you're right colonel they did not.  But all at once they became interested in the Tuskegee Airmen while I was there.  And I still didn't know the significance of the Tuskegee Airmen, yeah.  I understand that a lot of people did not like the movie but I haven't seen it yet.  Have you?
Speaker 1: That's the new movie.
Speaker 2: No, I was asking--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know.  That's the new movie about the Tuskegee--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: there's another one.  There's a--it's a documentary.  There's a made for TV movie with Laurence Fishburne and then there's the latest one that they made with--
Speaker 2: Did it get better raves?
Speaker 1: I don't think it was as good as the other one but that's--
Speaker 2: Oh is that right?
Speaker 1: --that's what I thought.  But yeah, you should probably see it and think what you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I haven't talked to Colonel Carter since they made it.  Colonel Carter had got weak all at once.  He's one generation ahead of me and he doesn't get around hardly at all now and he lost his wife recently.  She flew before he did.  That was interesting.  He was a Tuskegee Airmen and she you know flew before he did.
Speaker 1: What was his wife's name?
Speaker 2: Oh boy, I don't remember.  And she was a pretty good friend of mine too.  I apologize for that.
Speaker 1: Well that's fine.  I'm making a note of it so--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if somebody watching this in the future you know hears it they might be able to follow up and do some research and find out her name.  It's not that hard.
Speaker 2: I may have that article on the desk there that they sent me you know because she was a friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I'm not certain.
Story_ID: 36187
Speaker 1: So now was it difficult to earn a Ph.D. in counseling at Auburn?
Speaker 2: No, academics came very, very, very easy to me and I think it was because I was older.  I'm certain that's the reason because I was, the one year I went to Tuskegee [University] I was just a B student and when I came back all of my studies were summa cum laude, high as it could be.  And I didn't have to worry about books and so it had to be my age.  And I enjoyed it so much too, it was just wonderful.  Not only Tuskegee, Auburn in Alabama [University of Alabama] and a couple of other institutions.
Speaker 1: Sir, who is your advisor at Auburn?
Speaker 2: At Auburn, his name was, I can give you that because I leave because I have a copy of my dissertation here upstairs.  Yeah, but it was Dr.--something Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I'll give it to you if it's not too late.
Speaker 1: Now what was your--do you remember what your dissertation was about?
Speaker 2: Counseling.  Counseling and I took a lot of statistics.  I didn't learn anything but--I shouldn't say that but a minor, if you can have minors for a doctorate for statistics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now you went to Tuscaloosa University in 1980 to do post-graduate study right?
Speaker 2: Well that was post-doctorate.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Alabama, University of Alabama.
Speaker 1: Oh, at Tuscaloosa, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: At Tuscaloosa.
Speaker 1: University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa, yeah.
Speaker 2: And Colonel Carter got that for me so I left Tuskegee because I was paid my salary and all expenses so it was just one year but it was 12 months.
Speaker 1: Now the end of that period, I think in--well in 1983 you published I don't know if it's a book or an article or--but it's called "Building and Coordinating Educational Articulation Programs Towards One Educational System".  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: No, but I'm certain I have it here.  Arnethea put away quite a few of--I wrote a lot of them in those days but it's a little different now to think a lot slower.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it was published in the fall edition of the Journal of Negro Education.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I published about twenty around in that time I was doing pretty good yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now--
Speaker 2: And she put them away for me the other day, didn't you?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 36188
Speaker 1: Okay.  Dr. Archer, now when did you start working on the book "Growing Up Black in Mississippi"?
Speaker 2: When did I start on it?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Ninety--oh, I started on it years before.  I don't know.  It must have been at least ten years, a long time and I had a lot of versions and I settled on this one, especially when I found out they would publish it, you know.
Speaker 1: Now why did you decide to write about growing up--?
Speaker 2: No particular reason, I just did.  And no concrete reason, I can't say.  I just decided to write growing up black--now the last evening I was trying to remember if I came up with that topic.  You know the publishers, they would come up with topics too, with a topic that would make more money for them.  But I think I came up with that one.
Speaker 1: Or the title you mean?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The title?
Speaker 2: The title of the book, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I think I came up with it and stuck with it, "Growing Up Black in Rural Mississippi".
Speaker 1: Okay.  It received you know good reviews and I know our staff that read it before they passed it on to me really liked the book too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I saved a copy of a lot of reviews for you in case you're interested.
Speaker 1: So yeah, it would be good to have them in the archive.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'll give them to you before you leave.
Speaker 1: Now the book was published in 1991.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were age seventy-three when the book came out.  It was reviewed by "Publisher's Weekly" and which gave it a favorable review.  Did you go on a book tour?
Speaker 2: Did I what?
Speaker 1: Did you take the book on tour?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Yes.  For the first year after it came out I had to take a leave from here, this college and tour and I was kind of a hero at most places in Mississippi, all but Tchula.  And they didn't say anything to me but they wouldn't let me have book signings at any place in Tchula [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was the problem?  Did they talk, they tell you what their problem was?
Speaker 2: They said it was controversial, yeah.  That was their answer, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what do you think was controversial about your book "Growing Up Black in Mississippi"?
Speaker 2: They said they were not treating people that badly.
Speaker 1: Oh these are the white people in Tchula?
Speaker 2: Oh those are white people in Tchula.  One particular family, one, that wielded a big stick down there, yeah, he's the one.  And I was scheduled to have a book signing in the library and he said no.  That's what the librarian said anyway, yeah.
Speaker 1: So this individual was powerful enough to tell the librarian--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --not to let you have a book party?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: A book signing?
Speaker 2: That's right.  I did know his name but I don't remember now.
Speaker 1: So he could actually, he was rich enough to go to the public library and stop your book signing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm certain he just picked up the phone and called and told them.
Speaker 1: But his reason was he wasn't that bad, he didn't treat people that bad?  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Laughter).  None of them were that bad.
Speaker 1: I guess I mean, I, you know yeah I think history kind of demonstrates he probably was.
Story_ID: 36189
Speaker 1: So now the, in--okay in--now when did you start working for Northern Virginia Community College?
Speaker 2: Community College?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: '82 [1982].  October '82 [1982].  Yes, October it was '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you worked there for quite a while right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I retired from him.
Speaker 1: And the school is popularly known as NOVA, right?
Speaker 2: NOVA.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That is a fact.
Speaker 1: Northern Virginia.
Speaker 2: NOVA is a fine institution too, next door to Tuskegee [Institute].  Well next door to Saints Industrial [and Literary School].  That's my second favorite school and NOVA's third.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Tuskegee's first of course.
Speaker 1: Now in 2001 you published "Green Beret's in the Vanguard".  And was that--now what motivated you to write about that experience?
Speaker 2: I was asked to write about it.  The--who published it, right over here, the Naval, where they commission the people.  What is that they--?
Speaker 1: Naval War College or something like that or--?
Speaker 2: Something like that.
Speaker 1: The book is in the other room.
Speaker 2: Do you got a copy of it?
Speaker 1: It's in my case--yeah.
Speaker 2: Like they are for the navy as [United States Academy at] West Point is for the army.  Yeah. (BRIEF PAUSE)
Speaker 1: Sir, now we have the book now.  So it was published by the Naval Institute, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And they're the people that ask you to write it?
Speaker 2: One of the people asked me to write it, yeah, an editor over there.
Speaker 1: It's part of a series of books that they published about the you know--right.  Okay.  Well tell us about the book?  What does the book cover and--?
Speaker 2: I explain, talked about how I got mixed up with the Special Forces and how we trained the Navy SEALs and I'm not certain that's in here though, Navy SEALs.  But when I went to Laos and that's in here, when I went to Laos the first time I really grabbed farming.  I wanted to help them improve their farming.  But they were good too in Laos and but that was a project that I grabbed hold of.  And the second time was marksmanship since I was one of the best around.  By the way I was the best in the Far East with a hand gun, not the rifle but the hand gun.  But I was teaching them how to fire any weapon you know, the basics.  And let's--could I look at the index?
Story_ID: 36190
Speaker 1: Well just to summarize it.  I mean it's about the Special Forces, the beginning of the Special Forces--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --being formed in the early 50s [1950s] and--
Speaker 2: Then we went to--
Speaker 1: --then their use in Southeast Asia prior to the Vietnam War, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we went to Hawaii for a year.  Why I do not know.  Why the Pentagon sent us to Hawaii for a year to do nothing and no particular training.  We did some parachute jumping and we went hunting boars.  I think that's the way they pronounced it, boars--the hogs, wild hogs.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: We went hunting them.  I didn't want to kill any so I just took it easy while the other, the rest of us hunt for boars and gave it to the local people you know the ones you kill.   And, which was a good idea I guess.  And we left there and we went to Thailand.  Thailand was one that the president thought that from what was it, the--you told me the other day, the game that the whole game went--
Speaker 1: Oh, domino.
Speaker 2: The dominoes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Domino theory, right.
Speaker 2: He was afraid that they would you know fall under that and that was Thailand and two or three more.  Vietnam was one.
Speaker 1: Cambodia, Laos and--
Speaker 2: Cambodia and Laos and maybe some more.
Speaker 1: Burma yeah.
Speaker 2: But we went to Thailand and we put them through a complete Special Forces training that, same as we had but not quite as rough as ours was.  So--I don't think.  But unless it was just easier for me since I had gone through it not too long ago.  Maybe that was it, I don't know.  But we put them through jump school and we also put them through ranger school, a brief, lack of a better road--a better word, put them through there in less time than it took them in the infantry school, about half the time.  But it was rough.  And we got to know all of the dignitaries and most of those dignitaries, some of them got to be premier and all of them were top dignitaries that we dealt with.  They felt it was important if [Dwight D. Eisenhower] you know sent us over there and Colonel Manning talked us up, you know said the president sent us and so on.  And I got a chance to meet the King.  The King sent for me and he wanted--
Speaker 1: This is the king of--?
Speaker 2: I've forgotten his name.  It's in the book ["Green Beret's in the Vanguard"] though.  It's in here.  He sent for me because I was black and I think--but he was educated in the United States and he was interested to talk particularly about the music, Woody Herman and all of the black--Woody Herman of course wasn't black but all of the black--
Speaker 1: Musicians?
Speaker 2: Musicians, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he seemed to--if he was--what I couldn't understand was if he was educated in the United States and--but he seemed to have thought all black people played music.  He seemed to, he asked me which instruments did I play you know?
Story_ID: 36191
Speaker 1: So you said the king was concerned about, now this is the King of Thailand you said right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He wanted to know if [Dwight D.] Eisenhower was really interested in enforcing the integration in the schools and I told him no because Eisenhower was not.  I told him hecks no, but he was a military man and he had orders to do that.  And he sent from the 82nd protection for the young--you know that little girl that walked--
Speaker 1: Yes, Ruby Bridges, yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh you remember the name?  That's amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was in my home town last year there.  She was painted by Norman Rockwell.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was painted by Normal Rockwell, she certainly was.  Yeah.  Yeah, she was.  That's amazing too.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I told him no, Eisenhower was not interested but I'm certain he would--that's the reason that he did have the 82nd escort her to class and keep her there.  And no one bothered her either, they'd better not because he's a military man you know and he had orders to do that.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you this and correct me if I'm wrong but I think the book, in the book from what I read of the review of the book--
Speaker 2: You mean this one?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yes sir, that you said that the U.S. Government Special Forces were trying to befriend the people of Southeast Asia and they were trying to make friends with them in order to as a military strategy and that you think if they had continued in that way we probably would have had more success.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: I remember thinking that but my mind, I mean my thoughts my have changed since then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I remember thinking that and I remember putting it in here.  I never thought of it again you know but now I do.  Now I do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you don't think that way anymore?
Speaker 2: I don't think so now.  I don't think so now, I really don't, yeah.  But a lot has gone through the pipe since then, since--what was that, '67 [1967] that I was in Thailand.  And--about '67 [1967], something like--but anyway, that doesn't make any difference, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I think you went over in '57 [1957] I think.
Speaker 2: '57 [1957] wasn't it?  Yeah, '57 [1957] yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 36192
Speaker 1: How was this book received?
Speaker 2: This one?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Not too well.  Not too well.  The-"Growing Up Black in Rural Mississippi" made the bestselling (sic, bestsellers) list, short time, very short time.  Now this one was because I was here [Virginia], it was the best seller in this area because that's the only reason you know.  And they didn't promote it like Walker did for that one.  That one was sent to every library in the United States the "Growing Up Black in Rural Mississippi," library and something else, oh bookstore, in every bookstore, major bookstore in the United States.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's Walker--
Speaker 1: Sir, can you tell us about your teaching career and--?
Speaker 2: Mine?
Speaker 1: Yes, your teaching career and you taught until what time?  When did you retire from teaching?
Speaker 2: I retired from here [Virginia], I was on the faculty but I wasn't actually teaching.  I still had to teach one course here [Virginia]. My career has been very slack with the actual teaching.  I was mostly administrator all the way through.  I did a lot of writing for Tuskegee [Institute] and I brought to show you all where I got weekend college added to Tuskegee and it's over there.  The dean--you know I wasn't there then.  I was in Tuscaloosa [Alabama] but he wrote me a letter and said it was approved and I don't know how it's doing since I left you know, but a weekend college and evening and weekend really.
Speaker 1: It's for adult education, continuing education?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was continuing education.  And I also for Tuskegee, I was proud.  I wrote along with Colonel Carter the one that I said is getting quite old now, I noticed about Colonel Carter, it happens all at once too.  So I kind of hated that it happened all at once.  We wrote the one together for the counseling center.  That's where I became interested in counseling although I heard mama [Eva R. Archer] talk about counseling.  She's a teacher.  And I was already somewhat interested in counseling, yeah.  But may I tell about another career I was interested in?
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to Tuskegee [Institute] because Tuskegee was considered an institution that supported farmers.  It was a--and Howard [University] was kind of sophisticated you know they had medicine, had all that at the time.  And I wanted to take, I considered getting a degree in science and take a job back and try to get a job back in our, in my hometown doing what papa [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] does or did, advising the rest of the people how to farm, how to improve farming and so on and so forth.  But that didn't work out.  I changed my mind somewhere down the line, I don't know where.  But sometimes I wish that I had stuck with the farming part of my life, interest in my life and I didn't.
Story_ID: 36193
Speaker 1: But someone said that--and was it you--said that my legacy I should want would be to say that I tried to help as many young people one at a time to make a decision and to reach for their dream and to stick on and to reach and stick with it and I did.  I did for twenty, maybe twenty years straight, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now sir, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 1: For the what?
Speaker 2: For the black community today?
Speaker 1: I think the most thing is for some way to get the many black young boys or young men and, or well men of color out of jail and keep them in some way to keep them in high school and finish high school and maybe a two year college or even a four year college rather than in jail.  Right now it is said that there are more black people of color, I mean people of color in jail than there were people in slavery, during slavery time.  I don't know if that's true or not.  But I read that somewhere or someone told me that, I'm not certain.  But I would like to see those young men not be in jail and in school cause education itself is cheaper than what they are calling, causing the state of whomever you know pays that.  It's expensive.  It's expensive and it's more expensive than education.  That's what I'd like to see.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 36194
Speaker 1: Well sir, tell us something about your family now.  Now do you have children?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have any children.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I don't have any children.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother and father think about your career?
Speaker 2: About my career?
Speaker 1: Yes sir.
Speaker 2: Oh they satisfied.  If I had just gone to [Tuskegee University] one year and completed it, they would have been perfectly happy because they believe in education.  Education they really believe in and my mother [Eva R. Archer] wouldn't give up on me.  She would make certain that I'd get that bachelors and I always say she would not give up on me.  My father [Chalmers Archer, Sr.] either, but my mother was right at the, it seems right at my back all the time you know make certain that I get prepared to go back to Tuskegee.  I had completed a year there.  Go back to Tuskegee.  She never gave up on me and I was never a bad kid, a bad young man and a bad older man either.  But I just kind of lost interest there and my mom wouldn't--she didn't.  I'll never forget it either.  I'll never forget it.  She was a wonderful person and my dad was the brightest one although he didn't have any education but he was the brightest one.  He was the smartest you know.
Story_ID: 36195
Speaker 1: Sir--oh, go ahead.
Speaker 2: There were six of us and my running buddy, she calls her sister a running buddy, I couldn't think of his name the other day, could only think of five of us.  Boy and he's not living anymore but if he was here I'd be in trouble for forgetting his name.  But there were six of us and they all woke up to college, they all went to college.  They all finished but one.  She got married.  She got married and didn't finish but that's, that was fine.  It was a--she's in Chicago now and she's a little ill but my favorite--she's the youngest sister, my favorite sister.  My oldest sister was my running buddy and we lost her so we've lost a brother and a sister, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they were both my closest friends and sibling they were.  I think about them everyday, everyday.  They were not interested in farming like me though I'll say that.  They--not a one of them were interested in farming.  They did their chores while we were coming up and like I did but I enjoyed mine and I enjoyed the farming and enjoyed the truck farming more.  And that's what I learned how to do really.  I didn't learn how to do the tractor farming and so on and so forth.  I never learned how to chop cotton.  I can pick cotton.  I can pick some cotton but I never learned to chop or anything like that.  So we were a close family, very close.  I don't think there are many families that's closer and I wouldn't think, I couldn't think of a better family.  Naturally, most all families I'm certain say the same thing but I really mean it, it's coming from my heart, it really is.
Story_ID: 36196
Speaker 1: So when you think about growing up black in Mississippi at the time that you grew up what do you think has changed you know since you grew up?  I mean are--
Speaker 2: Since--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mean what, I guess what do you think about life now in Mississippi cause you were there for a little while, at least a while and you went back to visit right a second time?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did you think about--have things improved enough or do we still need to do more or what?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.  Mostly all of the top positions such as the mayor and so on are held by blacks.  And the reason being of course is there are more black people there than there are white you know.  And I know of a couple of small towns that still have black--I mean white mayors but most of them are black and police chief and so on and so forth.  And you can vote.  That's important, you can vote and you can set up your own legislature.  You can elect your own dignitaries and so on and so forth.  And since President Johnson in '68 [1968] made it so that you know black people could vote everywhere, it's a big difference.  You can do anything you want.  I mean Easter Rising I'm talking about now.  It's a big difference.  I would say it's three hundred and--well almost a complete turn around than what it was before.  And people get along.  They found out they can get along, they're doing fine.
Speaker 1: What do you think about the progress of black people in the military since you left?
Speaker 2: Oh boy!  You're talking about a--at the time when I was first in they only had one brigadier general, a two star general and he was Benjamin O. Davis, Jr., the father of the commanding officer of the Tuskegee Airmen.  Now it would be hard to count the five star generals we have, black that's in--look at Colin Powell.  He was a Republican but he's a--I noticed he's--boy my mind.  She asked me the other day if I was losing it.
Speaker 1: Well he was secretary of state under the Bush [George Walker Bush, 43rd president of the United States] administration.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he's a history maker.  He--I saw his name somewhere, where he is.  Yes, he was.  He made the, somewhat of a bad decision when he agreed with Bush about the destroy--
Speaker 1: Iraq War, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What he called it?
Speaker 1: War on Iraq.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But he voted for President [Barack] Obama last time, yeah, although he's a Republican, yeah.  I don't know what he is now.  He came down and spoke for a meeting that we--I sponsored some time ago.  I used to work quite a bit in the community before and he was a Republican then.  But they wanted him and he would come, so he came.  He was there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36197
Speaker 1: Now sir, we always ask this question.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  When you look back over everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy?  Oh, I guess, oh boy.  Can we come back to that one?  No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, we can.  I guess.  I only have one other question I mean one other question.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Oh.
Speaker 1: Well maybe I could phrase it this way.  This is a different version of the similar question.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: How would I like to be remembered?  I would like to be remembered like someone said I should be.  I'd like to be remembered that I tried to help as many young people, all races, young people reach for their dream and hold onto it and one by one, one by one.  And someone said I should and I would like for that to be my legacy that I tried hard and I think I was successful over the years.  Because I--not officially but I did the same thing in service.  In service a lot of the people would come--they knew I was interested in education.  They would come and talk to me and so on and so forth and it would always be a discussion, not you should do this and not you should do that but a discussion and possibly this is a good idea and what do you think about what you're thinking about?  Or something like that you know a discussion.  And that's the legacy that I tried to help people reach for their dream and hold on to it.  And I got that hold on to that, hold on to it from my--a former slave, my great grandmother [Dina Suma Redmond].  She said, told us, always told us hold on to your dream.  She meant it too boy.  And we listened to her too pretty good, pretty good.  Most of them did more than I did really.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 36198
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is there anything we haven't talked about we need to talk about?
Speaker 2: No, I don't guess so but I really enjoyed today because well it was just pleasant today.  I really enjoyed it.  It was wonderful.  Can I call it a discussion?  It was a wonderful discussion and I could go through that--another session of this.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well thank you.  Now--
Speaker 2: It was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Now what I want to do that I didn't do in the beginning is slate the interview.  We didn't slate it.  But my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer with the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Aramenta--what's your last name?
Speaker 2: Dixon Summerville.
Speaker 1: Okay, Dixon Summerfield, okay.
Speaker 2: And I'm Chalmers Archer, Jr.
Speaker 1: Yes.  And today's date is July the what, 15th?
Speaker 2: 16th.
Speaker 1: 15th?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 2012, right?
Speaker 2: It is the 15th, isn't it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: 16th.
Speaker 1: It's the 16th.
Speaker 2: 16th.
Speaker 1: 16th.
Speaker 2: 16th, okay.  16th, 2012 and we're in Manassas, Virginia right?
Speaker 1: Since I retired I don't have anything--if I didn't pick up the paper every morning you know Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Sunday are all the same to me now.  But when I was working of course it was different.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well I'd like to thank you very much and--
Speaker 1: And thank you very much.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 36199
Speaker 1: Just talk about the picture, who's in it and about when it was shot.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.  Is that the one--I can't see it.  I have to come closer.
Speaker 1: You can see cause it's going to be a few pics--
Speaker 2: Yeah this one's captioned already.  But show him first so he knows what he's talking--
Speaker 1: All right, that's just a picture of you.
Speaker 2: That's just me.
Speaker 1: And there's another one of you with some students here.
Speaker 2: Oh this is a class I taught.  That's a class of bad kids they gave them to me to teach.  I shouldn't say that about them but they were nice kids.
Speaker 1: The kids that had problems and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: No, here.
Speaker 1: Here in Manassas?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: This is you with your shades on?
Speaker 2: That's a handsome guy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I tell stories--she say I tell stories a lot.  What--oh--
Speaker 1: The one at the top.
Speaker 2: That's the Emeritus award.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're Professor Emeritus from where?
Speaker 2: Here, Northern Virginia Community College.
Speaker 1: Okay, the top one.
Speaker 2: I retired from Tuskegee but I didn't get emeritus.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Let's see, I can't see it.
Speaker 1: That's the book signing for--
Speaker 2: Oh a book signing, yeah a book signing.
Speaker 1: There's a caption on that one too.  There's one on the back too.  Yeah, he's with a statue.  Now where (unclear) there?
Speaker 2: What is it?
Speaker 1: You're with a statue someplace in (unclear) Europe.
Speaker 2: In Cambridge, um-hmm, Cambridge, University.  Cambridge University, I worked there one summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, what, you remember what year?
Speaker 2: You don't know do you?  No, I don't.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think--
Speaker 1: I don't know who that is.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that's you though with the (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's me, yeah and my brother in law on the left.  I don't know who the girl is though.
Speaker 2: Is that around 1967?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: When you came back--?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, come to think about it, it's--I was on my way to Hawaii.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was in, that's at my sister's house and that--when did I go to Vietnam?
Speaker 2: '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: '57 [1957] then.  '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: That's '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Henry Kissinger [Heinz Alfred "Henry" Kissinger, 56th Secretary of State of the United States].
Speaker 1: I went Republican, Dole, got a picture with Dole and they asked me to join the--
Speaker 2: That was Henry Kissinger there.
Speaker 1: That's Kissinger there, yeah um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, the Cambridge (unclear) 1988.
Speaker 1: Oh is that what year it is?
Speaker 2: Have him say it in the mic, Cambridge was '88 [1988].
Speaker 1: Which one--what am I supposed to say?
Speaker 2: The caption.
Speaker 1: What is it?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) 1988.
Speaker 1: Cambridge University, England, 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Boy, you all do it up, I'm telling you.  I'm so proud.  That's the air force, United States Army--what did you cal it?
Speaker 2: Air Corps.
Speaker 1: Air Corps, yeah.  That's Chanute, Chanute Field.
Speaker 2: Rantoul, Illinois.
Speaker 1: That is the beret that Kennedy approved and on the inside of it that's the one that's out here.  It has sixty two on it.
Speaker 2: Where are you on this one?  Can you tell us where you are?
Speaker 1: What is that (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That's the Saints literary--
Speaker 1: Industrial Literary School Group.  No, that's just a group.
Speaker 2: Oh but that--but you're not in it?
Speaker 1: No, no I'm not in it.  I'm not in it.
Speaker 2: Okay, maybe I shouldn't have--
Speaker 1: What's on the back?  I--
Speaker 2: That's the picture of the school, Saints--
Speaker 1: Saints School?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (unclear).
Speaker 1: Oh yeah that's, on the left that's Francis [Archer], in the middle is my cousin Rezelle Archer and that's my sister Hermione [Archer] on our right.
Speaker 2: Okay, now that's on The Place in--?
Speaker 1: I don't know whether it's my grandmother's or The Place.  It could be The Place.
Speaker 2: But it's 1936.
Speaker 1: 1936.  But I used to go visit my grandmother.  I decided it's my grandmother.
Speaker 2: I think this is a school here.
Speaker 1: That's the school I attend.  That is the school I attended.
Speaker 2: It's Rose Hill Church School.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's a school--
Speaker 2: Picture of it.
Speaker 1: That's my first school.  My mother [Eva R. Archer] taught there.  Of course it's been re, been built.  And the bottom one is the one that's from papa's place.  Papa's [Chalmers Archer] was--that's Dr. Arena C. Mallory, President of Saints Industrial and Literary School.  And I think that's Saints down below.  Is it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.
Speaker 1: That's Saints.  That's my mother.  I still think she looked 32 or 16 or whatever she is for 32 years.
Speaker 2: She looks pretty young.  Looks pretty young on there to me.
Speaker 1: That's my mom.
Speaker 2: Now what is this?  Is this The Place itself?
Speaker 1: No, those were black houses.  I had them send them to me from--for a book I was trying to write, sent them from--
Speaker 2: From Mississippi--from--
Speaker 1: From Tchula.
Speaker 2: From Tchula, Mississippi?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm, from Tchula, Mississippi.  I was trying to write a book.  That's my grandmother, Grandmother Catherine [Archer], my father's mother.
Speaker 2: Street scene, Lexington.
Speaker 1: Lexington, Mississippi, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lexington, Mississippi.  I wonder what street is that, talking to myself.
Speaker 1: That's when you used to sell vegetables.
Speaker 2: Raymond's Movers is there.
Speaker 1: It gave the street?
Speaker 2: No.  No, the movers that's all.
Speaker 1: I'm not on there.  I'm not on there.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) Ambrose High School.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they sent--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) there you said?
Speaker 1: I'm not on there.  They just sent me--
Speaker 2: It's the school he graduated from though, but--
Speaker 1: They just sent me that picture.  Oh that's Grandma Catherine.
Speaker 2: About what year is this one?   Is this '67 [1967] or is this earlier?
Speaker 1: Oh no.
Speaker 2: That's earlier?
Speaker 1: No, I made this year--what is that rank?  Oh, that's in Thailand when I went to Thailand.  I went to Thailand in '67 [1967], '57 [1957], at '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Okay, that--you're in the uniform, that was in Thailand in 1957.
Speaker 1: '57 [1957]?
Speaker 2: But where are you on this one, 19 (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Which year was he in Thailand?
Speaker 2: Here I am.
Speaker 1: '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: Right here, see my hand.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got it.  Here he is right here, get a close up on him.
Speaker 2: My, I got a couple of graduation classes on the table up there.  You want me to bring them down?  "Growing up Black in Rural Mississippi," I never did give a good answer to why I wrote that.  I don't know why.
Speaker 1: Oh I know why even though--
Speaker 2: I'm pointing to the guy that, first guy they killed in Vietnam, yeah Vietnam.  His name is Harry G. Cramer, Captain--[United States Academy at] West Point graduate.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) a chance to keep this one, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Yeah you can keep it.
Speaker 2: Here's a--well that's on the cover of the book but this is a better shot of it.
Speaker 1: That's the same picture isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He can keep that one can't he?
Speaker 2: I think--
Speaker 1: You gave him that?  Give him that one.
Speaker 2: You got a couple upstairs?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I got another copy.  Oh that's Uncle Nick and his first six kids and he has twelve.  That's a--
Speaker 2: Okay, who's the--
Speaker 1: You all need to, all you all need to read about Uncle Nick [Nicholas Archer].  Uncle Nick was quite a guy.
Speaker 2: What's this picture up here?
Speaker 1: Oh that's my Great Grandmother that called slavery--what she call it?
Speaker 2: And who's the (unclear)?
Speaker 1: The time of the devil.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The time of the devil.
Speaker 2: Oh the time of the devil, the time of the devil.
Speaker 1: Okay and this is the uncle.
Speaker 2: Uncle Nick, yeah.
Speaker 1: Uncle Nick.  You all need to read that because Uncle Nick was something else boy.
Speaker 2: Uncle Nick.
Speaker 1: Did you get your--did you get his father, you got that?
Speaker 2: Which one is his father?
Speaker 1: World War I, yeah.
Speaker 2: That one.
Speaker 1: World War I, yeah.  He always--he said I refer to myself as a (unclear).  I don't know why.
Speaker 2: Give your father's name for us?
Speaker 1: Huh?  But he was a captain though.
Speaker 2: Sir, give us your father's name please.
Speaker 1: Chalmers Archer, Sr.--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --my father.
