Story_ID: 303179
Speaker 1: My name is Shawn Wilson, I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers, and this is Neculai Burghelea, the videographer.  And I will just have you introduce yourself state your name, spell it out for me, give me your date of birth and place of birth.
Speaker 2: Okay, so I'm Dr. Catrise Austin [HistoryMaker Dr. Catrise L. Austin], VIP Smiles [New York City Cosmetic and General Dentistry, New York, New York], the owner and primary dentist.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell your name?
Speaker 2: C-A-T-R-I-S-E, middle initial L for Lynette and Austin, A-U-S-T-I-N.  And I am from Flint, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Your date of birth?
Speaker 2: May 2nd, 1970.
Speaker 1: And that makes you a what, a Gemini?
Speaker 2: Taurus (laughter).
Speaker 1: Taurus (laughter).
Story_ID: 303180
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm gonna start with five basic questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --that you will know the answers to, right off the top of your head.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Collard greens.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pink.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summertime.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh that's tough, oh boy, Jamaica--I take that back Cancun [Mexico].
Speaker 1: Okay but tropical.
Speaker 2: Tropical.
Speaker 1: Okay and your favorite phrase of saying?
Speaker 2: That one I, gosh, I don't have one, I don't, do I have favorite phrase?  Can I come back to that one?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 303181
Speaker 1: So let's start we're gonna talk about your mother's side of the family.  This will be your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll talk about your mother's side and then your father's side.  So we'll start with your mother's side, if you can just state your mother's name for me, give me her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's name is Michele Austin, she is--she was born January 26, 1953, in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: And your mom--she's pretty young?
Speaker 2: She is, she had me at seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what can you tell me about your mom's early life?  Stories she told you, did she talk about her childhood?  What do you know about your mother?
Speaker 2: We talk about a lot it was very challenging for her to be a young mom.  She was pregnant at sixteen, with a high, high school sweetheart and was out of the house by seventeen by--when she had me.  Grew up in a very religious family and her parents [Carlean Austin and Wilman Austin (ph.)] did not approve of her having a child out of wedlock.  As a matter of fact they asked her to stand before the church and apologize for her being pregnant without being married.  And it was something that she wasn't sorry for and she didn't feel that she needed to that.  So as a result she had to make the decision to be out on her own, the first five years.  And that was pretty challenging for her to be seventeen and basically on her own raising a young one.  So we talk a lot still about how challenging it was.  And she was never willing to put me off on other people so that she could continue her teenage years.  Everything that she did and she had a love for the arts.  Everything that she did I was present, so I think a lot of my love and passion entertainment comes from her.  Because every concert that she was at, be it a Funkadelic [Parliament-Funkadelic] concert I was two years old, Funkadelic-ing it up.  So my love for entertainment and music really came from her being a young mom and taking me to a lot of events and exposing me to a lot things.  And everywhere she traveled I'd always traveled and she loves to travel.  So I do have a passion for travelling.  So a lot of--the first five years for her was a lot of struggle and finding herself and just being a new mom.
Speaker 1: But she was seventeen, so she's not only finding herself as new mom, but finding herself as as a person, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) As a person, yeah.  So we, I feel like we kind of of grew up together and it's been wonderful having a youthful mom.  To this day she still--she could have the new Kanye West album before I do.  She tells me what's going on.  She has a subscription to Sister 2 Sister magazine, so she's always telling me things.  So I think it was really a great thing.
Story_ID: 303182
Speaker 1: You told me where your mother [Michele Austin] was born, but tell me again and where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up--
Speaker 1: In Flint [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: She grew up partially in Detroit [Michigan], my grandmother and my [maternal] great-grandmother [Hilda Denham] our, our base is Detroit, Michigan.  But my grandparents moved to Flint in her teenage years--early teenage years.  So, she grew up in Detroit, for her early part of her years and then the remainder Flint, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now if you look, if you just think back in your family's history, was it--was--did other people other mothers have children young or was your mom stepping out of line to do this?
Speaker 2: Actually there's twenty years difference between my mother and my grandmother and then my grandmother and great-grandmother there's twenty years difference.  So it wasn't a huge discrepancy, with my mother having me at seventeen.  But I think it was the whole religious, it's wrong to have sex out of wedlock, which everybody else did as well (laughter).  But it was something there that they felt that it was wrong.
Speaker 1: Now did your mother have the opportunity then to go to school?  Did she, was she--did she complete high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She finished her last year of high school in Detroit.  So she did finish and get her, she got her high school diploma so.  And in her later years took advanced education courses.
Speaker 1: So when you, let's go back one step--your mother's mother, what's her name and her birthdate, do you know that?
Speaker 2: Oh, she's gonna kill me, Carlean Austin, in--
Speaker 1: And how, how does she spell Carlean?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-L-E-A-N, Austin, A-U-S-T-I-N.  In January--I'm sorry July 28th, and the year (sound) (laughter), 'cause you know the grandmothers don't like to share their true age, but (unclear).
Speaker 1: But at least if you just go back twenty years, because she had your mom (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you're--we're talking about your grandmother now, Carlean.
Speaker 2: Carlean.
Speaker 1: Tell me about her early childhood, what did she, what stories did she share about her having grown up in Detroit, I'm assuming?
Speaker 2: Actually my grandparents both are from Louisville, Mississippi.  And I don't know a lot about her early years.  Which this whole process is making me think that I really need to sit down and find more about her earlier years.  But my great-grandmother--our family history is Choctaw Indian [Native American], so.  I'm sorry I'm stumbling.
Speaker 1: No but that's good because Choctaw Indians is very prevalent in Mississippi, I'm from Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So your great-grandmother was Choctaw Indian?
Speaker 2: Choctaw Indian.
Speaker 1: Okay. So do you have any idea like did they grow up on a plantation, did they, were they sharecroppers, any idea like about what they did in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: From what I understand my great-great-grandmother--
Speaker 1: Now do you know her name, your great-great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: Tommie Lee, give me one second last name, Turner, Tommie Lee Turner [ph.].  There's an educational background was I do believe a school teacher.  And that's all I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, you were going tell me a story about her, before I asked her name, you said my great-great-grandmother?
Speaker 2: Oh boy.
Speaker 1: Now she was Choctaw Indian?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Full blood?
Speaker 2: Actually her father was full blood, so my, my great gosh the--
Speaker 1: Great-great-grandfather [sic. great-great-great-grandfather].
Speaker 2: --great-great-grandfather was full blood.
Speaker 1: Okay and then she was black, her mother was black?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay so they mix, they married and mixed and then had your great-great-grandmother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, you got it, you got it.
Speaker 1: Okay and then so but--the Indian blood is still in the family?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 303183
Speaker 1: Do you have any, any other legends or stories they told you about being in Mississippi, or like even like something that's like--?
Speaker 2: The only my [maternal] great-great-grandmother Tommie Lee [Tommie Lee Turner (ph.)] she was a cook for the plantation owner.  And I realized that's where our family love for cooking originated from.  And the one story that I was told is that, she had a specialty of making these homemade biscuits.  And I guess she got a little hungry one day and just took a little nibble off the biscuit and they, her plantation owner, beat her senseless for just taking a little nibble off the, off the biscuit.  So that's the one story that came down that she was a great cook but, she wasn't allowed to eat her own cooking.
Speaker 1: Wow, do you have, have you ever seen a picture of her?
Speaker 2: I have not.
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: Only as far back as I go in terms of pictures and my great-grandmother is still alive.  I don't have any picture of her mother or her father.  So I haven't seen anything.
Speaker 1: Tell me who's still alive, is it--?
Speaker 2: Okay so Hilda Denham is my great-grandmother that's currently an Austin's mother.  She's still alive I actually got a chance to see her this Christmas.
Speaker 1: Now what--spell her name out for me?
Speaker 2: H-I-L-D-A, last name Denham, D-E-N-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: And she is your--Carlean's [Carlean Austin] mother (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mother she's my great-grandmother, she's still alive.
Speaker 1: And she's still alive, what does she look like?
Speaker 2: She actually looks to me a hundred percent Indian [Native American].  She's very fair skin her hair is long and thin and curly.  You would look at her and you know she's Indian.
Speaker 1: Now is she, did she--was she born in Mississippi also?
Speaker 2: She was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Does she still live in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: No in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you--
Speaker 2: Seems like a lot of my family had migrated from Mississippi to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) During the '70s [1970s]--
Speaker 2: --or even earlier--
Speaker 1: --when the car industry--?
Speaker 2: --when, when--exactly when the auto industry was booming, a lot of my family came to Michigan, to have a better life.
Story_ID: 303184
Speaker 1: Before we move any further, let's talk about your father's side of the family.  Do you know much about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: I don't know a lot about his side, I do know that his mother, Alberta Conners [ph.], was a nurse, and she passed away when I was about five years old.  My father would--did not have a big role in my upbringing.  Being teenagers they separated and went their ways.  So, it was primarily my mother [Michele Austin] who had involvement and he would pop up at different times during my life.
Speaker 1: Birthdays and Christmas (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Birthdays and Christmas.
Speaker 1: Easter.
Speaker 2: But I must say when I look at photos of him, I think I, I think he just spit me out.  So sometimes I'll look and I'll say gosh (laughter) that is me, the female version of him.
Speaker 1: Is he still alive?
Speaker 2: I do believe I haven't seen him since, I would probably say my freshman year in college [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], so at least about fifteen years.
Speaker 1: Were you the--I'm gonna ask you this but then I just still want to jump back--but were you the first one to have the opportunity to college in the family?
Speaker 2: I have--my mother's sister, her name is Angela Austin [ph.].  She attended college and she was--I would say she was the first, and I was the second.  And there's seven years difference between us.
Speaker 1: How many siblings did your mother have?
Speaker 2: She had two siblings, a sister and a brother.
Speaker 1: And what are their names?
Speaker 2: So Angela Austin is her sister and her brother is Wilman Austin, Jr. [ph.].
Speaker 1: Do you know the order?
Speaker 2: My mother was the oldest, and my uncle, Wilman Austin, Jr., was the middle child and Angela is the youngest.
Speaker 1: Now do you know the circumstances around that--that allowed your aunt to be able to go to college?
Speaker 2: She was pretty intelligent I know that she did get some scholarships.  My [maternal] grandfather Wilman Austin [ph.] was really focused on us getting our education.  He really believed in education.  So he really pushed her, to make sure that she had all the opportunities that she could have.  She ended up working for General Motors [General Motors Company Corporation; General Motors Company, Detroit, Michigan], but more on the corporate side.  So that's--
Speaker 1: Your grandfather on your paternal side, your--
Speaker 2: My--on my maternal side.
Speaker 1: Maternal side.
Speaker 2: Maternal side.
Speaker 1: His name was Austin?
Speaker 2: Right, Wilman Austin.
Speaker 1: Wilman Austin. Now what do you know about him?  Do you know his date of birth, where he was born?
Speaker 2: I do know it was also in Louisville, Mississippi.  I'm now sure I don't remember his date of birth (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is it Louisville or Louisville?
Speaker 2: I think the country way of saying it is Louisville (laughter).
Speaker 1: Louisville, okay, Louisville, okay?
Speaker 2: But the proper name is Louisville, so that may come out periodically.
Speaker 1: Okay, so.
Speaker 2: Still--pretty country.
Speaker 1: But that's okay, so he was born in Louisville as well, do you know when he and your [maternal] grandmother [Carlean Austin] met and married, did they ever tell you that story?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't know they were reaching before he passed I know at least forty years, it--they had been together for a while.
Story_ID: 303185
Speaker 1: So let's talk about you.  We've summed up sort of the family and what you know about that.  What are your earliest memories of your own childhood?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISRUPTION)
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: That's okay we'll let that ring--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and then give you a minute to think about.
Speaker 1: Earliest memories, the earliest memories I would say would be hanging out with my mother [Michele Austin].  I do remember going a lot of places with her, always going to concerts.  We had a lot of fun, she's a very, very fun person to be around.  I remember being that the family is religious going to church a lot.  And at one point I know, before the age of five, we lived directly across the street from the church.  So I was in church a lot, whatever programs they had I was there.  I just remember just a lot of family kind of like 'Soul Food' we definitely did the Sunday, Sunday dinners and getting together.  That's one of things I really miss being away.
Speaker 2: Well you talked about a lot of cooks being in the family.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Take me back to one of those Sunday dinners.  I want to know the food, I want to know the people that were there.  If you can remember what people talked about?
Speaker 1: Oh boy.
Speaker 2: Let's start with the food.
Speaker 1: Food, see I'm gonna get hungry right now (laughter) talking about.  As I said my favorite food is collard greens, so if that is a staple, maybe fried chicken, macaroni and cheese.  My mother is known for her homemade rolls, as a matter of fact this past Christmas she tried not to make them.  And at eleven o'clock, right before dinner, I'm like, "Where's the rolls?" And so she whipped them up really quick but she always made rolls.  And then the desserts there's banana pudding, what else, that's my favorite, lots of like--oh pound cake, staple.  In, in terms of conversation general you know, "How was your day?" For me, "How was school?" in my younger years.  Just general conversation of what was going on at the time.
Story_ID: 303186
Speaker 1: What street do you remember living on, the first street or the street where you--?
Speaker 2: Root Street, R-O-O-T.
Speaker 1: And that was in Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: In Flint, Michigan, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In Flint, Michigan, okay.
Speaker 2: 2008 Root Street (laughter).
Speaker 1: Talk to me about that street, the neighborhood, the community?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood was considered the ghetto, low-income families just working families, lots of kids on the street.  So, I definitely remember playing a lot and always having someone to play with.  I was an only child until I was fifteen, so I really appreciated having kids around, and depended on the neighborhood kids to you know to help entertain me.  And until maybe five years ago I kept in touch with definitely two of the neighborhood kids.  I love back in the day that you would know your neighbors.  And you would get together and take a dish over, definitely have community relationships.  And that's one of the things I'm really missing right now, 'cause it's not like that.
Speaker 1: So you said something that I want you to elaborate on, you said it was the, the ghetto, is that the word you used?
Speaker 2: I did use ghetto.
Speaker 1: And, and it's funny because I've been thinking about this in my own mind lately.  But how--what does that mean to you, ghetto how do you--?
Speaker 2: You may see broke down cars, the houses may not be kept up very well, people just didn't have a lot of money, we did okay.  But just you might see mice and things like that running around.
Speaker 1: Now did you live in a house or an apartment?
Speaker 2: A house.
Speaker 1: A house.
Speaker 2: My [maternal] grandparents' [Carlean Austin and Wilman Austin (ph.)] house had an attachment or a little tiny apartment.  So my mother [Michele Austin] and I lived in that attached apartment, for a few years.  But at the same time she was young and that wasn't enough privacy, because they would monitor who was coming in and out of the house.  So eventually Michele decided that she needed to get away.  But it was convenient in terms of if she needed a babysitter, to be attached to your parents' house, it doesn't get any better than that.
Story_ID: 303187
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school?
Speaker 2: Dort Elementary School [Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: D-O-R-T.
Speaker 1: First grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was--yeah I started there kindergarten and I actually remember I had I remember my kindergarten teacher, there were I think there were great teacher there.
Speaker 1: Can you name them, the ones you were--?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Schofield [ph.] was my kindergarten, how do I remember this I don't know, but I do remember her.  And Mr. Holiday [ph.] was the principal and these were times that you could get punished with the paddle in school.  So I remember that nobody wanted to Mr. Holiday and he was a big, big scary guy.  So you didn't want to go to Mr. Holiday's office.  I think I got paddled once, I don't know what I did, but I do remember getting a thrashing one time.  And Peter Murphy [ph.], I remember, was like my favorite teacher of all time because he would give you rewards for good behavior.  If you were willing to answer a question, he had a candy bar box.  So I always made sure I knew the answer 'cause I wanted a candy bar.  So I really have fond memories about Dort Elementary, actually I--when I went home I see that it's still there.  I hope that it's still in existence, I think it is.
Speaker 1: So elementary school there is Mr.--what was his name that you had--?
Speaker 2: We had Peter Murphy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Peter Murphy that you really liked.  Who did you look up to at this time?  Who were your role models?  And I'm talking about from like zero to first grade?  Who did you look up to?  Who did you want to be like?
Speaker 2: Be like, (unclear) in the '70s [1970s].  That is a good question.
Speaker 1: What did you want to be at that time?
Speaker 2: I think I'm quite--I know that I wanted to be something in the entertainment industry--I remember always dancing.  That was one of the after school activities--they would have dance parties and roller skating parties, but I always wanted to be noticed.  I liked to sing.
Speaker 1: So it's fair to say you wanted to be a singer, dancer, actress at that age?
Speaker 2: Yes, I sing pretty, I can hold a note (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I do remember that one of my friends from elementary school Sophia Taylor [ph.] could sing really well.  And I always wanted to sing like Sophia and we would battle each other, but she, she had me every time (laughter).  So I'm quite sure that I would say that something a singer, a dancer, something in the entertainment field (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) When were you aware of the fact that you were black in the sense that there was racism in the world in which you lived?  Was it early on or were, was it in something that happened early on?  Or is it something that you didn't you didn't become aware of until you were much older?
Speaker 2: Because my world was primarily black, and I would say during elementary school I didn't feel any racism there.
Speaker 1: So were all of your teachers black as well?
Speaker 2: Peter Murphy was a white male.  But he has soul, so I didn't feel like there was any racial tension.  But most of the teachers there were black, but definitely didn't feel anything for him.  My first employer was a white male when I was sixteen, I would probably say maybe in junior high school [Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Much later?
Speaker 2: Junior high school is when we, moved to what was considered the suburbs of Flint, Michigan, Flushing, Flushing, Michigan.  And I didn't have a lot of black neighbors and I think at that point I might have felt--I didn't have as many friends to play with, I didn't feel as comfortable or desired to play with as I did on Root Street.  So I would probably say that's when I started to feel, maybe there was a white and black world.
Story_ID: 303188
Speaker 1: So when you were on Root Street [Flint, Michigan] growing up, did--were there people, adults in the neighborhood that you looked up to?  Or were there only the teachers at school [Dort Elementary School, Flint, Michigan] that you--I mean were there any committee leaders like, like was the pastor, the minister who lived across the street was he someone you knew, and associated with?
Speaker 2: No, the church wasn't on Root Street, we moved away from Root, Root Street, and moved where the church, the street that the church was on.  There--actually our church pianist, gosh I can't remember his name right now.  But he actually lived down the street, it wasn't on Root Street but at the corner.  And I remember wanting to learn how to play the piano.  And begged my mother [Michele Austin] for piano lessons, I looked up to him because he had a skill that I wanted to attain.  Of course I got the lessons and I hated playing the piano, 'cause you have to practice, and I didn't want to practice.  Who else was on this street, there was Mr. Smith [ph.] was a automotive repair guy.  And I thought that was something different, that wow he can fix cars.  And I don't remember very many other adults on this street.
Speaker 1: Okay, let's move into, like secondary school or primary school, what's it called like--
Speaker 2: We call it junior high school.
Speaker 1: Junior high school.  What was junior, leaving elementary school, graduating--what year did you start junior high school and what was the name of school?
Speaker 2: So, sixth grade, I would be about thirteen, I attended Flint Academy High [Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan], but actually it was called high school but they had, it was a junior high school and high school mixed together (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And a high school.  So you started there in seventh grade (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: In the seventh, sorry seventh grade.
Speaker 1: You were a freshman, so that's 1983?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I thought it was very cool be, 'cause I was the only school that was mixed junior high and high school.  So I thought I was very cool to be with the older kids.  And I think a lot of maturity came from there, because I didn't want to hang with the junior high school kids, I wanted to be with the high school kids.  It was known for a diverse education, I--
Speaker 1: Which means what?
Speaker 2: It was one of the schools where you could have--take a class in camping or wildlife.  And that one of the things that I appreciate about growing in Michigan, that I was able to learn those things and have a background that maybe I wouldn't have here in New York [New York].  They had a gifted program where you learn advanced mathematics and science.  So I definitely appreciate the, the education that they offered there.  It was a diverse population, both white, black, Hispanic.
Story_ID: 303189
Speaker 1: What were my activities [at Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what were they?
Speaker 1: I think I started ch- pom-pom squad I won't even call it cheerleading, because I have no acrobatic skills (laughter).  But I did the pom-pom squad.  I remember being heavily into Prince, that's--he's one of my favorite entertainers.  And during the '80s [1980s], it was always Prince versus Michael Jackson.  So I started collecting all these Prince tee-shirts and, and buttons and I used to where them at school, I would have a jacket on and like fifty Prince buttons all over the--so I was known for being the Prince girl and having my hair flipped up and trying to be Vanity of Vanity 6 and getting into (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is all in junior high, this (unclear)--?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And getting into arguments, who's better, Prince or Michael Jackson?  And a lot of my friends were in high school and my mother [Michele Austin] was pretty liberal, she let me hang out with the older kids.  I never had a curfew she pretty much trusted my judgment, so.
Speaker 2: And that, is that because she was young also, you think?
Speaker 1: May--I think so.
Story_ID: 305337
Speaker 1: Talking about your junior high school [Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan] years.  You were into Prince, you had the Prince jackets, the buttons.  At that point in your life what did you think you would be when you grew up?  Were you still gonna be a singer, entertainer?
Speaker 2: I--let's see, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you said your mom [Michele Austin] gave you a lot of freedom, she was very liberal.  Did you--what type of crowd did you run with, and, be honest, were they good kids, bad kids, a mixture of both?  What type student were you?
Speaker 2: I was definitely a A, B student all throughout my secondary education or younger--elementary [Dort Elementary School, Flint, Michigan], junior high school, high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan].  Have remained a A and B, Cs to my mother was unacceptable, just not, not gonna happen.  I would be afraid to bring a C home.  So I always loved to study, loved the library.  I hung with good kids, but we liked to party.  Always music, always of my friends had cars because they were in high school.  So I always liked to kind of hang in the streets.  Or, oh by that time I had a twelve, I had a moped, so I definitely means to get around and leave the house.  So I remember riding around Flint [Michigan] on the moped.  And a lot of kids had mopeds.  So would definitely go driving, or riding our mopeds around and going to the park.  I do, in my earlier years, I remember playing baseball and kick ball--what were some of the--dodge ball.  Those are things that I really enjoyed, I like playing street games, I liked being active.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the people that you ran around with?  In the group you said, you know, there was a group of kids?  Were there any kids that you looked up to that made impressions on you either good or bad?
Speaker 2: No bad impressions, because they were good kids.  Tony--I remember and they're gonna kill me for not remembering their last names (laughter).  Watts, Tony Watts [ph.], Jasper Watt [ph.], there was a girlfriend named Prissy [ph.] or Chantel [ph.], those were the three people that I remember.  Tony and I we bonded because we--oh and Tiger [ph.] who became my boyfriend (laughter)--we all love Prince.  So, we that was our--and we like comedy.  So we get together and always listen to music and go to concerts and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 305338
Speaker 1: You're in seventh grade [at Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan], by the time you--did anything happen in your life from seventh to ninth grade that stands out for you?  Were there any teachers at that, at during, during those three years that may have big on impression on you?  'Cause I know in 1985 your sister's [Alicia Austin] born.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So anytime be--from seventh to ninth grade, before your sister's born does anything stand out?
Speaker 2: There were no memorable teachers.  So sorry to say, I can remember elementary people but--
Speaker 1: What about your high--your counselors, what were they--what areas were they steering you towards?
Speaker 2: I have always been strong in math and science.  And I do remember--did I, I actually remember in junior high school is when I started taking, I started taking French.  And I decided that I didn't like French and that's when I started Spanish.  I definitely and I can't remember my Spanish teacher's name, but that was one of the things I remember I enjoyed--learning the language and I thought I was special that I could learn a different language.  And being here in New York [New York] now, I really appreciate learning Spanish, 'cause it's very helpful here, I'm not fluent as I should be, but that was one of the classes that I definitely enjoyed, or remember enjoying.
Story_ID: 305339
Speaker 1: So in 1985, your sister's born, how does that affect your household?  Or your relationship with your mother [Michele Austin], or the relationship you have with yourself?
Speaker 2: Honestly, that is probably the time that I gave my mother the hardest time.  I was pretty much a good kid until my sister.  And wasn't because my sister was coming along, it was because I didn't really--I wasn't fond of her father.  I didn't approve of the relationship.  The interesting thing is, he pretty much, once my mother was pregnant with my sister, he disappeared so I became the birth coach.  I took the Lamaze classes I was the one that was there for her, so that really made me, not like him even more.  But he at times--like my father would pop in and out and she would sometimes fall for his smooth talking.  And she would I would give her--that's when I would leave and stay out as long as I can, so I wouldn't be around the house.  So it had nothing to do with the birth of my sister.  It was exciting to actually finally get a sibling, but I just didn't like him coming around (laughter).  Because of the way that he treated her at times, and eventually she saw the light and he didn't come around as much.  But that's when I gave, I was little rebellious.  And, oh, I wrote her, and she'll never forget it, I wrote it the nasty letter and it was totally out of character.  But I wrote her a letter, and I don't remember everything that I said.  But she told me that she's holding on to the letter 'til when I have a child, she will show me (laughter) whatever I said to her, but I remember I tried to be mean 'cause I was mad at her, for letting this guy come in and out of her life and not be as supportive as he should have been.  So I would definitely stay out the house as much possible and I clung--hung around my friends a lot more during her earlier years.  But I love the babysitting I like holding my sister, I thought was quite exciting.
Speaker 1: What's your sister's name?
Speaker 2: Alicia Austin.
Speaker 1: Now she was born in '85 [1985], so you were in the ninth grade.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And so by the time you graduate high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan], she's only four years old?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 305340
Speaker 1: At what point did you start to, or who introduced the idea that you would go to college to you?  Who starts--talk to you about going to college and that high school wouldn't be the end for you?
Speaker 2: The, I, I would probably would say my aunt [Angela Austin (ph.)] and my [maternal] grandparents [Carlean Austin and Wilman Austin (ph.)] definitely encouraged me to continue on and my, and my mother [Michele Austin] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What did they say--what did people say to you?
Speaker 2: Well once my aunt became successful after having a college degree.  At an early age, she was able to buy her first home and buy a car.  So, you know, we were all looking her like wow she's, she's really making it and the college education has paid off.  So I think seeing her achieve the things that she did, with her college education there was no question that I would go on and get my college education.  But I discovered, also at fifteen, that was the age I discovered that I wanted to be a dentist.  Because I--actually had a large space between my teeth and had a routine dental visit.  And just expressed to the dentist, you know, they asked, is there anything about my smile that I didn't like.  And told 'em that I didn't like the gap, and he was like, "You can get braces."  So I begged my mother, you know, to get braces for me.  And the whole dental experience of wearing braces at the age fifteen, opened my eyes that maybe that this was something that I wanted to explore as a career.  Particularly when I got the braces off, I got so many compliments on my smile, my self-esteem just sky rocketed.  I really, at that age, discovered how important a smile is and that people pay attention to your smile.  And how it could have positive impact on your life.  So at that point having discovered that this, this is something that I may want to do for a living I knew at that point that college was definitely was gonna be.  'Cause I had to go to college in order to become a dentist.  So at that point, I was focused in high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan], I knew I had to take math and science courses.  I really became focused on that, on that path.
Story_ID: 305341
Speaker 1: Were there any other women doctors that you'd visited?  Did you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --did you ever think it was not possible, because you were black and a woman?
Speaker 2: I never thought about being black my--being black and a dentist.  My childhood dentist was black and he was actually, when I expressed to him that I may want to do it, he became very encouraging and let me come to his office, and, you know, sit for a day.  And even when I went to dental school [University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland], he periodically would send money he was very encouraging he was I guess exciting that had chosen to follow in his footsteps.  Oscar Wright, and he was the dentist that was not too many people advertised on the radio.  And he really promoted himself and maybe that remembering how he promoted himself has helped me in my practice.  But no other women, I didn't even meet another female--well I met female dentist in dental school who were our--my instructors.  But I hadn't met a female dentist until then, until my education.  He did express to me that he thought it would be a good idea, if I were ever thinking about having a family.  If I wanted to work for myself being a woman and working for myself I wouldn't have to, if I was a medical doctor be on call.  I could have more control over my adult years and my career and my family life.  Being a dentist versus being a medical doctor so that, pretty much sealed the deal for me.  'Cause I always like to have flexibility.
Speaker 1: But when you, when you enrolled, was it the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You were a psychology major.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.
Speaker 1: But before we talk about that I'm kind of jumping ahead.  I do want to talk about graduation, high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan] graduation.  So you were on the, the pom-pom--you were a cheerleader?
Speaker 2: Pom-pom squad cheerleader, um-hm, dance squad.
Speaker 1: Pom-pom, dance squad, what other activities were you involved in, in high school, in high school--student body?
Speaker 2: Wasn't in student body, that may have been, wait let's see.  I didn't do a lot of, in high school, a lot of after, after school projects because I was so focused on studying and making sure I graduated with honors.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a part-time job during this time?
Speaker 2: I did I actually started at the age of sixteen.  Working in a pharmacy which was called Long Way Pharmacy [Dort Long Way Pharmacy, Flint, Michigan] I was the delivery girl.  Which was cool because I used the company car and I just had--I got a chance to deliver medications to elderly people.  And it, there was a lot of flexibility, I could listen to my music while driving around.  I could--sorry Mike (laughter)--I could go visit my friends for a hot second.  Mike Larson [ph.] was my boss, so there was a little flexibility, and it was cool to drive around in high school.  And I kept that job until I graduated.
Story_ID: 305342
Speaker 1: Being very young up to the point you graduate [from Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan], what sights remind you of those years?  What, when you see something what is it the sight of that reminds me of--being in Flint, Michigan?  What sights, and life now?
Speaker 2: Snow, lots of snow we get lots of snow here in New York [New York] and it definitely reminds me being in Michigan.
Speaker 1: What smells?
Speaker 2: The smells there, I wouldn't say there's any smells now that reminds me of Michigan.  Because the environment here is much different we don't have as many cars.  I can't--I wouldn't--I can't say that there's a smell that reminds me.
Speaker 1: But not even here but what sort of smells in general would remind you?
Speaker 2: I would say if I do--if I am in a wooded area that definitely reminds me of Michigan.
Speaker 1: So the smell of woods?
Speaker 2: The smell of woods.
Speaker 1: What other smells remind you of growing up in Flint?
Speaker 2: The--definitely the smell of flowers.  The sight of water I like driving down the west side highway because I, I was surrounded by the Great Lakes and I grew up fishing.  I am a nature girl, so when I see water I definitely it was reminds me of Michigan.
Speaker 1: So it's just so interesting, though, because it sounds nothing like the ghetto.  I mean, when you, when you hear ghetto you think, oh it's urban, it's this it's that.  You don't think, oh the possibility of you having a lake to go fishing, or.
Speaker 2: You know I was fortunate because that's what my [maternal] grandparents [Carlean Austin and Wilman Austin (ph.)], or in particularly my grandfather did.  I can't say a lot of my friends, did a lot the activities that I did, particularly in the neighborhood.  But we definitely did fishing and camping and took those long drives to Mississippi, it wasn't that we flew.  So I definitely gained the appreciation of nature.
Speaker 1: So did you spend summers in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Not an entire summer, but we would definitely go on a yearly basis for about a week.
Speaker 1: And what did you think about traveling to the South during that time?  What were your feelings about it?
Speaker 2: I was a long trip, but I liked seeing different regions of the country.  And driving gives you that opportunity to see what other states are like.
Speaker 1: What did you think about your family that lived in Mississippi?  Did you think they were country did you think that--
Speaker 2: Definitely, they're definitely country.  But survived off of much less then, than we did in the city.  I learned to appreciate fresh foods, they have farms in everything was fresh.  And I had food that tasted like no other.  And everybody was friendly I definitely remember, everybody says hello and the same thing in Michigan.  Everyone says hello, everyone's friendly, and I definitely enjoyed that about southern, southern hospitality.  I like the sense of community and there's definitely that in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: So what--we talked about sights and sounds what smells can you think of that reminds you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: I think we mentioned the flowers and, and nature, the trees (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Then I guess what we, we didn't talk about sounds?
Speaker 2: Oh sounds, sounds. Oh, you can actually hear birds chirping.  Not a lot of horn honking.  I didn't live directly near the water, so I didn't have the lake sounds.  Actually quiet (laughter), quiet is what I remember.  And I appreciate it so much more now that I live in New York.  Or I live in Jersey [New Jersey] but, I appreciate quiet, and when I go home quiet is something that I look forward to, the sound of nothing (laughter).
Story_ID: 305343
Speaker 1: So let me ask you about graduation, you graduated in what year?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eighty-eight [1988].
Speaker 1: And would--so the place you--Flush, Flushing High School?
Speaker 2: Flushing, Michigan is where I lived, and then we moved back to downtown Flint [Michigan] during my high school years.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what was the name of the high school you went to?
Speaker 2: High school was Flint Central High School [Flint, Michigan].
Speaker 1: So you only went to the Flushing school [sic. Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan] from the seventh to ninth grade?
Speaker 2: Seventh to ninth yes, and then I switched so I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then you moved back to--?
Speaker 2: To the city.
Speaker 1: What was the move?  Why did you, why did the family move back to downtown Flint from the suburbs?
Speaker 2: There was new development called River Village [Flint, Michigan].  They started to build up they, at the time in the late '80s [1980s] is when there were trying to really revive Flint and make it a tourist--tourist destination.  They built this amusement park called AutoWorld [Six Flags AutoWorld, Flint, Michigan], downtown Flint.  They started built community--tried to build up the community.  And I think my mother [Michele Austin] wanted to get back to the city.  And River Village was the townhouses were really nice and affordable at the time, so I think--
Speaker 1: So that was the best opportunity?
Speaker 2: That was their best opportunity and brought us closer to civilization (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you went to Flint Central High School?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you graduated from Flint Central High School in 19 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen eighty-eight [1988].
Story_ID: 305344
Speaker 1: Had you decided on the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] at that point?
Speaker 2: How did I come with Michigan--I--
Speaker 1: Is that the one in Ann Arbor [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Ann Arbor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There is a Flint [Michigan] location.  I--a lot of my friends were thinking about--some of my close friends had decided to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].  But I didn't think that I would graduate (laughter) if I had gone to Howard.  Because I know that I like to party and have a good time.  And I didn't trust myself going away and being in that environment, that I was actually get the job done.
Speaker 1: Had you ever discussed whether or not you'd go to a historically black school [HBCU] or a white school, like the University of Michigan?
Speaker 2: I--it wasn't a huge discussion.  I really, honestly, I had the impression that my mother [Michele Austin] had a developed, or had been saving a college--had a college fund for me.  And in junior year [at Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan] we were having discussion, I'm like, "I know you have saved up for college for me."  And she was like, "No, I don't have a college fund for you, you better sign up for some scholarships, you better do some research and find out what kind of money is out there 'cause I don't have any money for you," (laughter).  So that kind of changed everything, 'cause I thought I was golden.  She had provided so much for me, I just knew that the college fund was there.  So that kind of changed where some of colleges that I was looking at, because I knew that I had to support myself in college.  And it was all on me.  So my senior year was dedicated to writing essays and searching for scholarships.  And I'm quite sure that University of Michigan was the school was that able to give me the most money, in terms of scholarships.  In addition, because I had to hustle, I won about five scholarships on my own to supplement what the University of Michigan was going to supply me.  So in total I paid about fourteen hundred dollars for my college education at University of Michigan.  So I it really came down to money.  And it was also close to home, about forty-five minutes away from Flint.  So I knew that if I needed to get home, or if they needed visit that I wasn't too far away.  And in addition it was a top university.
Story_ID: 305345
Speaker 1: At the time they had experienced a lot of racial tension, and they were looking to recruit a lot of African Americans just to show that they support, you know, minorities (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] is where they, recently the affirmative action case [Gratz v. Bollinger, 2003] with the law--the lawsuit.
Speaker 1: Exactly, the lawsuit, exactly. So throughout the '80s [1980s]--
Speaker 2: So let's just go back to the start you arrive, you're accepted into the University of Michigan.  Do you know about its troubled past with racial issues?
Speaker 1: I did, was slightly concerned, but not really.
Speaker 2: Not really, but I want to kind of get a feeling of, as to how you saw yourself during this time?  Were you a, were you like black and proud or were you just in the middle of road going with the flow of things.  Were you a nationalist?  Like how did yourself as a black woman in America?  At the--
Speaker 1: Well I'll be honest, great academic student, I test poorly--I stink when it comes to standardized tests.  So when I took my ACT I didn't have the highest scores.  I had in order to get into the University of Michigan I had to start directly after high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan] in a program called Bridge [Bridge Program; Summer Bridge Scholars Program].  And it was a program for minorities to get a jump start on their college education, before the regular semester began.  So I didn't even have a break between high school and college, I jumped right in, started in the Bridge program.  It was great, because it was--I started with all black people.  So my--my initiation to the University of Michigan was a little jaded because I was there and it was mostly black.  And then came the regular semester and I had a white roommate.
Speaker 2: And was that your first experience living with someone white?
Speaker 1: That was my first experience, and it didn't go too well.  She actually--I guess I was having a conversation about how I got to University of Michigan and mentioned that I had scholarships.  And--I remember we had a big argument and it was like, why do you get to come here and have your education paid for, you're black it's not fair, you know you need to--you should work hard like everybody else that's here.  So I remember once we had that conversation we did not get along (laughter).  And it was a interesting experience because I was used to being a only child for most of my life I've never had to share anything.  I mean the space is so small, it was just very different to be with someone white.  And then someone has a problem with me because I'm black and I have been given opportunities.  So I think I stayed with her like a half of semester.  And then I ended up getting a dorm by myself (laughter).
Story_ID: 305346
Speaker 1: And I lived pretty much by myself throughout my college years [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now around that same time Spike Lee's movie came out, 'School Daze.'
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That definitely--it made me think back, maybe I should have gone to a historically black college [HBCU] that seems like a lot of fun, it also opened up you know my eyes about sorority, but didn't--
Speaker 2: 'Cause you had not pledged at this time.
Speaker 1: I had not pledged--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --I didn't pledge or start the initiation process until my junior, junior year, my--
Speaker 2: So you, so what year was 'School Daze,' do you remember exactly?
Speaker 1: I would like to say, eighty--I want to say '88 [1988], actually somewhere around '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: Around '88 [1988], okay.  So did you, did you have any issues about light skinned girls versus dark skinned girls, or good hair and bad hair and--?
Speaker 1: I didn't personally have any issues, that definitely light skinned, dark skinned didn't come into play with my immediate circle.  Or I never felt, well the only time that I would say that it came into play is when I decided to join Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority (AKA)] because Alpha Kappa--AKAs are known for being the light skinned girls and I happened to be a light skinned girl.  So maybe, maybe with the time around--that I was pledging that may have come up but.  We didn't hate the Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] because they were traditionally brown skinned girls.  I didn't feel that, that tension I definitely didn't feel that tension not like predicted--in the movie, I, I didn't feel that.  What else (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So when you let's, let's talk about, so you, you enter the university you decide you're gonna be a psych major, psychology major?  What made you come to that decision, that psychology is where you should be?
Speaker 1: I had taken math and science throughout my junior high school [Flint Academy High School; Flint Southwestern Academy, Flint, Michigan] and high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan] years.  But I didn't like it enough that if I decided that I wasn't going to be a dentist, that I would be a scientist or mathematician.  There wasn't a career that I felt that I would want to utilize those skills.  So I thought about psychology, I thought it was interesting how the human mind works, and just dealing with people.  I actually a love of for writing and with psychology and not being a standard test taker, psychology was really up my alley.  Because I love to think and I love to express myself with writing.  So I decided that if dental school didn't work out, then maybe I would do something in the psychology or sociology field.
Speaker 2: But you had gone to school with the hopes of becoming a dentist?
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But you decided--okay.
Speaker 1: So I never lost, yeah I never lost sight that I wanted to be a dentist.  I just wanted to take the required courses that I needed to take to get into dental school, while focusing on--on psychology.
Story_ID: 305347
Speaker 1: You were talking about your best friend, Darlene.
Speaker 2: Yes, Darlene Tolbert.
Speaker 1: Now Darlene, you just said, you said, tell me what you said--that you guys were able to run together you didn't have a curfew? Yeah.
Speaker 2: Darlene and I think we met around the tenth grade [at Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan].  She and I really became close because neither one of us had curfews.  I do believe her mother and my mother [Michele Austin] are close in age, both very young mothers and very liberal.  So at the time--I got my first car at the age of fifteen.  So we were able to ride around and be girls, little hot mamas (laughter).  And, and hang out without a curfew, which really bonded us.  I really appreciate having the freedom.  Just enough freedom where, you know, my mother knew to give enough freedom.  And she knew I wasn't going to do anything really harmful (laughter) to myself, or.  She trusted that I would hang with the right crowd, so.  It was really a fun time.  And a time when I really discovered myself and had a great time with Darlene in high school.  And we went on to go to college [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] together.  She was on the pom-pom squad with me, so she really became one of my best friends in high school and to this day.
Speaker 1: So what--did you and Darlene share any sort of, we're not gonna like, like rules like, we're not gonna get pregnant; we're gonna go to college, we're gonna--did you share any camaraderie like that?  Did you even talk about it?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't remember us saying together, we're not gonna get pregnant.  It was just understood that you know we are keeping our eyes on the prize.  She was a very studious person as well.  People called us the nerds, we were the nerds of the class and we laugh about today.  Because we're both very successful, and all the people who were cool in high school, you know, aren't doing very much.
Story_ID: 305348
Speaker 1: But you said you kept your eyes on the prize?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Where did that--who instilled that mentality into you like--?
Speaker 2: I think it was the fear of my mother [Michele Austin], as I said, a C was not an acceptable grade, so.  I had the type of mother, she'll give you that look that, you know, you're not gonna mess up, all she has to do is look at you, so.  I was afraid I, I was afraid of letting her down and I was--letting myself down.  I think once I decided at the age of fifteen that I wanted to be dentist, I felt so strongly about it that nothing could stop me.
Speaker 1: And you wanted to be a dentist because--?
Speaker 2: Of my personal experience it really, I would say changed my life how people received me.  I actually went on to win prettiest smile in high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan].  So that you know having people recognize me for the change that I experienced with my own smile--that did a lot, I mean, just did a lot for me.  So now when I get patients in and they feel bad about their smiles it's great because I know where they've been.  I never make people feel bad about the look of their teeth.  Because I know that it's something that can easily be changed.
Speaker 1: So, I guess I'm trying to get to the course, I gotta keep working at it.
Speaker 2: You keep working on it.
Speaker 1: So the, the dentist [Dr. Oscar Wright] had given you your self-esteem back, with, with the smile.  Was it having your self-esteem that allowed you to break the cycle and not, and not that--and I'm speaking, generally speaking about the cycle of teenage moms.  Was it self-esteem that allowed you to break the cycle, to keep your eyes on the prize?  Like what is it you can say to teenage girls to, to give them what you were given?
Speaker 2: Well my mother--you know what--my mother told me whenever you think about having sex, please tell me.  And when I thought having sex (laughter), I told her.  It was the scariest thing, but I knew that the relationship I had with her that I wasn't gonna get hit upside the head.  So I told her she came in the house one day after work I had to have sex as a teenager, bad me. And I told her, and she took, she took me to the doctor and she put me on birth control.  So I was like, "Mom, I'm not going to do it anymore."  She was like, "Yes you are, once you start you're not, you're not gonna start so let's be smart about this, we're gonna put you on birth control."  So I knew that I didn't have to--there was a way to prevent pregnancy.  I didn't have to get pregnant if I didn't want to.  And I wasn't trying to at the time, so.  I think it was her, you know, me having a relationship with her to be honest, and say look I'm having sex.  And her to be good of a mom to say, you know what, I'm gonna prevent pregnancy, I know she wants to do things in life, let's prevent something from happening.
Story_ID: 305349
Speaker 1: Do you feel you, you broke a cycle?  Do feel you started something new (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did--
Speaker 1: --for your, for your daughter, you know, the daughter you're gonna have, or the son you're gonna have?
Speaker 2: I definitely broke the cycle because until me, everyone that had a child their first child by the age, definitely by the age of twenty, so.  I definitely broke the cycle, and it's okay, I mean I know that I don't think having a child at a young age would have worked for me in terms of achieving my goal.  When I started college [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], I did not stop, I went through summers, I just kept going and that was the best thing for me.  If I'd stopped for a summer to make money I think that I would have been content with making money and not kept my eyes on the prize.  So for me, I just went start through and I finished a semester early.
Speaker 1: What about Darlene [Darlene Tolbert] what kept her eyes on the prize?
Speaker 2: Her eyes on the prize is that, she came from a very poor family.  She had at the time four siblings, I do believe, and she had to share everything and she saw the conditions that she grew up in.  She had a hard time growing up and she wanted to break her cycle and have a better life.  Had been in I think foster care at points, and, you know.  So for her, she didn't, she wanted to break the cycle and have a better life for herself so, she was driven by that, that fact.
Speaker 1: And it sounds like the two of you saw that in each other which helped bond this relationship.  And you know like those three brothers (unclear) that got each other through (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly, exactly.  She has gone on to get her MBA.  So I still to this day, with her having a business degree I count on her to advise me.  And she has paid for the education so it's just--it still works for me, that we support each other.
Story_ID: 305350
Speaker 1: So you're at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You are a psychology major.  Freshman year passes, sophomore year passes, you're taking the required classes for becoming a dentist.  Your junior year you decide to pledge?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How do you go about choosing which sorority is, is best for you?  Which sorority was best?
Speaker 2: Oh, I had thought about becoming a Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] because they were one of the organizations that had given me a scholarship to go to the University of Michigan.
Speaker 1: And why had they given you a scholarship?
Speaker 2: I wrote a great essay and my qualifications were outstanding (laughter).  So they had no choice but to give me a scholarship.  But when I got to the University of Michigan, I found that the women that were most friendly towards me personally, that were studying science--that were in my science classes were women of Alpha Kappa Alpha [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority (AKA)].  It's just that I bonded with them and they were the first sorority, I, I like their history.  And Darlene [Darlene Tolbert] was also interested in Alpha Kappa Alpha, and we just decided to join that organization together so we pledged together.
Speaker 1: Okay but before we get to you actually pledging, there were things about the AKAs that you liked?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I want you to list those things for me.  I want you to list the things you saw in these women that made you want to be a part of that particular sorority.
Speaker 2: Well the women I found were very driven, they were very visible in terms of the community service projects that they did.  They did throw some great parties (laughter), have to be honest.  I found genuine friends in the women that I met.  And I felt that I would bond better with those women and that's what it really came down to.  Deep down, I would say I was probably looking for people or women that I could become friends and establish relationships with.  Not having, you know growing up with siblings I was also looking for people that I could really become a family with.  And those women--definitely provided that with me.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: For me, rather (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For you--so once you learned the history of the sorority, did--what effect did that have on you?
Speaker 2: Well I appreciated that it was the first female sorority.  With a history of strong women and even the women honoraries, women that have been inducted into the sorority, are all just strong, strong women.  So I look, I always look for strong black women to look up to, role models.  And I just saw a organization of role models, that people I wanted to be like or be around.
Speaker 1: Was pledging difficult, for you and Darlene?
Speaker 2: It was one of the most difficult, humbling experiences that I've ever had, and it was a long process.  You really, during the pledging process, get to see who you are.  See--it tests you endurable, it tests your strength, it tests your belief in yourself, your confidence in yourself. There were just tons of tests.  And to say that I passed I didn't give up and out of it came--some very strong friendships, it's a beautiful thing.  And I love the fact that anywhere I go, I can see someone and they can have a AKA tee shirt on today and there's an instant bond.  It's a beautiful thing, I have support no matter where I go.  I get--I do get clients to this day I think on my website, I have put that I'm AKA and people will say, "I read on your website that you're a AKA. I came to you just because of that," so it's, it's definitely a great thing.  And my sister [Alicia Austin] has gone on to pledge AKA as well.  So maybe I've started something in, within the family.
Story_ID: 305351
Speaker 1: How old is your sister [Alicia Austin] now?
Speaker 2: She is now twenty years old.
Speaker 1: What has her experience been?  As far as school and going to college, and did she follow in your footsteps or is she making imprints of her own?
Speaker 2: She has always been a great student.  She's followed in my footsteps in that regards.  She also has gone to the University of Michigan, but she stayed at the Flint campus [University of Michigan-Flint, Flint, Michigan], she got a full ride.  She's interested in communications, which I'm happy, she could be my publicist any day.  But I would love to see her in from of the camera using her journalistic skills.  She is actually pregnant (laughter), she expecting in about four more months.  So that's interesting isn't, yeah (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, it is interesting, so, but 'cause you know I was going to talk to you.  I was when we got to your sister I was going to say, now did your mom [Michele Austin] have that sex conversation with your sister that she had with you?  Or was your mom older and didn't feel comfortable saying, now, when you want to have sex talk to me?
Speaker 2: I know that the doors have been opened. I'm quite sure they had that conversation.  They definitely had the sex conversation.  My sister has felt comfortable talking personally to my mother. How this pregnancy has happened, I have no idea, I mean, I know how it happened but--
Speaker 1: Right, but were you disappointed?
Speaker 2: How this pregnancy has happened I have no idea, I mean I know how it happened, but? INTERVIEWER:  But were you disappointed? Honestly yes, I would have loved to see her get through this last year of college without the responsibility of having a, a child.  But thank god it's only one more year, and I know that she can pull through and graduate.  And she's still very driven, so I think she's gonna be okay.  I have seen just in the last few months, as she's been pregnant, I've seen a lot more maturity develop in her.  She's thinking more about her life's plans.  Because she knows she has another person to be responsible for.  I will say that she wasn't as responsible as she is now.  She was spoiled and a lot was given to her and now she's growing up.  And so it's exciting to see her growing up, and I think the pregnancy is definitely helping her do so.  And it is exciting, at the same time, to know that, because I don't have children as of yet, that I'll someone that I could play mom, when I want to.  And spoil and have fun with and then go home and sleep peacefully.  So it's exciting at the same time, and my mother at the same time is--was a little disappointed, but at the same time, excited about being a grandma.  And the kid is gonna have a good time, she's gonna be a great grandmother.
Speaker 1: And is her, is his father, his or her, the baby's father, still involved?
Speaker 2: He is, he's also a senior at Michigan State [Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan], so (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well good, yeah right so, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I mean there's a lot of hope, at first I thought, it's the end of the world.  But they both have promising futures and they're both dedicated to finishing school and they were high school, you know, they've been dating since high school, so.  You know there's definitely a foundation there, so, it's a little exciting.
Speaker 1: Good, good.
Speaker 2: It--when I went home for Christmas a couple of weeks ago.  It really hit home that a), she's growing up and she's a woman now.  And she's about to have her own family and it was interesting to see her with a, a guy.  And he was around and being, being very attentive, so it was very interesting, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nice, nice.
Story_ID: 305352
Speaker 1: What year did you actually cross the line and did you become full-fledged AKA [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-seven [1987], no fall, '88 [1988], fall of '88 [1988] is when I crossed.  And I only had a--that fall, I graduated that December.  So my experience (laughter) was really--full fledge experience was only a half of a semester.  Because in December, when I graduated, I actually moved back home to Flint [Michigan] to take a break before I entered dental school that summer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So let me just get this straight, what year did you graduate high school [Flint Central High School, Flint, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: So high school was 1988, and then I graduated University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] December of 1991.
Speaker 1: Okay. But you pledged what year, did you start?
Speaker 2: I, what year did I start?
Speaker 1: AKA--because you said you (unclear), just getting the dates.
Speaker 2: I said--I'm sorry, fall of '90 [1990] is when I crossed.  So fall of '90 [1990], and I began the process of pledging in '89 [1989], '89 [1989].  And, I'm sorry, so I graduated in '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: You graduated college in 1991?  Right, okay.
Speaker 2: You got it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had a year.
Speaker 1: So you--and you completed the University of Michigan 1991.  At that moment did you decided I'm going straight into medical school or dentistry school, or what happened?
Speaker 2: I wanted to graduate early because I hadn't any kind of break since high school having gone the summers.  So I had, I decided to finish my requirements early, so that I could have a six-month break before starting dental school.  And I decided on University of Maryland [University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland] versus University of Michigan [University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan] for dental school.  I decided to go out-of-state.  Because if I had not moved to go I hadn't gone to dental school out-of-state I thought that I probably end up in Michigan for the rest of life.  And I thought since I didn't go away for undergrad, now's the time to kind of spread my wings.  I had--even though I was at University of Michigan, my mom [Michele Austin] had always been close, I still had a lot of support.  I wanted to see what it would be like to move to the East Coast and really be on my own for the first time.  At the same time, the University of Michigan and University of Maryland competed as dental schools to recruit the most black students.  So either choice would have been beneficial for me in terms of having support, and other people like me in my class.  Because most class--dental classes you might find one or two black students.  But both University of Michigan and Maryland recruited about 10 percent African American so, I knew that either way I would be okay.  But I wanted to spread my wings and kind of grow up a little bit.
Speaker 1: Did that come into play for you the number of black students that you'd be studying with?
Speaker 2: It did as I visited other dental schools like Northwestern [Northwestern University Dental School] in Chicago [Illinois].  When I went into the school I didn't see anybody like me.  And I had never been in that situation before, so I--I wanted a little support.  And it was definitely a great decision.
Story_ID: 305353
Speaker 1: You arrive in 1991 at the University of Maryland [University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Ninety-two [1992] is when I started.
Speaker 1: Also was now we didn't talk about this, but who's the first president you had the opportunity of voting for?
Speaker 2: That is (unclear) '88 [1988], was Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] in the eighty--in the '80s [1980s], or Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is the point when I have turn to Neculai [Neculai Burghelea] because I have no idea.
Speaker 2: That's a good question--Carter?
Speaker 1: Eight-eighty [1988], who was it?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Bush the elder [President George Herbert Walker Bush], versus Dukakis [Michael Dukakis].
Speaker 1: Bush the elder.
Speaker 2: I'm quite sure Dukakis is probably who I--yeah, that's who I first, I definitely voted when I was eighteen.  So it would be--wow your guys are good, I couldn't remember that. Dukakis, was it George Dukakis? What was it--?
Speaker 1: Michael.
Speaker 2: Michael Dukakis, yes.
Speaker 1: So that was, that would have been the first presidential candidate that you voted for.  So in '92 [1992], was that Clinton's [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] first year, I'm getting my dates all screwed up?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ninety-two [1992] was the election of Clinton versus Bush, the elder.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Right, so then was your first, I mean your?
Speaker 1: I was registered in Maryland and I definitely voted Democratic.
Speaker 2: And for--?
Speaker 1: And for Clinton.
Speaker 2: And for Clinton. So you are, in '92 [1992] you arrive at the University Maryland.  Where's it located?
Speaker 1: It's in Baltimore, Maryland, downtown Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Home of John Waters also.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, I liked--I lived on Johns Hopkins' [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] campus as I was a student at Maryland.  And that was a great decision because I had the chance to interact with other.  I would study in their library and I got a chance to meet people, other students in the area and develop friendships at that university.  And experience a little bit of sorority life at that school.  So it was definitely a great experience living on their campus.
Speaker 2: So at the University of Maryland, you said that they had actively recruited 10 percent black students.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Do you--was there--how did you guys hang out together?  Did you--were you dispersed amongst the other ninety percent or did you mainly--?
Speaker 1: We were dispersed, but we definitely formed our alliance--
Speaker 2: Bond, yeah and alliance, that's right.
Speaker 1: Our bonds and we studied together.  And the school had like a big brother, a buddy system.  So I had a African American buddy that would pass down old exams and act as my, my mentor, tutor if I needed.  So there was definitely a system there.  And it was a African American student organization called the SNDA, Student National Dental Association.  So we all definitely got a chance to interact and do things together and study together, it was just a lot of support.  I know that I could not have gotten in--through my dental school years without that support that I had.
Story_ID: 305354
Speaker 1: The thing that I discovered in the downside to majoring in psychology in undergrad [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], is that I did not have the strong, as strong of a science background as all the other students [at University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland] had.  Majoring in psychology, I actually missed out on a lot of things that could have helped me in my dental school education.  Especially the first two years, are very heavily science focused, anatomy and a lot of medical education.  And a lot of, of the other students had that background because they majored in science.  I had to bust my butt, and had a lot of failure in school my first two years.  It was very, very difficult, sometimes didn't think I would make it.  Cried a lot in my counselor's office, Billie Brown [ph.], it was the lady that did a lot of the recruiting, African American recruiting.  And her office doors were always open.  If you had a relationship problem, if you're having school problems, she was definitely the rock.  And, and the person that made you think that you could do it.  So there was definitely a lot of, a lot of tears in her office.  But a lot of support to say, hey, you've come this far you can do it.  And I wasn't used to failing, I mean I straight failed some courses (laughter) and tests.  One of the funny stories is, the grades would always be listed by your student number, and posted.  And went to see what my grades were from an exam and my friend, good friend Tony Johnson [ph.] went with me I knew, I just knew, I failed this test.  And he went with me, he was like, "You didn't fail now this person, this person failed," who was it? It was me.  "This person did really bad. I know you didn't do that bad." I'm like, "Tony, that's me."  (Laughter) So he felt so bad but, I knew I had done bad and (laughter) he confirmed how bad I messed up.  But I hadn't experienced failure before I was used to getting A's, Bs, being top of the class and that's where I really said, hey, if I'm gonna do this I'm gonna have to really buckle down and put extra time in.  And thank god I had the drive to do it. And that was the first two years.
Story_ID: 305355
Speaker 1: And you also said during this time that the--your old mentor, the dentist [Dr. Oscar Wright], not that he was really a mentor.  But the gentleman that put the brace, that you looked up to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --would, would send you money from time to time?
Speaker 2: Yes, he would.
Speaker 1: What contact did you have with him?  Did you talk to him about how you were doing?
Speaker 2: I didn't really contact, I and to be honest, I was really surprised that he would send money.  He would actually give it to my mother [Michele Austin] to send to me.  I was really surprised that he was so supportive it wasn't that I called him all the time for advice.  Would check in periodically or if I came home I would definitely a dental checkup or something like that and visit the office then.  But I don't know what it was--I think he saw something in me that said, hey I'm gonna help this young lady along from time to time, but definitely appreciated his--
Speaker 1: Of that 10 percent of African Americans that were in the dental program at the University of Maryland [University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland], how many graduated?
Speaker 2: I would say eight, 8 percent graduated, we did lose a few but 8 percent graduated.
Speaker 1: Of that 8 percent how many are in practice now?
Speaker 2: I would almost say 8 percent, and maybe 7 percent have their own practices, everybody's doing well.  As a matter of fact, many of my classmates are still in the Baltimore, Maryland area and have joined in and partnered together.  I'm a little jealous because they all work together and they still have the bond that we have created, and I'm not there (laughter).  I want to, kind of be there, be with my people.
Story_ID: 303209
Speaker 1: At the University of Maryland [University of Maryland School of Dentistry, Baltimore, Maryland] we were talking about the people who started practice.  But what year did you graduate the University of Maryland?
Speaker 2: University of Maryland my graduation was May of 1996.  I--one of my classmates, actually a few of my classmates were from New York [New York] originally, and I had dated one of my classmates who from New York.  And for New Year's Eve and Labor Day, Labor Day Parade, which are fun times to be in New York, we would come to New York and have some fun.  And that's when I saw maybe New York would be a place that I'd like to, just try out of a year. So upon graduation I decided that I wanted to do a extra year of dental residency, and it's totally optional, you don't have to do it.  But that one of year dental residency or hospital training is equivalent to two years of work experience.  So, a lot of dentists will go on and do that year of hospital training to get the experience--to get hired for a great position.  So I decided that there were a lot of hospitals in the New York area versus the D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Baltimore [Maryland] area, there are more opportunities to do residencies here in New York.  So I said, you know, I'm gonna try New York out for a year and then I'll come back to Baltimore area, or D.C. area, or maybe go back home to Michigan.  Well I started the residency in July of 1996 and one of my classmates in dental school, Tony [Tony Johnson (ph.)], the one that laughed at me, he also did his residency at the same hospital.
Speaker 1: Which hospital is this?
Speaker 2: It was Lutheran Medical Center [NYU Lutheran Medical Center] in Brooklyn [New York].  So it was great, it seems like everywhere I go I always bring one person with me.  I bring Darlene [Darlene Tolbert], to college [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] with me and brought Tony to the residency with me.  And that year was pretty intense, learned a lot about oral surgery and things that I hadn't gotten a lot of experience with in dental school.  And it definitely built my speed and confidence levels up, in terms of a dentist.  I--that was a year program that I finished the following July.  And like most people who are ready to enter the workforce I decided to look in the newspaper for jobs, oh I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But before you go further that--that year of residency at Lutheran--
Speaker 2: Lutheran Medical Center.
Speaker 1: --Medical Center. Who were the patients that you were seeing, who were the people you were interacting with?
Speaker 2: A lot of people in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn, that community.  The clinic was always full of patients we may have seen twenty patients a day.  You definitely had to build you speed up.  And you had attendings [attending physicians] that made sure everything was done properly.  Or if you needed guidance you always had the guidance and then there were daily lectures.  So you learn more advanced things about dentistry things that we may not have learned in dental school, a few things about the business of dentistry.  At the time that I was in dental school, cosmetic dentistry was just starting to take off.  Learning how to do white fillings versus silver fillings, but they still promoted silver fillings more so.  So to learn about cosmetic dentistry you had to also do that extra year of training, that's where you start to learn things that you didn't learn in school.  So definitely if there was anyone thinking should I do a residency or not?  I would definitely say get that extra year of experience.  You get paid for doing so, so it's not a huge salary, but you make money while you do it.  And it definitely gives you the confidence to go out into the real world.
Story_ID: 303210
Speaker 1: So you completed the one-year program at the Lutheran Medical [NYU Lutheran Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York], and you decide New York's [New York, New York] the place for me and I'm gonna stay?
Speaker 2: You know what, during that year what solidified the fact that I wanted to stay, I had a co-resident her name was Dominique St. Juste, another black female dentist, and we bonded.  She was from New York, and she gave me a little bit of my social life while I was here.  And she turned me on to this comedy club in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] that was called the Boston Comedy Club [Comedy Village Club, New York, New York].  And every Sunday we would go to this comedy club.  It was five dollars to get in, and you would see all of the top comedians available for the five dollars.  You never know who would pop up, Chris Rock, Eddie Murphy, for five dollars so, and it was just a great, great show.  So we started every Sunday and as I became a regular, I started to meet a lot of the comedians.  I started to see--that's where the idea--meeting these people in the entertainment industry, maybe I could become their dentist.  So being in that residency actually started to mold my idea of how I would become a practitioner in New York City.  Still didn't know how I would do it, but, I thought the more people I met in that arena, once they started to learn my name and know what I did.  And they were all very impressed because I was twenty-six, and they never met anyone like me who was cool, who like to hang out and laugh and do things that they did, their perception of a dentist was a older white male.  So it was a little different for people to meet me at the same time.  So they were interested in me, and I was interested in them.  And it, it really--at the time we became a family.  Not only did we see each other every Sunday, but we would go bowling every other Monday.  We would go over each other's houses and cook and play basket--or, I would watch them play basketball.  And I just, that gave me a sense of family in New York, since I did not have any at the time.  So that would--is one of the things I think that made me want to stay.  And once I saw that I could possibly become the dentist to the stars.  Because comedians open up for music acts and you just see celebrities in New York.  I started to think that this is something that I might do and it's different.  I have a niche that maybe has not been tapped into, particularly for young black female, so.
Speaker 1: And you're attractive so that helps.
Speaker 2: Why thank you.  So I didn't know how to pull it off so just went to the newspaper and started to find different jobs that were posted.  But as I would take certain jobs I learned that a), as a beginning dentist, you get paid peanuts.  I mean the pay was, there were times I that I actually had to call home for money, I was so broke.  And I didn't understand, I started to question, well why I did I go to dental school, and why I did put so much effort to get paid peanuts.  It's like I have friends that only went to high school that are doing better than I, I am.
Story_ID: 303211
Speaker 1: During one of my down periods, I saw that there was a temporary dental--agency that specialized in--a temporary dental agency that would place hygienists.  The hygienists are people who solely clean teeth.  I, I contacted the agency, and I told her that I was dentist but I really wasn't making money, the type of money that I needed to survive in New York [New York], and would she be willing to temp me as a hygienist and she said, "Sure."  So that was the best experience and the best idea that I could have come up with.  Because a), I could work when I wanted to and I made way more money than I did as a hygienist, as I did as a dentist.  So financially I was doing better, I was gaining exposure with being in different dental offices.  I started to get an idea of how dentists really practice.  I saw good offices, and I saw bad offices where they didn't sterilize instruments.  Where they didn't care if they were doing a white filing, they didn't care about matching the color exactly.  We only have one color, we're putting that color in, so what if it doesn't match at least, at least the color is--I mean the cavity is gone.  So I saw great practices and practices that I didn't want to have anything to do with.  So it opened my eyes to how I, maybe I want a practice.  As I went into one office, the dentist said, "So you're a dentist?"  And I said, "Yes," he was like, "Why are you doing this, why are you practicing as a hygienist?  You, you deserve to practice as a dentist and practice your profession."  He was like, "You know you can, you can start your own practice."  And I'm like, "Really?" I--but I'm not from here, I don't have any friends, many friends, I don't have any family, I have no support, I have no money saved up.  I don't have any dentists in my family, how, how can I do this.  And he was like, "What you do is you start to rent space from a dentist. You start with the room, you build you clientele up you sign on with insurance plans and the patients will come.  You go out, you market yourself, you collect business cards.  You create business cards and tell them who you are, and you can do it."  So he said, "As a matter of fact I have a room that you can rent."  He practiced on 57th Street on the East Side [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: What was his name?
Speaker 1: I want to say Doctor Fink [Dr. Arnold Fink], he and I met for about six months and planned how I would join his practice by renting space and building my own clientele.  At the same time, I found a job with the New York City Department of Health [New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene].  And they offered positions as a school dentist.  They had a series of schools throughout the New York City area, where they actually have a dentist come into the schools and offer free dental service, services to the students with the permission of their parents.  And like you have a nurse's office, we had the dental office and that's what I did in the meantime.  And that actually--I worked for the school system for about three days a week and then I temped, with the temp agency, the remaining days.  Unfortunately, the month before I was supposed to start my practice with Dr. Fink, he decided that he didn't want to rent space anymore.
Story_ID: 303212
Speaker 1: I was already motivated and planning how I'm gonna start this practice and collecting business cards.  So I said, well, I guess I'm just gonna have to find another office.  And I'm, I'm already dec--I've already decided that I'm gonna to do this.  I've already started telling people that I'm gonna have a practice opening soon.  So I started to--I went to the S--small business association [U.S. Small Business Administration] and I said, well, I think I need a loan, I need to get some money, need to just plan my practice, start a business plan.  So I had a counselor, I don't remember his name.  But my counselor had met another black female dentist, Dr. Karen Gear, who's a root canal specialist.  And he thought it would be a good idea that her and I meet.  It so happened that she had affiliations with Harlem Hospital [Harlem Hospital Center, New York, New York].  She knew a lot of dentists in the area.  We met, and she said, "I know plenty of dentists in the area that would rent space to you.  As a matter of fact I have a dentist that's on 57th Street. He's African American male who's been there for thirty-five years.  He's looking to rent space, you should give him a call."  So it was great because I--it was the same street I wanted to be in the high profile area.  And I would be with someone like me, so we met Dr. Thompson, Albert Thompson, and we decided that I would rent space from him.  Now here's the good part, he knew that I didn't have any money saved.  I didn't know how I was gonna really pull this starting a practice thing off.
Speaker 2: And you didn't get the loan?
Speaker 1: I did not get the loan at the time.
Speaker 2: At the time, okay, so you didn't have any money saved and he--continue.
Speaker 1: He said, "Listen, I know you're starting out, I'm gonna let you have the space at no charge.  Just come here, work, work, work, you can use my instruments just get some of the basic things that you need to operate.  You can rent my--you can have my space.  And I'll see when you're starting make money, and when I see that you're starting to make money, then I'll charge you rent."  So I worked in his office rent-free, until I built up enough clientele for me to afford to pay him rent.  And I, that ex--that in, in itself I don't, I think it was priceless to have someone recognize the good in me and want to help me.  And you don't find a lot of people that would be willing--that would be willing to give you something for nothing in return, so I definitely commend him.  So I built my practice sharing the office with Dr. Thompson on 57th Street.  And when it's--was time for me to open, I had been collecting business cards, I sent out a mass mailing.  I'd signed on with some insurance plans.  And my first patient was actually a friend of mine, a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], from University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Who said, "You know what, I know you from back when, and I know you're a good person I'm sure.  I know you were always smart, I'm gonna give you a try."  He worked for Pfizer [Pfizer Inc.], the pharmaceutical company, and he went back--I impressed him so much--that he went back and told all of his friends at Pfizer they have to support me.  And he was very instrumental in helping to build the practice.
Story_ID: 303213
Speaker 1: And with hard work, it just--the patients started to come and I decided to--oh, my mom [Michele Austin] decided that well, if you're gonna be this dentist to the stars you need to have a publicist.  And I'm like, publicist, what do they do?  "Oh they, you know, they get the word out about your practice they build your name."  So she said, "You need to call [HistoryMaker] Terrie Williams. She was Eddie Murphy's publicist, so, here's her number."  So I called Terrie Williams, and I'm like, "I'm Dr. Catrise Austin [HistoryMaker Dr. Catrise L. Austin], I, I need a publicist."  And she says, "Well I really like your story, and where you've come from, and the things that you have planned for your practice, but honey, I only work with accounts that are fifty thousand dollars a month or more. But let me refer you to someone that might be in your price range."  And she, she referred me to my first publicist and I was able to get a lot of press, I was in Essence and a lot of the black, major black publications the first year and that really started to skyrocket.
Speaker 2: And how did you come to meet [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes and what--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and how was that instrumental in your practice?
Speaker 1: It was so instrumental, somehow I built up this fearlessness. I saw him, gosh, it must have been '88 [1988] or '89 [1989] [sic. 1998 or 1999], in Puff--Puff Daddy's [Sean Combs] restaurant Justin's [Justin's Restaurant, New York, New York].  And I said, wow, that's Isaac Hayes, he's a legend, and I--it really me about a hour, I tossed should I go, should I not go over and introduce myself.  And then I said to myself, you know what, this may be a once in a lifetime opportunity, the worst that he can say is, sorry I'm busy, I'm not interested.  And I just decided to take that chance, so I went over to his table, he was sitting down with at the time he was on the radio, as a morning radio show host.  And he was with some of his co-workers.  And I just went over to his dinner table and I introduced myself.  "Hi, I'm Dr. Catrise Austin, I'm a cosmetic dentist in New York City, I have my own practice, and I just wanted to let you know if you need any type dental services I'm here for you."  And he said, "Really? Why don't you sit down have dinner with us."  And I sat down and joined them for dinner and he talked to me.  And just learned more about me and he was very impressed.  And he said, "Young lady, I'm gonna give you all of my phone numbers, fax number, home phone number."  He gave me all of his information to contact him.
Story_ID: 303214
Speaker 1: Maybe a couple months later he [HistoryMaker Isaac Hayes] sent his personal assistant in to see me for dental treatment. Her name was Michelle [ph.], and Michelle and I were about the same age.  I impressed Michelle, and she went back and gave a great report, and he eventually came in for dental treatment.  I don't know what he saw in me, but he decided that he really wanted to help me.  So he, at times that he was given functions or he was traveling he really enjoyed the Acapulco Black Film Festival [American Black Film Festival], which is now in Miami [Florida].  He enjoyed that festival and would go on it every year, and I was always invited to go to the film festival, which opened the doors to meet more entertainers and any time he's around people just, he's the type of person that people flock to.  So I had the opportunity to make a lot of contacts and just be in an environment, if I was gonna to be the dentist to the stars.  I was always, or in a environment where I had the opportunity to meet a lot of people.
Speaker 2: And he helped provide you with that opportunity?
Speaker 1: He helped provided me with that opportunity (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How so? I mean he would get, he'd call up and say, "Hey, I'm going to the Acapulco Film Festival, you should join us."
Speaker 1: Or, Michelle would say, you know, "Isaac thinks it's a good idea that you come along."  And I would share the room with Michelle.  And it was great because she was here in New York [New York] by herself and really became best friends.  And you know it was good for her and it was good for me and we all got along.  And we just support--you know, she supported me and he supported me and I supported them in what they did.  He was at the time trying to build his own company.  And re-establish himself as a driving force in the entertainment industry because he had some down time.  So it was a time that we both were trying to get our names out, so it was definitely a win-win situation.
Speaker 2: And how is that relationship today?
Speaker 1: It's great I don't, he's moved away from, from New York City, he's back in Tennessee.  But he had a grand opening, he has a restaurant [Isaac Hayes Restaurant & Nightclub, Memphis, Tennessee] in Tennessee.
Speaker 2: Where in Tennessee, is it the--?
Speaker 1: Memphis [Tennessee], Memphis.
Speaker 2: Memphis.
Speaker 1: So when he had his grand opening he definitely invited me to come down for that, and it was a big to-do.  And he recently got married but he didn't have a big wedding.  But, you know, he keeps me in touch with what he's doing.  And he still sends me patients, which is great, so I still benefit from the relationship.  I feel the father--I've had Thanksgiving dinner, times that I wasn't able to go home, I've been over to his house for Thanksgiving--he's a great cook, he has a cookbook ['Cooking with Heart and Soul: Making Music in the Kitchen with Family and Friends,' Isaac Hayes and Susan DiSesa].  So I've been over to--you know feel like I have family in him even though--like a distant father.  I definitely feel like he's been supportive.
Story_ID: 303215
Speaker 1: Toni Braxton, how did she come to the office?
Speaker 2: It was great.
Speaker 1: What year was it?
Speaker 2: Eighty--maybe '89 [1989], she was here doing Beauty--
Speaker 1: Ninety-nine [1999] you mean, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, '99 [1999], she was here doing Beauty--I think the first play she did was 'Beauty and the Beast.'
Speaker 1: So Isaac [HistoryMaker Isaac Hayes] was also '98 [1998], not '88 [1988], (unclear) right okay, '98 [1988] okay.
Speaker 2: Thank you so much '98 [1998], thank you '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Okay she was doing 'Beauty and the Beast,' '99 [1999]?
Speaker 2: And my hair stylist, is it, does lots of celebrities, he's name is Gerard Dure, and I met him, I read him and I met him at a party and I was like, oh my god, there's Gerard Dure.  And when I introduced myself to him he was like, "Oh my god, you're a cosmetic dentist, I've never met anyone like you."  And he and I built a relationship.  I we decided to do so work, Gerard and I did some work together, I did cosmetic dentistry with him.  I did a smile makeover. And the day that I completed him, he went directly to Toni Braxton to do her hair, and she was like, "Oh my god, look at your teeth, your teeth are beautiful, I've gotta, whoever your dentist is, I've gotta see her."  So eventually she defin--she called and she came and supported the practice.  And she has since moved back to Atlanta [Georgia], so I don't get a chance to see her, as much as I did before.  But it was just--I thought it was great that having done, I--he went straight to her to do her hair and she saw the change and was impressed, with the work that I did, so.  He's been a very instrumental as well, because of the clients that he has, he gets to be my biggest advertiser.
Speaker 1: Will you spell his name out for me?
Speaker 2: Gerard is G-E-R-A-R-D, Dure, D-U-R-E.
Speaker 1: Missy Elliott?
Speaker 2: Missy Elliott. As I met more people in the entertainment industry, I was told that I should go to, going to the functions that they are, they attend.  So I started going to music conferences, such as IMPACT [IMPACT Music Conference].  I would--I started going to Soul Train Awards [Soul Train Music Awards], and I met her manager at one of the conferences and her manager, Mona Scott, became a client.  And Mona manages Missy and Busta Rhymes and 50 Cent and a lot of the top rappers in the industry.  And Missy needed my services one day, right before she was gonna go on 'The David Letterman Show' [sic. 'Late Show with David Letterman'].  And because I had invested in traveling dental equipment, I was able to go to the set of 'David Letterman' and meet her and discover what the problem was.  And when she was done, we actually had to come back to my office.  But through the connection of getting out and networking I met her manager, who was able to refer all of her clients to me.  And that's how I met Missy and Busta.
Story_ID: 303216
Speaker 1: So what cosmetic, I mean like, like, you know, the stuff on the teeth, the gold, the bling-bling, do you do any of that, is that cosmetic?  Or, or are you simply here to make peoples' original teeth look originally better than they originally looked before (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I, I primarily will do, make your natural teeth look better, and it does involve porcelain or whitening.  I have worked with Slick Rick, however, who's known for working, you know, having gold teeth.  So I've definitely provided bling-bling as well (laughter).  But I prefer to do things that are cosmetically pleasing to the eye.  But I have been called upon to do gold and diamonds.  And, you know, if it's someone who's like Slick Rick, who's known for--that's part of this image, I'll definitely work with.  Or if it was Master P, I would, I would definitely do gold or diamonds or platinum with him.  But for the average, everyday person I don't encourage getting gold or doing those type of things.
Speaker 1: So this particular office we're in today, this was not the room you rented.  When did you come here and when did you get this much space and how did that come about?
Speaker 2: I rented space from Dr. Thompson [Albert Thompson] from 1998 to 1991 I started to grow--
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-eight [1998] to 2001 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To 2001, thank you, 1998 to 2001.  I started to grow so fast, it started with renting one room, and then I had to ask him for another room, so he only had three rooms.  It got to the point where I was renting two out of three of his rooms.  So I decided that, at that point, it was time to find a bigger space.  It so happened that in my building a space became available, when I was ready, when it was time for me to grow.  And I--it was a shoe store but the space was, I felt accommodating for a dental office.
Speaker 1: So it's this space, this is (unclear) was a shoe yes.  So you were in this building before?
Speaker 2: So it's this space, so it's the same building, I was in this building.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was fortunate enough to be able to stay in this building.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And one of the things that people assume is that because I'm on 57th Street [New York, New York]--which is one of the most expensive streets in America--that my prices are going to be gouged, or so much more expensive than another dentist's prices.  But the building, the fees, or the rent here in this particular building is very affordable it's very fair.  So I can offer quality dental service without killing my patients on the fees.
Story_ID: 303217
Speaker 1: You're pretty set up here, and the practice [VIP Smiles; New York City Cosmetic and General Dentistry, New York, New York] is running extremely well.  And you're building on your celebrity clients.  What's next, what are your hopes for the practice in the future?
Speaker 2: A part of my five-year plan last year I became licensed in the State of California.  And I've always had infinity for the West Coast and Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Hollywood (laughter).
Speaker 2: In particular Hollywood, my slogan is "Creating Hollywood Smiles in the Heart of Manhattan."  So I'm thinking maybe I have to create Hollywood smiles in the heart of Hollywood [Los Angeles, California].  So eventually I plan to have a second location in Los Angeles.  So last year I became licensed to start the ball rolling.  I, last year, wrote a book proposal, I want to create a book that provides dental education.  Because I feel that you can read and you can there's lots of information about medical conditions.  But I don't feel that we get a lot of education about dental health.  So my primary goal as a dentist in, when my patients come here one of the things that they really enjoy is that I explain everything.  Because I know that you, you probably haven't been educated about dental health.  And if more people were educated about dental health, I wouldn't be filling as many cavities or I wouldn't be treating as much gum disease that I--that I do.  So I want to, I hoping to, I have a book agent, and I'm hoping that my book ['5 Steps to the Hollywood A-List Smile: How the Stars Get That Perfect Smile and How you Can Too!' Catrise Austin] will be picked up and published.  I'm also developing my speaking career.  I always enjoy speaking in front of people and educating.  I love doing career days and telling people the career of dentistry or dental health.  Or talking about cosmetic dentistry and what I do with the celebrities.  Because people need to know if you're unhappy with your smile you don't have to be, there's options.  Dentistry has advanced so much in the last ten years.  Especially that you don't have to live with an unhappy smile, or an unhealthy smile.  So my main goal over the next five years is to get out into the community, educate, educate, educate.  And just let people see that there is definitely hope for young people, if you want to be in the field of medicine you can do it.  If you're female, if you want to be a career woman you can do it.  If you're African American you--there's no limitations as to what you can do.  And while I'm young and I can get out and do these things I definitely want to.  So I want to give a message of hope.
