Story_ID: 2622
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Anne Ashmore-Hudson, A-S-H-M-O-R-E hyphen H-U-D-S-O-N.  First name is Anne with an E.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is June 23, 1942 and place of birth is Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: All right, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a psychologist, clinical psychologist.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: August 1, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't give the address, just--.
Speaker 2: Washington, DC.
Story_ID: 2623
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  The first thing that came to my mind was broccoli (laughter).  I like broccoli.  I like vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, melon, sort of a melon--kind of somewhere between peach and yellow.  It's sort of a melon color.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Santa Fe [New Nexico].
Speaker 1: And, finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: A favorite phrase or saying.  Not really, no.  I have a mantra, and I suppose if one thought of that that would be my favorite phrase.  It's my--it's a, it's a Buddhist mantra.
Story_ID: 2624
Speaker 1: I want to ask you about your family history.  I'm a ask you about your mother and your father's side of the family.  I want to start with your mother.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: You mean her maiden name or her married name?
Speaker 1: Yeah, inclusive, you know, with her maiden name.
Speaker 2: Oh, Willie Mae Walker Ashmore.
Speaker 1: And what is her date and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was July 23, 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: In Georgia, but really just in the country.  I think it was outside of Valdosta or someplace like that, Georgia, but she grew up in Atlanta.  She came to Atlanta when she was a preteen, before she was a teenager, when she like ten or twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about her side of the family?  How far can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: I know about her side of the family.  I can't trace it--there is my grandmother, my mother's, my mother's mother and my mother's grandmother and my mother's great-grandmother.  So it goes back to about 1867 or '68 [1868], this great-great-grandmother.  But it's not a very happy story.  I think it was different from my father's [Clifford Ashmore] side of the family.
Speaker 1: So what is the story?  Can you tell us?
Speaker 2: I almost want to say why do you want to know this (laughter).  It's, well this, this, it's a side of the story that has to do with slavery.  My mother had, was a very smart woman.  She grew up with--it's an interesting story.  I'm not quite sure I was prepared to talk about that.  Her father was a white man who, whose name was Waldo Nunn.  And he owned basically the plantation that they lived on.  And he took advantage of my grandmother.  The difference was is that he acknowledged my mother.  He was the one who told her when she was a little girl--he asked her when she was maybe about ten going on--well, going on twelve, I think, close to time when they moved, "Do you know who your father is?"  And she told him her stepfather's name.  And he said, "Go home and ask your mother who's your father."  And that's how she found out that he was her father.  And, interestingly enough, even when they moved away, he never had any other children, and he never married.  He voluntarily paid child support.  And before he died he came to see her in Atlanta.  They lived on the black side of town 'cause Atlanta was very segregated then.  This was in the early, I would say '20s [1920s].  And she said she saw this white man coming down the street with a straw hat on dressed in a linen suit.  And she said I knew it was my father.  And he came to see her, and he said to her, "Are you okay?"  And she said, "Yes."  And he said, "Do you need anything?"  And she said, "No."  And he said, "Is the money I'm sending you enough?"  And she said, "What money?"  And he said he's giving it to some cousin, Jimmy or somebody and--I mean Jimmy's the name I just made up--and he, she said, "My mother's not getting any money from Jimmy."  And because my grandmother had married and her husband was a poor but proud black man who didn't want money from this white man who had at some point in time taken advantage of his wife.  And so he refused to take money from him.  So his way--and he wanted to send money to my mother, so his way was to give it to this emissary who was, this was supposed to be Jimmy.  So Jimmy had a good deal.  He was keeping the money (laughter), and everybody else was happy, until he came to visit my mother.  And so my mother said, "We're not getting that."  He said, "Well, okay, I'll, I'll see about that."  So then he said, "Well, is there anything you want?"  And so she said, "I want a piano."  And he said, "Okay, I'll see about getting you a piano."  And so he went away.  And she didn't hear from him again.  So she wrote him a letter.  So, apparently, she knew where he was all this time.  And a few months later she got a letter from his attorney saying that he had died and that what was it she, he had promised her.  And my mother never wrote him again.  I said, "Mama, you might have had--."  And she said, well, she was a little girl, and she just never wrote him again.  So that--her story was, you know, that kind of story that comes along not shortly after slavery.  My father's family was quite different.  They had much more.  They had land.  These--my mother's family, they were sharecroppers on this land, so they were very poor people.
Story_ID: 2625
Speaker 1: My father's family were landed.  I mean, after my, let's see, it would be my father, grandfather--I think it was my--my, would have been my great grandfather.  He was a slave, but he was, I think, the only one in a small family and knew how to read and write and was the coachman.  He drove the carriage in Savannah [Georgia]--I think they lived in Savannah and that's where he drove the carriage.
Speaker 2: Now, what was his name?
Speaker 1: That's a good point.  My grandfather's--oh, I'm sorry.  You asked me that straight off the bat like that.  I could have told you.  I'm sorry.  Unfortunately, when you, at my point in time, when you ask me something like that--for a definitive answer--it goes out of my head.  Later, it'll come back to me.  I can tell you that.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But he, he--well, we have the documents right here.  We can just pull it up.
Speaker 2: You can--go ahead and talk about it, you know.  What's your father's full name and can you spell that for us?
Speaker 1: Clifford March Ashmore, Senior.
Speaker 2: Clifford March Ashmore?
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: M-A-R-C-H, Senior.  My brother was Junior.
Speaker 2: And what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: My father's date of birth would have been the same as my mother's--1909, 1909, November the, I think it was the 27th, the 28th.  And, it was, he was born in Appling, Georgia, which is right outside of Augusta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My great grandfather came from Savannah.  He was called "the man who came from across the river."  And he, after slavery, he, he could read and write because he grew up with a little boy--he was his companion.  And, we have a letter from that man who said that your father, your, written to my grandfather that he was his companion, an honorable man, and loved him and all that and that he, as he went to school and learned how to read and write, my grandfather who was a grown, young man, but learned to read and write as well.  And somehow after slavery was abolished he had money and crossed the river and, the Savannah River,  went over to Washington County [Georgia] and bought up a lot of land on Ridge Road.  And we still have some of it now.  We've had it since, since, since then, since 1860s.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So are there any other stories from that side of the family--from your father's side?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) My grandfather went, my grandfather, my father's father, went to college, went to Paine College [Augusta, Georgia].  He was a minister, was a teacher, preacher.  So was my grandmother.  But in those days--and my father--there were twelve children.  My father was the oldest boy.  What I did not know at that time, which I think we, all of us in terms of being African American need to know, is that a lot of what our parents accomplished was within the framework of what was possible at that time.  And we, our frame of reference gets skewed.  When my father was growing up, the only public high school in the state of Georgia was in Atlanta.  There was only one--Washington High School.  And so he, his father sent him as the oldest boy from Appling, Georgia, from the country to live with relatives to go to high school.  The private high schools were at Paine College, and the girls went there.  But my father--he sent the boys to Atlanta to sort of work their way through school.  And so my father did.  He finished valedictorian of his class.  And he wanted to be an engineer.  And I remember being about twelve or thirteen years old and saying to him, "Well, daddy, why weren't you an engineer?"  Like hello, click.  Because Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology] was across town--he finished valedictorian of the only high school for African Americans in the entire state--clearly he could have gone and finished Georgia Tech.  He majored in math, he taught math, but it was segregated.  And you have to remember in a certain way the [Civil Rights] Movement with all of the uproar we had is good because it reminds us that that wasn't even a remote possibility at that time.  And so he did what was available for him to do.  He became a math teacher and a counselor, and executive vice principal at Grady High [School] when he died, at the time he died.  And we had a restaurant.  My mother was, my mother was a small businesswoman.  She went and got a loan from the bank 'cause there was a--Mr. Milton was president of Citizens Trust--had a bank and a, had a banking and loan that didn't fail during the Depression.  She got a loan.  She opened up a small business over in what was the fourth ward.  And my daddy worked there afterwards.  They bought small houses like triplexes with three apartments, two apartments, three or four apartments.  And so we had, you know, apartments that she managed and we had the restaurant and my father in the school system.  But at--we didn't value--African Americans at that time didn't value businesses that much and so--not small businesses.  We valued education more.  So, my father never became a principal because they came to him and said, you know, Ashmore, we'd really like for you to be a principal, but we think there'll be a conflict with you having the restaurant.  Really what it was was they wanted him to give up the restaurant.  They thought it was undignified for a principal to go from being a principal to wearing a chef hat and serving hotdogs and sodas after school.  And so the restaurant, though, made a lot more money or least equal or maybe more, more than my father made being a principal.  And it would have meant one income instead of two.  So he never became a principal.  He was an executive vice principal, but that was it.  He never complained about it.  But he did tell me about it.  And then my brother [Clifford Ashmore, Jr] explained to me what it really was.  They didn't think it was dignified.
Speaker 2: That's an interesting dynamic about--.
Speaker 1: But you can think about, you'd know it's true.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Story_ID: 2626
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet?  Is there a story about how--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they met--my mother [Willie Mae Walker Ashmore] was a doctor's receptionist, a dentist's receptionist and my father [Clifford Ashmore] came in.  And he was very handsome; she was very--very beautiful.  And so she said, "You're Clifford Ashmore?"  And he said, "You're--?" whatever.  And so that was--I think that--they were--they called themselves sister and brother.  They called themselves Sis and Bro to the end of their life.  I mean, 'cause my mother was an only child.  And they started off as being friends.  And they got married secretly.  And then they got married.  So, it was a bit of a scandal actually because my mother had been married before, legally married, had two children, and got divorced.  And my father had never been married, was a young college graduate and teacher.  Had a little house close to the campus, the university campus at--Clark AU, [Clark] Atlanta University.  And to marry a divorced woman sixty-some years ago was a great kind of scandal.  And my aunt told me, my father's sister told me--she said your mother did not let that faze her.  She said there was a big uproar.  And his mother, 'cause he was he first son after five girls was--he's the--maybe he was the fifth so maybe they had four girls and the was the first son.  In any case, she was not pleased.  It was sort of like I've sent my son through school and, you know, he's my--she adored him, and he comes home with a woman who finished high school with two kids and her mother.  She did--she was not happy.  But my father had a little stubborn, kind of little rebellious stubborn streak in him, and he adored my mother always.  And that--that was that.  And she's--my mother is sort of spucky, spunky.  She, she could care--she, she wanted to win my grandmother over, but the rest of Atlanta, she could care--she, that was it.  And they stayed married their whole life.  I think by the time when Daddy died, I don't know, let me see--well, Mommy just died.  I don't know if when he died how it, whether it was sixty some years, fifty-five.
Story_ID: 2627
Speaker 1: What are your fist childhood memories?
Speaker 2: My first childhood memory is probably me washing my clothes in my toy washer and then filling up the tub 'cause I thought--.  You know, my mother [Willie Mae Walker Ashmore] would say something about us washing, doing, messing up or something, and I thought, I'll do this myself, you know.  You don't have to, whatever you are worried about, it won't be me.  I'll do it for myself.  And then I had kind of overwhelmed--I did too much.  So she ended up having to kind of pull me out of that.  That's one memory.  Another memory is--my little brother [Clifford Ashmore, Jr.] was a towhead blonde.  He got all the recessive genes in the family.  And this little kid down the street--his name was Jimmy.  He was very dark.  And one day my brother came home.  He had found tar somewhere and, poor little baby, he put tar all over himself and in his hair--we had to cut.  And he said, "Mommy, mommy, now"--he wanted to be like everybody else.  He said, "Now I'm black like Jimmy."  But my mother was not pleased.  If he had to cut all his hair off--.  But he was--I was dark--in my family, he was lighter than me, and he had a hard time with it. On either extreme, you can have a hard time--if you're too light or too dark, so--.
Speaker 1: So kids teased him a lot?
Speaker 2: Well, there would--they would not know he was black and so there could sometimes there it could be dangerous.  I mean like when we went out of town and we were at a swimming pool and we were just standing--we were at the deep end.  We weren't in the pool.  We were just there.  And a kid came from out of nowhere and pushed--in this instance he got me in the deep end of the pool without knowing if I could swim.  And there was, there's nobody a--I could swim, fortunately.  But I could've drowned.  So it was more--it could sometimes be quite vicious.  He, he got beat up a lot.  And then if he was in the wrong place and sometimes it was truly bad.  There were a lot of unfortunate stories about that.  And he got arrested--I guess he was in the, he was someplace with some black kids, guys, and he got arrested.  They put him--it was in Augusta [Georgia].  They put him in the jail with the white people and the other guys in the segregated jail.  And then when they, the white guys, asked him where he went to school, and he said where he went to school, which is a black college, you know, they beat him up, put his head down the toilet, they did very--he had a hard time.  And I think some of my anger and rebelliousness had to do with how he was treated.  Because I was--wasn't much I could do about it, except certain times.  I was a, I was one year older than he was so I had to defend him a lot.  I had my own problems, you know (laughter), with race in class.  But he had more.  One time a guy was outside our house.  He just started picking on my brother.  I had to go in the house.  I got a broom, and the end of the broom, I just beat him off my brother, literally.  Clifford wouldn't fight back, but I would.  As a girl, I would get away with it.
Speaker 1: Well, these kinds of incidents just kind of highlight the sort of craziness of race identity i guess?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, yeah, period.  That's a lot of anger.
Story_ID: 2628
Speaker 1: Kind of reflect some more when you were a little kind and give us some idea of what some of the sights and sounds and smells of childhood were.
Speaker 2: Well, there were different ones.  I moved three times.  There was on Beckwith Street [Atlanta, Georgia] where we grew up, it was really almost idyllic, you know, Daisy.  I mean, the people across the street were Daisy and Sweetpea, you know, it was a family.  Jimmy was up the street.  You know, someone else down around the corner.  Everybody--Mr. Checkers had a store right at the corner.  (Cough) Excuse me.  We all--everybody knew everybody.  You could go in and out of houses.
Story_ID: 2629
Speaker 1: We were asking about some of the sights and sounds and smells of--.
Speaker 2: Oh, I can go--and I remember was really summer playing hopscotch, the sidewalk thing.  Sometimes in summer it's so hot that if you were going barefoot, you'd have to jump from one little patch of grass to another.  And ice cream trucks coming down the street.  And being able to go into anybody's house and get anything you wanted really.  It was--Atlanta [Georgia] is very nurturing, and it was.  I don't know how it is still now, but it was a very nurturing, very supportive environment then.  It was very, it was very loving.  It is, it--you could look at both sides of it.  It could be little bit too structured around you.  You couldn't do anything that was out of place because--I mean if I skated on one skate going down Jepter Street (ph.), which is a little bit of a hill, by the time I got home, somebody would say, "I know you didn't want Anne skating down the street."  And my mother [Willie Mae Walker Ashmore] would say, "I know you just had on one skate," but--.  So it--you couldn't really, if you--when I would started to date, if you got on the--from the time you got on the porch and the porch light would be on 'til the time that you got in the door and maybe you cut the light off to say goodnight, the neighbors would tell your mother exactly what time you got on the porch, exactly what time the light went off, and exactly what time you went through the door.  So it was like, it was overly protective in some ways.  But it was very--the expectations of you were high.  You knew it.  You lived up to it.  Atlanta doesn't forget if you do well.  And they don't forget if you mess up (laughter).  So even though I've been gone all these years, I could, I feel like for those people who were there when I was there, I can always go home.  And I'm very proud of it.  It was a very good place even if people didn't have an ideal home, there were usually institutions that bolstered you and pushed you up.  I liked, I loved Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Now was the church a factor in growing up at all?
Speaker 2: It was definitely a factor in that I went to church.  But it wasn't a, it wasn't--when you say a factor--I mean, the church was well organized. The church, with my father [Clifford Ashmore], did this huge Boy Scout group through the church.  I went to church every Sunday.  And I met a lot of people--Ruby Doris [Smith-Robinson] and those--her family went to my church, Ruby Doris of the Smith family.  Bobby [Robert] Allen who ran '[The] Black Scholar' went to my church.  But that's, you know, it was an organizing factor with the YWCA [Young Womens' Christian Association], Phyllis Wheatly Y, was also someplace--I took ballet lessons, and it was someplace to have parties and to go--.  There were institutions that were very supportive.
Story_ID: 2630
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Where did you go to grade school and--?
Speaker 2: I went, I started first grade at E. R. Carter, a public school.  And I went there for two years, I think.  And then I went to Catholic school, Our Lady of Lourdes, in the third grade, and I finished in the eighth grade.  I went there through the eighth grade.  Went to Howard High School for two years (laughter) where my father [Clifford Ashmore] was working.  And then I left and went to Palmer Memorial Institute, which is a private high school in Sedalia, North Carolina.  And I graduated from there.
Story_ID: 2631
Speaker 1: You went to two grade schools.  You started off at--.
Speaker 2: E. R. Carter [School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: --E. R. Carter and then you--.
Speaker 2: Catholic school [Our Lady of Lourdes School, Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah, went to Catholic school.  What, was there a reason for change--?
Speaker 2: Well, I think at that time and people thought that--when we moved, we moved across town, moved to a bigger house.  So things are segregated and even if you had resources you couldn't--there were only certain places you could live.  So a neighborhood on, I guess in fourth ward and near Georgia Baptist Hospital near Boulevard opened up on East Avenue and so we bought a bigger house.  And so we moved to that house.  So Catholic school was on that side of my town.  And my daddy's [Clifford Ashmore] school where he worked at Howard [High School] was on that side of town.  So we moved.  It was closer to the restaurant, to my father's work, and we just changed schools.  And so when you change schools, we, they would start going to a Catholic school, which was, you know, considered--they were like a year ahead of the public schools at that time in terms of what they were teaching kids.  And some kids were put back a year because they were ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You could ask--.
Speaker 1: Well, how did you like school and what, and how did you do in school?
Speaker 2: I did well in school.  I liked school.  In fact, one time when I--well, it was a nun who didn't like me too well for whatever reason and my mother [Willie Mae Walker Ashmore]--I didn't want to go school.  My mother said--went to talk to her she said because you've always liked going to school.  So when you don't want to go to school, then something's wrong.  So, remembering that--I mean I liked it.  I, I had a difficult--some of the schools at that time were really much--weren't to my nature.  I mean we didn't think of fitting a child to the school environment at that time.  I don't think I found that kind of fit until I went to Cal Berkeley.  When I went to University of California at Berkeley I thought I'd found heaven.  It was wonderful because there was--it was just sort of like they believed in you.  It was free, was open, I could study.  But the--I got a basic grounding.  I liked school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Right.  Are there any teachers that stand out as particularly helpful or interested in your development at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, like I got a masters degree in social work from Simmons [College School of Social Work, Boston, Massachusetts]--.
Speaker 1: Oh, I mean grade school.
Speaker 2: Oh, grade school--no.
Speaker 1: Still in grade school.
Speaker 2: Unfortunately, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what were your favorite subjects in grade school?
Speaker 2: In grade school?  Probably geography or something like that.  I don't remember.  I don't, I didn't have any--in Catholic school I didn't have any favorite subjects particularly.  It wasn't that kind of environment.
Speaker 1: Did you like the public school better than the Catholic school?
Speaker 2: The public school was good.  I think that the--my first grade teacher was, was very good.  I don't remember, I'm sorry, don't remember her name.  She was a friend of my mothers.  But, but my experience at E. R. Carter was very good.  Catholic school was very strict and paid a lot of attention to whether you talked or not or whether, you know, a lot of performance activities.  But it was okay.
Story_ID: 2632
Speaker 1: You went to high school at--which, which one did you say?
Speaker 2: Two years at, at Howard High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Public high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Where my father [Clifford Ashmore] was.
Speaker 1: And, well, what did you think of Howard?  I mean, academically, did you like that?
Speaker 2: Howard was fine academically.  I was in a accelerated--you know, the accelerated program.  But socially it was difficult because I didn't quite fit into the neighborhood.  And my father was there.  He was on the faculty.  And, you know, it was--some of the kids came from pretty rough neighborhoods.  So, I had to prove myself 'cause he couldn't protect me all the time.  So you had to, you had to, you had to deal.  But it, but it gave me a good background in terms of dealing with all kinds of people.  And that was my first real awareness that there were kids who were there who were very bright, very smart, and the only difference between them and me was that I was gonna go to college.  And it wasn't sure that they were.  And the only difference between it, as to why that would be true was that I had parents who start saving money for me to go to school when I was born and they didn't.  It was just a matter of economic resources.  But they were very smart.  But what opportunities they had were decidedly different.  I, I became really clear on that.  And I think that's one of the reasons I went into social work.  I thought that maybe I could make a difference, you know, as--I felt that was unfair.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any teachers at Howard that stand out that you, that made an impression on you?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no) Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you changed high schools.  Now what was the reason for the change?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think my parents--I got, I was old enough to go away.  I mean I think they always knew that you could--I mean they were trying in their own way to give me a better educational experience.  And they were truly things I could get in boarding school that I couldn't get--since high schools in Atlanta were segregated, there weren't any private or independent secondary schools for African Americans at that time.  So if you were going to go to a private high school, then you had to go away.  And the two that people went to were Northfield Mount Hermon [School, Northfield, Massachusetts] and Palmer Memorial Institute in Sedalia, North Carolina.  And I--there was some reason why I didn't go to Northfield Mount Hermon.  I think it's because I applied in the spring for the fall.  We had to apply like a year earlier or something and just missed the deadline.  Excuse me.  So, I went to Palmer.  It cost--the cost was about the--the cost was the same.  And I, I would think the standards were about the same.  But it was just to give me a better educational experience.  And it was a relief in a lot of ways because I didn't have the, the dichotomy in terms of class really.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now Palmer Institute is in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Sedalia, North Carolina, right outside of Greensboro.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you like being away from home and in this new place?
Speaker 2: I liked it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I liked it.  It was extremely strict, very strict.  But it was a good experience.  I'm glad I went.  I'm glad I went.
Speaker 1: Is this an all girls of school?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.  It was boys and girls.
Speaker 1: Boys and girls, okay.
Speaker 2: But boys on one side of the room and we were on the other (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they actually split the room like--?
Speaker 2: I recall being out--well, I know we went one way out and they went another way.  They, they were very strict.  They weren't gonna have any, any chances there taken, you know.
Speaker 1: That sounds like the Nation of Islam, doesn't it?
Speaker 2: Sort of.  It wouldn't have been too far.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there any teachers there that made an impression on you or who, you know--?
Speaker 2: Mr. Steptoe (ph.).  Mr. Steptoe was a teacher, and he later became principal here.  He died a very tragic death, but he, he was there, and he was very good.  And, and Ms. Crossem (ph.) were encouraging.  Steptoe encouraged me in terms of creative writing.  And he was a good, very good teacher.  And Mr. Darden (ph.)--Mr. Dardeaux (ph.) rather--he was Haitian and taught French.  And they had some very good teachers at that school.  I appreciated that very much.
Speaker 1: With that, well, how did you do in school?  Were you--?
Speaker 2: I did well in school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did, I did well in school.  School wasn't--I mean I liked school.  It wasn't difficult for me, not particularly difficult, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you get involved in social activities at school like clubs and--?
Speaker 2: In high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There weren't that many clubs to get involved in, in high school at Palmer (laughter).  I was an Alice Freeman Palmer Girl, which means that you were, you upheld the standards of the school.  And, and I was in the honors, I was in the honors dorm.  And I was vice president of the girls dorm, which is like being vice president of the girls part of the class or president--was that president or vice president?  I think it was president for a semester--one or the other.  And I was in the honors--honors cottage.  They had a cottage for honor students or Alice Freeman Palmer Girls, which was an honor.  So I was honor roll all through high school and, and it may have been some time when I wasn't, I don't remember.  But for the most part, I mean, I graduated with honors and I was, you know, upstanding citizen in high school.  So, that wasn't difficult.
Story_ID: 2633
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from high school, did you know where you were going to college?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to University of California, University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California] actually or to University of New Mexico [Albuquerque, New Mexico] or to Antioch College.  I wanted to go away from home (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, those are all interesting places because they all seem to be very free campuses.  Antioch College in Yellow Springs [Ohio] is probably the most liberal campus in the United States.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) That's exactly where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I--that's exactly where I wanted to go.
Speaker 1: That's where Coretta Scott King went to school.
Speaker 2: Oberlin [College] I thought she went to Oberlin.
Speaker 1: She went to Antioch.
Speaker 2: Did she?  I never knew that.  Darn it, I never knew that.
Speaker 1: She and Rod Serling of 'The Twilight Zone'.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, any rate.  But, yeah, and, you know, University of California, you know, where everybody thinks that as a free place that--.
Speaker 2: Well, I always wanted USC, University of Southern California.  Yet somehow I, I got to USC instead of UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] because they--I was out of state so it would have cost the same.  But I've forgotten what slant I got on to that.  But I was accepted.  And I had a big sister [Eloise Bowen Baily] on campus.  And I was a year ahead in school.  And so my father [Clifford Ashmore] thought--and that was year ahead in school--did I say that?  So, then I graduated from high school at sixteen.  So when my father told me I couldn't go to U-, University of California, I, I really felt like dropping out, just like not doing anything at all.  In fact, I try, I tried to flunk out of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  And my first semester I did nothing.  'Cause figure I'm a year ahead.  Maybe if I just kind of blow this year, I can still start and I'll be right on track with everybody else anyway.  But the first semester I did nothing.  I did zero.  I didn't even go--I mean I didn't even go to music.  I mean I had been taking music for twelve years.  It's not as--I'd really--'cause he'd always told me I could go where I wanted to go.  If I made the grades, he would make the, he would send me.  And this is the--.
Speaker 1: So you were angry.
Speaker 2: Well, this is the first time he ever had broken his word to me.  So I really did not want to be there.  So in a way, in the spring of 1960 when as my memory call, recalls, the first semester I, I guess I got a--when I got a C and a D plus, plus, plus, plus, four pluses after my D in music, which I'd been taking for ten years or twelve years.  I didn't like that.  So I guess my spirit got up a little bit and I thought, well--I finally figured it out that if I flunk out, that nobody's gonna say I flunked out because my mother [Willie Mae Walker Ashmore] and father broke their word to me.  They're gonna say I flunked out--Anne Ashmore flunked out--not Clifford, not Willie, but me.  And that it was my name, my reputation, and my life, and therefore I'd better pick it up and do something with it.  So I started going to class in my second semester.  'Cause I'd never gotten C's.  I'd never gotten a D in my life.
Story_ID: 2634
Speaker 1: My memory is that--I started to say Charlene--is that Marian Wright Edelman I think I had been talking to.  She was, she had just come back on campus, and she was sort of like my idol.  I looked up to Marian a lot.  It's a few people on campus [at Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] I really kind of admired.  And my memory is that Marian said there're gonna be, we're gonna have a meeting of--I think I thought at that time it was like fifteen of us from Spelman's campus, fifteen from Morehouse [College], fifteen from the other schools.  And it's a secret meeting.  Don't say anything to anybody about it.  And so we met and said what the plan was.  And so we were gonna sit in and that some people would be willing to be arrested and some people would not.  And if you didn't want to, you could leave, and who would be willing.  And I was willing for all of it because I was like up to--I was angry.  I was just angry.  I was--I had gone to--probably going to boarding school.  I had gone to boarding school.  It was a boarding school and a finishing school.  So, not only did you have a very demanding academic program, and we were getting up at six o'clock in the morning and watching some televised program from some college.  And we had these teachers that were really qualified to teach in college, but lacked teaching these kids, black kids.  And, but it was also a finishing school.  So, you sat down for--you changed clothes for dinner on Sunday, you had teas in the afternoon, you had, you had table, linen table cloths, you, you served family style.  You know, it was finishing school.  You couldn't--you had to wear hats and gloves to go into to town and I'm fifteen years old.  So here I come back from this finishing school with these kids who are relatively well off from all over the East Coast at least and I can't go into McDonald's or not, it wasn't a McDonald's, in the five-and-dime and get a hotdog.  So what is this?  And you look at people who have fewer resources, less education, they're less well mannered, and certainly less well exposed than you are.  And they can go in and buy anything you want--and you can't?  It's like, why, and for what reason.  And I was like ready.  And my daddy [Clifford Ashmore] didn't let me go to California and get out of here.  It's like yes I'm ready to change the system (laughter).  What do you want me to do?  So when we went the very first sit-in, I went to City Hall [Atlanta, Georgia] and that was it.  And we were arrested.  And I went.  It was fun.
Speaker 2: Well, tell us about it.  You all went to City Hall.  What did you do?
Speaker 1: Went to City Hall.
Speaker 2: How many went?  How many was it?
Speaker 1: I don't remember how many went.  I think there were about--it may have been thirty of us.  I don't remember how many I--who went.  I mean, you don't remember, I don't remember.  I remember I went.  I mean, I remember what happened to me (laughter) at that point.  There's a huge sign outside of City Hall that's over the cafeteria entrance.  It said, "Public Welcome."  Public welcome, hello.  So we went inside.  But you were supposed to somehow read the, you know, read my lips that you're not the public and you're not welcome.  But we did anyway.  So we went in.  And I remember we stood in line.  And people were there, and there was--I was in front of this water fountain.  And so this man kind of came between me and pushed this glass of water to get this glass of water.  So, I didn't move.  So he got this glass of water and he looked at me, and I looked at him.  And then he took it and went away.  And so then my friends said to me, "Anne, don't do that again."  Because they weren't sure that he was gonna put, pour the water on me.  That did not even come to my mind.  It didn't even come to my mind.  It didn't even occur to me.  So, we just stayed until the police came, asked us to leave.  We said we weren't leaving.  Some people left.  We said we weren't, and so they took us to jail.  They took us to the city jail.  And we had seen movies where, you know, you go and you hold your hands out to them, and then held our hands up.  And this little old lady--she was--I don't know what you call it--the jailer or whatever.  She was so upset.  She said, "You put your hands down.  You just put your hands down."  She was upset because here we were not her usual prisoners.  These were her grandchildren like.  And you were in college, and she was upset that she had to have us there.  And then they gave us something like--cold black-eyed peas with a, a thick lump of fat on top of these cold peas.  We said, dag, we thought the food couldn't get any worse than Spelman (laughter).  Guess we were wrong on that one.  So, being naïve, I know what taking and having a restaurant as my father and mother [Willie Mae Walker Ashmore] did, I remember taking orders for how--we were gonna send out for some food 'cause, you know, we brought some money.  So I said--'cause we were supposed to be able to pay for the food should they serve us at City Hall.  So I kind--took orders for hotdogs, chili dogs, how many sodas, how many oranges, whatever.  And I call up (laughter) and order takeout food.  So we sit there and we wait and we wait and then somebody said, "Anne, I don't think they let them deliver into the jail."  You know, like you can't just order takeout food to bring to the jail.  You could put something in it.  I said, "Oh."  So, when they decided to, to--we could leave on our own recognizance, we thought that's not a bad idea.  So that's what we did.  That was it.  It was an interesting experience.
Speaker 2: Certainly, a big one for you and a number of other students, too.  You didn't really know what to expect in jail, huh?
Speaker 1: Us in jail?  No.  (Laughter) We didn't even know anybody that had ever been in jail.
Speaker 2: So how did you get out again?  They just--?
Speaker 1: I think they let us out on our own recognizance.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We just sort of signed a paper or whatever.  The next time we went, we stayed 'til about five, excuse me, I stayed for about five days.  But that time we just got out.
Speaker 2: What was the repercussions of the first time?  What happened after the first time?
Speaker 1: Oh, I think there were big repercussions because that was the very first sit-in.  That's when we did, you know, that's when, you know, we joined--that was 1960.  That's when all of the students hit all of the targets at the same time.  And nobody knew we were gonna do it--not our parents, nobody.  And so there was a big--you know, kind of explosion.  But once we had started, you know, it started.  And the, the decision you had to make later was--and I'm looking at the picture.  I did that first time it was in, in the spring and the, the picture that I have is from October.  So I must have come back from the summer and then started right in again (laughter).  And that's when my grades did begin to suffer.
Speaker 2: Can't believe--well, what were the personal repercussions?  Did your teachers--were they upset?  Were your--was the school administration upset?  How did your parents feel?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) They were unrelenting.  They, they did--they were unrelenting.  They did not--I think history rewrites itself.  My memory is that--and I'm sure this is correct--that they did--if you had an exam, they would not give you any reprieve from that exam.  They did not give you a, a time to retake it.  They didn't give you a makeup exam.  They didn't give you any, anything extra on your grade.  Now when I went to [University of] California [at Berkeley] and they had had the free speech movement at Berkeley.  That's a totally different experience.  They gave, I mean they basically gave them grades during the free speech movement.  But they did not do that for us at Spelman.
Speaker 2: Now, what did your parents think of the sit-in?
Speaker 1: My father didn't say too much.  Some people said that, that I could be putting my father's, you know, career, his job in jeopardy because he was with a public school.  And so they didn't know if they could, if they would retaliate, you know, and put his--but he never, ever, ever said a word to me about that.  And then, then the other thing about it is that we had other income.  I mean not that I wanted to put my job, father's job in jeopardy.  But I think one of the things why it wasn't so frightening to us is that we had other means of income.  If they cut off his job, it wasn't gonna, it wasn't, we weren't gonna starve.
Speaker 2: Okay, so he didn't say anything about it to you--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) My father never said anything about it.  He's in--.
Speaker 2: Your mother or your brother [Clifford Ashmore, Jr.]?
Speaker 1: My brother--no, he's just curious.  My mother was kind of worried.  She's always worried.  Nobody jumped up and down, thought it was wonderful.  But on some level I think they were proud of us.  But they didn't discourage us, but nor did they encourage us.  I mean, it, it--you know that your child's in danger, so you know that there, there could be some dangers, so if my son [Alan Poussaint] did something now, I'd be proud of him, but I'm not sure I would encourage him to put himself in harms way.  And they knew that there, that that could be dangerous, but they, they didn't discourage me from doing it.  They didn't, they didn't do that.
Speaker 2: So the--did the administration of Spelman and at [Clark] Atlanta U[niversity] issue some edict or about this kind of thing or--?
Speaker 1: Not that I remember.
Speaker 2: They're very silent about it, true?
Speaker 1: I do not remember anything that they said.  They may have said something.  I think it was more about we had to--I mean they just didn't give us any breaks on the grades.  Dr. [Albert E.] Manley came to visit us when we were in the county jail I remember that one time.  Somebody brought us down our books to study.  But the--.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Well, now you said that you were arrested another time at Spelman, too, when you all went to another, did the sit-ins again and had to spend five days in jail?
Speaker 1: It was five days in the county jail.
Speaker 2: And what about that time?  What happened?
Speaker 1: That was jail without bail.  That was on--actually, in some ways it was fun.  It didn't last too long, and it didn't last too short a time.  And it, the spirits were very good.  It was fun in the sense that we believed in what we were doing.  Our spirits were high.  We got in jail and we start protesting the conditions in jail.  They had--the, the county jail was very pretty.  It was a new jail (laughter).  You couldn't see the sky--that's what bothered me the most is I couldn't see out a window and I couldn't see the sky.  But the guys were downstairs.  There were trustees that would take notes from us to the guys downstairs.  They used to serve the white prisoners first before they served us.  So the food was fairly decent, but the food was cold.  So we start protesting them serving their food first before they served us.  And so--and we used to sing our freedom song, and we used to stand together and pray.  And we started helping the other prisoners who were there.  And we had our books and we started studying.  So we were pretty busy.  And we started organizing the prisoners really (laughter).  And actually they wanted us the hell out of there.  They were really glad when we left (laughter).  It was, it was real funny.  So that's the way it was.  And we had a way to get notes to the guys.  We got information back up.  The, the female prisoners were, were depressed.  We started livening them up saying why you stand for this.  We start telling they had to give us the food--they start serving our food at the same time that they did the white prisoners.  So, actually they were glad when we left.  I think they wanted us out.  We would sing, and they would say, "Will you all please be a little--be a little quieter 'cause you're disturbing the other prisoners?"  And we thought, okay, whatever (laughter).
Speaker 2: So, I mean, did, did you--like were there any immediate changes in the, or the sit-in in Atlanta generated in terms of civil rights as a result of what you all did?
Speaker 1: In the, that at the timing of it was things began to change pretty, I think, pretty quickly.  What was, what was also, what was really extraordinary was the response of the black community.  When we, when students start going 'en masse' to jail, people who didn't even know you put their homes up for collateral.  I mean they just were 100 percent behind us.  It was extraordinary.  I didn't have to worry about that 'cause I knew that my parents could get me out if I wanted to get out.  My mother came down and offered, but I said, "Mama, don't you know this is jail without bail?  That means you don't get bail."  "Well, okay," she said, "Just wanted to know."  But people who didn't have--students from out of town--people put their houses up.  It was extraordinary.  So, the black community really came together and coalesced and felt a solid, solid support.  It wasn't just the students out there.  I mean they really were there, and you felt it.  I mean it's one time it was I mean--I'm try remember when the bus boycott was.  But when you--things changed.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You mean in Montgomery [Alabama] or in Atlanta it was a bus boycott?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) No, Atlanta had a bus boycott at one time.
Speaker 2: Bus boycott, okay.
Story_ID: 2635
Speaker 1: I wanted to know some of the other personalities involved in the Atlanta [Georgia] sit-ins and demonstrations you were telling me about.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, one of the, one of their leaders in particular was Lonnie King.  Lonnie was very, very active--the student leaders.  And Julian Bond was there.  Marian Wright Edelman, Ruby Doris [Smith-Robinson]--these the ones I remember in terms of the student leadership.  And, of course, Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was there.  He was just a very quiet, interesting, very subtle but quiet presence.  And sometimes he was on a, a march we were on, sometimes he wasn't.
Speaker 1: Now you, you had mentioned Benjamin [Elijah] Mays and so he was a--.
Speaker 2: I think that Benjamin Mays was much more of a visionary than, than many of these, some of the other leaders that I knew, other college presidents that I knew at that time.
Speaker 1: We should pause.
Speaker 2: (tape interruption)
Speaker 1: We're rolling.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were talking about Dr. Mays and--.
Speaker 1: He was, he was just an inspiration.  He really was.  There is a difference between running a college and having a vision.  He was just one of--I remember that when I was homecoming queen I wanted to be that in part because I wanted the dance with Dr. Mayes.  And it was like he was--when he came on campus we all just came alive.  He was, he--he believed in you and he lifted you a student higher than when you came through the door.  I mean he basically said, you know, you come through you're whoever you are, but when you leave here you're a Morehouse man.  Well, you know, it just, it, it just infiltrated--his spirit, his belief system just sort of infiltrated the whole campus and anyone who was around him.  And so he was--he was just a positive force that brought out--took you higher, on a higher ground, a higher level, and made you aspire to things high.  Even though I wasn't at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I was at Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], I looked to him as for inspiration and probably approval at some level.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now who was the president of Spelman at that time?
Speaker 1: Manley, Dr. [Albert E.] Manley.
Story_ID: 2636
Speaker 1: You were a homecoming queen and--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I was Miss Maroon and White Morehouse and Alpha [Kappa Alpha sorority] Sweetheart.  But at the same time I was also in the [Civil Rights] Movement.  So they were not usually thought of to go together--to have a social consciousness (laughter) and a fraternity consciousness as well.
Speaker 1: Most people would split them up and then you think that maybe they were two different (unclear).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I know.  That's what I enjoyed about it.  No, I was--yep, I was, I was worried one time I was gonna be in jail when homecoming was.  I really did want to be there for homecoming.  So I had to admit I wanted to get out of jail for that reason.  But I was not not gonna go.  So, looking back on it--I mean at the time it really didn't seem like a dichotomy to me.  Looking back on it I kind of enjoy saying it, but it was okay.
Speaker 1: So for youths today, college students today--I don't, you know, I just wonder if they have the benefit of that kind of experience.  You all were doing something that was serious and was actually changing the world.  And then you were enjoying homecoming (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now, yeah, we were.  But today I think, I think the students don't--part of it is that they don't have a sense of struggle.  And so--I had some anger that I, I had some anger that I could put in a positive direction, you know.  Like I was saying, I think that boarding school experience [at Palmer Memorial Institute] did something for me in a different way.  I, when I came back I knew that I had been exposed to more than my counter--in many ways my counterpart who was Caucasian.  I mean I, I knew that I, unless they went to a finishing school, they, I certainly knew more manners than they did (laughter).  I mean 'cause we had been drummed that through and through.  And that was part of being black, I mean, sort of so you could--I mean that was part of what Charlotte Hawkins Brown wanted to do.  But when you came back and you saw that the opportunities--she was from Massachusetts, I'm from Georgia--and so the opportunity wasn't there.  It didn't matter what I knew.  You get angry about it.  It's like those, it's like the veterans coming back from war--like, oh, think so.  So, you--that's just part of it.  I'm sorry.  You asked me something.  I think I lost it.
Speaker 1: You're answering the question.  And the, the rhetoric in the schools in those days was also that you had to be twice as good or should try to be twice as good as white people and do, you've got to--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but when you're twice as--when you are and then you're still in the same place where you were before, you think, uh-uh, I don't think so.  Now, with kids now I think they feel as though the opportunity is there--it's much more subtle.  It's not as clear.  It's much--there is, is, is a much more subtle discrimination that can go on.  I mean they have a lot of opportunities and so they have exposure.  And they, they appear to have opportunities but then at another level it begins to kick in.  And I think it's Claude Steele, the research psychologist at Stanford [University] talks about the stereotype, the damage that a stereotype does even with children who are privileged.  That at a certain level when you have a stereotype, it diminishes your performance--not just for African Americans but for Caucasians, for anybody where the stereotype goes, is, is seen as against you.
Story_ID: 2637
Speaker 1: You graduated from Spelman [College] in '64 [1964]--was it '64?
Speaker 2: I would have been '64.  I graduated in '63 [1963].  I was a year ahead.
Speaker 1: '63? And what was the--are there any other experiences you want to tell us about from Spelman [College] that stand out? Any teachers or professors?
Speaker 2: What's--we had Howard Zinn there, and we had--.
Speaker 1: Oh. That's Z-I-N-N, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He was a historian.
Speaker 2: He's now at BU [Boston University].  And we had [Staughton] Lynd, and I had Mrs. [Esther] Seaton who was a English teacher who was, who participated in the movement herself, I think.  And Howard Zinn did not--his wife was the one who made an impression on me.  He, he was, well--but I remember getting on the bus.  The buses were segregated then.  I remember getting on the bus.  I don't know where I was sitting, somewhere in the middle probably.  And she walked very slowly, 'cause I think she was a dancer.  If not, she walked like a dancer.  She walked very slowly from the front of the bus, very carefully, very graciously, straight to the back and sat on the very last seat.  She never said a word.  She didn't change her expression.  She didn't--and the black people who were sitting on the seat, like--.
Speaker 1: Now she's white, right?
Speaker 2: She's white.  Howard Zinn is white.  It's like, okay.  There's no place else to move.  You can't move back anything further 'cause (snaps finger) this is the deal.  And so I remember thinking to myself, well, now that's a lot of nerve.  That takes some guts.  And she did it very graciously, and she just sort of sat there and act as if, you know, it's like I love sitting on this back seat.  And got off the bus at Spelman and went on her way 'cause I used to have to ride the bus.  And the buses were very, a very sensitive thing.  My brother [Clifford Ashmore, Jr.] used to walk halfway--we would walk across town rather than ride on the bus because he looked so Caucasian that if he sat on the bus, he sat down next to black people they would get up and say, "I'm not white.  Why are you sitting next to me?"  He'd be embarrassed.  If he sat in the back, then black people thought they had to sit behind him.  If he sat in the front, they would think he was trying to pass--you know, so he just avoided the whole thing by walking.  It, it was--the bus, it was a silly thing but it was real.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now Howard Zinn's the author of 'A People's History of the United States', I think, and some other ones.
Speaker 2: He's written several books, and he's still at BU.
Story_ID: 2638
Speaker 1: I went to Crossroads Africa when I was at Spelman [College].
Speaker 2: That's important.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's important.  When did you--now you went to Kenya, right?
Speaker 1: I went--well, the part--I went to--to Malawi, which was then part of northern and southern Rhodesia and Nyasaland.  It was then Nyasaland and now it's Malawi.  And we went to Mozambique that summer.  I went to--to the Portuguese, what was then Portuguese Mozambique.  And we went to Kenya as part of that whole trip.  So, I did that that summer.  And the other summer I worked at Summit House in Chicago.  And that was interesting--it wasn't significant.
Speaker 2: Now that trip to Africa, I mean, you--I saw a picture here of Jomo Kenyatta that you took before he ascended to the presidency of Kenya.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  We took a bus (unclear) out to his farm outside of Nairobi [Kenya].  And he had Uhuru written on his sandals.  And he had this, the chief sort of--it was like a flyswatter.  It has a--I think it's a monkey's tail.
Speaker 2: A whisket (ph.).
Speaker 1: Yeah, that he had and small hat, jeweled, that he's--.  He was charismatic even then.  And he was saying he, his country was going to be free.  And true enough I think a year or two later he became the first president, you know, first African president back again of his country.  So--.
Speaker 2: So did you have a sense that he was, that he was going to be or did you ever think--?
Speaker 1: You--I had a sense of that.  I think some of the other students in the group, especially the Caucasian students, seemed to like pooh-pooh, like, yeah, right, you know.  He's on this farm--good luck.  But one, one sort of student who was from Cal Berkeley [University of California at Berkeley] actually was very sort of submissive.  But I had a sense that he would be--he, he was, he had been the kind of rebel leader--he had survived.  And he was essentially not exactly in exile but he was kind of in a compound.  You had a feeling that if he wasn't, if he's still alive, he was going to be.  The danger would have been someone assassinated him.  But he had a sense of determination about him that you felt.  He, he is a strong presence.
Speaker 2: Now was this your fist trip out of the country?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Only the other time I've been like to Mexico, yeah, just crossing the border.  Other than that, it was my first trip out of the country, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Seems like that would be exciting.
Speaker 1: It was.
Story_ID: 2639
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating from Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]--at Spelman your major was sociology?
Speaker 2: Psychology.
Speaker 1: Psychology.
Speaker 2: Minor in English.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And so you had made arrangements to UC [University of California at] Berkeley?
Speaker 2: No, I went to Simmons first, the School of Social Work.  I had still had those kids from Howard in my mind.  I still wanted to help and make a change.  I didn't know what psychologists did.  I didn't know what psychologists could do, I mean, really.  And, but I knew sort of I thought I had a sense of what social work did, and I wanted to be a social worker.
Speaker 1: Now why did you major in psychology at Spelman?
Speaker 2: I found people interesting.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I found people interesting.  I found it interesting how the mind works.  And I just found people interesting.  I wanted to kind of understand how they, how they thought things through (laughter).  The first time they knew I was serious is when I took a, a class at Morehouse [College] at eight o'clock a.m. on Saturday morning.  It was abnormal psych.  And the professor said, "We did this deliberately to weed out those who are not serious."  And that's when all my girlfriends that we used to take all our classes together left me.  And so I was there and I said, well, whatever.  I was, I wanted to take this class.  So that meant you could go out too late on Friday night.  So then I have, always have.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you went to Simmons?
Speaker 2: I went to Simmons College School of Social Work.  It was a very, it's a, it's a clinical more of a case studies individual therapy.
Speaker 1: And where is that?
Speaker 2: Boston.
Speaker 1: Boston.
Speaker 2: Massachusetts.  And it's a, it's very good school.  And I went there and I got a masters terminal degree, which is a masters in psychiatric, in psychiatric social work.
Story_ID: 2640
Speaker 1: Then I went to California to work at--you know, still wanted to be in California.  But instead of going to L.A. [Los Angeles] I went to San Francisco--without a job, without really a place to stay, and no car.  But I was gone.  And I bought myself a one-way ticket (laughter).
Speaker 2: Now did this cause your family any trepidation that you had just taken--?
Speaker 1: Well, they wouldn't buy me the ticket so I had, you know, I had my own little savings, I had little accounts--people give me gifts.  I had my saving accounts there opened when I was a little kid.  So that's the first time I used my money.  Before I went, though, that summer I went to Europe.  I went to study the Lisle Fellowship.  I went to Denmark and to study the social service system in Scandinavian countries.  They did that that summer.  That was a travel summer.  And then I went to--then I went to California.  I knew one person, and he helped me get a, like a, a place to stay.  I--the university medical center had like no rooms.  They went to people until you can find a apartment.  And you come for the services at the hospital.  So I stayed there.  And then I got an apartment.  But then I looked for a job.
Speaker 2: Well, was it easy to find a job?
Speaker 1: In those days social workers could get a job relatively easy.  The difficulty I had was that I, I didn't--well, they also wanted this friend to loan me a car, but I didn't know where I was going (laughter).  I was in San Francisco, Palo Alto [California], and San Mateo [California].  My first job was in San Mateo.  So--but I was very fortunate.  I, I lived in the Haight-Ashbury [neighborhood, San Francisco], very--just at the time the Haight-Ashbury really began to change when there were flower children.  And I was there before that happened.  And that was, it was a, a mixed neighborhood--all different classes and cultures.  It was fun.  And it wasn't, it wasn't really the way they portrayed it.  It was really neat.  And we, you would go out in the mall and people would be playing drums and passing out flowers and--and this before drugs really hit hard.  It was--and there the drugs were like marijuana.  It was really not hard anything at that time that I'm aware of.  And I had friends in the neighborhood.  So it was, it was a lot of fun.  And then I started teaching at San Francisco State [University], which is now the State University of California, San Francisco.  And they had a program for minority students.  And I worked with Bill [William] Grier and Price Cobbs who--first I worked in San Mateo in, in child psychiatry and then I worked with Bill Grier and Price Cobbs who wrote 'Black Rage'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's, that's really a groundbreaking work, 'Black Rage', right?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yes, yes, that was.  And they were brilliant.  And Bill Grier was my, my supervisor and mentor.  And he, he's, he's absolutely brilliant.  So I was very fortunate to have that kind of presence around.  And at the time they had started a program in the psychology department for minority students--all, and, but minority in California does not mean African American only.  It means everybody.  It means South Pacific, African American, Latino, Latinas.  It means Asian.  It meant every, every group.  I mean, so many different groups you can't quite imagine.
Story_ID: 2641
Speaker 1: And so I was teaching an introductory psychology course [at University of California at Berkeley] and then some--and I, I did teach it and then someone in the regular curriculum died--they died or didn't come back.  I think they died.  And suddenly it was an introductory psychology course.  And, of course, the other professors didn't really want to teach that.  They wanted to teach something more exciting.  So the department asked me to teach it.  I did.  And so they suggested, well, if you--why don't you--have you thought of going into psychology?  I had because I was tired of certain psychologists, psychiatrists telling me as a social worker what to do.  And so I applied to Berkeley only.  Had no idea that Berkeley had only--I don't think they had ever admitted anyone from a historically black college to the psychology department.  And prior to two classes before me they hadn't admitted an African American in over half a century.  So it was not an easy department to get into. I just happened to--I was--my grades were equal to everyone else's, my scores and my experiences I had somewhat more.  But they didn't trust grades from a historically black college I think at that time.  So, whatever.  I, I went.  I finished.  It was good.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I loved it, actually.
Speaker 2: Well, who were some of your key professors and teachers?
Speaker 1: Actually, Margaret Singer.  Enrico Jones, who just died, was, was a African American who had gone to Harvard [University] and was one of the first students that they admitted.  But he, he just died, and we're gonna have a memorial for him in September.  But, strangely enough, Margaret Singer was considered a conservative because she was for Vietnam [War] veterans.  And, and Berkeley's campus at that time that was conservative.  But she also was just a very supportive person who helped me clamp on my vision about what I did for my doctorate.  And Bill, Bill Pierce was there at that time.  He was one--he was the adjunct professor who helped pull together--or who pulled together the other people for the jury selection for the Angela Davis trial.
Story_ID: 2642
Speaker 1: You worked on selecting--you helped--right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The jury for the Angela Davis trial, right.  Howard Moore was the attorney, and he's married to Jane Bond Moore, Julian's sister.  And they're from Atlanta.  And he'd gone to Howard High School.  And so they were living in Berkeley.  And we were talking.  And it come up that this was happening.  He said what do you know about this, etcetera, etcetera.  So anyway it--from that conversation we tugged, pulled together about five psychologists.  And there was inside paper written on us to go at different times to also since--make suggestions of questions to answer, ask, and et cetera.  As far as I can determine, 'cause I did a paper, one of my oral papers, on it--Howard was the first person to really systematically use psychologists to select juries at that time.  I, I couldn't find any record of anybody earlier than that doing it in a systematic way.  After that you had the, the Berrigan brothers, you had Ken Eaglin, you had a lot of political trials.  And now it's just standard.  But I think Howard was the first that I'm aware of who ever did that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did you all proceed?  What were you looking for?
Speaker 2: We were looking--you see, what's not known is that Angela Davis was put on the Ten Most Wanted list by J. Edgar Hoover before there were charges against her in California.  The state of California had not brought any charges against Angela Davis before J. Edgar Hoover had made her already one of the Ten Most Wanted.  And one of the reasons I think is that I wanted to be a part is that she, she--I didn't see that she had done anything.  There were no charges against her.  What they can, what the charges were at the time that they took her through all of that was conspiracy, which means that--I'm not quite even sure what that means--but that, that she may have known, or that she had a gun, that she knew they were gonna do something with it, which I don't think she could possibly have done.  But she was a communist--not, and by communist I mean--at Spelman [College] they didn't even teach us what communism meant.  But that was her decision.  But she's an intellectual.  She is an African American woman.  And she was--had a, a, a middle class similar background.  And I could identify with those things.  I didn't identify with being a communist.  Identified with her activism around changing what she saw as being wrongs for our prisoners.  But that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well what kind of juror were you all looking for?  I mean, what was your--what are you looking for in people to make that decision or for the recommendation about--?
Speaker 2: Well, you, you're kind of looking--well Howard may be able to tell you that better than I.  But I think we were looking for someone whose mind would just be open to understanding the fact that there were no charges against this woman until the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] decided to bring charges.  I think J. Edgar Hoover at that time was known not to like people who were communists or perhaps African American and, and women.  And so--.
Speaker 1: Well, you could say that all those things are true (laughter) in hindsight.
Speaker 2: So it could have been a little bias there.  But she--we were looking for someone who at least could give her we thought hopefully a fair trial--at least have your mind open to the fact that this woman would never advocate violence in this foolish a way.  I mean it was, it was self--it was not even a smart thing to do.  That she really had nothing to do with it.  Just have an openness, not a, a clear prejudice against, but at least an openness to so that you don't have your biases so strongly colored that you can't even see the facts for what they were.  'Cause we really thought that if you present the facts for what they are, that it would be clear.  Not only did she not know, but she would have tried stop it had she even thought that that's what his younger brother, this kid's younger would have done.  It was hopeless.  I mean it wasn't smart.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and Jonathan Jackson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't smart.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the--well, were you all pleased with the results of the, I mean, of the jury that they had?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it took an awful lot.
Story_ID: 2643
Speaker 1: You went on to earn a Ph.D. at University [of California at Berkeley]--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could have aban-, I actually got married.  I was, I was, I had met my son's father in--I met my son's father I think one New Year's Eve and, and then I--.
Speaker 1: Now this is Alvin Poussaint, right?
Speaker 2: [nods for yes] Um-hum.
Speaker 1: He's been largely, he's widely recognized as a, you know.  When people think of a black pychologist or--.
Speaker 2: Psychiatrist.
Speaker 1: --pyschiatrist.
Speaker 2: Which is different.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: People don't think of being, you know--.
Speaker 1: Of Alvin, right.  And he was.  He was at Harvard [University] then.  I was a graduate student at Berkeley.  I had just finished the trial.  Just finished, we'd just finished working on the trial.  I think 'Ebony' had just written something up on it.  And we had a--we met through mutual friends at a party.  And I had friends, he, in Boston that he knew.  And then he had friends in L.A. [Los Angeles] that I had met.  And so we started talking and dating.  And I think shortly--he was on the West Coast for things and--that was December.  And I think by the next fall I had--we were back and we got married in November.  So we got married about nine months after we met.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And we were married for over fourteen years, and we have one son, Alan Poussaint, who is a wonderful, wonderful--he's a joy--young man.  Very proud of him.  We both are.
Story_ID: 2644
Speaker 1: Were you around at the beginning of the Association of Black Psychologists [ABPsi]?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was.  I think I was.  I'm trying to remember was I.  I know Association of Black Social Workers I was.  And for Black Psychologists, I think so.  I wasn't--.
Speaker 1: There's a strong group on the West Coast I think.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: I think Wade Nobles and quite a few--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right.  I know Wade Nobles well and Bill [William] Pierce.
Speaker 1: And Dr. Bobby Wright in Chicago as part of that.
Speaker 2: But I was a, I was a graduate student at that time.  And at that point you really have to focus on surviving (laughter) and doing your work.  So I wasn't that involved with them, but I--but Wade Nobles was at [University of California at] Berkeley and I knew him and Bill Pierce and some others as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you weren't really involved in the beginning.
Speaker 2: In the beginning, no.
Story_ID: 2645
Speaker 1: Tell us about UC [University of California at] Berkeley, what you learned there.  And you're pursing this Ph.D.  Well, what did you write your dissertation on?
Speaker 2: I wrote the dissertation on the--on impact theory.  It's basically--it's sort of like a precursor to emotional intelligence where you take the, the emotional kind of impact--I developed a scale and I tested it on about 126 students.  But I did it with samples of information from Rorschach's [Inkblot Test].  And to make a systematic study basically is using your feelings or your emotions or the impact someone has on you to make a diagnosis.  And in this instance because it was written dialogue it was a discrimination between what was psychotic and non-psychotic communication with monopsychotic twins.  So they were twins--one was schizophrenic and one was not--but the, the communication on a set sample.  So it had to do basically with impact and a kind of emotional intelligence using your feelings as a way of discriminating between behaviors and communication.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to explore this, but I don't know where to start (laughter). Let's see--.
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's to simply put--I remember feeling that there were people I could see in practice where they could sit down and I could feel--empathically, I could feel their depression or I could feel their anxiety.  I could feel what was going on.  And that wasn't a very--that wasn't considered very scientific.  And that wasn't considered very even apropos at that time because you were trying to be a scientist as a therapist.  So it was a way of--of showing that in fact you can--based on if you can, if you can discriminate carefully enough what reactions you have, then you can actually begin to use that as a way to, to project larger discriminations.  For, for instance, I'll give you a small example then we're off the--if you read the Rorschach of someone who is psychotic and someone is a high creative.  High creatives can talk about things in ways that don't sound realistic at all.  But--and, and people who are psychotic but very bright can talk about things that don't sound realistic, but you're not quite sure where they're going with it.  If you take a sample of that communication, a high creative--the difference, they may say things that are quite different or sound sort of crazy, but they can take you with them.  You know, if they have a movie or a screen, it can seem sort of scary, okay, but they take you with them.  Psychotic communication doesn't.  They, they'll take you here and then it skips and it drops off.  And every time a student came up to me and said, "I think this is misprinted; this is--the transcript doesn't read right," it was always psychotic communication because they went to a certain point, they could follow it, and then it didn't make any sense whatsoever.  And the, the sample isn't that sensical anyway 'cause it's a Rorschach.  But you could still follow it with a high creative.  You could still--with someone who is in a normal communication, even though you may not believe--you don't have to believe--you can still know what they're saying.  There's a, there's a sort of subtle difference between someone who's psychotic and intelligent but non-psychotic behavior.  So it's the impact.  And it's not something that's concrete.  It's something you feel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was developing a scale.  And probably a precursor in a way to what we now call emotional intelligence--when you use your emotions and you use the impact and empathy you have for people to validate judgments.
Speaker 1: I know recently magazines have written about--like 'Psychology Today' had an article on how the emotional IQ or social IQ--this is people, no matter how smart they are, just don't get it in terms of how to relate to other people.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And so--but there's a, there's a high value in having, having a social IQ where you can actually decode your environment and work, you know, with what's in front of you--.
Speaker 2: Oh, for sure, for sure.  When I worked in industry, people who are fired from jobs are not ones who usually can't just do the job.  I mean they're not hired in the first place if they're not competent.  They're people who don't get along with other people.  That's more likely when you're gonna be fired.  I mean getting along with other people, reading social cues, and understanding and being able to empathize with others is an important part of being able to live with people and work with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is part of your research or your study concerning how to decode our first, our gut feelings about things or-?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So there--people have always talked about having gut feelings and it's not always right, but there's a--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --a thing--.
Speaker 2: That's impact.  That's the--your gut feeling is sort of the impact someone's having on you.  If you--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) But the struggle is how to decode that gut feeling.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now how can we do that?  I mean, you know, how do we decode that?
Speaker 2: Well, part of it is you have to be as much of a blank screen as you can.  I mean you have to really sort of know yourself pretty well.  And if you're--as, as a therapist you really--if, if you bring any of your, I mean, as much of your--if, if you have some baggage with someone for whatever reason, you can't be that blank screen.  You need to sort of put yourself aside and not be there.  Let somebody else do it.  But if you can for--the first step is to really know yourself very well.  I can remember people would come in and one woman in particular who sat down and as she sat down a wave of depression just went over me.  I just felt that--she didn't change her expression, she didn't move, she even smiled at me.  But I could feel it.  I don't know--I can't tell you why or how.  But I listened to her and I listened to her talk.  And I said to her, "Now let me tell you what I'm feeling, and you tell me if any of this is how you feel."  And so I told her exactly what I was feeling--the just sort of, you know, the deep sadness, a kind of hopelessness, a kind of--.  And she just absolutely broke down.  She had said nothing that would really lead me to understand that.  She was sort of masking it.  She was kind of hold it together really.  Now, the differences is that when she left out that door, even though I felt what she was feeling at that time, when she left out that door, it went with her.  I didn't keep it.  I didn't still have that feeling.  It was her feeling.  It was not mine.  And so one of the first things you have to do is, is really be exquisitely clear what's your own feeling and what's someone else's.  So you kind of really are as much as possible blank slate.  If you're using the impact or empathy with someone else--and you have to--you don't keep it.  I mean they take it with them when they go.  'Cause you can't possibly have--you, you couldn't--I mean--there have been other people who've tried and they, they keep the sadness so that it stays with them and they can't do the work for too long.  Or, they protect themselves by not going into that ground because it can be very scary if they open themselves up to feel with someone.  Then--but people know when you're really there with them.  So in a way it's a gift to be able to empathically feel with someone intensely while they're there, but have distance enough that you, you're gonna get them from the, from the middle of the lake to the shore.  Somebody's gotta know where we're going.  And therefore, you don't take on someone in therapy if you don't know the way out of the woods or if you don't know how to get back to shore.  You can't--you can be there with them in feeling, but intellectually you are with them and know where you're gonna go to get them out.  And that's a very important thing.  I, I found it intriguing.  And I liked it.  But it, it's a, you know, it's a luxury in a way to be able to have that time to give to someone and for someone to be able to have it for themselves.
Story_ID: 2646
Speaker 1: What did you do next when you, after you finished your Ph.D.?
Speaker 2: I did therapy (laughter).  I was a therapist as I was just explaining.  And I had a firm.  It was called Urban Psychological Associates on Beacon Street in Brookline, Massachusetts.  And I did the employee assistance program for Digital Boston for the--for the factory in the Boston area for Digital.  For five years I did that and before the Urban Psychological Associates I did that for almost ten.  And Guy Seymour was my partner at one time and, and friend and consultant for a long time.  He went on to--he's in the forensic psychology.  He went on to Atlanta [Georgia] and was head of the employee assistance program for the police and the fire department down there.
Speaker 1: So your clients were city--workers?
Speaker 2: No, his clients in Atlanta.  No, my clients were really mostly professional people.  I think my, my niche practice became a lot--I, one of the things I worked, one of the areas I worked with that I enjoyed was working with professional women who were very successful in their careers but were work--but were a-, then becoming concerned about this, their personal lives because they had put their energy into working and being successful in work.  And they look up and say, what happened to, you know, to having a baby and getting married and, you know, having a partner.  And so I started doing a lot of work with very successful women who found themselves in that situation, which I found interesting.
Speaker 1: Now you've actually written about this too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What advice would you give most of them?  Can you generalize?
Speaker 2: Just think about your--just think about your social life the same way you would a career.  I mean, you know, if, if, if you meet a man for instance who says, you know, I'm not--or you sense that he's really not ready for a commitment or interested, etcetera, etcetera.  I mean would go take a job where they said there is no possibility of career advancement--this is a dead end job.  You know, you can stay here for a year or two years or three years if you want to, but there's really nowhere to go.  Not one of them would, not one.  So why would you date a man for one or two or three years, oh, that you know, that, that, who tells you or in so--tells you either outright, straight up or tells you in so many ways that I am not available or who may be married and not available or who may not be emotionally who just doesn't want to go any place else.  But why, why, why spend three years doing that?  They wouldn't do it with a job.  So part of it is, you know, there's this dichotomy we have in our brain sometimes, and you just have to, if you put it together and start thinking about this relationship like you would your career, which you've done so extremely well in, then you'll have the solution.  But, I mean, not that they didn't say that Dr. A was what they called me, that's too calculating and that's too--.  Whatever, but it works (laughter).  It was, it was fun.  I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And exciting women--they were intelligent, they were--I, I enjoyed it--and families and couples and men, too.  I mean I, I enjoyed it.
Speaker 1: What were some of the common problems of men that you had?
Speaker 2: Some--I don't know that there's, you know, there are common problems of men.  The men were more varied in some ways.  One would, one could, some who could say that it was intimacy, but others would have a problem--it could be sleep, it could be--sleep disorder, could be family, it could also be a kind of--I mean have interesting men.  It's sex, some were sex addicts and they don't exactly know that they are, but they know something somewhere is beginning to register that something's wrong.  Or they just aren't as happy as they think they ought to be and they look below and it's like some of this, you mean, this isn't really gonna bring me happiness.  And, but there's anxiety.  There is, there is more, it's much more, it seemed to be much more diverse a bit with men.  Women--or more likely to be brought in around a relationship or it can also be--it was also could be job-related when you're having a great deal of difficulty on your job because of suspected discrimination or could be a power play. When I say power play it could simply be power politics within an organization and you're getting the run end of it.  So men would have a relationship problem, but they would us--it would usually manifest in another way.  Women would come in around a relationship problem, but they also came in, both groups came in around work-related problems.  And, and it could be some very serious ones.
Speaker 1: What are some of the, examples of some of the, I guess, the problems that black people are having in the workplace, professional black people?
Speaker 2: It's discrimination or--and not so much outright, straight up, but subtle, just applying rules more firmly, more strictly to you than, than they would to someone else.  There was a strike at one of the firms and it was a public utility actually--I think it was.  And this lady just took some toiletries that are--it was, it was a very small thing that, that she did that they saw as supporting the union instead of management.  And with something like over twenty years' experience they fired her and wanted to give her no benefit of her, of her retirement after twe-, after over twenty years.  That, that sort of thing will send you into shock.  I mean or you just don't get promoted.  Promotions were a large thing in psych--not getting promoted or getting so angry--men can get very angry on jobs.  You get so angry that there's a real danger.  You could be a danger to yourself or someone else.  This one can be much more serious.  And employee assistance--I managed the contract.  I didn't do it directly.  But you, you start to have problems with, with drugs, with people threatening to harm to themselves.  You have to deal with all of that.  But at a management level, you get, get a lot of anger.
Story_ID: 2647
Speaker 1: If one needs a place to belong, when you go away and you go to Africa, you go to Europe, you go--it's like, this isn't really my tribe, you know.  But when you put me here with all of us with all the different cultures with all the--they come together with all the different colors with all the hair, the nose--all of it--I belong here.  This is where I am.  This is who I am.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Yet, and yet identity seems to be one of the, I guess, the--still one of the key problems in the black community--identity thing, who are we, you know.  And so many names for black people--Negroes, colored people, African Americans, Afro-Americans, Afra-Americans, you know.  We--and people identify themselves based on their religion or their political party or their sorority.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I think now that there is, there, there'll be a not as segregated.  At least the middle class is not, the middle and upper middle class African Americans are not as segregated than they may seem to be, more confusion.  I'm still, I'm still my tribe.  So part of that confusion is, you know, mine--I'm not, I don't feel confused about it.  But I think that as the younger generation comes up with less of those external pressures then we have to have something that's more positive instead of negative.  And negative--what I mean is before we were defined by segregation.  We were defined by outside forces.  And now we have to come up with something that's, that's us.  And it's not--and has to be us.  It is inclusive.  It's not just, you know, a ghetto us or a hip-hop us.  It's a us that includes all of us.  And I'm not separate from them, it's just that my, we, we are different, but we're all the same people.  And we just have a lot of variety in our people.  And it's--so, that's something we have yet to do.  That to take pride in it.  We, we can do it.
Speaker 2: It's something where it's a project.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter), now how you do it is a different thing.  I don't know.  We have our little piece of the world, whatever.  What my husband [James Hudson]--now my husband and I do is we have two little boys in addition to our own children that we raise, co-raise, co-help, raise.  So you pick off a little piece of the world that you can do something about.
Story_ID: 2648
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: We got a lot of tapes here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) For the black community today.  What are some my hopes did you say?
Speaker 1: Hopes and concerns.
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns.  My hope is that we begin to understand that what we think and what we say does matter.  It does go into our brain.  It does go into our head.  It does create a kind of person that we are.  When we say--I know I don't use the "n" word.  I never--I won't say I never did, but I stopped when I had a child.  I just didn't allow it in my house.  And when you see people calling themselves whores and bitches and dogs, it's like you're not a dog, you're not a whore, you're not a bitch.  You just don't do that.  And sometimes I used to do this with my clients is that you have to train your mind and you have to determine you will not let certain things into it.  When you're working with someone who's trying to change their life--for instance, if, for instance, one of the ladies or women I was talking about.  Let's say you're in a relationship that isn't going anywhere or if it's with a married man and it's not going anywhere, you don't listen to Whitney Houston's song 'Saving All My Love For You' 'cause that's really about a married, a man coming to visit you once a month whenever that happens.  You don't, you don't, you don't listen to that song.  You don't even let it into your consciousness.  You listen to 'I Will Survive'--like, you know, you leave, whatever, you go, you're gone, you go.  I will survive.  That's what you, you have to determine at best you can--what kind of person you want to be and make that happen.  Now if all the around you is an environment that says something different from that, it's just gonna be harder.  But it's through that hardness that you find yourself or some spirituality--that is often when people become spiritual is when you have difficulties that you have to find some way to get through.  Whatever it takes that you need to do, you need to do it.  But we need to have a light somewhere.  We need to somewhere not let the darkness overwhelm the light to say this is not who you are, that there is--we all have a dark side.  We all have a, a light side.  And dark and light is not racial in this instance.  We all have a side of us that is not or could have that can be developed.  And you have to decide what you're gonna, what you're going to develop.  And have a small vision that becomes a larger one of the kind of person you want to be.  And then persistently pursue it.  So as a people I would hope that we would begin to take responsibility, not just for ourselves, and not become so stratified from classes--but it's difficult not to that.  We begin to say, you know, this is the kind of people we want to become and take the best of it.  But to do that you need leadership.  And right now I think that what's fragmented is, is that we don't have, we don't have the leaders we seem to have had in the past--some due to assassinations and some due to undermining in our community, not from the outside, not from the inside--that holds up a beacon and says this is where we're going.  And I don't care where it comes from as long as it's positive and takes us forward.  I think we need--I think it's now leadership.
Story_ID: 2649
Speaker 1: There's a lot of that comes from the outside.  And now I think we should, we should diminish--and it's hard to put your finger on what, the role that media and government have in terms of undermining some of it.  And the media portrays and projects.  You don't see any projection of middle class black people at all on almost anything.  And it's--and that it is too strong a statement.  But if you don't, if these--what has happened is, is middle class people have moved out of the community, you know, black community.  It's not segregated in that way anymore.  They don't even see you to know you.  I, I called the--these little kids that we have live in a housing for formerly homeless families.  And I had a idea.  I'm president of The Links [Inc.], a club--it's set, one, one, one chapter.  But I wanted them to have a sport.  And these, these schools now are cutting out all the sports.  And it's not that I wanted to play basketball, but just soccer, something.  They need physical activity, get tired.  And so I called her and I said, you know, we would like to maybe write a proposal, come in, you know, I'm just thinking I was going to teach our kids soccer.  Maybe we could just do, have a coach come and teach a whole, you know--it's like, twenty-six families, sixty people, so however many kids they have.  And she was so excited.  She said we only know the people we serve who need our help.  We don't know anybody who really could help us, who could have resources to help us.  And I thought that's really not that unusual, you know.  It's like you don't, you may, but most of us don't know anybody who lives over there, you know--on New York Avenue [Washington, D.C.] in homeless housing and they don't know us.  So how are we gonna help them in a personal way?  You know, these little boys happen to be on my doorstep.  And so--their, their grandfather, one of them, was a man who helped to paint the job and we kept him to just pick up outside the house.  And he started bringing them because he, their mother was off somewhere.  And so the first week we kind of let them stay.  And then the second we bought, gave them some juice.  And the third we gave them some food (laughter).  And then the third, really the third, we went and bought them some clothes.  And then, then they just were there.
Story_ID: 2650
Speaker 1: Talking about the children that you're helping to raise.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I have my own son.  I have a son, Alan Poussiant, in his--he's working in New York.  He's twenty-four.  He's working in New York.  He graduated from Princeton [University].  And he's a joy.  I'm very proud of him.  He's a very good person and a fine young man.  And I have two stepdaughters, and--my husband's [James Hudson] daughters.  And they're doing well as well.  And one is getting married in August and she's head of the Arts in the Schools program for Los Angeles County, and that's Yannie [Ayanna Hudson].  And Julie [Julia Hudson] is chief of staff for Eleanor Holmes Norton, the Congressperson.  And so--but we have these two little boys, Maurice and Raynon (ph.) who are also a joy to us.  That, the grandfather worked for us and so we, so they were on our doorstep literally.  And they've sort of been in our lives now for the last, let's see, they're nine, eight and nine.  They were one and two.  Six, seven, that's seven going on seven years.  So it's, no, way beyond mentoring, I think it's more like co-parenting because it's not just once a week or once a month. Raynon comes over every day after school.  My husband picks him up.  And they're in Montana now at Silvertip Ranch together.  And, most importantly, we have been involved in helping them stabilize their family environment, you know, and, and in a housing environment that's stable and in getting educational testing and getting into the right schools, which is really very important.
Speaker 1: Are they being raised basically by their grandfather or--?
Speaker 2: No, he no longer is in the picture.  He was at one time when their mother wasn't around--I don't want to go into too much.  The mother is around now.  She's around them but--she, he was the one who was sort of helping mostly with them.  The mother is there, and they're being raised mostly by their mother.  But we for, you know, for, for--Raynon needed to, when Maurice needed to go to be tested--he has a learning disability--I did not want him to go through the public school system and fail and then find out that you need something.  Because one of the characteristics or the characteristic that's most highly associated with success in life is, is confidence.  And he didn't have confidence at all.  His older brother's very bright, and he couldn't pick up the things that he picked up.  So he relied on him.  He would--if you asked him what kind of ice cream he wanted, he would ask his brother what kind he wanted.  So I didn't want him to have that failure.  So we got him into testing at the Kingsbury [Day] School [Washington, D.C.] early on before he's really started.  'Cause he had, he was in pre-K and he was failing pre-K.  But I knew that before that.  I told his mother before that.  And her, her family told her that he would outgrow it.  I knew he wouldn't outgrow it.  He would grow into it.  And so we got him to be tested and then we got him into kindergarten at a school for children with learning disabilities.  And so that's what he--and he's a delightful child.  But, you know, there are things that people say to children that they don't think make a difference, you know.  You don't say to a child you're gonna be just like your father, especially if your father's not a good man.  Or you're mean like your somewhat--especially if your father was mean.  It doesn't matter.  You are a newborn person in spirit.  And so a lot of what has gone on has been sort of bringing along, putting into practice those things I just talked about in terms of you have a vision, what kind of person and child and you want this to be.  And you don't put those other things into play.  So it's a struggle in a way because one has a very different ability.  One has ability but a very severe learning disability.  The wiring is all turned around.  And the, and he can't yet read, but he said, yes, he said to me, "Godmother, sooner or later"--he calls me godmother.  "Sooner or later" and so sooner or later he will read.  That is not right now.  And the other, his brother, who is one year older, is very bright, doesn't have a learning disability and is super confident.  So you have very different needs.  And until--but in order to get a public school system to pick up the training in a private school for a child like that you have to one, know the resources to do it.  Sometimes as we did, you pay for the first year or two for them to go until you get that legal process in place.  You have to pay the lawyer to put the legal process in place.  And if someone doesn't have the resources to do that, it doesn't happen.  So when I say it's, it's loud and it's exposure.  It's--when we have a party, you know, they're here.  They're part of our family now, including their mother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: To whom I'm also I guess godmother in a way.
Speaker 1: Is she young?
Speaker 2: Is she young? Yes, she is only about--she's probably now about twenty-five.  She was only about seventeen or so when they were born or maybe sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now your own son has been, has done quite well.  And there sounds like there might be a sort of a scary thing that you're going to be raised by a psychiatrist and a psychologist.  It's a great thing, but it could be, you know, scary, too.
Speaker 2: He handled it pretty well, actually.  He's, he's very sensitive--he's had, he's, he has a sense of humor is what Alan has.  It's like, I mean, we say quite well--I would put that he's done quite well.  I'd like to--he'd doing just fine.  I'm proud of him.  And he's a very good person, but he has a sense of humor.  Alan is funny.  And I don't know if that had to do with--I think when he was growing up his father [Alvin Poussaint] was consulting to the 'Cosby Show' and I think he used to watch and see that this humor thing is really a very powerful thing.  And he--Alan has a sense humor about it.  So when people say something to him, he'll say, "Well, you know, what do you expect?  My mom's a psychologist and my dad's psychiatrist."  Like, yeah, I'm sensitive to people or something.  But he doesn't seem to--he's not maladjusted.  He just has a good sense of humor about it.  He's funny.  He makes me laugh.  And I talk about him and I smile (laughter).
Speaker 1: I can see, I can see.
Speaker 2: At--that's what he has mostly is a good sense of humor.
Story_ID: 2651
Speaker 1: Now Dr. Alvin Poussaint, who was consulting with the 'Cosby Show'.  And you all were married during the time that he was consulting, correct?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He was--and the show lasted, what, about ten years?
Speaker 2: Yeah, eight, nine years, yeah, something like that.
Speaker 1: Nine or ten years. But at the same time people were surprised when they found out that he was no longer married, you know, his marriage was breaking up.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And him being a family consultant and all, you know, I mean, an expert.  And what do you feel about that?  What's the, what happened?
Speaker 2: It wasn't all his problem.  I think that, that you, you sometimes make a decision not so much for the present as you do for the future.  And sometimes even in the best of--the best thing you do is you think what is the ultimate, what is the best thing for my child.  And that's what you really have to do.  And if you can, if you can do--serve yourself and your child well, then you do that.  I think that he and I do very well together and apart around our son [Alan Poussaint].  There's--we have never--we have a communion of values.  We have never, ever, regardless of what he may have thought of me as a wife or me as a--we've never, ever thought anything other than the best about each of us as parents.  He's a very good father.  And I'm the best I can be as a mother.  And so Alan kind of reflects that.  Now I don't know what fallout Alan--he seems to be doing just fine.  And I'm very grateful for that.  But I think the commonality that we had is that we could come together in the worst, the best of times.  We always could come together around Alan and what's best for him.  And we've--never, ever has there been one time ever that I would say anything that had to do with Alan that start with an A, that he wouldn't respond to and vice versa.  So whatever our differences are, we knew just we're human beings.  And you come to certain points and make decisions and take responsibility for it.  But in the best--I think the best thing we did is that we did well with Alan for him.
Speaker 1: It's a good thing that you all were balanced enough to do that.  And that's something that doesn't happen very often.  And you see so many cases of people that, married people that are divorced and then the children suffer more than the parents do.
Speaker 2: Well, now that was never our intent.  I mean that, that, that, that would not--I think in some ways Alan has doubled his pleasure sort of.  I mean he doubled that he has not lost--he doubled our houses he had go to.  He doubled the people who care about him.  I mean he has, he knows, I think he feels pretty firmly rooted in his relationship--I know he feels firmly related, rooted in his relationship with his father and with me.  And, and he has a stepfather who adores him and I think a stepmother who does as well who in some ways have broadened his life even more.  That doesn't replace having parents together.  I think that having parents together is really the ideal.  I, I think that's a, a, a great--but not if, but not if the suffering is or whatever is, is not good for either of them 'cause then you have a crippled person.  But if they could both grow and thrive together, that would just be wonderful.  But, second to that, 'cause, you know, sometimes life brings you some difficulties.  But you can grow out of that.  Would be what I think we have and that's where we have people who are divorced but who respect each other and have married partners who are respectful and equally competent people who all adore this one child.  I mean so I'm grateful for that.
Story_ID: 2652
Speaker 1: Speaking of divorce, I mean that is a problem, I guess if--I don't know--as a psychologist today, divorce would seem to be, you know, more complicated.
Speaker 2: You know, we're not brought up to, we're not brought up to live with people.  You know, we're brought up in an individualistic society to compete and to take care of ourselves, to look out for yourself.  And it, it's reinforced by seeing if there are women who appear to be devoted and put their families first being cast aside when they've been married for thirty years.  And the man goes off and says, well, this is the second part of my life, and he goes, marries somebody else who's like twenty or thirty years younger.  And there you are.  So it doesn't encourage you to say you should sacrifice yourself for your family.  Because the modeling here is not necessarily in your favor.  So it encourages women to say you need to, as my father [Clifford Ashmore] said to me, you want to be able to care of yourself--and that day he said just in case.  I guess he meant just in case you have to.  But it's, it's what is expected now.  And it's--and therefore you, even with that you're not, we're not--men with men, women with women, men and women together.  People are brought up to like live with each other.  If you don't--you have--why do we have three or four, five TVs in a house?  So if I want to watch a program and you want to watch a program, we don't have to--we don't ever learn how to compromise about a program 'cause I will watch my program and a separate car for everybody who can't even possibly afford one to, so you don't have to be inconvenienced by someone else.  So when you get together and you're married, it's like, well, I mean who--what is the preparation?  You haven't even learned how to share the phone, you know (laughter).  I think that's part of it.  We have the culture that encourages just thinking about yourself.
Story_ID: 2653
Speaker 1: When you said culture there it just made me wonder about if it's possible to change popular culture in a household.  Really we're discussing the kind of images you see in the media and the kind of language you hear on records and CDs and things--CDs today, I mean, I can't even say records anymore (laughter).  There are no more albums anymore.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But the kind of language, kind of image you see in popular culture--and popular culture seems to be the most common denominator culture--you know, the poorest part of the black community portrayed as the black community.
Speaker 2: Right.  That's the only community.
Speaker 1: That's the only community. Is it--you know, how can you change popular culture?  How can you avoid being caught up or swept up in the ills the plague both the poor black community and the middle class black community?
Speaker 2: Probably by being a little counterculture.  You know, counterculture is something that's been around--I don't watch TV very much.  If I do watch TV, I watch, I, I choose what I watch.
Speaker 1: The 'Cosby Show' (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) That's one.  But I choose what I watch and I--I choose what I listen to.  That's what I do.  Now how do we change a culture?  You probably have some ideas on that.  I am--you've made--the people who have studied popular cultures and how they change in a group way.  I think consciousness.  I think the beginning would be a kind of awareness and consciousness, a education of just the kinds of things we're talking about--just an actual consciousness raising about what impact you're really having when you allow these things into your life, into your mind, into your thought process.  Just the beginning would be a kind of consciousness.  And then--but, see, you can raise consciousness like we did in the movement and then it can go.  You know, now you have--you know, there was a time with Afros and, and, you know, you love your hair.  Now it's, you know, it's this, it's some of the thing--people have bleached their hair blonde and they don't have Afros and it's, it's a--so there's a consciousness that has, that can be raised.  It's not--that has to be kept up because you can raise a consciousness, but there's an energy that has to keep going to keep it there.
Speaker 1: So there's no support system for it--or hardly any.
Speaker 2: There's no--and, you know, we might want to think about that.  There are other cultures that seen to have somehow institutionalized support systems that keep, keep an awareness of their culture.  And we might want to look at them and see how did they do that.  You know, how do you, how do you stay, whatever system that you make, do you, that you see that works--how did they manage to do that, to keep that kind of consciousness in a world this bombarded with other images?
Speaker 1: I think the--that question raises an interesting--it raises a condition that I think that black people in this country are in that I'm thinking of I don't know of any other group that's in--a condition where you, you were brought here with a culture, it's taken away basically, and then you're turned loose in somebody else's popular culture and you have to survive in it, which is--I don't think any other group that came over here has to deal with that.
Speaker 2: No, they don't.  But given that, that we have, that we did do that, we still have some experiences that have created a kind of--as Elma Lewis said, "This is still my tribe," we, we do have a tribal belonging.  And we are a hardy people, you know.  We were not annihilated like the Indians just about.  And we did survive.  Now we're at a precipice now.  We're in a very dangerous place now, I think.  But maybe we've always been because I think we're, we have become so separated from each other, from groups.  But--.
Speaker 1: And the gap between the rich and poor in our community is probably a chasm, you know what I mean, just getting wider all the time.
Speaker 2: It's getting very wide.  The, the gap between the rich and poor in America is becoming very wide.  And, and if we're not, if we don't work at it very carefully, it's gonna get wider and wider because the things are getting in play now favor, I think, rich getting richer.  And the middle class, we may be more like South America and then we might not have much of middle class.  We'll have mostly poor working class or we will have--.
Story_ID: 2654
Speaker 1: You had mentioned Bob [Robert] Moses while we were off camera.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But in terms of someone who could organize for social change, I guess.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know--Bob, Bob was a quiet presence who's a very powerful presence.  He, he does or did--he's been doing the Algebra Project.  And my awareness with him as a friend of the family--he grew up with my, with my son's [Alan Poussaint] father, Alvin Poussaint.  And he started mentoring, teaching at his children's schools.  And then he developed from that, teaching them algebra 'cause he believes that math is very important for all kids but especially for inner city kids.  And algebra's a place where they begin to falter.  I think--he can explain it much better in terms of at that point when you take algebra, you either take algebra and go further or you can not.  And, and it's, and it's, algebra is sort of the cutting point.  It's whether or not you proceed in math.  And he began teaching algebra by taking kids on the subway train to express positive and negative values.  If you have Park Square here next to Center--if you go in this direction, then you, that's a positive value and you go in this direction, that's a negative value.  Just sort of concretize the concept into visual--make it visual.  So from that he's developed a whole project.  But, of course, he was in the [Civil Rights] Movement and a major part of it in Mississippi.  And, and that's an example of a person who in a positive way is counterculture in the way that we know it and has made a very positive impact.  I think, I think individuals can make incredible impact.  Often they do it with their lives and they do it--they've given their life to it in a way.
Story_ID: 2655
Speaker 1: So you would say then, I guess I hear you saying that we need more institutions to do, to change culture but we also need individuals just to make an effort to do what they think is positive and constructive.
Speaker 2: I think that--my work has been more on an individual level 'cause I'm a, I've been trained as a social worker, that was a psychiatric social worker and as psychologist.  So my work has been with individuals changing their lives.  And I've been involved as a person in an, in movements that have helped changed.  But I can sense that your interest has to do with how do we change a society.  And that's something that takes not only the doing of individuals, it takes leadership, and it has to have in this society enough commitment and support at a broader base.  Because you can make change, but then just as we've seen that we've made some change in the past, we can, if not lose it, you can, you can have another younger generation that comes up knowing, not just building on that change but assuming that that's just the way it was and taking it for granted and not understanding what it meant to make that happen.  And so part of what we have to do I think in, in talking about change is to preserve, is to do what you're doing--to preserve the history.  But not just preserve it, but to teach it so that we don't just take for granted that what we have was always there.  I've go into rent a car in Atlanta, and I see all these young, bright African American faces behind the counter.  And I look at them and they do their job and I think to myself they have no clue, no imagination at all that twenty, thirty years ago, forty, they could not possibly have had just this front counter job.
