Story_ID: 581103
Speaker 1: Hello Mr. Anderson [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson].
Speaker 2: Hello how are you today?
Speaker 1: Good.  My name is Linda Williams, and I'm the interviewer--
Speaker 2: Okay Lin- Linda it's my pleasure.
Speaker 1: --and, thank you, and the videographer is Matthew Hickey.
Speaker 2: Okay Matthew.
Speaker 1: And, sir, I would like to start by having you to state and spell your entire name.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's Monroe, M-O-N-R-O-E, Anderson, A-N-D-E-R-S-O-N, III, although it's on my birth certificate I just, I simplified it to just Monroe Anderson.
Speaker 1: And, and your, your date of birth?
Speaker 2: April 6, 1947, 4/6/47.
Speaker 1: And the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Gary, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Gary. And finally the location of this particular interview?
Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers headquarters at 1900 South Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] on the third floor.
Speaker 1: Mr. Anderson, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My career occ- occupation is generous.  I'm semiretired now, but I'm a contributing columnist to the Chicago Sun-Times.  I wri--my column runs every Sunday in the controversy section on the op-ed page.  I'm right next to George Will's.
Story_ID: 581104
Speaker 1: Now I would like to engage in five short answer warm up questions--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --before we get back to your controversial section (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  Right, sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Five warm up questions.  The first is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken (laughter), chicken.
Speaker 1: Chicken.
Speaker 2: The national bird (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right (laughter). And what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Summer.  What's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: It depends on the time of the day and the season of the year.
Speaker 1: That makes sense.  Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: And last, what is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh (pause) living well is the best revenge.
Speaker 1: Living well is best revenge?
Speaker 2: Revenge.
Story_ID: 581105
Speaker 1: Now let's talk a bit about your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Could you first state and spell your, your mother's entire name including her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Norma Jean Scott [Norma Scott Anderson].  N-O-R-M-A, J-E-A-N, S-C-O-T-T.
Speaker 1: And what is your mother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: September 9th, 1925.
Speaker 1: And the place of your mother's birth?
Speaker 2: Sparta, Illinois, or was it Murphysboro [Illinois].  She, let me think about this.  Sparta.
Speaker 1: Sparta?
Speaker 2: Yeah Sparta.
Speaker 1: Is Sparta close to Murphysboro (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah right--
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: --and she lived both places.  That's why she used to talk about it and I was trying to remember which was which.  But Sparta, Illinois, is where they shot 'In the Heat of the Night'--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --because they couldn't shoot it in the real South, so that gives you some, some idea of what it was like there okay.
Speaker 1: They could not shoot it on the real South.
Speaker 2: Right, right exactly.
Speaker 1: Meaning that the real South is where most African Americans lived?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because Illinois is still north even Sparta (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that real South.
Speaker 2: --yeah right even Sparta.  I mean as in down south where the actual location is, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Geographically, I get it.
Speaker 2: Yeah geographic, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah sorry I should have been a little more, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand.  What was your mother's occupation?
Speaker 2: Homemaker overall, although she did some domestic work.
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's background and her growing up?
Speaker 2: She was, she had nine brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1: Gee.
Speaker 2: Only three made it to adulthood.  All the others died of tuberculosis and other illnesses.  They were very--my grandfather, her father, her, her father died in his forties.  His name was Samuel Scott [Samuel Scott, Sr.], and he died in his early forties from having too much fun.  He was quite a character.  After he died, she and my grandmother and two other children [Samuel Scott, Jr. and Marion Scott Elmore] moved up to Gary [Indiana] and they were on welfare and I mean they were poor.  My mother had one, one or two dresses to wear to school.  I think it was two dresses for a while.  When my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] met, met her, my uncle, my uncle was too ashamed to go get the government issued cheese and peanut butter, so my father who didn't care went and got it for him, stood in the line and went and got it.  He wasn't, he wasn't as, as proud in that way.
Speaker 1: It's called survival.
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: So, your mother was born in, in Sparta you said.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Grew up in, in--
Speaker 2: Well from age eleven on yeah, yeah, and yeah she spent the rest of her life in Gary.  And my grandmother, Elizabeth Scott, lived with us when I was a kid and then with my mother and father, but they all lived together for the remain- the remainder of their lives.  I mean those, well my father died first, then my grandmother, and my mother died December 19th of 2005.
Story_ID: 581106
Speaker 1: And how many siblings grew up in your household? How many sisters and brothers did you have (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) One sister [Elizabeth Anderson Hollins], one brother [Dariek Anderson].
Speaker 1: Very small.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  My mother [Norma Scott Anderson] said it was, childbirth was so painful, she needed a breather going from next, one to the next.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Good. Well tell me something. Were there any stories that your mother shared with you about growing up about her background?
Speaker 2: Parents.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said my grandfather [Samuel Scott, Sr.] died from having too much fun.  He was a, he drank a lot and he chased a lot of women.  So there was one story where my grandmother [Elizabeth Scott], who was a very proper and respectable, prided herself to be a very respectable woman, went after him one night.  He had a car, this was back in the '30s [1930s].  My grandfather had a car.  She went, she went down to this, this joint where, whatever type of joint it was he was at, with a gun and told his buddy because my grandfather couldn't, according to this story, my grandfather couldn't drive, so she told, she pulled a gun on him and told the buddy to drive him back home right now and so she retrieved him.  And he was, my grandfather was younger than she was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is all still in Gary [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: No, this is all in Spar--
Speaker 1: This is back in Sparta [Illinois].
Speaker 2: --in Murphysboro [Illinois] or Sparta, one of the other--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --yeah probably. Yeah, I don't know. I, I, they, they're blending.  I think it was probably Murphysboro okay, yeah.
Story_ID: 581107
Speaker 1: I asked you your mother's [Norma Scott Anderson] date of birth.  What was your grandmother's date of birth?  Do you remember or can you recall?
Speaker 2: I know the day was January 16th.  The year I think was 1895.
Speaker 1: And back then many of them had problems--right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They, they, yeah, yeah they didn't keep, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Particularly coming right after slavery.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly and plus they didn't, and plus we're, we're not sure if she did fudge on her age a little bit anyway, so (laughter), 'cause she was, she was a, she was an attractive woman who knew it and was proud of it.
Speaker 1: Great.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And the other situation did you have any legends about whether your grandparents' parents, or--how far back in history can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Not far, especially on my mother's side.  Not far period okay.  Her, my grandmother's maiden name was Welch [ph.].  Her mother was half Sioux Indian [Native American].  I, when I was very young, by that I mean maybe four, I remember her mother in this small apartment we lived in Gary [Indiana]. It was her mother, my grandmother's mother, my grandmother, my mother and father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.], me all lived in the same apartment.  My, my great-grandmother whose name was, it will come to me, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: By the way, you said your grandmother's name was Welch, what was her first name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Last name, it was her last name.
Speaker 1: Last name was Welch
Speaker 2: Welch yeah.
Speaker 1: What was her first name?
Speaker 2: That's what I'm try, trying to remember.  My great-grandmother.
Speaker 1: No, you said your grandmother's--
Speaker 2: No, on no my gr- sorry my grandmother was Elizabeth Scott okay, yeah although her maiden name was Welch.
Speaker 1: I get you okay.
Speaker 2: Okay I'm sorry.  I was trying to remember Nina [ph.] I think was, yeah I think my great-grandmother's name was Nina if I remember correctly.  But anyway I was going to say I remember my grandmother taking care of her mother who had Alzheimer's, although they didn't call it that.  Well, I mean that's one of the tragedies I think 'cause my grandmother died of Alzheimer's and my mother had Alzheimer's when she died and so.
Speaker 1: They say that it is genetic.
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah it could be.  They're aren't 100 percent sure 'cause it could also be lifestyle and diet.
Speaker 1: Diet, yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Very prominently so.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, but I don't know.  I'm a little reluctant to find out.
Story_ID: 581108
Speaker 1: Was there much singing of songs in your family while you were growing up?  Storytelling or anything about your ancestors being enslaved or, or freed slaves or, et cetera?  Like early history that you may be able to recall?
Speaker 2: Not on my, not on my mother's [Norma Scott Anderson] side so much that I paid attention to.  'Cause my, my grandmother [Elizabeth Scott] didn't discuss her business a lot.  I, I knew she had a, she taught kindergarten, which was curious to me 'cause I think she had about a third grade education herself, so, but, but she, then she, when she came to Gary [Indiana] she was a domestic until she retired in her early seventies.  She lived up until her nineties.
Speaker 1: But then because of education teaching kindergarten was just a matter of having knowledge.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: That wasn't based on--
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: --having an education.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  She, she had a number of brothers and sisters.  One of her brothers who we called Uncle Don [ph.] owned a barbershop in Gary and when I was seven, that's my first job I had was working at his barbershop sweeping the floor and shining shoes.
Speaker 1: Shining shoes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he would berate me periodically because apparently I was not very good at either, but I was seven (laughter).  And he gave me my first--I found it fascinating working in the barbershop because you had these old men telling these stories, which were interesting--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --but it gave me my first taste of not liking physical labor, right.  There would be others.
Speaker 1: So you knew right away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --that you had another training in mind.
Speaker 2: Well I knew I didn't particularly like this.  I, I didn't know what my future held at that point at that age, but I, I knew that--
Speaker 1: It would not be physical labor of any sort.
Speaker 2: Exactly, well I, I didn't think I wanted to do it.  Although I had other jobs like I said I got a little old, older, I'd go in the white part 'cause Gary was very segregated back then.  We would, my cousins and I would take lawnmowers, push mowers, and rakes and go cut people's lawns in the white areas to make a little money.
Speaker 1: But that was physical, but it wasn't the same type of labor that shining shoes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, no, right, you're right, no.  And, and my cousins were older, so it was more the, the joy of hanging out with my older cousins than it was doing the work.  You know, they'd give me a little of the money.
Story_ID: 581109
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your father's side--
Speaker 2: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) of the family.  First let's state his first and last name and--
Speaker 2: Monroe Anderson [Monroe Anderson, Jr.].
Speaker 1: I should not even asked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's right, no that's okay.
Speaker 1: --since you are, since you are the third.
Speaker 2: Exactly right, okay now let me, and in fact I'm the fourth.  I found out later but on my birth certificate it says that the third.  My father grew up an orphan.  He, he was born in the Mississippi Delta.  His father [Monroe Anderson, Sr.] was a sharecropper.  His mother is, well, well my, my, his mother and father had a six year old daughter and he was one.  As the story goes and I was told this by older relatives.  The family was, sat down to dinner one night, they lived in a, they were sharecroppers in one of these shanties.  A twister came along, blew the house a mile away according to the story.  Now, that may be a little bit exaggerated.
Speaker 1: Legends are important though.
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, exactly.
Speaker 1: There is some accuracy.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  Blew the house a mile away, killed everybody.  The next day as they were going through the, the, the furrowed fields.  They were picking up the bodies and throwing them on horse drawn wagons.
Speaker 1: Do you remember that date this was back in?
Speaker 2: My guess, you know because again this is a family story, so they didn't provide dates, but since my father was born June, June 19 of '22 [1922], 1922, then this probably was around June of '23 [1923] was my guess according to the story.  Okay, and, and it's true, but you know the dates could be all--
Speaker 1: Right, probably within that era (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, but, but he definitely grew--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --up an orphan okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But, but anyway the house was blown away.  My grandfather, my grandmother, and my aunt, six year old aunt were all killed.  They were, they were, they were throwing the bodies on this horse drawn wagon, and my father was face down in a furrow, according to the story.  They picked him up to throw his body on there with the rest and he cried, and so they knew he was alive.
Speaker 1: Incredible.
Speaker 2: Right, right, and so he was raised by his grandmother and aunt who, and aunt who was not that much older, you know maybe she was sixteen or seventeen and so and he had a grandfather.  He would talk about his grandfather, Delhigh [ph.] who taught him how to hunt and fish.
Speaker 1: Delhigh, that's unique--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right.
Speaker 1: --in terms of names.
Speaker 2: Right, right exactly right.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Delhigh?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know.  I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Delhigh.
Speaker 2: My guess it's D-E-L-H-I-G-H, but I have no idea, you know, and the problem is that it's only when you're much older that you realize how important this is.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: You know when you're a kid you just listen to the story and either it interests you or it bores you, you don't, but other than that, that's as far as you go with it.  And so now that everybody's dead I wish I had asked a lot more questions than I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But, but, but, anyway his, his grandfather took him hunting, taught him how to hunt and fish; I know that.
Story_ID: 581110
Speaker 1: He got an eighth grade education.  That's as, that's as much of an education my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] got.  It was only recently when I read John Johnson's book, 'Surviving the Odds' [sic. 'Succeeding Against the Odds: The Autobiography of a Great American Businessman,' John H. Johnson and Lerone Bennett, Jr.] that I learned that that was typical in the South. That they only educated black kids to the eighth grade and then they were done with them, which is why John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] moved to Chicago [Illinois] to get a high school education.  But, anyway my, when my father, because he had been on his own, when he moved up, he move, he came here at sixteen and he lived in Chicago for a little while, then he moved to Gary [Indiana], which is where he met my mother [Norma Scott Anderson].  Actually he met my aunt, my mother's older sister, and he was interested in her, my Aunt Marian [Marian Scott Elmore], until he found out that his cousin was interested in my aunt, so then he became interested in my mother.
Speaker 2: How unique.
Speaker 1: Right (laughter). And they just--he, he asked my grandmother [Elizabeth Scott] if he could marry her when she was fifteen.
Speaker 2: And of course he was sixteen.
Speaker 1: No, he was, he, he was three years older.
Speaker 2: Right. Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) He was born in twenty--'22 [1922], she was born--
Speaker 2: Right okay.
Speaker 1: --in '25 [1925], about three years different.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, he was, he was eighteen and she was fifteen and he wanted to marry her, and my grandmother said no because she wanted my mother to finish high school.  World War I [WWI]--World War II [WWII] comes along, my father gets drafted.  He talks to my mother about marrying him.  The rules back then, which are drastically different from today, were that you couldn't get married in high school.  They would kick you out if you got married.  So, on January, January 4th, 1943, they eloped and were secretly married 'cause she was graduating in June.  He went over, he, he, he went to, away to boot camp and they were writing love letters and then once, once she graduated she announced that they were married and she went off and hung out with him in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: What a story.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and he never, he was fortunate enough he never was shipped overseas.  He was a truck driver in the Army, and then the war ends.
Story_ID: 581111
Speaker 1: You said they went to boot camp and, and where was boot camp?  Did she have to travel out of state to get to him (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, no, no, she, they were, I know they were--I know of two places they were, Jackson, Mississippi, and some place in Southern California.  I've forgotten now.  They used to tell me because, and they were--when, when they were in Jackson, my mother [Norma Scott Anderson] worked in a cleaners for a while because she, she, 'cause one of the things I remember her telling me was about how some, some people didn't clean themselves properly, so when you would iron the seat of their pants it was a terrible odor (laughter).
Speaker 1: I would imagine.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly (laughter).
Speaker 1: Even after the cleaning process?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, right.  I don't know how good the cleaning, I don't know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --you know this, but she just, you know this was one of the things she told me, which I found interesting even back then.  And he [Anderson's father, Monroe Anderson, Jr.] later was in California I know that because they said I was almost born in California, but she, and they almost stayed in California, but she wanted to be back in Gary [Indiana] with her mother [Elizabeth Scott].  My mother always was a homebody, so they came back to Gary and they, they got an apartment.  My grand- well actually my grandmother got the apartment, and they just moved in with my grandmother.  And they, they were attempt--they wanted, the baby boom was kicking off.  Everybody was having babies, but they were unable to.
Story_ID: 581112
Speaker 1: So, I assume that you are the oldest of your siblings since--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you mentioned that in California--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that was almost your birthplace?
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly and they, and the thing is they, my mother [Norma Scott Anderson] wanted a child, could not have one.  They were on the verge of adopting one of my cousins, and when she went to the doctor she found out that she had a crooked wound and he did something and straightened it out.  I was born on Easter Sunday, so I was this gift of God.
Speaker 1: Yes, I would say the same.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, exactly you know, and was treated as such for the most part.
Speaker 1: Most older kids are.
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly, exactly.  Right.  My sister Elizabeth [Elizabeth Anderson Hollins] is five years younger than I am, and my brother, Dariek [Dariek Anderson], was eleven years younger.
Speaker 1: And all three of you grew up there right there in, in Gary [Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We moved from the apartment, which was on the east side of Gary to a house on the west side that my parents bought, 2341 Buchanan Street in Gary.  When we first moved there, it was a new housing development and the road was not even paved.  It was rocks--
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: --pebbles, yeah.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: And, and these new houses going up fast.  We were the second or third family on the block in the development.  This is in '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: What street was that you said that you grew up on three--
Speaker 2: Fifty, fifty, fifty-three [1953]--
Speaker 1: Forty-one.
Speaker 2: 2341 Buchanan Street.  My mother--everybody lived there until they died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you describe the house (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My sister lives in the house.  Yeah, yeah it is a, when it was new it was very, you know better than the apartment, but it was a small house.  It was a theoretical three bedroom.  It was a frame house with shingles, siding, shingle siding on it on a block base.  We had a basement.  The house was probably twenty by twenty-five, the size--
Speaker 1: That is relatively small.
Speaker 2: Yeah it is.  No, I--and, and my mother and father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] shared one bedroom.  My grandmother [Elizabeth Scott] had the other in there with my sist- and my sister, and then I had this bedroom that was so small, the third bedroom which is what I grew up in.  It was so small that it can only hold a single dresser and a, a single bed and a dresser and that was it.  It was about the size of a cell prison, and it had a window--
Speaker 1: And this of course--
Speaker 2: --right exactly, it had a window.
Speaker 1: And this of course was prior to your brother's birth?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: It was just you and your sister.
Speaker 2: When my brother was born, then he slept with my parents.  They kept him with the parents.  And because he's eleven years younger, well a couple of things happened, my father finally got around, he was a handyman, but he finally got around to finish, doing the basement.  So, I moved downstairs to the basement.  I had a larger bedroom, a much larger bedroom down in the basement and my brother got my old bedroom.
Speaker 1: And by that time you're almost in high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] when he was old enough to start school (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was, yeah right exactly, exactly.
Story_ID: 581113
Speaker 1: So, you mentioned that during the time that you grew up in Gary [Indiana] you were living on 2341 North Buchanan [Street].
Speaker 2: Just Buchanan, just 2341 Buchanan, not, no north, just 2341.  Ga- Gary is not that big.  And Gary's an interesting the way it's laid out.  Okay Gary was founded on 1906 by Judge Elbert H. Gary who lived in oh god I, I forget now, one of the Chicago [Illinois] suburbs.  But, it was developed to be a steel town--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --that's what it was developed for.  And after the war, no, after, after the First World War [World War I, WWI] started and the industries were coming, then you got Mexicans, Poles and other East Europeans and, and blacks from the South all converging there because there were very good jobs where you could make a living and raise your family.
Story_ID: 581114
Speaker 1: Well my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.], when we lived with my grandmother [Elizabeth Scott] on the east side at 1901 Delaware Street [Gary, Indiana] we lived on the second floor.  My uncle [Samuel Scott, Jr.] and his wife [Christine Scott] and children lived on the first floor underneath us, my, my mother's [Norma Scott Anderson] sister.  I mean, my, my, mother's brother.  And you know so I, I, I had a very extended family there.  And, and my father who did not--when, when I was very young he would say, he delivered coal, and he had great muscles 'cause he would shovel it all day, I mean he had, he had an incredible physique.  He shoveled all day coal, and I didn't realize how little money.  I think he was making twenty-five dollars a week at that time--
Speaker 2: That's a shame.
Speaker 1: --but, and was saving it to buy a house, the house that we moved in on twenty, at 2341 Buchanan Street.  He also, he wo- he worked two jobs.  He also drove a taxi because I was very impressed with that 'cause he'd tell me stories about how he rode around and dropped this person off or that you know.  For some reason to a four year old that sounded exciting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But, my father was, I mean, he was, he was this incredible father because he had he, he, he never had a family, so this was all he wanted in his life.
Story_ID: 581115
Speaker 1: So, he would, I mean, he would take me everywhere with him.  We, we, we had this ritual where every Sunday we'd walk to the movie theater and see a movie.  You know, I mean that was my earliest memory.  In fact, there was, there was this one time--I hated--I, I, I love chicken, but didn't particularly care for, particularly as a child, I still not that crazy about them, but I never cared for wings.  I mean not wings, drumsticks.  Sorry, drumsticks, I love wings, drumsticks.  And so we were supposed to go to the, to the movies one Sunday, and I had this drumstick that I did not want to eat and he tells me he says, "Well when you finish your dinner we can go to the movie," and I said okay, but I just couldn't (unclear) I was not a big eater when I was a kid anyway.  I mean frequently I just didn't want to eat much.  So he says well, there was a store right across the street from us, he says, "I'm going over to the store. When I come back you should eat your dinner and we can go."  So, he goes to the store, I'm four or five years old, four years old I think, I have this brilliant idea I will hide the drumstick.
Speaker 2: Tell me not on you?
Speaker 1: No, no.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I hid it behind the refrigerator and this much I thought out in my scheme.  I, I hid it back there because I knew that there was roach powder back there and so, which was poison, so if they wouldn't make me eat it anyway.  So, I hid it back there and my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] comes back and he says, "Did you finish your dinner?"  I said, "Yes."  He says, "Where is the drumstick?"  (Laughter) Li- little detail that my, my young mind hadn't quite worked out you know.  And so he went to the movie without me and I just was so crushed and I cried.  But, he tried, most of the time he tried to accommodate me.
Speaker 2: That was actually your fir- one of your first memories hiding the drumstick and not going to the movies.
Speaker 1: My first, yeah right, but my very first, my very first memory I was three and it was, the sun, it was in the winter, the sun hadn't even risen.  It was still dark, and he was building the fire in our potbelly coal stove in the apartment.  So, and I remember him stoking the coals and then putting, watching the fire come up.  That's my first childhood memory.
Speaker 2: Really.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: But now with that experience of your, your drumstick do you think that, that allowed you to even hate drumsticks even more?
Speaker 1: (Laugher) Yeah it may have, it may have yeah 'cause I missed the movie and, and, another at the 1901 place [1901 Delaware Street, Gary, Indiana] there were a couple of other things.  It was an apartment building, but I wanted a pony.
Speaker 2: A pony in the city?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: As a child, that, that's unreal (laughter).
Speaker 1: My father right--because you know the cowboy movies.  I mean that's all you saw--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --on TV at that time and so I, I wanted--I, I didn't want a horse 'cause I was too little for a horse, so I wanted a pony and he had to explain to me how it would be a little difficult to have a pony in the, in the--
Speaker 2: In the city.
Speaker 1: --yeah in the coal shed that we had.  And it soon became a moot point because one day he accidentally set, he set the shed on fire and burned it down and I was so upset because I, I was not much of an eater, but I was a heavy sleeper and so the fire trucks came, put the fire out and left, and I slept through it all.  And I knew this would have been exciting having these fire trucks and watching them, and so I was--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) really upset, I was disappointed.
Speaker 2: Oh my.
Story_ID: 581116
Speaker 1: Okay now my mother [Norma Scott Anderson].  My mother was incredibly doting and a strict disciplinarian at the same time, so it was almost a yin yang situation.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: She was--when, when I, when I went to kindergarten she went out and bought me five white shirts and five corduroy pants and she would walk me to school every day, which the school was five blocks away or less, Pulaski elementary school [East Pulaski School, Gary, Indiana], and she would walk me there and after the second or third day I started feeling very mama's babyish, boyish (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At that age?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And so the next time I went to class I hid so she couldn't see me, then I went home another way and it occurred to her I might be able to find my, my way on my own, but that was the only way.  Then the next thing of course was to convince her that white shirts were not cool, although I didn't use that term (laughter) in 1952.  But anyway white shirts were not the thing for somebody in kindergarten to be wearing.
Speaker 2: Because of (unclear) the soil and the playfulness (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly, so I got a colored shirt (laughter).  I got colored shirts.  She went out and got me some colored shirts.
Story_ID: 581117
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And now, and then when we moved, when we moved over to the west side on Buchanan Street well it was a completely different situation there in that okay the baby boom.  This, this was the baby boom and segregated schools, so we were on double shifts and they had trailers outside to accommodate us all.  So, you would be sitting, sitting in these trailers as classrooms and some people would be in the real school and you only go half a day because that the only way they could accommodate--
Speaker 2: That many kids.
Speaker 1: --that many kids and you know of course (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And fewer teachers.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly and of course when you're six years old, 'cause this is first grade, you're six years old, I mean you don't understand all this.  You know you just, you just go along with whatever program there is.  And as, as, as, as I said when we first moved there it was a new development, so we had the, the rocky, they just had poured rocks for the road down there and at the end of the road was a sand dune, this incredible sand dune.  And so we had this natural environment.  I mean it went on for, it, it was a, probably a four block radius.
Speaker 2: Of sand?
Speaker 1: Yeah and trees and, and it was a sand dune, but it was like--have you ever been to the Indiana Dunes [Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore]?
Speaker 2: No I haven't.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh yeah you aren't from here.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but anyway yeah it's, it's and, and a sand dune is where the wind sweeps it so it's high and low (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes I, I understand that concept.
Speaker 1: --and there is some growth. Yeah and there, there, there are trees, but they're sparse.
Speaker 2: Right exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but, but this was at the end of my block, and so this was my playground.  We would go down to the sand dunes and, and play every day.  But, but a couple of blocks where it was a public housing project and as I got older it became more adventuresome passing through (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, passing through there.
Speaker 2: Some of the sights and sounds?
Speaker 1: And the other, the other thing that happened again because with, with segregated schools is okay there was, there was Gary Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], which was, high school, which was a, which was the school--my, my mother [Norma Scott Anderson] graduated from Gary Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: Still there when you were--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, no I went, that's what I'm saying I graduated from it.  I mean it still there now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Gee.
Story_ID: 581118
Speaker 1: William Marshall, the actor, he was a year or two ahead of my mother [Norma Scott Anderson].  He had graduated from, from there [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana].  He, he played, he was in, let's see what was he in.  He played Blacula to put it in--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay and in fact in my--I'm, I'm jumping ahead of myself.
Speaker 2: Oh no you're okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, anyway in our, we did a high school play, Job.
Speaker 2: Job from the Old Testament.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, but it was a modern, you know, the modern version of it.  It was called 'J.B.' [Archibald MacLeish].  I, I forget the play right now, but I mean it's, but anyway, William Marshall lent his voice, he was the voice of God in the play.  He taped it for us because he had, he, well, of course I didn't know this at the time, but he had been, I think he was in 'Spartacus' [sic. 'Demetrius and the Gladiators'] also as a slave in 'Spartacus.'  But anyway he had been blackballed.
Speaker 2: For his political views.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and so he, he was not getting any work, you know, so he, he was the voice of God in our high school play back then.
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I never knew that he was from Gary [Indiana] though, I really did not.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah there are a lot of people from Gary.  Alex Karras who was the football player who had a TV series for a while.  He was in 'Blazing Saddles.'  He was Moose [sic. Mongo], the guy who knocked out the horse.
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember it well.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly.  He was from Gary.  One of the astronauts was from Gary.  Fred Williamson was from Gary.
Speaker 2: I somehow thought Fred Williamson was from the West Coast--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: --because of his accent.
Speaker 1: Right, right, no, went to college and got proper.  Of course The Jackson 5 are from Gary.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah that, that, well everyone knows that.
Speaker 1: Exact, exactly right, exactly.
Speaker 2: Gary was not famous until after The Jackson 5 became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah right, yeah exactly, but yeah right I know, I know.  But, but anyway Gary, people from Gary are very proud of the people who are from Gary.
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: Although everybody who is from Gary is just that from Gary you know (laughter) they don't stay, but that's a different story.
Story_ID: 581119
Speaker 1: So anyway I had this great, I mean my childhood was nice in that sense. I had an extended family--
Speaker 2: Excellent.
Speaker 1: --and we were, we were not poor.  We were not rich.  Yeah we were very blue collar working class, but my mother [Norma Scott Anderson] had incredible middle class aspirations, so she would correct my English.  You know if I, I, I, you know that sort of thing.  And we had to act a certain way and--
Speaker 2: Behave yourself.
Speaker 1: Yeah behave, you know.  I mean and, I mean too--
Speaker 2: Properly.
Speaker 1: Yeah right exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Do you still have relatives in Gary [Indiana]?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, well my sister [Elizabeth Anderson Hollins] lives in the house we grew up in.
Speaker 2: What a connection.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's still there.  I have cousins who are still there.  My brother [Dariek Anderson] was murdered seven years ago at thirty-nine.  He was, well he was beaten into a coma by some teenagers and didn't come out after three months.  But, he, but he, he had been tragic.  I mean he had, he, he, he, he graduated from high school, Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], and went to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] for a year or so and then decided to join the [U.S.] Army 'cause he liked photography and they lied to him and told him they'd let him be a photographer.  Once they got him in there, they handed him a gun and he was, he was defending missile silos in Germany, which was a very boring job because--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now you're down in a hole someplace.  But, anyway he became paranoid.  He developed schizophrenia and got a medical discharge and was never quite--
Speaker 2: The same.
Speaker 1: No, this is aft- this is--the same after that, I mean, but--
Speaker 2: This was during the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era?
Speaker 1: During--seven--he graduated in '76 [1976] from high school.  I think he came back home for good in '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: So, this is in the Gulf War.
Speaker 1: No, no Gulf, no war at all, it's peace time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just going to Germany to--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but no, yeah but, but the disease is one that if you're gonna get it that's usually when you get it like around nineteen, twenty, twenty-one.  I mean that's the most common, and there are other times that you can get it obviously, but that's when his--which is a pretty common timeframe for it to occur.  Of course, we knew nothing about it at the time until it, it was a fact.  In help that I believe, I'm afraid--my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] died in 1984 of a heart attack.  He was sixty-one years old, and I think that may have contributed to it.  I mean I think it broke his heart to see--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) my brother--
Speaker 2: His son.
Speaker 1: --in the condition that he was in.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 581120
Speaker 1: But anyway, so back to--okay I think we should go back to my childhood.  Oh, this was what I was talk- with the schools and segre- the segregated schools in the second grade I went to Lincoln Elementary School [Lincoln School, Gary, Indiana], which was new, but had, had the, the trailers because it needed to expand to accommodate all the students.  And so because it was overcrowded in the third grade, well know that's not right.  First grade I was at Lincoln.  Second grade I got transferred to Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], which was a high, it was a K though twelve school [kindergarten to twelfth grade], so second grade I'm at Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I missed my first month of second grade because I scalded myself.
Speaker 2: How did that happen?
Speaker 1: My mother [Norma Scott Anderson] was giving my sister [Elizabeth Anderson Hollins] a bath.
Speaker 2: A bath.
Speaker 1: Another one of my favorite foods is corn on the cob.  And I wanted some corn on the cob (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my goodness I could imagine.
Speaker 1: Right, and she says, "Well I'll fix it for you. I'm bathing your sister."  "I'll do it myself."  So, I put the corn on and the water is boiling, and I'm trying to get it out and I tipped the put and scalded myself, second degree burns.  And because my parents were not educated and because a lot of this may not have been known at that time, I mean because the treatment for severe burn is cold ice water.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They put me in a warm tub, and my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] went to the drugstore to get some Noxzema because that was the universal cure for anything--
Speaker 2: Right, discoloration so on--
Speaker 1: --yeah exactly, right exactly.  So, by the time they finished giving me first aid I had a blister, excuse me, down my, my thigh this length, just one continuous long blister.
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: So, they took me to the hospital then, emergency room.  They realized it was a little more serious than they had suspected, and I'm crying and screaming the whole time.
Speaker 2: The pain I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Yes, exactly.  They take me to the emergency room, and there was some guy I remember this, there was some white drunk who was in the emergency room who looked like he had fallen through a plate glass window.  The cops had just beaten him up.  You know he was all bloodied and what have you, and a couple of people.  They took one look at me and just--
Speaker 2: Zoomed you on by.
Speaker 1: --I went to the head of the line.  Anyway I could not walk because of the burns.  I literally could not walk for weeks.  I was, I was, I was bedbound and when we go to see the doctor, I'm seven and because I couldn't walk my mother was carrying me up the stairs.  People were coming to her saying, "What's wrong with the little boy," you know 'cause somebody is carrying a seven year old kid (laughter) and, and then again because of the burns when I did, when I was able to walk I had to wear a slip because my thighs--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --I couldn't have any friction on my thighs.
Story_ID: 581121
Speaker 1: Anyway so by the time I get to school I'm behind and--so I, it wasn't long before, they were tracking people even back then.  It wasn't long before I was in the third group, the third track because I had missed that time.  I was always the smartest student, the third track, when I was in the third track (laughter).  The next year I went to, I went to back to Lincoln Park High School [sic. Lincoln School, Gary, Indiana] third grade, and then the fourth grade I was still there.
Speaker 2: They keep you in that same track when you elevated to, to the level.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was still in that track.  I was still, I think I had moved up to the second track, but I was not with the smart kids.  What happens is because the school system, the Gary [Indiana] school system was and still is, but it definitely was back then, in a way and they didn't know who was where, one day they gave us this test.  They didn't tell us what it was about, what it had to do, but they gave three classes with thirty some students in each one the test, and after the test was over they, they took nine of us and said we would be in the fifth grade the next year.  The others gonna repeat the fourth grade and but we had to go to summer school and they, you know they put us through this entire drill.  You know I didn't care you know.
Speaker 2: Accelerated summer school I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Yeah right exactly, right exactly.  You know I, I loved summer school anyway.  I had gone, I think I went to summer school from second grade, third grade, third grade through sixth.  I didn't mind.  I liked school.  And there was not that much to do in Gary anyway, so I didn't mind.  So, go to summer school.
Story_ID: 581122
Speaker 1: Then in the fifth grade, this new fifth grade I'm back at Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] and I'm in the fifth grade and we have other teachers and this one teacher just loves me and she's telling everybody I'm a genius.
Speaker 2: And what was her name (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I go from a idio- I don't remember, I don't remember.
Speaker 2: She had to have been one of your favorite teachers.
Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah right.  No, no, no she--no, no, no she wasn't.  I mean she, I liked her you know, but I just, I can't remember.  I mean strangely for some reason they put her out of the school, and not because she thought I was a genius, but anyway they put her, but anyway we, we, the students liked her a lot and so we circulated a petition asking that she remain and to show you how different times were then they are now, they threatened to suspend us for protesting and circulating a petition.  It wasn't, it wasn't even nonviolent, it was just we circulated a petition and all signed it saying we liked this teacher, thought she was good and that she should stay.
Speaker 2: Did you initiate that protest?
Speaker 1: No, I didn't initiate it.  No, I was not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was about to say that--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, exactly no--
Speaker 2: --that was the beginning of journalism.
Speaker 1: --no, no, I got, right, I, I later, no, no, no.  By that, I still was not, you know I was, I was still fairly go along, get along at that time, but I was just trying to, trying to do well in school, you know because it occurred to me that I should do better.
Story_ID: 581123
Speaker 1: So, then we go to, back to the sixth grade.  In the sixth grade, I'm back at Lincoln Park high, elementary school [sic. Lincoln School, Gary, Indiana].  We had a teacher who gave us this writing assignment, you know, everybody's to write.  And so I wrote this story about the adventures of Sir Anderson, and it was just a goofy story, you know like the character Sir Anderson pulled out his sword and shot somebody, that sort of thing, but the kids loved that.  I mean they were laughing.  I mean they were cracking up.  I went hm.
Speaker 2: Creative imagination.
Speaker 1: Exactly right, no, but also you know it's like you know I enjoyed it.  It was a writing experience, and I read my writing and it was nice, but still I just, I was just doing what I was doing.  In my, but in the seventh grade, back at Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], now back to stay seventh grade I had an English teacher, Lester Gustley, Leslie Guster [ph.] who had given us a writing assignment to do and after reading mine he pulls me aside and says, "You should be a writer.  You have this natural talent," and this was the first time that anyone had assigned a talent to me. You know I'd, I'd--people had observed that they thought I was bright and what have you, but no one had said you have a talent--
Speaker 2: A natural talent to write (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) a natural talent and so at that point forward I thought of myself as a writer.  Quit studying my math (laughter).
Story_ID: 581124
Speaker 1: I became editor of the eighth grade page in our high school newspaper and then I went on to become editor of the newspaper, the Roosevelt News [ph.], which I changed the name to the Panther Post.  This predated Black Panther [Black Panther Party], but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Because this, that predated the Black Panthers?
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, yeah right.  No, I was into alliteration and so Panther Post yeah (laughter) so, so that's why I changed that.  Plus the, the main, the hometown newspaper was the Gary Post-Tribune.
Speaker 2: But you said you named your, the paper the Panther--
Speaker 1: Post.
Speaker 2: --Post and this, this predated the Black Panthers?
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, this was in 1964 when I became editor.
Speaker 2: What a coincidence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah, but we were the, we were also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But the mascot the Panthers?
Speaker 1: Yeah, the mascot was the Panthers too.
Speaker 2: Okay I get now where you're coming from, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly right the mascot is the Roosevelt Panthers--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --in high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] yeah, so yeah, but also the alliteration.  Anyway, I was, I was editor of the paper and we had a, we had a, a journalism class and our professor Mrs., Mrs. Marian, Mariner [ph.].  It had been something else she got married.  You know it through you off--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but she, she, she became Mrs. Mariner and she brought over Les Bro- Les Brown who was--Brownlee, Les Brownlee, who was a reporter for the Chicago Daily News black reporter, Negro reporter, for the Chicago Daily News.  She brought him over to talk to us, and he says, he tells us he says, "This is the time for Negroes to go into journalism because of the Civil Rights Movement and everything.  This is an ideal time."  Now when Mr. Guster [Leslie Guster (ph.)] told me that I was a writer, we had been, we, we had been reading Baldwin [James Baldwin] and Ralph Ellison and things like that.  Yeah I was, I was, I was already going to be a novelist.  But he says okay well you know go into journalism Les, Les, Les Brownlee says go into journalism, I said hm.  He says it was great opportunity.  So, I go home and tell my mother [Norma Scott Anderson] I'm gonna be a journalist and she says, "There are no Negro journalists.  Be a school teacher," (laughter), and I went with Les (laughter).  (Unclear) my mother since she, she was at home raising children (laughter).  And so I, I, I, I applied to Howard University [Washington, D.C.] and Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  I'm still waiting to hear from Howard.  I mean I got, I heard--
Speaker 2: Oh too bad.
Speaker 1: --I got nothing.  I mean it wasn't yes, no, we don't care, or any, I just never heard.
Speaker 2: No information whatsoever (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I just said, exactly, no response.  So, and then, then the more I thought about it, I mean I knew no white people socially.  I mean in my senior year of high school I got a job as a bag, bag, bag boy at the A and P [The Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company].
Speaker 2: The grocery store.
Speaker 1: Yeah and I worked with and for white people, but that was my only exposure.
Speaker 2: Experience.
Speaker 1: You know I had an occasional teacher at school.
Speaker 2: But your schools were completely segregated throughout your junior high, high, and elementary (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, they right exactly, exactly yeah.  Yeah, I knew no white people on a social level.
Speaker 2: So Indiana was a gift?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. No right exactly.  No, that's why I decided I was gonna go there because I should see how the other part of the world lived and get to know them.
Story_ID: 581125
Speaker 1: Mr. Anderson [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson], apart from establishing your identity in high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] as a journalist--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we you involved in other activities?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes I, I was, I was, I liked doing things.  I've always have been interested in being involved in things, so I was, I was in plays, in, in, in, in, in junior high one of the plays I was in was 'H.M.S. Pinafore' [W.S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan]. I was the guy who got the girl at the--I can't remember the character right now, but it was at a time, I could, I cannot sing.  I'm a horrible singer.  If I'm in the shower, I'm very good, but other than that if I sing do- dogs howl and my family members tell me to shut up.  So, I had to sing this part.  It's, and it, and it was, it was right at the time my voice was changing also.  So, the song was (singing), "Farewell my love, light of my life, farewell.  For crime unknown I go to a dungeon cell" ['Farewell, My Own!']. So, so finally to get me through this 'cause they tried and they tried, so it ended up with the chorus singing with me, so they drowned me out 'cause my acting was good enough, but my singing was not.  Okay after that we also did 'Witness for the Prosecution' [Agatha Christie].  I was the judge in that one, which was again not a major role, but I, I enjoyed.  And then we did 'Tammy Tell Me True,' and I was the guy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I've never heard of that.
Speaker 2: It's, it's, remember the Tammy movies those (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: Do, do, do, do Tammy--
Speaker 1: Yes I do.
Speaker 2: --well this was a play version of it, and I was the guy that got the girl and of course there was 'J.B.' [Archibald MacLeish] we did which, with William Marshall.  I can't, I can't remember what role I had, so it must not have been major.
Speaker 1: One of Job's, one of the Job's antagonist that was attempting to persuade him.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah I can't remember, but I was not Job.  So, I was a good enough actor, but not good enough to be major.  But, by that time I'm shifting to writing.
Speaker 1: Who was the drama teacher that introduced all these magnificent plays in, in your high school?  I think that's--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Gray [ph.], Mrs. Gray--
Speaker 1: --fascinating.
Speaker 2: --who, who had taught my mother [Norma Scott Anderson].
Speaker 1: Incredible.
Speaker 2: And she was really like, she was, she was this very, she had this, she had this really beautiful stone house right across the street from the school, so we would pa- I would pass it every day on the way to school.  But, she was, she was very middle class, very attractive woman who we all had crushes on, but she was very nice also.  So (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Because to have those type plays at a high school, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly, but no that was the thing because, again because of segregation in the country, I mean we had Ph.D.'s teaching us in high school because they couldn't get jobs at colleges.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I mean, and, and these people were dedicated. I mean they cared about us for the most part.  You know there were, there were some teachers that didn't care as much as others, but they, they, I mean you were nurtured, you know.
Story_ID: 581126
Speaker 1: I can remember when I was in the seventh or eighth grade [at Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], I, I made all A's and Bs until I was in the, in the seventh grade, mostly A's and Bs, not all, but mostly, and I had, I had this math teacher that I really loved.  This is before I became a writer.  It was about the same time that I was making the shift.
Speaker 2: For your big career (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, because I was good in math at that point.  It was partially because this teacher, Mr. Brown [ph.], was this very, and he's a, he's an incredible math teacher.  He, we used to laugh because as he taught he'd stand up in front of the class and scratch himself and adjust all the time subconsciously.
Speaker 2: Thinking--
Speaker 1: Right, right which the kids--
Speaker 2: --thinking, as a thinking process.
Speaker 1: Yeah right, right exactly, so he was there shifting his stuff around and you know teenagers thinking that's--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, on the other hand he would, you know, he, for example I mean he, he taught more than--one of the things I remember him doing one day he was talking about knowing words and understanding them and how connotation impacted how you reacted to words, and then you know he said--
Speaker 2: Incredible theory.
Speaker 1: Yeah he said, he says, "For example if I were to say to you, 'I regurgitated,' what would you say?"  You know we're seventh graders.  He said, "Well what if I told you I threw up." "Ew." Yeah, and, and, I mean I found that interesting--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and enlightening.  You know, but that was--
Speaker 2: In terms of your writing at that, right.
Speaker 1: Well yeah right, and, and this is a math teacher doing this, so we loved him.  Okay, but then we got this guy--he got promoted and we got this guy who was a horrible teacher you know and he, and nobody, everybody missed Mr. Brown.  They didn't like this guy.  He was like wimpy and nervous and you know 'cause he would be sitting up there going through some boring formulas and something like that and then we would all be doing what teenagers do, and he'd turn around and say, "Who's talking, who's talking," and so then he'd turn his back and write and you go, "Who's talking," (laughter).  So, one time he caught me and so I went from an A to a D in the math class, and of course my parents [Norma Scott Anderson and Monroe Anderson, Jr.] were furious.  And I said I'm no less intelligent than I was when I was getting an A than with the D, and so I decided grades didn't matter--
Story_ID: 581127
Speaker 1: From that point on, I didn't worry about grades, so sometimes I got good grades and frequently I did not you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I didn't get any Ds or Fs--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know that was, that, that was in high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: College [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] was different.  But, in high school I didn't get any Ds or Fs, but I, I had a C.  I ended up with a C plus average or something like that because I just didn't worry about it.  I just--
Speaker 2: The concept of grades didn't matter any longer.
Speaker 1: Exactly, I, I just pursued my interest.  But I would write papers.  Yeah I was, I was, back then I was writing protest papers and teachers were like tell- telling the rest of the class how great they were, so I had these, just these encouragements throughout high school about my writing.  The only, the one drawback I had is Mr. Guster [Leslie Guster (ph.)] back again in seventh grade who I wanted to impress, you know, because I was a writer and he had encouraged me.  So, I had a book report due and I got writer's block on this book report, 'cause I, I just couldn't, and then I read the--
Speaker 2: Being too excited you think or just nervous (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, no just because I wanted it to be great.  I mean I, this was, this was an experience I would have many more times in my life as a writer--
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: --you know where you just wanted to impress, just do the best and so I, I couldn't, I, you know I read the book, but I just couldn't think of, I, I just wanted it to be so great to keep impressing him.  And, and you know then I read the jacket cover and that said exactly what I wanted to say, I mean I couldn't have expressed it better.
Speaker 2: And then from that point you began to just engage in the writing just from that one--
Speaker 1: No, from that point I began to copy (laughter) and so I wrote, I, I, turned in my book report and he read it and he was impressed with it.  He was impressed with it than I was and so he has me read it to the class, and the class is impressed with it except for one girl in the class Tanya Sanders who read fifty books a year literally and she raises her hand and she says, "Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson], isn't that on the jacket cover, jacket cover," (laughter) and so that was the only time I plagiarized in my life.  I was so humiliated in front of everybody, and I got an F on the paper and so I, I learned early that you don't plagiarize.
Speaker 2: That's a lesson, that's a hard lesson to learn, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, right exactly.
Story_ID: 581128
Speaker 1: I also tried sports and I was the greatest benchwarmer.  I mean I, 'cause I was, I was, I was about as good of an ath- athlete as I was a singer.  I mean I was playing football and I was five, at the time 5'11" and 145 pounds and I had some guys who was I was supposed to be blocking who even back then was 200, they were 200 pounds and 6'3" you know.  There was this one guy who, who went on to play hot college football.  I was trying to block him and he said, "Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson]," said, "I don't know how hard you try--."
Speaker 2: Give it up (laughter).
Speaker 1: Exactly (laughter), you're not gonna be able to stop me.
Speaker 2: Did you try basketball?
Speaker 1: Well, this is football.  Okay, yeah I tried basketball too.  This was the end of my, my co- my basket- my football season as, as a sophomore.  We had this coach who was almost sadistic.  I mean you know they were, you know they were from a World War II [WWII] camp and so we'd be out there, it'd be a hundred degrees and we'd be out there in the sun practicing, scrimmaging.  You'd be soaking wet by the time it was over and it just so happen that this day after, after that day, the next day the temperature dropped significantly and so we had put on these wet clothes, you know from, from the day before--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I'm freezing.  I'm sitting, you know sitting and I'm sitting on the bench, and it occurred to me that now why am I out here terribly uncomfortable when I can be at home or doing something else and so I quit that day and that was the end of my football career.  I would go to the games and enjoy them and sit there and that's been, that's been it.  Basketball, which was much more interesting, but they, they had so many people who wanted to play basketball I got, I didn't even get a chance but, but for a brief period to bench warm and I was out of there for that.
Story_ID: 581129
Speaker 1: So, but I was in the, at the time I was very religious so I was in the, the, some youth, I can't, I forget, the young Christian something like that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Association.
Speaker 1: Association yeah--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and we'd go to a different church every Sunday.  We went to Pentecostal churches.  We went to all kinds of churches, and that was fascinating to me.  We went to this storefront, storefront perch--church, and there was as many of us there as there were parishioners and so they take up the collection afterwards and we're high school kids, so you know not getting a lot out of us.  And so the preacher, after it was over he said, "And I wanna thank you for this dollar sixty-five contribution," (laughter).  This was from the entire church, you know, 'cause this is like high school kids and poor parishioners, so no money, but then we went to another one where the holy rollers like went off and they were singing and dancing.  I grew up A.M.E., African Methodist Episcopal and the service, First A.M.E. [First A.M.E. Church] in Gary [Indiana], the service was very dry. You know it was very intellectual.  You know it's the scripture and so this was like a show.  So, I found that interesting doing that.  I, I played chess.  I, I'm trying to think of what else, maybe that was it, I can't remember now.
Story_ID: 581130
Speaker 1: But anyway I was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, I take for granted that you were not bashful in high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], nor shy--
Speaker 1: No, no, no.
Speaker 2: --but very, very, very outgoing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and, and part, part of what drove that is since I was four years old I've had this deep appreciation for the opposite sex.  So, so I mean I had a girlfriend in kindergarten who I was trying to impress and so I told the kids that I was Superman, I was Superman and of course they wanted to argue with me about what whether I was Superman or not--
Speaker 2: And how did you prove that?
Speaker 1: --and so then I said, "Watch me. I'm gonna pick her up and lift her up in the air," and so I picked her up and promptly dropped her 'cause--
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: --I was not strong (laughter).  As it turned out, I didn't have Superman strength, so I drop her and teachers were like were, in those days were really into punishment, so of course the teacher lines me up with the yardstick.  That, that was their form, they had these, these yardsticks and they'd beat you, you know paddle you.  So, she lines me up to paddle me.  The thing is she beat us for any old excuse.  I mean she was a paddling teacher.  She was a punishing judge.  And so she whacks me about three or four times and on the third or fourth whack the yardstick splinters because it was worn out.  And the boys in the class go, "Wow you really are Superman," (laughter).  I mean she hadn't brought me to tears by the time, yeah and I was, I mean I was not, I was not, one, one of the kids that would not cry, you know, but it was like we hadn't even gotten to that point.  So, it was like (laughter) and, and this, the girlfriend that I had that I liked I was walking home.  I was gonna walk home in kindergarten now and I was not lowed- allowed, you know this was the mother [Anderson's mother, Norma Scott Anderson] who had just finally gotten to the point where she (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was afraid of you.
Speaker 1: --was letting me go to school, letting me go to school on my own.  So, I'm walking the girl, she lives past my house.  We walked past my house and I said well I ask, "How much further do you live?"  And she said, "Oh a block," and I didn't know what a block was, kindergarten, and so I walk a block on the sidewalk (laughter), said, "Okay," and that was it.  But, but anyway getting back to my women.  I, I, would speak up in class just so I could get attention for the girls.  Had, had, had I gone to an all-boys school I probably would have been very quiet.
Speaker 2: Shy and bashful.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: Nonproductive.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.  But, I wanted to get as much attention from the girls as possible.  I was always attracted to the smartest girls in class.
Speaker 2: Except the one [Tanya Sanders] that told you about the plagiarism.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was attracted to her up until that point, but she killed, she killed her chances (laughter).
Speaker 2: But what about your college years how, how, how did that outgoingness and, and, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay well, okay, okay let me--I graduate from high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 581131
Speaker 1: But, is there anything else that, that's prominent about your, your experiences--
Speaker 2: In high school [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in high school and junior high that stands out?
Speaker 2: Not, no, I don't think so, except I used to, it was actual--because I was, I was smart and I was cocky and I was a lone ranger, I was always a loner. I got in a lot of fights, but not that I would start, but I would be a target.  I mean there was one point in my life, and Gary [Indiana] is a very--because it's a steel town--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --it's a very physical place and so I would have to fight my way--.  One, one, one month, I think it was in the tenth grade, I had to fight my way home from school for every day.  I mean somebody would be waiting for me after school and I had to fight (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was any of the, the, boyfriends of the, the little girls that you--
Speaker 2: No, no, these were just guys because they didn't like, they didn't like my looks or they didn't like the fact that I was smart or I, I, I didn't live--
Speaker 1: Typical bullies.
Speaker 2: --in the project.  I didn't live in the project.  You know it was a bunch of different reasons, but I, you know I hated fighting, but I would, but if you didn't, you couldn't run 'cause if you started running that's all you'd be doing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Now, I did have one incident.  I was in another part of town seeing a girl, and I got jumped by a gang and I was beaten so badly when I got home my parents [Norma Scott Anderson and Monroe Anderson, Jr.] took me to the hospital and I got x-rayed and you know I was swollen and bloody, but I was okay.  But, I'd been beaten so badly that when I went to high school the next day everybody was surprised to see me because the word was that I'd been killed you know and it wasn't that bad, but yeah, but anyway I--
Speaker 1: A gang I, I would imagine--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but so--
Speaker 1: --physical brutality.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so but, so that was my least favorite part of that whole environment in high school.
Story_ID: 581132
Speaker 1: So, anyway so I, I, graduate [from Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana] and I go work in the mills, which is what everybody does.  You know between--I go there to make money for this, for, to have for school [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I don't go there, but I just go there for the summer and the first mill I work in is U.S. Steel centering plant [United States Steel Corporation, Gary Works, Gary, Indiana].  This was something out of a bad movie.  I mean centers are these, these, these coals that they bake on this conveyer belt and they put it on this steel to make it tougher and the, the--
Speaker 2: The heat I could imagine.
Speaker 1: Yeah, exactly.  The con- conveyor belts were above and these flames were down, and they were moving all these steel belts where they were baking, but the, the, the hot fines would rain down and there was this incredible dust.  Within an hour, this much dust would accumulate and to work there you had to wear long sleeve shirts and pants or the--you, you were at risk of a hot, red hot fire falling and burning you.  You had to wear a helmet, you had to wear safety glasses.  You had to wear a respirator 'cause the dust was so thick and after a week's time there because of the heat you took salt tablets and you know you wouldn't change your clothes every day you, you would change, you, you would change into work clothes when you got there, then you would hang your work clothes, clothes, back, change back into your street clothes and hang your work clothes in the locker.  By the end of the week, your work clothes would be white from the perspiration that, that had dried and the salt.
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: And the job was the squeegee.  My job was the squeegee, take the squeegee and squeegee through and then shovel it into piles and that was it.
Speaker 2: Imagine people that had to work there for a lifetime that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh exactly, no it was terrible, it was terrible.  You know, but since I--it was good money, you know, I, I can't remember what it was, but it was very good money for somebody eighteen years old.  I had, I had all this energy.  I was a wiry kid and so I had this bad habit of running everywhere I went and so I'm running through this, this dust and I slip and fall and I cut my finger.  Now nothing serious, I mean, you know just a slit.  I mean I still have the scar, but it's just a little dark thin line, so I have to go to the infirmary.  So, I go there and they put a Band-Aid on it and some, get some disinfectant and then I'm sent back to work, but you know you have to fill, file out a report and what have you.  So, fine, but then the next week I make the mistake of telling this, this thirties, early thirties redneck foreman that I'm only working there for the summer. I'm going to college, and a couple of days after that--another job which was horrible they had these, these filters, these huge metal filters where they would pour the, the fines through it and they would shake it so that only the smaller ones that they wanted to be put in the steel would go through it and the rest would, they would throw out and these were machines and it would, it would come down through that and that, that was the process.  They had to be cleaned out because they had slits about the size a little smaller than my finger, it's like this way, and so I, I got assigned one day to go in there and you had, you had this little jackhammer and you would take it and, and just cle- it was like cleaning, cleaning teeth or something.  You know you go through it as, and this thing was horrible because you know it's this thick metal and there's a board underneath you because that's where the fines would go down and so you had that, you had to make sure the board was secure so that you didn't fall and the first thing for safety you locked off the machine so that nobody would turn it on while you were on there 'cause you'd be killed and so I'm in there and I'm jacking and you have to sort of position yourself in such a way so you don't slide down.  You know and you couldn't stay too long in one spot because the metal was still warm.
Speaker 2: At your age I'm surprised they gave you that responsibility.
Speaker 1: Oh right, well I was going to college, so, so that's probably, I don't know why I got it, but that's maybe why.
Story_ID: 581133
Speaker 1: But anyway, so I'm leaning on it and you only could lean on it because then the, the, the pressure from your body you'd burn, so then you had to position yourself another way to do it.  But, I'm in there doing the job and then I hear this incredible rumble (makes sound) and I think somehow someone's managed to turn the machine on because there was these like rocks and things fall, it's like being in a, in an earthquake or something.  And you know the door you--that you came in and out of this thing was about this big, so I scrambled through it.  I almost killed myself coming through it--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --but you know but I, but again I, I hurt, I, I scraped something.  It wasn't, again it wasn't like I broke a leg or anything like that, but I'm back at the infirmary and so then in the meantime I'm noticing that I'm being watched by other foreman, other white hats as I worked, and they're standing at a distance and they're watching me.  So, then after two weeks, I've been on the job two weeks [at United States Steel Corporation, Gary Works, Gary, Indiana], I get called in and the foreman who I told that I was going to college he says to me, "You're terminated."  I said, "What," 'cause I didn't know what the word was (laughter).  I was, I was not a great, I was not a, a--
Speaker 2: You're not fired, you're terminated.
Speaker 1: Right exactly, right exactly.  (Laughter) He said, "You're terminated."  I said, "What."  He said, "You're fired."  And I was fired for being accident prone.  And so I go home and I'm crushed of course, you know I get fired on my first real job and my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] told, insisted that I go find another job.  He did not want me hanging out all summer on the streets of Gary [Indiana].
Story_ID: 581134
Speaker 1: So, I got another job at Republic Steel [Republic Steel Company], and it was completely opposite.  It was like clean.  It was noisy.  What they did was they, they, they, they straightened out steel bars and they cut them.  They, they, they, they took steel bars--
Speaker 2: They would be noisy of course.
Speaker 1: --raw, raw bars and, and, and, and, and--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --processed them to, to go to wherever they were being shipped.  And I ran a band saw there.  The only problem was on the first ten days I was there I saw two different guys get their fingers cut off, which was a little unsettling 'cause I needed my fingers to type (laughter).
Speaker 2: Those steel mills aren't anything--
Speaker 1: Oh no, no, no they're interesting.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They're very interesting.  And, and then what happened about, after I'm there about three weeks, I'm not in the union.  You have to be there six weeks to get in the union.  I'm, I'm cutting these steel bars that are about this big in, in, in circumference, they're about twenty feet long.  They weigh maybe four hundred pounds.  And I let one too many go into the U, so it was two, it was overfilled and the crane wouldn't be able to pick it up.  So, the foreman gets on one end and he tells me to get on the other end. Gonna put it back up on the table.  Again, I'm (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Accident prone.
Speaker 1: So I pick it up to put it there and I'm not strong enough, it comes down on my hand and I yank away.  He said, "Are you okay?"  "I'm fine, I'm fine," and you know so that I continued to come to work, but I've noticed that I'm getting this--
Speaker 2: Numbness.
Speaker 1: --action in my finger that's not normal.  I mean it's--so I go to my doctor and tell him this, "I think there's something, I think my finger may be broken."  So, he looks at it he said, he, he twisted this way and that and he says, "Oh I think it's okay."  I said, "But it goes back and forth like this," (demonstrates). He says, "Oh," so you know, but I'm young so he puts it in a splint and I wear the splint except when I go to work and I take the splint off and it heals eventually, but anyway for three summers I did that, working at the school newspaper, you know, taking the classes.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 581135
Speaker 1: When I got down there, the first thing my freshmen year when I got down there I got, I got counseled, and the counselor asked me what do I--you know we talk about my aspiration.  I tell her I want to be a novelist, and she says, she says, "Well you're in the journalism department."  I said yes, you know, et cetera.  She says, "Well do you realize that if you graduate with a degree in journalism for, from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] you can write your own meal ticket."  And even at eighteen that sounded good to me, so, so I, I was sticking with it and I went up, I was there and it was very interesting that very, the culture shock was incredible--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I felt--because this was still the, the civil rights era, 1965.
Speaker 2: And undergraduate at that, not graduate school.
Speaker 1: Yeah right--
Speaker 2: Undergraduate.
Speaker 1: --ci- civil rights, there were, there were thirty thousand students on campus, six hundred were black and--
Speaker 2: And Martinsville [Indiana] down the road.
Speaker 1: --and, and they, and they were trying to flunk us out as quickly as possible.  You had, they had to let us in, but they didn't have to keep us and--
Speaker 2: What was the purpose for letting you in, to pick up the federal funding?
Speaker 1: No, no because it was a state school and so they had to if, if you applied and your grades were, the SATs were a certain level, then they, they could not.  You know it wasn't, it wasn't highly selective as a, as an Ivy League school, but, but so it was fairly easy.  But, they had, but they, I mean the policy was to flunk people out.  I mean in freshmen orientation we sat in this large auditorium and they said, "Look to your right, look to your left, one of these people will flunk out of school."  I mean that was officially orientation--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --and so I'm there and, I mean I was, I was, I was a journalism major.  I took advanced courses in my freshmen year.
Story_ID: 581136
Speaker 1: Okay now we left off at Bloomington, Indiana--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and Indiana University.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes culture shock total.  I mean first of all because I'd grown up in a segregated community [Gary, Indiana] and I get down among all these white kids and professors, I feel as if I had the weight of the race on my back you know 'cause I wanna prove to them that I'm decent and I'm acceptable and that I'm not the stereotype.  But, this is Indiana and, and southern Indiana, I mean Martinsville [Indiana] which had a, has a serious Klan [Ku Klux Klan, KKK] reputation is fifteen, twenty minutes away.  And I mean, to show you how, this is '65 [1965], and to show you how the times were back then some of the white boys had rai- been raised being told that we had tails, that's T-A-I-L-S.  And so we had these group showers, we didn't have the individual showers, and so you'd be in the shower and you'd see these guys darting their eyes trying to see if you had a tail or not.  I mean just the way they were, they would steal these looks at you.
Speaker 1: I can imagine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you know farm boys.  And so there were--my roommate was from Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana].  We, we had selected a room together, so I, I had a black roommate and then I had, there was another black on the floor [Charles Ellison].  We stayed in the, I was in the men's dorm.  I mean this was, this was the, this makes no sense whatsoever, but for somebody who is a writer, thinks of himself as a writer, I was not big on vocabulary.  I was not good at investigating these things, so when I was applying for dorms down there I could have gone to a coed dorm, but I thought coed and I didn't bother to look it up, I thought coed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Meant all male.
Speaker 2: No, I thought coed meant you had to work (laughter) you know I had to work in the kitchen or something like that (laughter).  Yeah I thought it was sharing your duties (unclear) and I wasn't interested, that's what we did at the steel mill.  I didn't want to be working while I was in college, so I chose the other and it turns out I'm in an all men's dorm, Wright [Wright Quadrangle Residence Hall].  I think it was Wright, the Wright dorm; I can't remember now.  But, anyway so I'm in this all--and I've never wanted to be all men anything so, but I'm there so fine.
Story_ID: 581137
Speaker 1: There was this one other black male on the floor.  He was, his name was Charles, Charles Ellison.  He and I are still very close friends to this day.  He's a, he was a, a music major, and he was a character.  I mean he'd have these tall tales he tell every, every time and but you know we would hang out together and they, they, they played all these games, these pranks in the college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], you know you they, they would put a bucket of water over a door and you open it and it would pour on you, I mean it was all this stuff and you know we tried to be part of the crowd, so we're playing the pranks with them, but then as the semester went on and on it occurred to me that more often than not we were, one of the three of us--
Speaker 2: The targets.
Speaker 1: --were the targets of the pranks and so one day the, they dragged Chaz, was his nickname, Charles, my friend Charles, into the shower, threw him in the shower with all his clothes on and they were about to throw me, you know it was just, you know just goofy stuff, but I had this forty dollar Italian knit on and I, you know, and I, and I told them I said, "No, you know you cannot do this," and, and they are arguing and they're pushing me and I said, "Wait a minute let me take the knit off," and I went Gary [Indiana] on them because I was getting ready to go into battle (laughter), which as I have always said I do not like to do, but and they knew that I was ready.  I mean there was no question that I was ready to fight, and so I didn't get thrown in the shower and after that I quit, I quit the pranks.  That was a lesson that was learned for me is that you can't, you know, if you're gonna be part of the crowd, then you gotta really be part of the crowd.  You can't be on the fringes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Halfway in the crowd--
Speaker 1: --yeah where you're only part of the crowd when they need a doormat and that was how it was.
Story_ID: 581138
Speaker 1: In the--I was in an advanced--these are examples of what was driving me nuts being in that idyllic, beautiful racist environment.  I was, I was in, in an advanced journalism class, at the end of the class the professor announces, Ralph Holsinger [Ralph L. Holsinger], announces that because it is an advanced class he's gonna grade on a curve and because I, I had this 83 average and this Mexican kid in the class had an 83 average, C started at 83, and you know I just thought that very strange.  I had also joined the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and the Air Force ROTC because my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] had been in the [U.S.] Army and I thought, you know, well this might be interesting.  This was another experience something I hadn't done and I had these, these white guys that just again they rubbed me the wrong way when they were giving the orders on what they would have us doing and plus I felt very awkward walking around campus in a uniform.  I just didn't, I'm not a uniform person.  I'm, I'm, I'm really a rebel, and so and then I had a situation where we had to debate, we had to have a debate on freedom.  Well it was about--
Speaker 2: Because you were a part of the debate club also?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well yeah, yeah in the ROTC.  We were assigned, it was part of developing you for an officer.  So, we had this debate that we had to do on 'The Communist Manifesto' [Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx] whether it was good or bad.  I knew nothing about 'The Communist Manifesto,' and so, but I decided I'd take the, the--because all, all, all, everybody else, and I was the only black in the class, everybody else you know Indiana boys, the flag wavers, so they all of course wanted the, wanted the, it's a horrible thing.  You know I didn't care, so I said okay I'll take, I'll take the, the other side.  I read 'The Communist Manifesto' and our paper, it makes great sense you know.  I mean if you go through it and if they, if they performed as, as the promised it, well so, so we had the debate and I just, I outperformed the guy to the point where the professor gave me this look like you know how loyal are you, you know are you one of those guys (laughter) and I'm going god you know and--
Speaker 2: 'Cause you're in opposition at that point.
Speaker 1: Yes, yeah and I, I argued too eloquently for--
Speaker 2: And were there other, others, the others with you of course on opposition.
Speaker 1: No, no, no this was a one on one debate.
Speaker 2: It's one on one, oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this was a one on one debate.  You know it wasn't, it wasn't, it wasn't a formal debate it was just, it, it was part of the learning process. And I, I didn't mention this, but I was the only black in my journalism class, freshmen class.  There was a woman a couple of years ahead of me.  We were the only two blacks in the whole journalism department [at Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], so that was a problem.
Story_ID: 581139
Speaker 1: The other problem I had in my freshmen year was okay I had taken French at Roosevelt [Theodore Roosevelt High School, Gary, Indiana], in junior high, I'd taken it in high school, but I never--I, I took it initially because it was supposed to be a Romance la- language--
Speaker 2: Language yeah.
Speaker 1: --and so that sounded good, but as I took it I never quite figured out the utility of it and so I didn't take it very well.  So, and when I got to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] I had to take it because back then it was like to get a, a, a fine arts degree you were required to have a language, so I take French and first of all I speak French, the little French I did speak I spoke with a Gary [Indiana] ghetto accent.  You know it was like (speaking French) parlez-vous francais (laughter) and that didn't go over well, plus I couldn't conjugate.  I was, I didn't know what, I was just horrible and I had five blocks, five hours in a fifteen hour block of courses of French of which I flunked.  And, and now the thing was you know with my, my English composition class, and, and I'm a good writer in high school, but I get there, there was things that I hadn't been taught.  For example, that you don't use contractions in formal writing and so I was writing like that, and the first composition paper I got back just bled red.  I mean it was just--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --corrections all through this thing and I was just shocked because this, this was the first time I'd ever been graded this severe.  I got a D on it.  But, by the end of the, I got a B out of that course because I was just--I learned quickly.  You know just things, but I also had to have math.  You know this was all to say that by the end of my freshmen year my grade point average was not looking good at all, plus I was adjusting to being away and not having my parents [Norma Scott Anderson and Monroe Anderson, Jr.] tell me what to do and when to, and I was having a nice social life.  By the end of my freshmen year 'cause I, I was on social probation, but we also got caught in the dorm playing penny poker with beer and so we got called in for that and being freshmen and silly we all decided, you know it was a group of us, black and white, we decided that we were gonna mess with them, so we came in costume, character, we just--
Speaker 2: To the dean?
Speaker 1: To the dean yes (laughter).  And you know because we thought it was all funny, and he says, "Well your parents will have to be notified and you could be put out of school."  And it wasn't being put out of school didn't freak me out as much as my parents being notified because my father was working two steel mill jobs to, to put me through college and make sure that my brother [Dariek Anderson] and sister [Elizabeth Anderson Hollins] weren't lacking anything in the process.  So, he would work at U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation, Gary Works, Gary, Indiana] for eight hours and then go to Taylor Forge [Taylor Forge and Pipe Works] and work another eight hours.
Speaker 2: As you said the steel mills was not anything easy.  It was very tough.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly and this was what he did and you know it occurred to me when they said they were gonna notify them that, that would be a big letdown.  You know I wasn't fearful of being, being--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --hit in the head with a baseball or anything like that, but it occurred to me that this was not a good thing.  So, that's when I panicked and so then I said, "Well how do I get out of this?"  I said oh I told him I said, "I'm sorry, I apologize."  I said, "But my parents are very religious and this is going to really--," (laughter), and so, I, I got a pass on it.
Story_ID: 581140
Speaker 1: Okay, so then I, I go home and I work at the mill that summer again and I come back in my sophomore year.
Speaker 2: But now also during this, this summer of your freshmen year--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --was that when you became a part of the Democratic, the 1968 Democratic [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 1: No that was, that was later.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: That was a year later okay--
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: --a couple of years later actually.  Okay I go back and I work, I get a job back at, at Republic Steel [Republic Steel Company] you know cutting the bars or what have you and I'm working there, but my social life, I'm disappointed with my social life because I don't have a car on campus [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and you know so you're just, you know you're just an underclassman, so I, I decide I gotta have a car and my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] didn't want me to have a car.  So, he says no and so we argue about it.  And so then I threatened, I said, "Look I'll just stay, I'll drop out for a semester and save up enough money to drive a car," and my mother [Norma Scott Anderson] wants me to stay, I mean my father does too, but she, she, she referees the battles because we're butting heads.  And so she referees, so I get a car.  I get a 1959 green Chevrolet Biscayne.  It's with the wings.  And at the time, 'Batman' the TV series is very famous, very popular, yeah the one that they show on, on TV Land now or whatever.  And I, so I, I, I, I get some, some moon, silver moon hubcaps and put on the side.  I called it the bat mobile (laughter).  It's a stick shift and I have a skull and bone and I'm happy you know three hundred bucks [dollars] for the car is what it cost back then.
Story_ID: 581141
Speaker 1: So, I'm back on campus and I got my ride (laughter) and I go through that semester and I go home and it's the--we had this incredible blizzard during spring, semester break, in between where it's when Chicago [Illinois] got, Chicago is like paralyzed, it's the famous snowstorm when nothing could move.  Gary's [Gary, Indiana] the same.  I can't go see my girlfriend.  She lives in East Chicago [Indiana]; I'm just stuck.  I'm watching the news and then I get the letter.
Speaker 2: From the dean?
Speaker 1: From the university.  I'm out of there, flunked out.
Speaker 2: Was it because of, of--
Speaker 1: No, no, not because of my social, because of my grades.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I've got, I've got, I've got five hours of an F in math, I mean science, math, and Ds you know and so I'm, I'm out you know it's like come get your stuff, your, your, 1.2 average or whatever it is, is not, not acceptable, whatever it was it was horrible.  And so I was depressed, but resolved.  I'm on the way back down after, after the snow clears and I'm packing up.  It so happens that a friend of one of my relatives had gone to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] she was older and she says, "Well you know you can petition to get back in," and I said, "Oh."  You know 'cause I thought I was just done.  And so she says, "But you have to have an argument of why you can get back in."  So, I said, "I can do that."  So, I go see somebody else, not that dean, but somebody I don't know who it was who is asking me about retention and that type of stuff, basically saying that I'm probably because I'm from Gary and black I'm probably too stupid to learn anything.  I said, "Wait a minute," I said, "if you look at it I have five hours a D and ten hour, I have ten hours a D and five in, in math and science and five hours, and five hours F and five hours a D in French.  So, if you take all those, those grades out that are required for this, if you take all those out I got a 3.2 average."  He looks at--I said, "So what I will do if you let me stay is I will transfer to the School of Education where these aren't require and I'll major in English--"
Speaker 2: How amazing.
Speaker 1: --and I'll be fine.  And so he says, "Okay you're back in."  I had no interest, no, I had no interest in majoring in education.  Those courses seemed like they were deadly boring to me, but what I did and, and of course the other thing weighing on me if I flunked out which also I, I started to realize was Vietnam War it was going, I had that backdrop.  So, what I did was I took classes that required writing.  I took the literature classes.  I, I stuck with my journalism classes.  I took philosophy.  I took things where you had to, to, to do essays, and my grades improved dramatically, but I just skipped the French.  And I got lucky in that because of protests and other things going on, on campus, which I want to go to next, the language requirement got dropped and that's how I graduated.  They never (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: Exactly, but--
Speaker 2: But then you transferred back after your English and education agreement back to journalism?
Speaker 1: I never transferred, I never transferred.  I just told them that.
Speaker 2: No, I mean did you go back into journalism after your, your grades were--
Speaker 1: Oh yes I was always in journalism.  I did the journalism, but it was going to be English.  I, what, what I ended up doing I had a double major, English literature and journalism, but I continued to take the journalism classes that entire time, but I just, but, but it was supposedly, but I never, the school of education never saw hide nor hair of me.
Story_ID: 581142
Speaker 1: Now the other--but this is what I want to point out, which is very important about my formulation and what have you is when I was in colleges, college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] it was a time of incredible social change in this country.  When I first started as I mentioned before, it was the Civil Rights Movement.  In '66 [1966], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] stuck up his fist and said black power and that whole burden that I said of the race that I felt I was carrying on my shoulders was lifted.  I became a black militant instantly. I, I, I, I grew my hair, I grew an Afro.  And part of the reason I grew an Afro because I'd gone to the barber, there were no black barbers in town.  I'd gone to this barber, this white barber, who had been an army barber and here I am sitting in his, his, his chair and he said, "A lot of people say they can't cut colored folk hair," he says, "I, I cut colored folks' hair in the [U.S.] Army." I mean he just zip, zip, and he gives me a buzz cut, you know, which was not cool.  So, after that, it's my freshmen year, so after that then my roommate and I decide we're gonna buy some clips and cut each other hair 'cause we're not gonna go through that; he went through it too.  Neither one of us know anything about cutting hair.  We gave each other haircuts that were so bad that I was walking down the street and people would stop to stare.  I mean I had big plugs (laughter) out my head, where you can see my scalp and I was like, it look like I had just been plucked or something.  So, after that I started growing my hair and, and I started paying attention--right after, after the semester break, in my freshmen year, my friend Charles [Charles Ellison] had come there and he said you got, he said, he said, "You gotta meet, read 'Malcolm X' ['The Autobiography of Malcolm X,' Malcolm X and Alex Haley], that's the bible."  So, I read 'Malcolm X' and I started reading literature and I became a black nationalist.  And then I was paying attention to things.
Story_ID: 581143
Speaker 1: But, okay, but anyway at that time from, from moving out of the--when I, when I first went there [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] they had hours for women in the dorms.
Speaker 2: For visitation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They had to be, well that, that too, but they had hours where girls had to be in, in the dorm.  If you weren't a senior, you had to be in by eleven o'clock on the weekends and one o'clock during, during weekends or they locked you out.  They literally locked the dorm, and, and you had, you could have open visitation on your floor once a month I think it was, maybe it was more than that, but I, I can't remember, but anyway where everybody, they could come, somebody of the opposite sex can come to your dorm, but you had to leave the door open.  You know you had all this stuff and of course no drinking or anything.  By my sophomore year, the, the women's liberation had kicked off--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the free speech movement had kicked off, the Black Power movement had kicked off, the anti-war movement had kicked off, and of course free love because of the pill and of course drugs.  So, you had all this stuff going on that a year before I wasn't aware of at least and, but now it's just there, I mean to the point of in, in my sophomore year you could walk down the hall and you would smell marijuana drifting from under people's door and the RA [resident advisor] wouldn't say anything.  The same RA that would bust you if they caught you with a beer or something, but they, they, they would ignore it because they didn't want the scandal of people knowing that people you know the parents finding out that their kids were down there exposed to grass or something like that, so and, and, and I, I never did LSD because I, I, I had some dreams that I wanted to get out of and so I didn't know.  But, I, I went to a party in the dorm one day and there were like twenty-five, there were twenty-five white guys in this room all tripping off LSD, and this one guy there was a, a painting on the wall that was just white with a red circle in the middle and that's all there was to this thing.  It was not much of a painting, and he was standing and just totally engrossed going, "Oh wow, oh wow," (laughter) and so I didn't stay very long at the party.  I was there about five minutes (laughter) and that was odd, but, but I mean but all this interesting, I mean you had, you had these anti-war [Vietnam War] demonstrations.  You had the black power, the protests going on so suddenly college to be very, very interesting and, and I was involved in school protests at the time.  And my, okay, let's see let me, let me get this right, maybe, besides watching people smoke dope and stuff like that.
Story_ID: 581144
Speaker 1: In my junior year, my, my first junior year because I was there for five years because of the bad grades in the beginning--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and also because the war [Vietnam War] was going on and there was no incentive to graduate.  And as part of my education I had to work for a school newspaper.  Now as it turned out, the really good positions there, editor and all that went to the white kids again because--and so I, I cut out a thing where I did reviews of movies 'cause I found out first of all I liked movies, I'd always like, but also you could get in if you were a critic or a reviewer and you got into them free, so, so I would go to the movies.  I'd go to the theater and tell them I was working for, I was a reviewer for the Indiana Daily Student and I would do my review and write it and it was like great and then I started doing other cultural things because none of, none of these journalists who were gonna be, white journalists who were gonna be serious journalists were interested in that.  So, anyway it's the, it's January, February of '68 [1968] and I'm sitting in the newsroom writing a review and Professor Farrell [ph.], who's a photography, who had been my photography professor passes through and he says, "Oh Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson]," he says, "one of my former students at Newsweek he, he's, he's in the bur- the Newsweek bureau Chicago [Illinois]."  He says, "They're looking for black reporters because they're expecting a long hot summer."  And I said, "Oh okay."  So, took the name, looked up the address, sent out a letter.  I got a call from them not a couple of weeks later and they said, "Yeah we'd like to interview you. When can you come up to Chicago?"  I said, "Okay I can be up there during spring break."  They said fine.  It's the day before my twenty-first birthday, the day after Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] has been assassinated.  The city is in flames.  There're more people leaving than coming in.  I go in for the, it's the easiest job interview I ever had in my life (laughter).  I was like--because, because, be--one were to think of the urban riots at that time, that was our affirmative action more than anything else simply because up until then they had nothing but white reporters and so they can always have--each newspaper if it was progressive would have one token black and that was it.  Everybody else was white.  They were covering these riots and the white reporters were targets.  They figured so they needed to darken up a little bit, so then they took an interest in us.  Well, and to be fair also you had the Kerner report [National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders] that came out around that time that said there are two Americas, one black, one white--
Speaker 2: One white.
Speaker 1: --and so there was some goodwill among editors, white editors to actually go out and get some black people on their staff.  Okay, so anyway I come to Newsweek magazine, I do an internship there that summer, and up until then journalism I found it to be boring and just conceptual and I wasn't really--still going to be the great novelist.  That was the most incredible summer for me.  I, I, I had my own little office, no windows there in the office on Michigan Avenue where the bureau was and it was just wonderful.  I, I, one of the stories I worked on was how white newspapers attempt to reach the black community.  For the assignment, I went and interviewed all four editors of all four white newspapers.  There were four at the time besides the Tribune, Chicago Tribune and Chicago Sun-Times.  There was the Chicago Daily News and there was the Chicago American.  I interviewed all four editors and everyone offered me a job.
Speaker 2: Gee and this is prior to even graduating from Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes prior to graduating and yeah I, I had, I had a girlfriend I was in love with and she had, plus again I didn't want to be exposed to the draft, so I, but it was, that was a gauge of how my future might be.  Then came the Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois].
Story_ID: 581145
Speaker 1: So, your summer intern is one of the most remarkable experiences that you've had at Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] which led you later into the full blossom of your career in journalism (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, well, okay I'm doing, I get the internship at Newsweek and it just so happens it's the year that the Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention] is being held in Chicago [Illinois] and, and now and this is, I mean '68 [1968] is this, this, this incredible year in American history in general.  Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.  Bobby Kennedy [Robert F. Kennedy] was assassinated, the war [Vietnam War] is going on, and LBJ [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] is not running, so it was up for grabs.  Hubert Humphrey is gonna, is running for president.  He's gonna, he's gonna get the nomination, but there's all this anti-war protest going on, so I get, I get to cover that.  As, as an intern, a twenty-one year old intern, and Newsweek, Newsweek had fifty-five employees out here.  They shipped fifty-five employees out here to cover that, and, and for the street team, the people who were gonna be out on the street for the protest, they were worried about our getting injured by the protestors, so there were these police riot helmets that were supposed to go to the Detroit [Michigan] police, but they got deserted and so we got 'em.  So we these like riot helmets on.
Speaker 1: All the journalists?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, we had riot helmets 'cause they didn't want us to get hurt.  So, we have these riot helmets and it's a Sunday night, the first night of the convention, everybody's arriving and the protestors have arrived.  So, we're out on the street, you know I--we're out on the street to cover this and what I find out later is--well okay let me do this first.  You have five thousands protestors about, they're all kids my age or around my age for the most part, and they're there to do anti-war protests.  Abbie Hoffman has, has done a little street theater and already has announced just to mess with Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley], the first Mayor Daley obviously, but to mess with him he's announced that they plan to drop LSD in the Chicago water supply, so everybody will be tripping out in the city.  Mayor Daley takes them seriously.  Now anybody who knew anything about county- counterculture would know they'd never waste LSD on the general population in Chicago (laughter).  But anyway, so he has, he has twelve, all twelve thousand of his cops out in shifts to, to focus on the convention.  If, if, if memory serves, now maybe it was three thousand demonstrators and six thousand cops, but it was twice as many cops--
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 2: --as there were demonstrators.  They were in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois], all the demonstrators, where they planned to spend the night.  And the reason they planned to spend the night, again because these are young people, and al- although there is no room at the inn even if they had money to stay in the hotels because the conventioneers--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the Democrats are in all the hotels and they're here to protest so they're gonna sleep in the park.
Story_ID: 581146
Speaker 1: Well, there are signs, there were signs in the park [Lincoln Park, Chicago, Illinois] that had been there said, "Park closes at eleven p.m."  Now, if you are a middle-aged white person walking through the Chicago [Illinois] park at three o'clock in the morning, hanging out in the park, the only thing a policeman is gonna say to you is, "Are you crazy," but they're not gonna arrest you or mess with you or anything like that.  But, because they were young kids and protestors, eleven o'clock comes and the police were masked, full riot gear, helmets, face mask, they've removed their badges that I- identified them with the excuse being that the protestors may rip them off and use them as a weapon by them.  But in the process of removing the badges, they are now a faceless mob.  They announced and, and, and we're sort of back where we can hear, but we're not there.  They announce that the park is closed eleven o'clock. That they have to disperse.  In, in, in, in, in the, in the, in the street lighting you see a bottle fly from where the protestors are towards the police.  Now--
Speaker 2: Oh god (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I later learned that it's an agent provocateur, but at that time it looked like the demonstrators had attacked the police.  So, they immediately start wading in and beating the living daylights out of people, shooting tear gas, and we're on the corner of LaSalle [Drive] and Clark [Street] and I decide this middle-aged reporter and I worked--white, Irish reporter while working with, John Culhane who was thirty-five at the time which I thought quite old for some strange reason (laughter), but anyway we, we started going against the crowd because these people are headed southbound away from the park down Clark Street and some of them are bleeding, bloody where they're beaten by the cops.  So, we head into the crowd.
Speaker 2: With the cameras and everything?
Speaker 1: No, with our notepads, but we had our riot helmets on--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and our press credentials hanging around our neck.  We don't get very far.  We get as far as, I'm having a mental block, but there's a Baptist church on Clark Street, black Baptist church, we get that far, it's about a half block off of LaSalle, god I'm, I'm blanking and I know the name of the church, but anyway, we get that far and it occurs to us the cops have just beaten the living daylights out of anybody who doesn't have a blue uniform on.  I mean they were just whacking people.  So we run into the church yard, you know to get out the way, and of course in American mythology a church is a sanctuary.  It wasn't for us that day.  Cops come to the fence and say, "Come out of there MFs."
Speaker 2: Come out of there what?
Speaker 1: MFs.  (Unclear) is it okay for me to say the word.  I, I will say what they said, but I'm trying to not say it, but I think you get the idea.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah and as we come through the gate they beat us with their nightsticks.  I have the dubious honor or being one of the first journalists beaten by the Chicago police.
Speaker 2: How incredible.
Speaker 1: So, they beat us, they--yeah.  You know and I had grown up in, in the quasi ghetto, not the hard ghetto, but a block, block away from public housing projects [in Gary, Indiana] and never felt the sting of a policemen's nightstick until then.  And so they're beating us and what they're doing is they're hitting us on the back and shoulders and in the kidneys and on the knees, yeah they're trying to hurt us, and you know and they hit us in the head, but the helmets protected us.
Speaker 2: Blocked that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  No, but, but for people who, anybody who is playing football you still get your, when you take a blow to the head you still get your bell rung.  There is just no, I mean you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --it rattles your brain and what have you.  So, we come out of there and then what I see is they've formed, the police have formed a gauntlet down Clark Street and they're beating people from one cop to the next cop to the next 'til they get past LaSalle street where it stops.  And you know up until that time I'd always thought of myself as a humanitarian, but as I'm taking these blows, as they're beating me from one to--I'm trying--
Speaker 2: Oh my god.
Speaker 1: --to find another body to take one of those licks for me.
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: I mean since, well as I later discovered 'cause again I didn't know anything about nightsticks, they're wood, but with lead on the inside--
Speaker 2: Oh my god.
Speaker 1: --so it's incredible.  So, they beat us all the way down to LaSalle, you know it was a half a block.  It was not a really huge distance, because we didn't make it in that far.  But they beat us down to the corner and then we're done.
Story_ID: 581147
Speaker 1: So, we get picked up and we go in and we report to our editors what happened to us.  And they think it's us that we provoked the cops, so we get grounded where Monday night we have to stay in the office.  We aren't allowed out on the street, but then later that night other reporters including Newsweek reporters have been beaten by the cops and so then they realized it's not us, it's them.  So, by Tuesday night I'm back out on the streets and it's incredible.  I mean it's like we get tear gas, we're watching cops beat people and people and now some kids are throwing back at them, you know they're throwing stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Did they know that you were a journalist?  Did you even try to introduce yourself as a journalist?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, no they knew.  As, as it was later, it was, it was described in the media and in history as a police riot, and one of the headlines, it may have been in Newsweek, but it was somewhere was: "Beat the Press."  I mean they were intentionally because they didn't want us covering or reporting what was going on.  I mean there were instances where police would take the camera of a photographer and break the lens.  Okay, but anyway the, the next Tuesday night I think and this was '68 [1968] and this is 2006 you're asking a lot of my memory.  I, I should have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, but this is, this is important--
Speaker 1: --refreshed myself, but, but anyway the next night I, I think it's the next night I'm at the, there was a protest going on in front of the Hilton Hotel on Michigan Avenue [Conrad Hilton Hotel; Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and there was this hill across the way where it has this statue of the man on this, on a horse, and this hill is covered with protestors and in the meantime the National Guard is, is lined along because they've broken out some windows at the Hilton already, the protestors have, it's getting violent, and they form this, this wall of, of National Guard, the Illinois National Guard [Illinois Army National Guard], and, and their army stuff with their rifles and bayonets and what have you and I'm on the side of the protestors, but I'm writing and just you know writing down things and there's a photograph of me of, of that, that, I'll show, I'll share with you later.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: But, but, I mean it was just, I mean it, it was like covering a war except there's--no bullets were being fired, but it, it was tear gas and, and things being thrown and just absolutely fascinating.  I mean just, I mean and that's when I became a journalist.
Speaker 2: The real--
Speaker 1: No, exactly,
Speaker 2: --a real journalist, a real one (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly because I, I meant I met--we needed to make a telephone call and obviously this predates cell phones and what have you, so went into Sargent Shriver's [R. Sargent Shriver] hotel room and borrowed his phone to call our office to report to them.  You know so I met Sarg Shriver.  I, I met Ka- Katharine Graham who's the publisher of The Washington Post and, and, Newsweek.  I, I, I, I--let me see who else did I meet.  I met several people that I never thought I'd ever meet in my life, and it was at that point it occurred to me that being a journalist you get to attend historic events and meet historical and famous people and you get paid to do it and that sounded like a good deal.  And, and again because, because I was beat, I was the only intern that was beat, and they had other interns there, but I was the only intern, I think it was five other reporters, Newsweek reporters and photographers that were beaten, but I was the only intern.  So, they took our picture after the week was over.  They pick our picture with our riot helmets on and our suits and tie and they ran it in the magazine with descriptions you know.  For me it was: "Anderson [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] Beat on Back," and then the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] took us, they picked us up in a limo and took us down and we were interviewed.  We're supposed to try and identify some of the cops, but they had plastic over their faces--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --no badges, so it was impossible to you know identify anybody, but, but then I was considered, again because I've gotten beaten by the cops, I became Newsweek's star (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The icon (laughter)--
Speaker 1: --intern for that summer (laughter).
Story_ID: 581148
Speaker 1: So they flew me to New York [New York], I spoke before, I spoke at this luncheon to the people, I was on, I was on the T- a radio program.  You know during the course of this luncheon, you know I, I didn't make a long speech.  It was minutes, you know five minutes at the most, but after I finished this speech this, this, this, this middle-aged white guy approaches me and told me he was a, he had, he was a, a Yale lawyer and that did I ever consider law school 'cause he'd get me into Yale Law School [New Haven, Connecticut] if I wanted to go.  And you know I've told this to college students over the years since then, and the joke I love to say, tell is who knows I could have been Clarence Thomas (laughter).  But, but anyway first of all, once Yale saw my transcript they wouldn't have let me in, but, but secondly I had no interest in going any place but into the business.  Now, I mean I was hooked--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know it was just like whoa this is really exciting.  So I, I go back to campus [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and because of the money I, I, I made covering, you know because I got paid even better than the steel mill [Republic Steel Company] at Newsweek--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and, and plus I, I get a job, the, the university gives me a job part-time in their public relations, the Indiana University News Bureau, I'd get a job there.
Speaker 2: A student job and work.
Speaker 1: A student job, twenty dollars a week and that's like a hundred bucks [dollars], a hundred, a hundred bucks every two weeks or maybe more I, but it was a lot of money for being in college because I had moved off campus into the dorm by that time and my apartment, which was a, a, a painted lady and where each room had been cut up into an apartment.  It was the ghetto, you know, it's college. I mean it was a slummy little place, but my rent was like sixty-five dollars a month, so I was living large.  I bought, I traded in the green hornet [Chevrolet Biscayne], which was, had gotten a little shaky, and bought me a '64 [1964] Pontiac Bonn [Pontiac Bonneville] with a black vinyl top.  I was cruising around campus in this tank and I was a BMOC [big man on campus], I was (laughter).
Story_ID: 581149
Speaker 1: At this time, were you interested, since you were so involved in all the politics and, and demonstrations and so on, were you ever interested at that time in fraternities on campus because Kappa Alpha Psi [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity] is--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah no, that, that, that's the home--
Speaker 1: The home state of Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].
Speaker 2: --yeah it's the home, yeah exactly.  No, I was, it, well yes I wanted to pledge in my freshman year partially because the Kappas had this beautiful home, they gave great parties, and the food was great.  I hated dorm food with a passion and so for those three reasons I plan to, but there was a little complication of grades.  You had to have a certain grade point average to pledge.  By the time I got the grade point average that I needed to pledge, I was a junior and I still was gonna pledge.  I signed up and I was about to pledge--
Speaker 1: With having younger guys harass you at this point in your life, since most of the Kappas at that time pledged as sophomores.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah no, no I was gonna do it.  They, they had recruited me you know 'cause I was cool.  I'd been recruited and I hung out with them over the two years I'd been there.  It wasn't like--so I knew everybody, we were friends--
Story_ID: 581150
Speaker 1: But there was one other complication in my sophomore, my junior year I had, I had, had, had developed this skill of, well not a skill, but I, I, I had decided to go out early to check out the freshmen girls so you could pluck one before everybody else got to them because now I was an upperclassman.  So, I see this very, very attractive girl, but I, I don't try to, you know but I'm still trying to figure out who I'm gonna hit on and my roommate who was a year older than me he, he said he was gonna go out with her, but then I happen to run into her and we get into a talk and now one of the things Chaz [Charles Ellison], my friend Chaz that I told you about, we had in our, our lying and talking trash and everything we were talk- we were having a debate on who was the--perhaps the greatest lover in the world.  You know, he, he had claimed he was. I said I was.
Speaker 2: And he's the music major at Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Classical music at that time?
Speaker 1: Jazz, he was a jazz musician.
Speaker 2: Okay with David Baker.
Speaker 1: He's a jazz musician, yeah but he was into music yeah which at Indiana it was debatable whether Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York] or IU's music school was better.
Speaker 2: Still is.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, exactly.  And so you know were just, we were studying, late night, overnight studying, but we got to just clowning and bragging and everything about who's the world's greatest lover.  Out of this by the time the morning came around we decided we both were and so we decided we were going to form this secret organization called the agents of ecstasy incorporated (laughter), and you know this in our freshmen year.  And our motto is dedicated to the proposition of spreading joy and happiness throughout the female population (laughter).
Speaker 2: So that counteracted all of your fraternalizing.
Speaker 1: Exactly, no the agents were much cooler because we made it, I mean it was secret, but it was not secret enough for people to know that we were agents (laughter) and because of all of trash talking lies, I mean it had gotten to a point where there were rumors that there're two male prostitutes on campus (laughter) and to which we thought was funny 'cause they said, 'cause we said, "We're not selling it, we're giving it away for free," (laughter).  But, and we had a few other members, yeah we had, but, but anyway okay--
Speaker 2: A secret fraternity.
Speaker 1: --so, so, but I tell this, this girl that I mentioned, this very attractive woman, Christine [Anderson's first wife, Christine Harris], that I'm interested in, and I start telling her about the agents and she's just like totally fascinated and it occurs to me that she's buying it hook, line, and sinker that she's interested.  So anyway she becomes my girlfriend and this is the girl that all the other guys on campus want, black guys, and they're trying to figure out how I got her and they're upset because I have her, so the night I'm about to pledge two things happened.  First of all, word gets to me from some of my friends that they can't wait to take me through initiation, they're gonna beat the living daylights out of me because they're upset because I have her, but also I tell her that I'm gonna go through it and part of the initiation you had to have a Kotex as a blindfold, so I ask her if she'll let me have a Kotex, you know of course I'm not gonna go to the store and buy one.  She says, "What do you need that for," and I explained to her what.  She says, "Why are you doing this?"  And I stop and I think about it, I said, "Yeah why am I doing this," (laughter), and so that was the end of my pledging.  I, I never became a Kappa [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity].  And they were very upset because they didn't get to beat the living daylights out (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they were ready, ready for you.
Speaker 1: --but, right, exactly, but it occurred to me my social life was not getting any better, but it was.
Speaker 2: Indiana University (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly, right.
Story_ID: 581151
Speaker 1: Junior year, first junior year when I'm there after I've done the Newsweek and I'm working for the Indiana City News Bureau.
Speaker 2: Indiana University.
Speaker 1: I mean Indiana University News Bureau and I'm also stringing for Newsweek, a campus stringer for Newsweek (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay and I'm also a black nationalist.  I mean I'm part of the group, I'm not a leader--
Speaker 2: Right exactly.
Speaker 1: --but I'm, I'm up there I'm in the debates and discussions.  Okay what has happened is Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] has decided that it's going to raise tuition at the campus.  Now keep in mind when I first started there, tuition was eleven dollars a credit hour, which means that if you took a fifteen hour load it cost you a hundred sixty-five dollars a semester for tuition, and they were gonna raise it by, I can't remember what percent, but they were gonna raise it up to 10 percent, something like that who knows.  The black students decide this is another just conspiracy for Indiana to get the black students off the downstate campus, 'cause they know we can't afford this increase and so we're gonna have a protest demonstration and make them rescind the tuition increase.  Well, we have a big meeting about this, you know, and I'm tr- you know I, I'm in the meeting and I try to explain how I think this is nuts to do this, but they, they decide there's gonna be, there's this faculty meeting with the president, the dean, everybody and we're gonna hold them hostage until they rescind the, the tuition increase.  And part of the argument for that--
Speaker 2: You would hold them hostage while they're actually in, in the meeting?
Speaker 1: In the meeting, yes in their meeting.  And part of this right before then there'd been a, a student takeover at one of the Ivy League schools.  I'm trying to remember which one.  Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York] I think; I can't remember.  But, anyway where they had taken over and held the administration hostage and they were on the cover of Newsweek because somebody had guns and what have you, you know so, you know so they, they were using that as their, their gold standard (laughter) of what we should do.
Speaker 2: This is so much history.
Speaker 1: And, and I'm saying this is nuts you know, but they gonna do it and so you know and I'm part of this organization, so I'm gonna do it.  So, it's about sixty or seventy students, I can't remember, but a sizeable number out of a campus of six hundred and we marched on the meeting and we walk into the meeting to announce that we're taking over and nobody's leaving until they rescind the tuition and we have our list of ten non-negotiable demands--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --got have blacks students and that sort of thing.  I walk in and the first person I see is John Newman [ph.], my boss at the Indiana News Bureau, Indiana University News Bureau, and I go oh no (laughter) and I walk back out, and I walk back out and I got all these students that are walking in and looking at me like where are you going?  And so I think about it, yeah I have my fatigues on, my fatigue, grey fatigue, army jacket, I'm into my whole black militant thing and I go oh my god what am I gonna do and then okay I walk back in there, I walk straight over to John and he's like white, you know he's seeing all these black students and everything he's white, I walk over, I tap him on the shoulder and I whisper in his ear I say, "Don't worry John I've got it covered," pull out my reporter's notepad (laughter).
Speaker 2: And then you would be writing about them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right exactly, no so I'm back and forth you know (laughter).  And so I was able to keep my job and my, and, and not be a sellout at the same time.
Speaker 2: And leadership at the same time.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 2: What ever happened did they actually--
Speaker 1: On no, no, we, no they didn't rescind it, but, I mean it was such a mess.  They brought in the, this is Indiana, they bought in the, the, the sheriff police and the National Guard.  We were surrounded and it was really getting to be incredible.
Speaker 2: Did you actually hold anyone hostage in that building?
Speaker 1: Oh no, we didn't let them out.  We were holding them hostage, that's what we were doing.  We were hold- they couldn't leave.  That's holding somebody hostage.
Speaker 2: How long did that--
Speaker 1: And the cops and the police and everybody with lights flashing and everything.  It went to, through the middle of the night and finally there was some agreement made and, but they took the president or the chancellor, I can't remember, but the chancellor or the president he got so upset they, they brought him out on a, on a, cot, and that made worldwide news, photograph, and so that next morning you know I'm fielding, writing press releases and everything.  And, that, that's when I decided I would never go into public relations 'cause I felt like such a hypocrite you know.  But, it, it was, it was fair for my colleagues 'cause by that time you know I was--
Speaker 2: And you were doing exactly what you had to do--
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: --in order to, to get both things done.
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly, exactly.  But I, so, but I, I got through it and, and I did file the piece for Newsweek.  I, I covered it.  I did my job.
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 581152
Speaker 1: So with all those experiences at Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] and, and, and prior to coming to Chicago [Illinois] I guess that did give you a start in the journalist world when you later began working for the Chicago Tribune (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, yeah, no, well no it gave me, I mean the Newsweek internship gave it to me for sure because having Newsweek on my resume was magic.  When I, when I did grad- you know(unclear) , and, and, and it gave me experience.  I mean it wasn't like--and so when I did graduate after my fifth year there 'cause then I was ready to get out and as it would happen, as it just, you know, better, better, better lucky than smart all, at all times they instituted the lottery and so they pulled the numbers and my number was just high enough, you know they were calling the birthdates, and my number was just, I think it was one hundred fifty-one you know which it did make me 100 percent safe, but it was high enough where I probably wasn't gonna get drafted, so I came on out because I was ready to get out of there get and be a journalist.  I, I, I went, in January of 1970 I systematically sent, every day I would write a letter to a different newspaper.  I just got editor and publisher listings and each day--it was a form letter that I would send out, but what I'd do is I would say I'm, I'm, I'm at, you know I'm at Indiana University, I'm graduating, I've worked for Newsweek, et cetera, and I wanna come to The New York Times because I always wanted to work for The New York Times.
Story_ID: 581153
Speaker 1: We were in the, your graduate school--
Speaker 2: No job hunt (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) or, or applying for job applications--
Speaker 2: Yeah, during my job hunt, yes.
Speaker 1: --right after graduating--
Speaker 2: --Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but prior to graduating from Indiana [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana], okay.
Speaker 2: Right, right.  What I did because, I, I, I tell my interns this, I used to tell my interns this, is that I decided to, I, I decided to apply early and often.  So, I was, I, I, I developed a system where each day I'd send out what was basically a form letter to a newspaper.  But what I'd do is I would change a line in it and so if it was The New York Times I'd say I always wanted to work for The New York Times.  If, if it was the San Francisco Chronicle I always wanted to live in San Francisco [California].  If, if, you know depending on where it was--
Speaker 1: The location.
Speaker 2: --though it sounded personalized--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but it was and I just systematically one, one a day and I got three job offers, but okay one of those job offers that I got which, which was, was good, I mean better than anybody else in the department, although it wasn't as good as I thought it would be, but one of those job offers I'd been watching TV news, and, and they had this commercial for The National Observer, it was a weekly newspaper, and it looked interesting the way they advertised it, so I subscribed to it just to see.  I looked at it and I said whoa this is really an interesting newspaper I wouldn't mind working here, so I sent them a letter.  And I got a letter back from them asking that I come, you know said they would fly me out there and talk to me, so I flew out to D.C. [Washington, D.C.] and in the paper was a sister newspaper, it was owned by Wall Street Journal [The Wall Street Journal], the paper, the, the, the philosophy behind the paper was financial.  The Journal published Monday through Friday.  They, they had the presses quiet for two days, so they figured they do a weekend publication and, and, they could use the presses.  The National Observer never had a black person work for them.  They had this racist managing editor.  Bill Raspberry's [HistoryMaker William Raspberry] resume had come over the desk and he pointed out to him, "Well you know this is a Negro."  Bob Teague who became a TV reporter in, in, in, in New York [New York] I'm told that his resume passed over, same thing.  This guy had just retired and they had vowed that the first qualified black person that applied after he left they'd hire.  It was me.
Speaker 1: Again.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Amazing.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.  So, I go there and I'm the first black.  It was, it was a great, it was a great newspaper.  It was a writer's newspaper.  It was national, so I got to fly places.  The only problem with it is from my point, point of view was there were no black people there but me.  And I say no black people, I mean--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --no secretaries, no janitors, no nothing, just me.  And so I, you know and some of the white reporters were, were my mentor, would act as a mentor to me, but the thing is I didn't know whether it was for my good or not; I just wasn't sure.  That, that was the time and that was my frame of mind, that was my experience, and you know in retrospect some of them I'm sure really did have my best interest and I should have paid more attention, but I didn't.
Story_ID: 581154
Speaker 1: So I was there--and I got to fly places.  One of the interesting stories I got to do which I pitched them on was 'Hair,' the rock musical ['Hair: The American Tribal Love-Rock Musical'].  They had a tribe in town and so I, I said I wanted to do it and so they said fine.  So, I, I went to, I, I went to their performance and I met, his name is escaping me, he was the, he, he eventually became the bartender on 'The Love Boat,' the actor [Ted Lange] who played the bartender on 'Love Boat.'
Speaker 2: I can't think of his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I--
Speaker 2: Think of his name.
Speaker 1: Yeah anyway it's blocking out right now.
Speaker 2: I know, I know the guy, I see his face--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the smile and everything.
Speaker 1: Exactly right, exactly, but you know and he, you know so I interviewed him and a couple of other cast members.
Speaker 2: What was that all about interviewing him?  How was his--
Speaker 1: Oh he was, he was very nice, very helpful.  I mean and to, to the point where he says to me, he says to me, "We're having a party tonight why don't you come to the party?"  And so I said fine and so I, I, I, I go to the party and it was a very weird party for me, you know being a western boy.  I mean it's guys are dancing with guys.  They're kissing each other and, and, and about fifteen minutes after I'm there the host of the party announces, "Unless you wanna take an acid trip don't eat the Jell-O 'cause it was laced," and I didn't eat of the Jell-O thank god.  But--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but anyway I, what happens is I start dating, her name was Helen, and she's now a famous, not a famous, but a well known gospel singer.
Speaker 2: What is Helen's last name?
Speaker 1: Lowe.  Helen Lashun [sic. LaRue] Lowe [Helen Baylor] was her name, but she has a married name now and I forget what it is.  I happened to look her up on the thing, but anyway I started dating her.  She was very, she was eighteen years old and this was such a, this whole 'Hair' thing was such a decadent environment, but fun, I mean 'cause I hung out with her for a couple of weeks, I mean a couple of months I think it was, and the cast and it was, it was very interesting as, as you might imagine.  She said she had been an Ikette at one time. Before that she was with Ike [Ike Turner] and Tina Turner.
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I tried to look that up, but I didn't see that anywhere.
Speaker 2: And this was, this is prior to your, the senior year of your graduating from?
Speaker 1: No, no I'm out, I'm at--
Speaker 2: You're already out and your job--
Speaker 1: --I'm in D.C. [Washington, D.C.]. I'm in D.C. I'm working, I'm working for The National Observer and I did this piece on the cast and I started dating a cast member, but I still had my girlfriend.  Com- life is complicated.  My girlfriend, Christine [Anderson's first wife, Christine Harris], was still on campus at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], but I was in D.C., and I was not good.  So, anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) For The National Observer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right exactly and, and so I, I worked there.
Story_ID: 581155
Speaker 1: Another story I did for them is on [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis.
Speaker 2: Remarkable. Remarkable (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the thing, this man, until '61 [1961], until the day he died, died was always endeared to me because again this was one of my first, one of my first celebrity interviews so I, I, I fly up to New York [New York] and we have the interview and I'm taping it, I have my tape recorder out, and I tape the interview, then I turn on the tape recorder and it's nothing on it.  We had talked (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no.
Speaker 1: --for an hour and it's blank.  I was freaked out, panicked, and he just very kindly said, "We'll do it again."  And so then we do the same interview over again, you know or something similar.  It wasn't identical, but, and, and I did my story, but think it was just so nice of him 'cause, because for example I had tried to interview Bill Cosby while I was in college [Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana] on this college paper [Indiana Daily Student] and I approached Cosby with my notepad, he just waved me off, and I never got the interview with him.  I tried to, when I was in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] I tried to interview Richard Pryor.  He was at, he was at the Cellar Door [Washington, D.C.], and I go back there and they're obviously doing drugs and everything else and he won't talk to me--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --Pryor won't talk to me, but as I'm leaving he says to me, "And you, you, you, you tell your buddy Bill," god I'm sorry, pro- problem with age, the publisher of the National Review, Buckley, Bill Buckley [William F. Buckley, Jr.].
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: He says, "You tell your boss Bill Buckley I said hi."  So, he had, he had The National Observer and the National Review mixed up.
Speaker 2: Confused (laughter).
Speaker 1: He was confused, and that's why he didn't give me the interview, but anyway I didn't get it.  It was another--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --one that got away, but on the other hand again while I was in college I interviewed the Three Dimensions [sic. The 5th Dimension], and they were just wonderful.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Lou Rawls was incredible.  He was just, he, you know he sat down with me and we had a great interview, so I mean some people, but that's, I mean that's, that's why you know my, in my later years whenever I'm approached by a student, I'm always, well--
Speaker 2: You feel obligated to a certain extent (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I try very much, yeah, to, to be open to them.  Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 581156
Speaker 1: So but anyway so I do The National Observer and after a couple of years first of all I'm not, because I hadn't had daily newspaper experience, so I'm not as good as I thought I was and so they're, they're not happy with me.  I'm under incredible pressure trying to perform, but I don't have the experience.  I mean one day my left arm just went numb.
Speaker 2: From writing?
Speaker 1: No, no feelings, just from--one of the guys there, I was twenty-three years old at the time, and the guy says, "That's the first," the guy sat either in front or behind me, said, "that's, that's the sign of a heart attack."  I ran to the doctor.  As it turned out, as it turns out, it was stress.  I was so stressed out from the job that I just, I just couldn't, I, I just didn't need to be doing, doing that.  And so I decided at that point, although I had not been badly treated at The Observer, but it was just because I didn't feel at home because there were--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --no black people.  I decided I was going home to my folks.
Speaker 2: And you came back to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Right I, I came, that's how I ended up, well I, I applied to The Baltimore--
Speaker 2: Sun [The Baltimore Sun].
Speaker 1: --the black paper there, that's, no, it's the Baltimore--
Speaker 2: Philadelphia Inquirer [The Philadelphia Inquirer].
Speaker 1: Yeah Baltimore Sun, maybe it is the Baltimore--I'm, yeah.
Speaker 2: Philadelphia Inquirer, Washington Post [The Washington Post].
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, no the black papers, the black paper of Baltimore.  I'm, I'm, I'm sorry, I, but anyway I applied to, no that's, is it the Baltimore Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] is that what I'm thinking of, yeah Baltimore Afro-American, but I applied to them.  I, I go up there for a day, and they tell me I have to try out.  So, I write, they send me out on assignment, I write it, it's a front page story and then we, we sit down and talk about money, but they can't afford to pay me nearly as much as I'm getting  at The Observer, said forget that.  So, then I, I, I applied to Ida Lewis out of New York [New York] was starting a new magazine called Encore, and I applied there and she, she hires me.  She's gonna give me a job.  I'm going to New York.  I'd also applied to Ebony.  I'd applied to Ebony in November and hadn't heard anything from them.  It's January, Ida's gonna hire me, I'm going there, but then I get the letter from Ebony they want to talk to me.  I'm going it take you, it takes you this long to get back to me, huh, but it, it so happens that I'm going to, to Gary, Indiana, going into Chicago to go to Gary 'cause they're having black power convention [National Black Political Convention] in Gary with Baraka--
Speaker 2: Amiri Baraka.
Speaker 1: Yeah Amiri, Amiri, Amiri Baraka and then Jesse and Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher], Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] and Hatcher.  And so I'm going to cover that for The Observer and so I figured I'd drop by Ebony and do my interview.  So, I go there and you know I got a job at Encore, so I'm just, I'm just, I'm reading them the riot act about how they're still doing the same old stuff they were doing when I was in elementary school [Lincoln School, Gary, Indiana].  They said, "Well this is why we want you.  We want some new blood, some fresh blood," and they'd just had the, just moved into the, the, the, the, the headquarters building downtown.  I'm taken on a tour and there are all these beautiful women in there and I so I said well and, and Ch- and, and, and Charles Sanders [Charles L. Sanders] who's the managing editor is telling me, making me all kind of promises that later don't really get kept, but, but anyway I said well I'll think about it.  And then so I call Ida and tell her that Ebony has made me an offer, and I mean I'd committed to her, I, I don't know if I should do this, and she says, she says, "If you have a chance to go to Ebony, go to Ebony," so I became an assistant editor at Ebony magazine in April of 1972.
Story_ID: 581157
Speaker 1: How was it working at Ebony with John Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] as CEO?  What were some of the--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) okay well let me, let me tell you this real quick. The week before I, I actually started at Ebony I've moved here, I'm staying with my parents' [Norma Scott Anderson and Monroe Anderson, Jr.] house in Gary [Indiana], Charles [Charles L. Sanders] has a party at Prairie Shores [Chicago, Illinois] where he lives and the party is for Billy Dee Williams and Billy Dee is at, you know, there and, and none of the Ebony models and other gorgeous women who worked there give him any, any, any conversation whatsoever because they don't know who he is.  So, he and I end up in a corner, Billy and I end up in a corner just talking movies, you know, about black exploitation movies and things like this.  He seemed like a nice guy.  It turns out our birthday is the same day, April 6th, he's ten years older than I am, he's thir- his is 1937, but you know we talk.  You know he has a, he, he was here to promote 'Brian's Song,' which hadn't come out yet, but okay so they don't know him, so, they just ignore him.  Three or four months later 'Lady Sings the Blues' comes out, the same Dee, Billy Dee Williams shows up at Johnson Publishing [Johnson Publishing Company, Chicago, Illinois] and these women are screaming and running after this man (laughter), and I said whoa this is really interesting.  Okay, but anyway--
Speaker 1: Publicity.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exact, no, you know, I mean it'd been on the big screen--
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'Lady Sings the Blues.'
Speaker 2: --and you know being, being portrayed yeah, portrayed as this great love, romantic love interest but--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --but it changed him, I mean he, he became the Billy Dee Williams at that point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, the icon (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly.
Story_ID: 581158
Speaker 1: Okay, but now getting back to--first let me talk about the wonderful things about working at, at Ebony. It was, there was a, a fraternity there that, that has gone, has been unmatched for any place I've ever worked, for me.  I'm sure people in other, other people in other news organizations have it, but for me that was it.  I mean people cared about me, I mean they were in my business (laughter), you know, which did not happen at other places, 'cause they didn't care enough--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to be in my business.  Sometimes they were nurturing, sometimes they were scolding, I mean and the value of all them for, is that after I left Ebony to go back into the white media I knew the difference between racism and office politics, and before I was sometimes mistaking office politics for racism and after that experience there I, I, I knew office politics when I saw it and I knew racism when I saw it, and that was valuable to know.
Speaker 2: Well what is office politics?  How would you, how would you--
Speaker 1: You know people were jockeying for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) the differences between--
Speaker 1: --you know for example at Ebony it was, everybody wanted the cover story or if there was a good trip someplace, I mean, 'cause you flew to different things.  I mean and I had some fantastic experiences there.  I, I, I covered Ma- Curtis Mayfield right after 'Super Fly' had come out and I did a tour with him through the South, through, through college campuses and what have you, and I did a piece on him.  [HistoryMaker] Jim Tilmon who is this, who was an American Airlines [American Airlines, Inc.] pilot, but had his own TV show I, I, I covered, I, I did a piece on him and I got to fly in the cockpit of a 727 [Boeing 727]--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --and we flew to California and Texas and Detroit [Michigan] and, I mean and it pretty much eliminated my white knuckle fear of flying.  I mean I still get nervous periodically, but, but after seeing how that worked and being up there.
Speaker 2: What was it like interviewing him, a, a pilot (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Who Tilmon?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh Tilmon is an interesting--, I mean 'cause he was also, he later on became a, a well known weatherman in TV here in Chicago [Illinois] and he's, he's no, he's, he's, he's like a fascinating character.  He just is.  He, he, he's, he's fascinating and very articulate and very self-assured, you know, no he's, he was, he was he's always been a fascinating character.
Speaker 2: And so when you interviewed Curtis Mayfield and Tilmon you were actually traveling with them during the time that you were--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --interviewing them, it--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --was not just a--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, no that was the thing you got to travel with them.  I mean that was, you know young people who are interested in going into journalism, what I tell them is you know is you get to meet these famous and influential people, you get to, to, to, to do the first draft on history 'cause that's what journalism is history on the run (unclear) and--
Speaker 2: A first draft on history because history is on the run.
Speaker 1: Right, no because jour- journalism is history on the run--
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) as it's unfolding you're running with it and you are doing it.
Speaker 2: The first draft of, of history.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, and what I tell--
Speaker 2: That's very interesting.
Speaker 1: Right and what I tell college kids is that when you go to college you pay to learn things, to get an education.  As a journalist you get paid to learn things.  Paying to learn things, getting paid to learn things--
Speaker 2: Getting paid one thing.
Speaker 1: --which what do you thing might be better?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know I trust when you're young it's just fun, so, no because I did, I, I, I did another story where we were out in the middle of the Gulf of Mexico on a oil drill, drill platform and we were like maybe ten stories up these things are pretty high, but you'd look down and you can see a barracuda and all these fish flying around because they, they fed them.  They feed, feed them and it attracted them, so I mean, you know so it was very--and, and I flew on a helicopter, you know what I mean.  So these were very--I spent a week trying to interview Stevie Wonder, a week in New York [New York] with Stevie Wonder, but I never got the interview, another one that got away.  So, I mean it's, you know it's just really.  I had lunch with Lena Horne.  I mean not me by myself, but it was you know the editors, but we all, Lena Horne I mean so those types of--we had all these movie preview, pre- previews that we see ahead of time now; that was great.  Now--
Speaker 2: So you had meeting, you, you had, did not have a chance to interview Lena Horne?  But, but you just--
Speaker 1: No, she was just there visiting.  She was there visiting.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: But I got to talk to her yeah, yeah, we got, I got to talk to her as part of the group, but no I, I didn't do a story on her no.  But, you know, but anyway fun, interesting stuff.
Story_ID: 581159
Speaker 1: Now, the bad part for me about Ebony is it was way too regimented.  Work started at nine o'clock.  If you got there at 9:01, you were late, and sometimes Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] was standing in the hall to see who was late I mean, he'd be in the lobby.  You'd see Lerone [HistoryMaker Lerone Bennett] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What an imposing figure.
Speaker 1: Right, I know you'd see Lerone Bennett running down this, down Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] to make sure he got there, if he was almost late, which I--you know, they told you, you couldn't have coffee at your desk.  They told, you had to have it in the cafeteria.  They, they told you when your coffee break was.  This was contrary to everything I'd experienced in the white journalism world.  It was just way too controlling, and then Ebony did, does, they may be changing, but as of this moment they do black success stories.  That's their whole thing, and that may or may not be interesting for people to read, but after writing so many black success, as a journalist, and you're about fed up to here with doing the formulaic stories.  So, that got to me.  And so after a couple of years I decided I should do something else.  [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett who was a well known and established columnist and had a TV show here told me that the Chicago Tribune had an opening.  I applied to the Tribune.
Story_ID: 581160
Speaker 1: So, tell me about Mr. Johnson [HistoryMaker John H. Johnson] though.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You said working there was like militaristic, it was military (unclear) and, and just very controlled and, and the, the difficulties of having everything to be structured.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How do you think it would have run if it had not been that way?  I think sometimes with some, with some structures like that sometimes can be more productive than counterproductive.
Speaker 2: Yeah probably, yeah it made people productive, but it was way too paternalistic.  No, my, my, my, my, from, from, from, my philosophy was then, is now, and always has been that if you're a professional then you do what you need to do.  You don't need somebody to tell you when to do it or how to do it, anything like that.  I mean if you're professional and you know that you need to get your work done you have to, you have to put in your eight hours and you know if you, if you, if you put it in from 9:15 to 5:15 I mean what's the difference unless you're missing an interview or something, I mean you know, I mean it's, or let me, let me think of another way is--he would scream at people.  I mean he would like, he would dress down his editors out in the hallway when they did something that upset him in front of us and that is not good management (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Discomforting yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that is not, you know, I mean because they're trying to command our respect and he's not giving them many.
Speaker 1: There again is old school philosophy though.
Speaker 2: Right exactly, yeah right the old school.  I was not old school.  I mean I had, you know, had I gone to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] instead of Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and had I not been influenced by a lot of white radicals--
Speaker 1: That regimented style may not have mattered.
Speaker 2: Exactly right, exactly right, then maybe I would have been, been, you know because I could, I mean, at a young age maybe I could have gone either way, but after I'd been experienced and exposed to all I had, regimentation was not good for me.
Story_ID: 581161
Speaker 1: So I, so anyway, so I go to the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and I was there for ten years.  There were about seven or eight black journalists out of maybe a couple of hundred or something, and we formed--[HistoryMaker] Clarence Page was one for example, Leanita McClain who was, was one, and during my, during my tenure there, I did reviews, I did, I covered police, fires, I covered co- courts.  I did investigative reporting.  One of the, the first investigation I did was in 1976 it was auto repair.  Bill, Bill, Bill Gaines [William Gaines] who now teaches down at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] and I, what we did we, we, we had cars broken in a, in a, in a, in an automotive--at, at Waubonsee College [Waubonsee Community College], we had a professor [Cecil Armstrong] there who would do things to cars that we knew exactly what it was, and we'd take 'em into repair shops to see how much they charge.  Half the time we took 'em in we got ripped off.  We went, we went to fifty-two different repair shops over a three month period and we knew what was wrong with the car. We'd tell 'em well the brakes aren't working and, or the transmission is not working.  One time we had Amoco [BP Amoco Corporation; BP Corporation North America Inc.] try to give us two--they, they, they had just, one Amoco had just given us a, a new transmission, a reworked on transmission.  We went to another one and they told us the same thing they're gonna rework it again.  We had one, one, one, one shop tried to sell us two master head, master cylinders for the brakes, it was like trying to sell you two heads when you only need one (laughter).
Speaker 2: One.
Speaker 1: Right.  I mean so we had really, the thing is it, it works, the, the investigation was so affective that City of Chicago [Illinois] got new laws and I was on the, we were on 'The Phil Donahue Show.'  This was my first TV interview, and this was in '76 [1976] and when, when Phil [Phil Donahue] was Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].
Story_ID: 581162
Speaker 1: Just to recap prior to your moving back to Chicago [Illinois] from Washington D.C.--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you mentioned that a black power convention [National Black Political Convention] that you attended in Gary [Indiana] with Baraka, Amiri Baraka--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]--
Speaker 2: Yeah and Mayor Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher].
Speaker 1: --and Mayor Hatcher.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did that experience relate to your, your, a change in your life, or did it have any effect on you at that time?
Speaker 2: I had been participating and covering black nationalist events, their demonstrations, et cetera, but this thing of course was huge. I mean it was, you had politicians, black nationalist activists from all over the country, and it had a lot of media.  There was hordes of media there, and so it was fascinating.  It was Baraka, Amiri, Amiri Baraka was, was, was in charge of it.  He had put it together, he had called it together, and he was walking around with his little entourage you know because this was part of showing how important he was and he had to have, he had to have bodyguards and what have you and then Jesse came in and as, as Jesse is want to do and upsets people, he stole the show you know by speaking firebrand. I mean he, he went from a civil rights leader to a black nationalist in a day and then Mayor Hatcher who was very smooth and, and, and re- refined as a speaker in my opinion sort of got lost in the shuffle between these two who were much more showy and, but it, but it was fascinating.  I, I wrote a piece for The National Observer.  It was one of the last pieces that I wrote for them, and of course it's memorable to me mainly because literally right after I finished covering the black power convention I, I went over to Chicago and had my Ebony interview.  As, as I said, I had a job and so I was very, very difficult in the interview.  I'm surprised I, I was offered the job, but in retrospect I'm happy that I was and I took it.
Story_ID: 581163
Speaker 1: Well you also mentioned that during this time, that this is after your, your tenure with Ebony and you began working with the Tribune--
Speaker 2: Yes, the Chicago Tribune (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and the multitude of experiences with--
Speaker 2: Yes during my, I was at the Chicago Tribune for ten and a half years.  I started there in June of 1974.  I, I, I, I left Ebony, I quit Ebony I think a month before and my, my old college girlfriend, sweetheart, Christine Harris and I were still together and we would get married that year in '74 [1974], but we, did we, I think we got married in '73 [1973].  I take it back we got married in '73 [1973], in August of '73 [1973], but anyway the marriage didn't last so I, I sort of let some of it go.  But anyway we went to Jamaica on vacation first and we had a wonderful time and then came back and I started at the Tribune, and it was right, when I started at the Tribune it was right when Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] was resigning, right around the time Nixon was resigning and so we were about to, to enter a new era completely.  I started there as a, a general assignment reporter and what I, the Tribune they, they already had I think six or eight black reporters on the entire staff and they had this system back then where they had a metropolitan section, they called the metro section and that's where all, almost all the blacks and women were 'cause it was a section that covered the city and it was like you, you did the stories that nobody else wanted to do. It was murders and fires and community stuff, things that they really didn't care about that much.  It, it was mainly for beginning reporters, but strangely enough blacks and women stayed beginning a lot longer than white males did.  They would come into the metro section and spend three to six months and then they were on to a beat or something more enticing.  Similarly black reporters just were there for years.  And if they weren't there they had a, a help line section, which was a consumer section which also wasn't thought very much of and, and some, some of the black reporters would go from the metro section to the help line section, but never ever getting into the real meat of, of the thing or it took 'em again for ever.  And then of course we also worked weekends because the, the really good white male reporters who are able to get past that fairly quickly.  In fact, we, on weekends would be mainly again minorities and women, by that I mean white women of course, 'cause some of the minorities were black women, and that would be our ch- chance to be real reporters because if news broke, news broke and, and you had, had to cover it and so sometimes news would break out and you'd become, you, you be able to show your stuff.
Story_ID: 581164
Speaker 1: So, we would sit around the desk, what we called a rim at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune], which is where the editor would sit, and there'd be seats and you'd answer phones with people calling in with news or what have you.  We'd sit around the rim and, and we'd joke about how this was equal opportunity time.  It was on weekends when we were actually like the real reporters, almost like the real reporters.  And you know, I mean and, and I noticed this a lot about a lot of young black people who were thinking about going into journalism, but they always want to be TV host because now the Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] influence or they want to do magazines.  They don't want to do daily reporting, and that was my sentiment.  I, I didn't want to do daily reporting because I, I read my hometown newspaper, the Gary Post-Tribune and it was pretty boring to me at that time and so I, I thought that I would be some sort of magazine editor.  That's why I went to National Observer [The National Observer] and then to Ebony.  But once I got at the Tribune what I discovered was news, being in a newsroom and doing, covering news was thrilling, I mean 'cause you, you would go to work and you never knew what your day would be like.  It may not be much, you may spend the entire day sitting at your desk or, or taking obits, or writing obituaries for somebody, or you might do a fire, you might do a murder, or you might do a community event that was interesting, I mean you just didn't know.  That's what made the job for a young reporter so fascinating and, and for me, I mean what happens is during the process of it is and what keeps it exciting and fresh is, is that unexpected and unknown.
Story_ID: 581165
Speaker 1: The first time I covered a fire for example it was just like ex- it was, it was so exciting.  The, the red lights were flashing and the, the water was spraying all over the place, and, and you had the, you, you had the firemen and the smoke and the flames, you know, I was running around with my reporter's notebook and my pen, and I was interviewing people and it's like whoa you know.  By my fifth or sixth fire, I was going through and I was going well know just sort of a checklist.  I need to talk to this person, I need to check this.  By about my fifteenth fire, I was going oh man my feet are gonna get wet, my clothes are gonna be smoky, and so there's a transformation with the experience from where it's exciting to where it's not so exciting, but the good thing about again being at a, a big daily, big city daily newspaper like the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] is there's so many different things you can do if you want to and, and that's what I took advantage of.  I did book reviews.  I did record reviews.  I did concert reviews.  I even wrote a sports story.  I knew very little about sports.  I, I, I did, I did feature stories.  I covered hard news.  I covered Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] every week for it must have been about five years.  Every Saturday I would be at PUSH to cover their, their regular Saturday meeting.  It had got to a point because, because I was there every week that I knew Jesse's [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] speech pattern, his rhythm.  I even knew the speeches.  I mean I could add to them because one of the things Jesse did was he would try out his speeches on the audience and refine them from week, one week to the next and so he would, he would do a speech and/or sermon or whatever and about 10, 15 percent of it would be fresh, the other would be something he had said the week before, but each week he would keep changing it just a little it seem to me and so, but he had said the other stuff so much that I knew the other stuff and then I'd just have to catch up with the new stuff, and it was fascinating to watch.  I mean and then he'd have all these movers and shakers and important people he'd bring in and he'd have 'em up on the pulpit and so and, and occasional, I mean and frequently, not regularly, but frequently he would make news and so I'd get in the paper because of what Jesse said or did, and, and, and, and so that was a good experience.
Story_ID: 581166
Speaker 1: Let's see my break at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] because I was just doing obituaries and I was doing not very great stories, but my break came in '76 [1976] when I got assigned to do invest- an investigative report with Bill Gaines [William Gaines] who was a Pulitzer Prize winning investigative reporter there, and Bill and I did this auto repair investigation, which I may have mentioned.
Speaker 2: Yes briefly.
Speaker 1: Yeah okay, but yeah right exactly because, yeah okay so, but I'll go, I'll go into greater detail.  What we did was we had company, Tribune pool cars, it was Chevrolet Novas and we had, we had arranged to have the cars broken, different parts of the cars broken, by this auto repair instructor, this automob- automotive instructor at Waubonsee College [Waubonsee Community College], which was way out in, I, I forget the place now, but it's way out in the suburbs, a forty-five minute drive out.  So, what we'd do is we'd go out there and either he would, he would, he would, he would either unplug or cut a hole in the vacuum hose so our brakes didn't work well.  I'm sorry, so when our, our, our--
Speaker 2: Exhaust.
Speaker 1: Yeah trans- transmission didn't work right because it wasn't getting the right flow, fluid and so the car would jerk along like that.  He would do something to the master cylinder so our, our brakes weren't working well, but I mean these were very specific defects that, that we knew how much they should cost to be repaired according to the Chilton repair book and their fees.  And so over a three month period of time we took these cars out to fifty-two repair shops, dealerships, et cetera, places that fix cars.  We got ripped off half the time.  I mean we had one, an Amoco [BP Amoco Corporation; BP Corporation North America Inc.] where they, they rebuilt the transmission at one we went to the on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois].  Then we took it to one on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] and which we had to drive, I had to drive the car through mud because it had been painted and looked so spanking new.  My cover story I told the guy a friend of mine that sold me the car a week before and that I was having problem with, with it, it was, it was jerking along.  So, he, he tells me we need the transmission rebuilt, so same transmission had been rebuilt by one, this one, one Amoco and then it's getting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Just weeks later.
Speaker 1: Yes, it's getting redone again.  But, we had all these experiences and then we ran, ran the series, which was incredibly popular.  I mean it had an incredible because a lot of people have cars.  Gene Siskel who was just at that time just a film critic at the Tribune.  He was pretty much starting off.  But he told me he didn't even drive and he had joined the series.  But, but, but, okay as a result of this Mayor Daley called for these investigations.  He changed the law, the consumer law in the city where now today in Chicago [Illinois] if you take your car in for repair they have to tell you how much they think, they have to give you an estimate on how much they think it's gonna cost and if that estimate, the actual cost is gonna be 10, 10 percent more than whatever they estimated, they have to call you and tell you that and so not to say that you still can't be ripped off, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but what a remarkable accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah exactly and this, this is how as I mentioned we, we were on 'The Phil Donahue Show' because we had these incredible headlines with our investigation for five days in a row just with one, one series of things that had happened and, and Phil Donahue's people had seen, seen the newspapers 'cause he was here in Chicago at the time.  His show was done out of Chicago, and so he had us on.  It was Bill Gaines, myself, and, and Cecil Armstrong, the, the automotive professor.  It was just the three of us on for the entire show, and of course that's when I told you my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] was really excited, but I mean all my, all my family, I mean everybody watched.  And after the show was done, that was the first time I got recognized from TV because I was, afterwards I was walking down Michigan Avenue and some people had seen the show recognized me and came up to talk to me, you know I was like--that's when I first started thinking of the power of TV.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now because before that I, I, I never thought that I could be on TV.
Speaker 2: Right, the media and the images.
Speaker 1: Yes exactly.  Okay but I did three, we won, we, we won some awards, reporting awards for that, so I became an award winning investigative reporter.
Speaker 2: Was that your first award as, as an investigative reporter, you have of course numerous awards.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah and most of them were from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Was that the actually the first?
Speaker 1: Yeah that was my first.
Story_ID: 581167
Speaker 1: And then I, I did three other investigations over, during my years at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune].  One, the next one was school, let me think about this for a second, school foods was the next one and Gaines [William Gaines] and I teamed up to do this one.
Speaker 2: High school cafeteria foods or?
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, to find out the nutrition, and it was a very weird investigation.  We, we would go, we had this, this lab in town [Chicago, Illinois] who, who, who analyzed nutrition for packaged foods of all sorts and so what we would do is go to a school cafeteria and we would package ten meals unopened (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But by this time you're well known, aren't you?
Speaker 1: No, no not well known, but known enough.
Speaker 2: Locally.
Speaker 1: This wasn't, this wasn't undercover.  This, this particular one wasn't undercover.  This was, this was, the, the schools, because you can't go into public schools without them knowing that you're coming.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, we went in and we, we got ten meals and we'd take it to the lab to have it analyzed, then we collected the ten meals from kids who were about to toss their meals and we'd take that and they would compare what, what was available to the kids to begin with and how much nutrition they actually got.  It was not a great investigation on a bunch of different levels.  It was, I mean 'cause first of all as, as a student I hated cafeteria food, so dealing with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was the outcome, similar to the, the automotive?
Speaker 1: No, no because, no because we had complications in that the lab that we were working with there was some question about how--
Speaker 2: Accurate.
Speaker 1: --accurate and efficient they were and plus the, the investigation had an impact on--one of the companies that we knocked and it was called Mass Feed [Mass Feeding, Inc.], that was the name, which was very weird.  But anyway they had a connection with one of the grocers, major grocers in town. I can't remember whether it was Jewel [Jewel-Osco] or Dominick's [Dominick's Finer Foods] now, but anyway, I think it was Jewel's, yeah Dominick's wasn't here, but I, I, I'm, I'm not sure it could have been another, so I don't, that's why I'm, I'm reluctant to call a name.  But, but, but anyway they had board members who came in and met with the Tribune's editors and they were about to launch a million dollar advertising campaign and so it turned into business instead of journalism, and the investigation started out on the front page and quickly fell inside the newspaper and then it was discovered that the lab had some efficiency problems and we had been nominated for a Pulitzer [Pulitzer Prize] and they pulled the nomination.  The Tribune pulled the nomination.
Speaker 2: God.
Speaker 1: Well, I mean you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but still.
Speaker 1: --I, I, I had been nominated, I'd been nominated, we got, I, I, I got nominated for the car series.  Each of the investigations I got nominated for, but it's sort of like being a runner up at the Academy Award [Oscars]--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --unless you actually win it, it doesn't mean much at all you know (laughter), so--
Speaker 2: Right, nomination.
Speaker 1: Right exactly, so I mean I was nominated for a Pulitzer four times and I still have nothing to show.
Speaker 2: Your time will come.
Speaker 1: Right, well let, let's hope (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 581168
Speaker 1: During these times that you were working with the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and what was called the metropolitan, the metropolitan part of the, the paper--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is that what led to your controversial column that--
Speaker 2: No, that was, that's later.  Okay, in fact no, but that reminds me my first year there the, the Tribune had the series they ran they called needless family, need, not need (laughter) that's Freudian, that's, I think that's probably how they may have thought of it.  It was needy families (laughter), and basically what they'd do, I mean you would go around and you would, you would interview a different poor person, a family, you know who needed, needed contributions for Christmas.  But, this thing ran for a month and so day in and day out you had to find, you had a needy family you go in and interview, you had to write a story.  I think that probably contributed to my ability to write a column as much as anything because the first stories of course again were interesting and what have you, but then they started taking me, developing a certain sameness to them, I mean A) all these people were poor; B) they needed money and they were in a bad way.  I mean they, they--yeah it, it was just a bad situation for them.  And so you've gotta try and figure out how to not be too repetitive and so I started thinking about how I could make each story different and interesting within the confines of these restrictions, and that was a great lesson for me.  And in the process of doing it, another interesting thing, I mean, I, I got around the city [Chicago, Illinois], I met all sorts of people and you realize how fortunate you are, I mean when you are just face to face with poverty and deprivation day in and day out.  It was this one His- Hispanic woman who I interviewed who had this baby and she was in such dire straits that she opened her cabinet and she had one can of Carnation milk in there, nothing in her refrigerator and you know reporters aren't supposed to get involved with their--but I, I, reached in my--I gave her some money.
Speaker 1: The heart, (unclear) a human (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right exactly, exactly, I just reached in my wallet-
Speaker 1: Perspective.
Speaker 2: --and gave her some money 'cause I, I just couldn't stand it.  So--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but anyway that was, that was, that was, although about halfway through it I wasn't so sure I was lucky at having the assignment, but again in retrospect it, it was good.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 581169
Speaker 1: Let me get back to the investigations, okay so the, the school foods was a bust, but then after that I did one and I developed this one on my own.  This was '78 [1978], and it was called the black tax.  And what, what it involved was how they discrim- how, how black people are discriminated against and what we used was, was real- property taxes just an example and insurance rates.  We had bungalows that looked alike, but were in different parts of town and we showed the difference in insurance rates that a black family was charged versus a white family in another neighborhood when they were able to get it.  And it was the same for their car insurance you know, car parked in front of one house versus the other.  I'm trying to think if I did that--that, that was 1980.  That was the last one I did.  Actually the one I, I did right before that was, you know that was--yeah no that was '78 [1978], that was '78 [1978], sorry about that, but these things yeah.
Speaker 2: I understand--
Speaker 1: Because I was getting, I was, I was getting divorced [from Christine Harris] at the same time, and so I was under that strain.  And, and that's, that's my connection now is because I was, I had a fight with my editor about whether I should write it or not and, and okay now, the other one was done in '80 [1980], and the other--oh god this is embarrassing.  Anyway, the other was, was fronts, in companies for set asides where minorities are supposed to be given business--
Story_ID: 581170
Speaker 1: So I thought about it and it's the '78 [1978] was the set asides and, and '80 [1980] was the black tax and with the set asides what happened was I had discovered through a source, one of my, my, my, my, my sources that Jesse's half-brother, Noah Robinson [Noah Robinson, Jr.] had set up all these dummy companies so that where he would get money to for set asides.  He said he had a black business and, and he get these, these set aside jobs in construction where he was just getting paid off.  No black people were getting jobs, et cetera, and so we did an investigation on it.  I, I developed it, and it had a great impact.  I had one of, I was, I was at PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] one, one Saturday.  I had one of Noah's people threaten me because of the, the investigation--
Speaker 2: Exposure.
Speaker 1: --that we had done.  He, he said, "So you're [HistoryMaker] Monroe Anderson."  You know he looked like he was gonna jump in my chest.  Being from Gary [Indiana] I was ready to accommodate him and Noah said, now, now be cool you know 'cause he didn't, he didn't want a reporter getting jumped on at, at Operation PUSH (laughter).  Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] would not have looked highly upon that.  And eventually Noah went to prison for doing all sorts of things, illegal things, and, and when I was doing that investigation some of these contractors would tell me they had been shot at and that it was very dangerous.  And I thought it was a joke, you know, I, I wasn't concerned about it until later I found out that Noah had some gang contacts and what have you and, but the thing as a young reporter you don't, you don't really take that stuff seriously.  You think it only happens in the movies and plus I mean as a general rule most, even the mafia knows, it's not worth the effort to go after journalists as a general rule because it brings more heat afterwards.
Speaker 2: And exposure.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, 'cause all the other journalists start doing stories about the journalists that got shot or hurt or killed or whatever.  But, but anyway as a result of our investigation there was a big federal investigation over set asides and how they were set up and what have you and it had a good impact.  And again I was, I was on some TV programs, radio programs talking about it, and years later, I mean two years later, the last investigation again which is something that I brought to the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] was on, on set asides and we did that, the black tax. I mean sorry, the black tax and we did that and that did well.  Okay, then what happens of course is you get Harold Washington or the, the need for a black mayor.  Mayor Jane Byrne had done a number of things to upset the black community, and the black community was responsible for her being mayor.  They voted her into office.  After Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley] first died, he was succeeded by Mayor Bilandic [Michael Bilandic].
Story_ID: 581171
Speaker 1: Okay, so now there was, it's this, with, with, with Mayor Byrne [Jane Byrne], you had Mayor, Mayor Bilandic [Michael Bilandic] who succeeded Mayor Daley [Richard J. Daley], and the Chicago City Council there was a, the president pro tem of the city council was [HistoryMaker] Wilson Frost, the alderman from the West Side [Chicago, Illinois], and by law at that time he should have become mayor when Daley died.  They literally barred the door not to let him into, into the mayor's office and they came up with some backdoor wheeling and dealing thing and Bilandic who was the mayor in the 11th Ward, Daley's ward became the mayor.  Okay, Mayor Bilandic was a very nice man, but very boring and very low key and not as attentive as people had grown accustomed to under Mayor Daley, plus his mother was dying.  So, you have a situation where and, and also he had fired Jane Byrne.  Jane Byrne had been department head in charge of weights and measurements [Department of Consumer Sales, Weights and Measures], and he fired her and replaced here with [HistoryMaker] Sharon Gist Gilliam who was a young black woman, and so Byrne was, was out of work and upset.  When we had the blizzard of '79 [1979], and Bilandic's mother was sick and dying and so he was not, he was asleep at the switch.  He really wasn't running the city so much as worried about his mother, understandably.  In the meantime, the people that were running the city made this very foolish decision of you had this huge blizzard and the CTA [Chicago Transit Authority] couldn't run all their trains, I mean the city was just really under snow.  So, what they started doing is running express trains from the, the far South Side [Chicago, Illinois] where white people were and these trains would be filled with white people and when they got into the in- into the closer South Side where the black people were, they didn't stop.  They just kept going, and so you'd have these trains full of white people going to work wh- while the black people were standing out on the, the, the platforms cold--
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: --and miserable and so Jane Byrne shows up, starts campaigning, she's running for mayor, nobody knows who she is at that time, and she's standing at these platforms with these black people saying this is outrageous et cetera, et cetera.  So, she got all the black votes that normally would have gone to Bilandic, and that's how she became mayor.  Almost as soon--because she didn't have a power base except for black folks, and she turned her back on that power base.  So she started, she started betraying the black community in a, in a whole bunch of different ways, so that by the time she was up for election again it was just out in the black community where they're having meetings all over, West Side, South Side about how to get a black candidate to kick Byrne out, to challenge Jane Byrne.  Harold Washington had run before against Daley.  I think it was seventy, yeah it was '76 [1976], and so he had run against Daley in, in seventy, or it was '74 [1974].
Speaker 2: The mid-'70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Yeah mid-'70s [1970s], but actually, actually, actually I should be accurate about this stuff, but--
Speaker 2: But it's been twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, for all this yes--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --so I should be forgiven, I mean and I've done a lot of things okay and, and actually when I, when I was lecturing more than I have in my retirement this stuff was fresh in my mind 'cause I talked about it all the time.  I haven't talked about it in a while, so my apologies.  But anyway it's, it's, I mean fortunately all this part is history, so I, I just--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --have to contribute my, my observations.
Story_ID: 581172
Speaker 1: Anyway, so this is what happened.  Because I'd been covering PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and because I had all these street contacts I knew about these meetings.  I mean people were telling me we're having meetings on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] we're gonna get rid of, of Mayor Byrne [Jane Byrne], having meetings on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].  I went to a couple of the meetings.  I knew there was this entire anti-Byrne sentiment in the black community.  And then what happens is I, I got assigned to do a piece, a piece on voter registration 'cause Slim Coleman [Walter Coleman] who was an activist back then, now he's a, he's a minister.  Here he's the guy, you know the Hispanic woman who, who's up in the church?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay same Slim Coleman.  Okay, but--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --back then in the, in the, the early '80s [1980s] he was able to in, in the, in the name voter registration he was able to convince the, the, the, the factors, the powers that be to set up voter registration booths in front of welfare offices.  So you know, so I, I did a piece on it.  I went out there and I interviewed these folks, and all the black people, I mean it was this surge of black voter registration and they all were saying that they were registering to vote against Byrne.  The one guy I interviewed wasn't even sure who he was gonna vote against, but, 'cause he said he was going to vote against Jim Thompson [James R. Thompson] and I said well you know as I'm interviewing him I said, "Well that's the governor."  He says, this man is like in his seventies or something like that, he said, he says well, he says, "I don't know who I'm voting against, but I'm voting against somebody white," (laughter) you know.  So, I mean they, 'cause they were just very angry because they felt betrayed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 581173
Speaker 1: And then there was the ChicagoFest boycott.  Byrne [Jane Byrne], Byrne had put, had kicked, had put these white people on the school board [sic. Chicago Housing Authority], a school system that was, was overwhelmingly black, she had put these white women on the board from the south/east side, which was considered very prejudice and not concerned about us at all.  She did that just to spite the black community, and when she did that Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was on this TV, radio station, black radio station and he called for a boycott of ChicagoFest and I thought huh you know that's a weird thing to do.
Speaker 2: And it is at this time ChicagoFest is the same thing that later became the Taste of Chicago?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes ChicagoFest later became the Taste of Chicago [sic.], which had been, but the original ChicagoFest which Byrne, Byrne, had instituted [sic.] and it was, it was like music, a music festival with some food on Navy Pier [Chicago, Illinois] and it was, everybody looked forward to it, it turned into a very nice event.  As fate would have it, this was on a Sunday, the next day there was a black business summit being held in Gary [Indiana] that I'd been assigned to cover, so I drive over to Gary, I park my car, and just as I'm walking into the, the Gary convention hall where it's being, being held I see Jesse and Mayor Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] and I know them both obviously, so I, I, I approach and say, "Well Reverend Jackson I said what is this about a boycotting ChicagoFest."  And he says to me, "Well Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson]," he says, "we can't allow the mayor to disrespect us as a community," and he's giving me his sermon on the street.  I said to him, I said, "But reverend," I said, "Stevie Wonder is performing at ChicagoFest."  I said, "We could have, you could have five thousand pickets out there, they'll be forty thousand people passing by to see Stevie sing." I said, "Have you talked to Stevie Wonder about this?"  And he's, "Well, well I don't want to give away all my, my, my strategy just yet," (laughter).  So, you know then he goes and we have, they have the meeting, I write a story, I cover it.  The next day or the day after I can't remember, but within forty-eight hours for sure, there was an announcement that Stevie won't be performing at ChicagoFest because he fears for his safety because of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unbelievable.
Speaker 1: --the press, yes and so then I go out there to cover it and there are these pickets out there, I mean just, I mean Jesse and others they had a lot of pickets out there in front and you know I interview some of the pickets and they say why they're there you know because, then I go inside to ChicagoFest and I walk around and there're almost no black people in there.  The, the--it had been very effective.
Story_ID: 581174
Speaker 1: And at this point between the voter registration and the ChicagoFest, I realized that there's something happening here.  And so I write a, an, an, an op-ed opinion piece predicting that we're gonna have our first black mayor and what's happened is Daley [Richard M. Daley] is in the race, he's announced that he's gonna be in the race.  You have Mayor Byrne [Jane Byrne] and I know that it's gonna either be Harold Washington or, or [HistoryMaker] Roland Burris who is a, who is state comptroller I think at the time, but one of those two will be the candidate, 'cause those are the two most prominent.  And I'm not sure who, but I write a speculative piece naming them as possible candidates and doing the math, the city is 60 percent white, 40 percent black, you split the white vote between, between the white candidates, two popular white candidates, the black candidates gets in and that's how--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that's, that's, that's my perspective piece.  Because, because the piece was speculative and nobody thought it could happen, they didn't pay a lot of attention to it.  I was at a--right around that same time I was at a party at Bill Kurtis' house and sitting around with all these like at that time really well known political people and TV anchors and they're having the whole discussion on who's gonna win, Richie or Jane and on and on.  And just to so I could participate because I don't know who's gonna win between Richie and Jane, but I said I'd like to participate in the conversation so I said, "What if we got a black mayor, what if a black man won?"  The conver- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I could imagine.
Speaker 1: --the conversation, the conversation came to a screeching halt.  People sort of pondered it for about ten seconds and they went back to the conversation like I hadn't said anything.  I mean that was just totally dismissed--
Speaker 2: Unbelievable.
Speaker 1: --I mean, but it was as if I, I, I, I, in the middle of their conversation I said what if we were invaded by a man from Mars, so you know (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it was like where, where is that coming from.
Speaker 2: They couldn't entertain the notion of having a black mayor.
Speaker 1: No, none, none, no they could not at all.  So, anyway I write the piece and it sits around in the, in the, in, in, in, on the editor's desk back there because it had no time--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --you know, they didn't think it was that important.  The meantime I get a call from one of my, my street contacts they tell me, tell, and they tell me that Harold Washington is gonna announce and be in the race, and he was gonna do it next week.  So, I, I tell my editors about it, I write a story for, this is on a Friday, for Sunday's Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and which ends up being in Monday's Tribune, but anyway I write the story and basically said Harold's in the race and then I again put the scenario.  I go to the editor who, the editorial page, the, the, the, the edit- the editorial editor who was Jack Fuller at the time who later on became to be editor and publisher of the paper.  I go to him and I say, "Well Jack you gotta run my piece now because it was a speculative piece and I had a hard news story that says it was gonna happen and it wouldn't make any sense running it afterward."  So, on that Monday I have, the early edition I have above the fold Harold Washington in mayor's race.  I scooped every political reporter in town, and I, I was the only one--
Speaker 2: Goodness.
Speaker 1: --who wasn't a political reporter--
Speaker 2: Goodness.
Speaker 1: --and then on the inside I have this op-ed page piece detailing how it could happen and as a result of that I become an instant expert on Harold Washington's candidacy.
Speaker 2: Whoa.
Speaker 1: I'm, I'm on radio programs, TV programs talking about the race, I'm everywhere but working for my newspaper.
Story_ID: 581175
Speaker 1: I mean they had put together a team of reporters to cover the primary and it was eight or nine white males, you know and I go in and I protest it and I'm given all these reasons why, why I hadn't been assigned.  And I was like well they, you know I said, "Well I have more contacts and you got a black candidate," I said, "there's nobody on the newspaper [Chicago Tribune] has more contacts in the black community than I do."  He said, "Well we don't make assignments according to race."  I mean every, every, every reason and argument--
Speaker 2: Hurdle.
Speaker 1: --I made they had an answer for--
Speaker 2: Right exactly.
Speaker 1: --which didn't make a lot of sense because they just hadn't thought about me, which is the way it was and some people with some newsrooms say it still is where they don't think about us when they're making these decisions.  I mean we're just not in the picture at all.  But, anyway again I, I'm, I'm on talk shows, I'm on--I've, I've been asked to write freelance pieces for other publications, I'm interviewed by other publications about what's happening in the race 'cause my contacts are keeping me abreast.  Okay, just as I predicted Harold [Harold Washington] wins the primary.  He beats Byrne [Jane Byrne] and Daly [Richard M. Daley].
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: And just as magically there's this, this, this Republican candidate named Bernard Epton who was thought not to have a chance.  All the white Democrats cross over and start supporting him.
Speaker 2: Just because they did not want to, to vote on a black mayor.
Speaker 1: Because they didn't want a black mayor, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: And many of those votes probably (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And one of the, I mean they didn't even know who he was.  There was a quote in the paper somebody was interviewed and his name was Bernard Epton, he's Jewish, and one of the people was quoted as saying they were gonna vote for that Epstein guy.  I mean they didn't even know the man's name, but--
Speaker 2: Goodness.
Speaker 1: --just, it was just, they were not going to be doing a black mayor.
Speaker 2: Right, goodness.
Speaker 1: Okay, but anyway I got assigned to cover, although I was like low, again low on the totem pole with that.  I mean it was an interesting, I mean newspaper, being a black back then in the industry was, was challenging to say the least.  For example, when the, when the pope came to Chicago [Illinois] we had a meeting and the assisting managing editor said that this was the most important story in Chicago for the decade.  So they're making out all these assignments of who's gonna cover what.  They have me on the West Side [Chicago, Illinois] covering the crowd for when he passes by to get reaction from black spectators and, and [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois] getting reaction on the street from black spectators.  I mean no place in the, the, in the pecking order high up (unclear), but anyway.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unbelievable.
Speaker 1: --yeah, so Harold wins, Harold, Harold wins.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 581176
Speaker 1: And by this time Jesse [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], I'd been with Jesse out to, I'd gone out to New England with, with Jesse.  He was, he was feeling the water, testing the waters to run for president, and it was, it was really interesting.  I mean just the reaction.  There was--we, --this one place we went there, this, there, there was this white guy who was a little overweight and he was so excited to have Jesse as his guest at his house.  No, he was like a kid at school.  He was jumping up and down.  We go there his neighbors are standing out on the sidewalk waiting to meet Jesse.  Yeah, I mean and I knew that Jesse was gonna be a serious candidate.  This wasn't gonna be like when, when, when [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory ran, which was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --more just a, a joke presidency.  I knew this was gonna be--so this is where my interest was.
Speaker 2: Especially for the (unclear) Dick Gregory.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah right exactly, exactly.  This was my--to, to cover Jesse, but I was told that Jesse, you know, I was told that I was going to cover city hall [for the Chicago Tribune].  And I didn't want to go to City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois].  I didn't want to cover city hall because I knew that it, it was polluted down there.  You had the race wars going on, the council wars between the white, twenty-nine white city councilmen and the twenty-one black councilmen and, and it was just racially tense, and I didn't want to be in the middle of that.  I would much rather had gone with Jesse.  The editor who, who, who told me I was going to City Hall said, "No we want you at City Hall."  I said, "I rather do Jesse, that's where the action is."  He says, "Jesse is not gonna be a factor at all."  He says, "The action is at City Hall."  So, I go to City Hall and it was horrible.  I mean the whole, I mean you had where secretaries of black alderman weren't speaking to secretaries of white alderman.  I mean it was just--
Speaker 2: Gee.
Speaker 1: --craziness, and I, I, and I hated it, plus I was the number three guy down there the way they set it up.  I, again, two white guys ahead of me.  One of 'em had just come out of, out of--
Speaker 2: College.
Speaker 1: --college, and he went to the same college, Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana].  He had come out ten years after I had, you know, but he's ahead of me in, in this, in this--
Speaker 2: The tier, three level tier.
Speaker 1: --the team, the team that was covering city hall.  So, you know and I was not given anything, so I was just sort of hanging around with Cliff Kelley [Clifford Kelley] who was an alderman at the time and some, some of the other black alderman.  I got to know them all.  Gene Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans], I, I got to know everybody.  In, in '84 [1984], in January of '84 [1984], my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] died of a heart attack and so I took off for his funeral and what have you.  When I came back, I, I, I had been yanked.  The, the whole, everything, there are all sorts of different assignments and so I got pulled out of city hall.  Unfortunately--
Speaker 2: How long were you gone during that period?  It could have been that long (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was out a week or two, no, but I mean, well this, it wasn't just me.
Story_ID: 581177
Speaker 1: We had this editor, Jim Squires [James D. Squires], who used to like to just shake things up to be shaking things up.  He was, he was a good ol' boy from Tennessee and he and I had fights over--earlier on in, in, in, let me, let me see, this would have been around January or February of '82 [1982] or '83 [1983], '83 [1983] he was quoted in Time magazine saying that there were only two types of blacks in the newsroom.  Those who were superstars and those who were there for affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Unbelievable.
Speaker 1: And that, it just alie- it upset every black working in the newsroom because, I mean that would be like saying the only two, the only two types of white people there are those who were very good and those who were there because of white privilege, you know (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and of course they'd never think that way.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But, anyway we were all upset.  Leanita McClain who was the superstar.  He, he had made her a superstar, I mean and she was good, I mean, but he had singled her out and that was it.  She was on the, she was the first black woman on the editorial board, and she had a column along with [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett.  You know I told her, this, this was in January or February of '83 [1983].  I, I, I, I talked about this with her.  She, she asked me, "Well do you want me to talk to him about it?"  I said, "No," I, I said I, I said, I said, "No I'll talk to him," said, "if you set it up," 'cause I wasn't high enough.  So, she told him that, she says, "Well what should I, what, what should I tell him?"  Said, "Tell him the natives are restless," (laughter).  And so, anyway I go in to talk to him and we have this big knock down blowout fight because I go in and--
Speaker 2: With your emotions all involved of course.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly.  Well I start off, you know I said, "I wanna talk to you about your affirmative action program in general and my career at the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] in particular."  And he says, "Oh I see the problem that's where you got things confused," and he starts to attack me.  You know he says that I'm, I'm slow and I'm just so, so as a reporter and I say, "Well I have more reporting awards than all but a handful of journalist on the newspaper."  He says, "Well that doesn't matter, awards aren't important."  I said, "Well I have more contacts," you know it's, no matter what--
Speaker 2: What it was.
Speaker 1: --arguments you make, you made to defend yourself--
Speaker 2: He would trump that with something different.
Speaker 1: --yeah it wasn't important.  So, anyway we had this big fight and so finally I end with saying, "Well okay let's pretend you're right, let's pretend I'm no good, then why don't you go out and find some good black reporters 'cause, 'cause you not giving anybody a chance right now."  And we sort of shake hands and leave and, and during the course of that conversation with him I had told him I wanted to write a column.  He asked me what did I want to do?   Now he was trying to at least appease me--
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: --so he says, "What do you want to do?"  I said, "I wanna do a column."  And he says, "Well I have my black columnist, Vernon Jarrett and, and Leanita McClain."  You know only could have two at a time and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know and I said, "Well Vernon's almost sixty-five years old."  He says, "Well Vernon," he says, "Vernon will be sixty-five in two or three years if you wanna wait around 'til that time be my guest before you get a column."
Speaker 2: Unbelievable with such hostility.
Speaker 1: I know, oh I know, I know.
Story_ID: 581178
Speaker 1: But, what happens in the meantime because he had not been treating Vernon [HistoryMaker Vernon Jarrett] well either, so I'm at, I'm at, this is '83 [1983], I'm at, I'm covering Harold [Harold Washington] at City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois] and Leanita [Leanita McClain] is writing a column, she's writing a column on Saturdays I think is her column runs.  Vernon at that time I think was Monday, Wednesdays and Fridays.  Vernon gets upset because he feels the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] is disrespecting him.
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: He leaves and goes to the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times], it's on Memorial Day.  He doesn't tell them, they read it in the Sun-Times.  The Tuesday after Memorial Day, I mean sorry Labor Day, Labor Day, Tuesday after Labor Day we're called into the office and told, I'm told that I'll be a columnist, my column will run on Friday, Leanita will be doing Mondays and Wednesdays, and don't ask for any extra money, that's it.  And that's how I became a columnist.
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I, I had been--
Speaker 2: --Right.
Speaker 1: --doing, you know I mean it wasn't that magical in that I'd been doing pieces like the op-ed page piece, but I'd--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --I'd done other things.  I'd done other opinion pieces 'cause I really enjoyed doing them--
Speaker 2: Right exactly.
Speaker 1: --and I had a talent for them and so, but then I became a columnist and after I was yanked out, that's, that's to say after I was yanked out in, in City Hall in February, January, February of '84 [1984] I was doing a column and they--because I had fought with Squire [James D. Squires] their, their, their punishment was to send me to metro and, I mean which was very interesting because, because when I first started at the Tribune because I'd been told that's what, that was the dumping ground for blacks, part of my condition for joining the paper was I would not be in the metro section, I would be a general assignment reporter and they agreed to it and now we're talking ten years later, not, not ten, well yeah ten years later here I find myself on the metro, metro assignment, a newly created.
Speaker 2: Again.
Speaker 1: It was me.  No, they, they had just abandoned it and so it was me and one, a white female.  We were the two people who were gonna be doing this.  And the excuse was they needed a strong writer to do it.  And so you know I'm out there doing these, these really silly low rent stories, and I ran into [HistoryMaker] Harry Porterfield who was a, a, a TV reporter at Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] at the time, it's a CBS owned and operated station here, and he was, he was trying to figure out somebody of my stature why was I on this dumb story--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that was being done.  I mean, I, I couldn't explain it.  I would go out on some of these stories and people were asking me for my autograph because they'd seen me on 'Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The news.
Speaker 1: --Week in Review' ['Chicago Tonight: The Week in Review'] and other places and you know I, I thought this was crazy.  So, I decided I was fully invested in my profit sharing at the Tribune and so it was time to go.  So, that's when I in January of that year I went to Newsweek magazine here, here in town okay.
Story_ID: 581179
Speaker 1: Okay so we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay so I left the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] January of '85 [1985] to start at Newsweek magazine, and as, as a, a Midwest correspondent and so I, I sort of went full circle in that if you recall I did my first internship at Newsweek back--
Speaker 1: I, I, remember.
Speaker 2: --in '68 [1968], so--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --now we're in '85 [1985] and I'm a Newsweek correspondent, and, and it was interesting.  I, I got to spend a couple of weeks in New York City [New York, New York], learning how the system worked because at Newsweek unlike the newspapers they have writers in New York or at least they did then, and I, I think it's changed a little bit now, but not still not dramatically, but the, they have correspondents out in the field who write the stories and they send, they file them into, to New York and the writers in New York read through all the files from different correspondents around the country and then write, a, a story out of the different things.  And when I interviewed for Newsweek beca- because I had fond memories of it in my internship, one of the things I was asked, "Well do you think it's gonna bother you to give up control of your story?"  And at that time I didn't think it would bother me because you know I, I'd done so much and I figured well it's not a big deal anymore.  But, when I got into it I found out that it was problematic giving up control, and by that again I, I, I went--in, in October of '85 [1985] I spent two weeks in New York City.  I took my, my wife, Joyce Owens [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], who was pregnant with our second child, Kyle [Kyle Anderson], at the time, and I took, we took our son, Scott [Scott Anderson], who was not quite three, and so we stayed, they put us up in a, in a, in a hotel room for a couple of weeks.  I, I got to be a writer to see how the system worked.  I, I would do, write, write the stories and using the correspondents, and this was just to help me understand their system.  And you know we had a nice stay in, in New York.  I mean it was--Scott was a baby, but he was, he was such a, I mean he was such an interesting kid even at that age that well we, we ate out all the time obviously 'cause we were staying at a restaurant.  When we first started going to the restaurants, they would sit us in the booth in the back in the corner in the dark 'cause they, these were tony New York restaurants; they didn't want a baby clowning.  But, he was so charming and he was so well behaved that by our third or fourth day there that the restaurants that we'd already visited they were putting us up front, you know and we got good seats and that's, that's off the thing, but anyway so (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 581180
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh giving up this power, how was that, and you said you didn't want to give up this--
Speaker 2: Okay no what, okay let me go through this, so you know so what happened is I mean let's say I'm doing an interview on, on you and you're a business, a very bus- busy corporate executive and so you give me an hour of your time where I interview you and then I would write this file about our interview, then report on what we had to say and it may be eight or nine pages long and I'd send it into New York [New York], but they're getting not only from the Chicago [Illinois], reports not only files not only from the Chicago bureau they may be getting it from the Atlanta [Georgia] bureau and the Los Angeles [California] bureau and some, some other place Miami [Florida], someplace else.  So, so they're getting all this information in and the, the writer in New York reads through it all and he's already basically decided the story he's gonna right, so he's just looking for quotes and situations, so he may pluck out of all that time you spent with me you may see one sentence in the story of yours and you know if you were just happy to be at Newsweek magazine that's not a big deal, but if you are a busy corporate executive whose time is valuable--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --then you're upset because you spent all that time and only see one sentence of what you had to say and you know you spent all this time with me.  The problem with that would be also that occasionally that I'd be asked to come back to you again to interview you again and you'd say you know last time I talked to you I spent all that time and he says no, I'm not interested.  You know so and, and when you're a newspaper journalist you can always stroke your contact, the person, your source.  You know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --what I, what, what I would do in, in a situation knowing that I'm gonna need to come back to you, interview you again or I may want to do that is I'm gonna give you a lot of ink and I'm gonna put you pretty high up in the story, so that the next time I call you--
Speaker 1: Give you incentive.
Speaker 2: --you, you will, you will respond immediately because you, you were featured prominently in the last story.  And so that's the control--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --that you have in a local, da- a daily newspaper that you don't have the way the, the, the New- Newsweek and Time is set up, the U.S. News and World Report.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I understand.
Speaker 2: --they're operating in a different thing.  So after a while that became frustrating for me, but I didn't think it would initially.
Story_ID: 581181
Speaker 1: Now, the one, the one thing that I, that really, that I enjoyed that came out of Newsweek because ironically while I was at Newsweek, I was approached by the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] about joining their editorial board, and I was interested except they wanted me to try out for two weeks.  There was this guy, there was some Indian guy who was in charge.  I can't remember his name, but he, he says well I had to try out for two weeks, they thought they were--I said, "What am I going to tell my employer at Newsweek? I'm doing two weeks while I'm trying out and that's, that's gonna get out."  You know I mean, I, I was well known by that time and so I said no.  And in the meantime, we had just started, we were about to start this, this, this, this extensive piece called 'Brothers.'  And now with 'Brothers' there was, one of the, the correspondents at Newsweek was [HistoryMaker] Sylvester Monroe.  Sylvester had been was, I had met Sylvester again back in '68 [1968] in Chicago [Illinois] where he was a high school kid who was interested in going into journalism, so he was just sort of hanging around in the office.
Speaker 2: You co-authored this book ['Brothers: Black and Poor - A True Story of Courage,' Sylvester Monroe and Peter Goldman] with Sylvester.
Speaker 1: Sylvester, yeah except it was a cover story first.  What we did, okay it was, it was Sylvester Monroe, it, it, it was [HistoryMaker] Vernon Smith, these are all Newsweek correspondents, Terry Johnson, and myself.  And what we did--Sylvester had grown up in Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], which is a public housing project there, and he used to tell stories about his experiences in it and the people who knew and their separate lives that what had happened to them.  And so what we did is we traced the lives of eleven brothers, black men, who had grown up in Robert Taylor Homes.  Sylvester when he was in the eighth grade, 'cause he was very bright, was picked by ABC to go to a, a prep school on the East Coast [St. George's School, Middletown, Rhode Island], so he was pulled out of that environment and put into a school and he went on from there to Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: And of course he'd be one of the eleven brothers.
Speaker 1: Yeah he was one of the eleven brothers in Robert Taylor, and he was one of the four brothers that, that did the piece.  And the four of us interviewed, we spent a lot of time with these eleven brothers just, just detailing their lives, just reporting on their lives, and we did these long files and then the cover story was about these eleven brothers and where their different lives went.  You know now you had Sylvester who went to Harvard.  He was roommates at Harvard with Cornel West.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: And from, then obviously became a Newsweek correspondent.  Later on he became a Time magazine correspondent, but, but anyway it was Sylvester's story about these people, these guys that he, he'd grown up.  Okay, Sylvester at Har- Harvard, Harvard graduate, Newsweek correspondent.  You had another brother who was on his way to prison for, for, they threw him a prison party, a going to prison party, which was interesting.  You had another brother who'd become Jehovah's Witnesses, was a janitor become a--I mean their lives had gone all these different--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --directions and that's what the--
Speaker 2: Inspired the writing of that, that book.
Speaker 1: Yeah exactly, well the magazine.  It was a magazine cover that Newsweek ran, because the reaction was so incredible, that they decided to make it into a book and so it became a book.
Story_ID: 581182
Speaker 1: By the time it became a book, I was at City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, because Harold Washington died and I was being approached by--because I, I'd been the first black reporter to cover city hall for a metropolitan newspaper [Chicago Tribune].  The Defender [Chicago Defender] always had somebody there, but none of the white papers had had a black reporter on a regular assignment at City Hall.  I, I became the first when I went there to cover Harold, and so when Harold died and you know, and, and I'd obviously become close to Harold during that time.
Speaker 2: Tell me about this remarkable man Harold Washington?
Speaker 1: Oh, he was incredible.  Yeah, he was, I mean he had, he was this incredible speaker.  He had, he had this incredible vocabulary.  He was, he was, his oratory was just something else.  I mean he, he could mix street language with these, with these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Professional politicians.
Speaker 1: --highfalutin words because he's a lawyer also and he had been a state legislator and he used some of these, these highfalutin words that would send reporters scrambling to their dictionaries trying to figure out what he was talking about.  And, I mean, and, and he was personable.  I mean, and he had this great sense of humor and so the bl- he won over the black community.  I was, I--again because of--as I mentioned because of my doing the piece on, on the possibility, the op-ed piece on the possibility of a black and getting the scoop--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and therefore becoming this instant authority on a black candidate becoming mayor--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --during the mayoral debates I was invited to be one of the questioning reporters--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --on the pa- on, on the panel for the debate. And so I mean that was my first really good--I'd, I'd, I'd known Harold, we had been on, I'd been on a radio program with him during my, the auto repair investigation.  We were on WVON [WVON Radio, Chicago, Illinois] together as guests 'cause he was wanting to know wh- whether we had been into his, his, his area or what have you, his district.
Speaker 2: And this is, the debate between Byrne [Jane Byrne] and, and--
Speaker 1: Byrne and Daley [Richard M. Daley] and Harold--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --three way debate.  Okay I was a questioning reporter, one of the panelists on that.  It, it was Harry Golden [Harry Golden, Jr.] and myself for this particular debate.  There were a series of them.  I think this was the second debate.  And the thing that I noticed is he performed--no it was the first debate.  You know he performed so well on this debate that after the debate was over, 'cause nobody knew what to expect of him in the black community.  A lot of people didn't know him that well.  They knew him in his, his district as, as a state legislator, state senator, but they didn't know him throughout the city, but he, he, he performed so well.  He beat Byrne and Daley in this.  He came just came on--
Speaker 2: Goodness.
Speaker 1: --as a strong charisma- charismatic black man.  And as I walked through the Loop [Chicago, Illinois] a couple of days later there was a sea of blue buttons Harold, you know Harold buttons, his campaign buttons were blue.  I mean just all of a sudden, and I knew that, that, that he was a contender for sure.
Story_ID: 581183
Speaker 1: And so, and, and when he [Harold Washington] became mayor there were--I mean they had done all--during the campaign the, it was such a racist thing--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah a lot of smears.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago [Illinois].  I mean they had all this literature, this literature with, it was, it was kin to 'Birth of a Nation' ['The Birth of a Nation'] almost where city hall people were gonna be eating chicken bones and throwing them.  You know they had literature with him with a bone through his nose, you know like, and they accused him of being a child molester and they were putting out that sort of.  I mean it was just racist, racist stuff.  Now, he did have problems.  You know he had, he hadn't, he hadn't filed his income tax in fifteen years or something like that.  This was a long time.  And his birthday was on April 15th, so you'd think he might remember (laughter).
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: And he had done thirty day, days at Cook County Jail [Chicago, Illinois] for that, but it was because it was political because he's such a political progressive and you know had he been--
Speaker 2: An intellectual.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right exactly.  Had he been Joe Doe he wouldn't gotten any time.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: But he got it and white people who didn't want a black mayor used that as the reason why they shouldn't vote him because he was a jailbird, et cetera.  You know and, and Epton, Bernard Epton, the, the Jewish guy uses this, before it's too late, campaign slogan, which was coded, but everybody understood what that meant.  And so it was just, I mean it was incredibly racist.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And Harold, you know we talked about it from time to time.  I, I can remember he, he had gone to Memphis [Tennessee], I, I think it was.  We were in Memphis meeting with the Fords, he was meeting with the Fords. I'm covering it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and I went to talk to him in his hotel room later and he told me the thing that bothered him most about all the things they had said about him was to say that he was gay because he wasn't.  But, that was one of the things that they had that he was a homosexual, he was a child molester. I mean it was anything you could think of they threw at him, and of course the stuff stuck--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, images (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to some extent, yeah exactly, exactly, but he said that bothered him more than anything else.
Speaker 2: Anything else.
Speaker 1: But the problem was he wasn't married.  He had, he came up with a fiancee when he was running, but when I got into city government and got closer to some of the people who were close to him one of, one, one explanation given to me about why he wasn't married and was that he had so many women (laughter) and then he had some, some rich white woman out in the suburbs that he had an affair with or something, that he was in a relationship.  You know I don't know, but there was no indication of his being gay except on the rumor mill.
Speaker 2: Right exactly, but he rose above all of that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, he was just intellectual.  I mean he, I mean he was just a great conversationalist, and he was a joy to cover and to know and the people who worked for him loved him.
Story_ID: 581184
Speaker 1: And I have been asked, ironically I had been asked to be his press secretary.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, and what happened?
Speaker 1: I turned it down.
Speaker 2: For what reason?
Speaker 1: I didn't know what a press secretary did.
Speaker 2: At that time.
Speaker 1: Right, since I had not covered city government, I'd never seen any of this up close, and I didn't want to go into a job where I hadn't a clue.  You know--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --it's easy enough to fail when you know what you're doing--
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --and it's almost guaranteed that you'll fail when you don't, and so I, I, I took a pass on it.
Speaker 2: And then the irony you became Sawyer's [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer]--
Speaker 1: Yes exactly because--
Speaker 2: --press secretary after his death.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right because, yeah because I at least, I knew what to do for that.  And I mean, and when I became--well okay.
Speaker 2: Who is Washington's [Harold Washington] press secretary at this time?  At that particular time?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Grayson Mitchell was his first press secretary who was a black journalist who had gone to work for Burrell [HistoryMaker Thomas J. Burrell], and Burrell was, Burrell was supporting Washington.  Tom Burrell [Burrell Communications Group, Chicago, Illinois] was this black advertising agency.  And so, so Grayson was sort of on loan and then he became the press secretary.  And Grayson was a very good press secretary.  He was succeeded by Al Miller [Alton Miller] who was this, who, who was white, and had been a PR [public relations] person for a dance company or something I can't remember.  But anyway Al, Al was there for, Al was there when Harold died.  He walked in there when Harold died.  And both of them were very good press secretaries.  I mean, yeah both were very good, but the thing was with Harold I think overall it would have been an easy job to do since he did most of the talking and he knew what he, I mean he--
Speaker 2: He knew exactly what he had to say.
Speaker 1: --was his own per- yeah he was his own personality and character.  So, I mean, but he was interesting, I mean I can remember one time when he was talking to a bunch of reporters, most of whom were white of course, and one of them referred to some situation as kinky and he says, he says, "Interesting choice of words and why do you say kinky?"  He says, "Why didn't you say silky or straight," and so, and obviously he was taking exception to the, the kinky hair, et cetera--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --you know, but, but he just turned on, he'd catch things like that and just turn them around, and, and do with a smile on his face and what have you, you know, but--
Speaker 2: He was so well loved.  People could never imagine that, many people proclaim that there was something else about his death other than the way that he, he passed away (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 2: --I never could understand.
Speaker 1: Right, right, but no that was, okay that was part of, okay well let's, let's get to that.
Story_ID: 581185
Speaker 1: Okay Harold [Harold Washington] dies and I'm approached about being his press secretary.  I've been, I've been a career journalist, you know I've been a journalist for eighteen years and I was fearful that there, there, there's a double standard.  You know white journalists can go over to government--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and it enhances their career and then they come back and you know they're higher up.  I was, I was very fearful that if I crossed over I would be stuck on the other side, and I didn't want to be a political flack or hack for the rest of my life and so I was hesitant.  And I, I called about twenty-five of my friends, mostly in the media, and asked them what did they think I should do?  Half said I should do it and half said I shouldn't.
Speaker 2: Tough decision there.
Speaker 1: Right, you know twelve to thirteen one way or another, twelve, twelve whatever.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, I, I couldn't make up my mind.  Joyce [Anderson's wife, HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] encouraged me to do it.  I mean one thing that, I mean the thing that's wonderful about Joyce is she's supportive.  You know like whatever I wanna try she says do it.
Speaker 2: She's there for you.
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm thinking back and forth.  Then I get a call from [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers.  Johnathan I'd known again, he was a writer back in '68 [1968] for Newsweek and I'd met him then.  We weren't close, but he was a writer.  He had become the first black general manager at Channel 2, WBBM-TV [Chicago, Illinois], CBS owned their own station.  When he was appointed that job, I had interviewed him for Newsweek, and we ran a piece on him.  And so we, we had renewed our relationship.  We weren't close friends, but we renewed our relationship.  Johnathan calls me, Johnathan calls me and he says, "Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] I see where you're being considered for the press secretary, they want you to be the press secretary," 'cause what, what Erwin France who had been charged with finding a press secretary for Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] had done was he was leaking, he was putting my name in Kup's Column saying that I was going to be press secretary, and I hadn't committed to anything, which was putting me in a, you know 'cause I got my people at Newsweek.
Speaker 2: In a very precarious situation.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and I'm denying it of course because it's deniable, I mean--
Speaker 2: You had made the--
Speaker 1: --I hadn't, you know I talked, I'd had a conversation, but that was it.  So, Johnathan says I see--I said, "Well," I said, "they approached me, but I'm not comfortable."  He says, "You gotta do it."  He says because it will position you, he says you can go this way, you can do that, you can do this, you can do that and I'm still nervous.  So, I say to him I say, "Johnathan," I say, "after Sawyer is no longer mayor are you gonna give me a job?"  There's dead silence on the telephone.  He doesn't commit to anything, but he's, he's, he's opened my eyes to the possibility.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, I call Erwin and I say I need another meeting with Mayor Sawy- Mayor Sawyer.
Story_ID: 581186
Speaker 1: Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] had been elected by the city council [Chicago City Council].  The black community was divided.  They thought, some people thought that Tim Evans [Timothy C. Evans] who was another alderman under Harold [Harold Washington] should be mayor because--
Speaker 2: And why was that?
Speaker 1: Because those who had worked for Harold, the department heads and what have you were fearful of losing their jobs and they liked, liked Evans.  Evans was more personable.
Speaker 2: Mild mannered.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no not mild mannered.  He was more, he was a smooth talker.  He was a lawyer.  He was a smooth talker.  He was charming.  He was more personable than Sawyer.  I mean Sawyer was very quiet and reserved, and, and not a self-promoter.  As I said, I knew them both and Harold had told me that Harold was impressed with Evans, Tim Evans, but he didn't, he thought that he was a little bit too much into what he was doing himself and what he was doing.  He said he was a man, basically a man on the make.  You know I mean and, and Harold wasn't critical of him, that was just his observation and it turned out to be true.  But, but, but okay, but anyway I, I, the myth that they perpetuated was that Evans was the heir apparent and in the meantime the twenty-nine selected Sawyer because they got to, the, the laws had been changed from the days when they just blocked [HistoryMaker] Wilson Frost to now where the city council would select a, a, an acting mayor, an acting mayor until an election was held.  So, Sawyer was elected for two reasons.  First of all everybody liked Sawyer.  I mean Sawyer was one of these guys that was just nice, and he was accommodating.  Everybody liked him.  And the other reason was the twenty-nine figured well if they elected Sawyer he didn't go along with them, then they'd run somebody against him and they'd get the office.  So, that's, that was why, ba- in a nutshell he was selected--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but there was, but the black community as a result of this (unclear) because they'd put out this stuff about Sawyer being a sellout, which was not true.  They put out all this nasty stuff and so the black community was split between Evans and Sawyer, which is how we got Mayor Daley [Richard M. Daley].
Story_ID: 581187
Speaker 1: But anyway Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] was getting beaten up in the press.  They needed a press secretary desperately--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I get you.
Speaker 1: --and they needed somebody who knew what he was doing, so they were trying to get me to do it.  Okay, so, and, and Erwin France who was this, he had been in government forever.  He was one of these people that was, had been in government and done all sorts of things and was loved by some and some questioned him, questioned him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not too much love.
Speaker 1: Yeah right.  He was, he had been charged for finding the press secretary.  So, I had, had a meeting with Sawyer and France in Sawyer's office, and Erwin had done all the talking.  You know he's, he's questioning me and he's you know and Sawyer is sort of just sitting there being nice, but he's not saying anything.  So, then okay it's time, it's time to decide whether I'm gonna take the job or not and so I tell Erwin, I said, "I wanna meet with the mayor and just the two of us."  I said, "I don't want you in on the meeting."  So, we arrange a meeting at the Drake Hotel [Chicago, Illinois] and Erwin, because this is the way Erwin was, he arranges where we have finger sandwiches and tea (laughter), and so well you know the two, now it's just Sawyer and I, and, and it's heads up and we're having this conversation, and I tell him I said you know and we reminisce about the old days and I talk about how okay I'm interested in taking the job, but only on these conditions, and the condition is that I and only I speak for him.  Because if you get everybody representing the mayor, then nobody represents the mayor (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And so I said we've gotta have this agreement that I am your only spokesman, nobody else.  And, and I mean that, that, that's the key thing and then there's other little thing, but I just wanted him to understand (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The most important factor.
Speaker 1: --see where he was coming from and where I was coming from.  And we shake on it and we're supposed to have, we're supposed to have a press conference the next day and so I, I go, I, I, I sort of hang out with him and the next day we're having the press conference to introduce me as the new press secretary, a story has broken about a thirty thousand dollar finder's fee that Sawyer has gotten on some deal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: --you know which was weird, but anyway (laughter) it's like I mean it's the, the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Having to get into that position.
Speaker 1: --the, the press--right exactly so I felt as if I had been parachuted into the--
Speaker 2: Oh I would imagine.
Speaker 1: --middle of a battle zone.  You know and I, and the thing is I mean it was a very weird situation because I'm being introduced to the city hall press corps who all knows me because I was among them, I was one of them and, and I'm well liked by most of them, you know so they're not gonna beat up on me, but they're out to beat up on the mayor and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and so I'm, it's--
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: --so right from the beginning it's just, it's just incredible.
Speaker 2: Intense, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you know so I move into my office.  I have an office at City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois] and it's really nice.  I have my own bathroom, you know, right in my office (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Really, well let's pause right here--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Story_ID: 581188
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is during your fifteen months at City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and in your office.
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly.  Now, I, I, I started on, on Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] birthday in eighty--
Speaker 1: Fascinating.
Speaker 2: --in, in, in '88 [1988]--
Speaker 1: Fascinating.
Speaker 2: --January 15th of '88 [1988].  And, I mean it was really weird, I mean once I said I was gonna do it I just got caught up in the thing that, that, that, when I made the agreement I was supposed to go back to my office, I got caught up with the mayor [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] because things were popping and it was just one--I didn't get home to ten o'clock that night you know from early afternoon tea [at the Drake Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] and then the next day I had the press conference.  I mean it was several days after.  I was, I was all in the newspapers or on TV before Newsweek--I finally had a chance to talk to Newsweek to tell them I'd no longer be there.
Speaker 1: Gee.
Speaker 2: I mean it was just, I mean the job was fascinating and it was just fast moving, I mean I was gone from, from, from early in the morning to late at night.  I worked weekends.  I mean when I first started, 'cause I had to evaluate the staff.  I had, I had four secretaries.
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 2: I had four secretaries.  I think I had ten writers, two photographers working for me, so this was my staff.  And one of the secretaries of course was my personal assistant, Tumia Romero.  She now works for Alderman Danny Davis [HistoryMaker Danny K. Davis].  But, at the time she was twenty-three or twenty-four years old and her mother was younger than me, which I was going my god I know I'm getting old (laughter).  I got somebody who's--I'm older than their mother working for me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is probably her first job.
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly, no plus she had, her mother, she is young, young thing going on.  She had been young, her mother had been young when she had Tumia.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: But, but anyway during my first days there it was very strange.  I would, it would, it would get into the early afternoon and I would notice I was in pain.  I was trying to figure out why I was in pain, and it occurred to me I hadn't taken the time to go to the bathroom, but I was so preoccupied and so busy--
Speaker 1: With the work.
Speaker 2: --but it was just, I mean it was just exciting.  I mean I did--we--for example shortly after I got in there, there was the fight in, in the, in the press secretary's job.  There was a fight between Mike Tyson and I think it was Larry Holmes in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  So, I flew with the mayor out there for that and got to meet Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump].  We were introduced to Donald Trump and obviously we met Tyson and Don King.  But, I mean that's the way it was, I mean limos were picking us up, it was a limo life, you had, you, you were riding around.  I had my own, and I had my own car, city car (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And this is the job that you had hesitations?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, exactly.  It was paying a lot more money too.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But, no I, I had my own car with Mars lights in the grill so that when I was going around if I was in a hurry I could turn on my Mars lights.
Speaker 1: Really.
Speaker 2: Yeah right it's a power trip.  And plus Tumia was my, my personal assistant.  I mean she would, what she'd do is call my, call, I parked out in front of City Hall back in those days, but she would call the Department of Streets and Sanitation [City of Chicago Department of Streets and Sanitation], they would pick my car up, wash it, fill it up with gas, and put it back in front.
Speaker 1: As press secretary this type of--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah exactly.  Oh yeah that, it was, and I, I, I live in Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois].  I've, I've lived there since '76 [1976], and my, my neighbors who had been trying to get their sidewalks fixed or street lights put in or trees planted--
Speaker 1: Finally they was able to get something done.
Speaker 2: Right because they would call me instead of the alderman and I could make a call--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and, and get it done.  Joey Meyer, who at the time was the coach for the DePaul [DePaul University, Chicago, Illinois] basketball team the son, son of Ray Meyer he lived down the alley from me and had a pothole in front of his garage and he wanted to put a basketball court, a basketball hoop on the, on, on his garage, so his kid could play and I was able to get that taken care of.  (Unclear) it was the first, well actually it was the first and only time I had real power (laughter), and it was very nice.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 581189
Speaker 1: Plus, I got to travel all these places--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --because wherever the mayor [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] went I, I went (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You were there.
Speaker 1: I, I, I, I met the, I, I--besides meeting Donald, Donald Trump [President Donald John Trump], we, we went out to the West Coast and Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] we met him.  We had some event, we met him.  We, when the Bears [Chicago Bears] played in, in, in Sweden, they had an exhi- exhibit game, exhibition game because we--
Speaker 2: You travelled there?
Speaker 1: --we went to Sweden.
Speaker 2: My goodness.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  To Gothenburg, Sweden and we spent three, four days there and, I mean and, and the nice thing about again being with the mayor's entourage is we flew in better than first class.  These, these seats we had turned into beds--
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness.
Speaker 1: --and so, I mean it, it was a very nice life.
Speaker 2: Almost like Air Force One.
Speaker 1: Yeah right exactly.  And wh- while, while we were there, I mean the king and queen of Sweden had been here for some reason Chi- Chicago [Illinois] I can't remember why, but there was a dinner for them here, which is when I met Ann Landers, and she and I became friends, Eppie Lederer, and then when we went to Sweden they gave, there was a dinner for the king and queen of Sweden that we went to, which they had--I remember having venison medallions was part of the dinner--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --which was, which I'd never had before, which was very nice.  I had, I, I had venison sausage, but never--
Speaker 2: Not, not medallions right.
Speaker 1: --these medallions yeah and, and, and we hung out and in Sweden it was, it was, one of the guys, one of the businessmen who were on the trip rented a Mercedes [Mercedes-Benz], and we went to jazz clubs and discos; we just hung out.  And it was four of us in a car and we would, you have four black men in suits and ties, yeah and these people didn't know what to make of us and, and we weren't basketball players (laughter).
Speaker 2: And you weren't jazz musicians (laughter).
Speaker 1: Exactly weren't jazz musicians, so they would, they basically said, "Who are you?"
Speaker 2: Had to be politicians.
Speaker 1: Exactly right, exactly right, yeah.  But it, it was, it was very interesting.
Speaker 2: Incredible.
Speaker 1: That was in August of '88 [1988] when we went there, and then let's see what are some of the other places.  I mean we went all over.  We, I mean we just would travel, which was nice go to New York [New York].
Story_ID: 581190
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And of course because he's the mayor of Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And, and during that time I, I mean it was interesting this being Chicago I even, I had, I, I, somebody attempted to bribe me.  They took me to the, to the East (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course that would, that would come with the territory.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they, they, they, they had bid on, on the request for proposal to do work at, at O'Hare [Chicago O'Hare International Airport, Chicago, Illinois] and they were concerned whether they would win or not and so this guy, this particular person he takes me to lunch at the East Bank Club [Chicago, Illinois] and he says to me, he says, he says, "Your children [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson] are young now, but you gonna be surprised before it will be time for them to go to college."  And at the time my older son was five and the younger one was two (laughter).  He says, "You gonna be surprised he says but you know we could probably put together something now so that by the time they went to college you would be ready for them," (laughter).
Speaker 2: Amazing.
Speaker 1: Right exactly, you know but it was said you know it wasn't like a direct thing, but it was indiscreet.
Speaker 2: Very indiscreet yes, right.
Speaker 1: And the thing was of course was, the thing was I had gone into politics just to see what it was like on the other side, but I had no intention of having a career in politics.  I wanted to go back and say I, besides just being a principled person, I had no interest in doing this and so--
Speaker 2: So could your choice have influenced the mayor [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer]?  Is that what--
Speaker 1: I don't think so.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I don't think, but I don't know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --since I did not follow it, but I don't think so.  You know I, I would like to think not.  But, it was not any, it's nothing I--but I was, I was flattered and amazed.
Speaker 2: That type of offer, yes.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know, but the thing is because I was with the mayor day in and day out--
Speaker 2: Your voice.
Speaker 1: --for a great part of that, I had his ear a long time and--
Speaker 2: Right would be--
Speaker 1: --so people, all sorts of people came to me--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with things to, to, that they wanted to get to the mayor.  So, I mean that was my power is that I had his ear.
Story_ID: 581191
Speaker 1: And being that he was soft spoken and compassionate (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right exactly, oh yeah no, because, yeah no [HistoryMaker] Eugene Sawyer had been an alderman for sixteen years I think it was and maybe eighteen, but sixteen or eighteen years he had been an alderman and there was no record of him being interviewed on a radio program, TV program, very few quotes of him and, and he was a power in the Chicago City Council, but he was a behind the scenes nuts and bolts guy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: I mean he was, he was very nice, but he was, he was not a publicity seeking, he was not a typical politician.
Speaker 1: But got the job done.
Speaker 2: But got the job done and knew what he was doing and he got the job done.  And so when he took over, it had to be this public persona.  It was something he was not--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --comfortable with and plus he was from Arkansas [sic. Alabama] and had a southern--
Speaker 1: Accent.
Speaker 2: --accent and he was soft spoken, so thus he became Mayor Mumbles.  You know they said you know.  And I mean, and the problem was because he was soft spoken it was hard to hear him at times, but it wasn't because he was mumbling, but because he was just a very soft, he just spoke softly.  And, and this, I mean this was part of his, his persona.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean I, I can remember being in one meeting with him and we were having a policy discussion with some other people and he disagreed with what I said, and he didn't scream and yell or anything like that he just very quietly says, "Well I think we might want to rethink that."  And you know and I got it immediately though (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: --we probably won't be doing this, we'll be doing something else, but I mean that's just how he was.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he was, I mean he was very easy to work with, very, very, very good to work for.  The only problem was, was trying to push him out.  I felt like a stage mom--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --trying to push her kid out, out--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --into the, from the wings--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --push her kid out to center stage you know.  Sometimes he didn't want to go.  I mean we'd have something and I, I'd come to him and say, "Mr. Mayor," I said, "we really have to address this issue.  You know you got the media, we just can't, we can't let it go by--"
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: "--so we gotta say something about it," and he would look at me and say, "Why don't you go out there and talk to them," (laughter) and so I'd go out there and have this news conference because he just didn't want to deal with it sometimes.  I mean not, he, he didn't mind dealing with the actual issue, but he didn't want to face the press.
Speaker 1: And because of that split in the black vote during that time that is what made for Daley [Richard M. Daley] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that was difficult, no because, right yeah--
Story_ID: 581192
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Early in his administration when I, I, I had, I had been on board maybe two or three weeks at the most we had a retreat in San Juan, Puerto Rico.  We went there and Bill Henry [William Henry] who was this, this brass knuckles West Side politician.
Speaker 2: How many people were on this retreat?
Speaker 1: It was, not including security 'cause it was always security, but not including security it was of his staff about three to four people, and, and you know one was an alderman who he trusted, you know Bill Henry, one of his fellow aldermen, former fellow aldermen.  There was Erwin France, me, it may have been one other person that I'm not thinking of, maybe a couple of businessmen and, and Mayor Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] had this girlfriend Nicki [ph.] who was twenty-five years old, twenty-six.  She, she had been a cheerleader or something like that.  She was very pretty, and when I first saw her I, I told Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson], my wife about her, and Joyce says, "He better, he better keep her a secret or every woman in the City of Chicago [Illinois] is gonna vote against him," (laughter), 'cause he had this young gor- gorgeous woman.  She wasn't, she wasn't that bright, but she was very nice, she was, she, she, she knew how to shop.  But, anyway she, he had taken her along and I took Joyce and so we're there and we're sitting around we're having these meetings and all these people were back, I mean because of the split you had sabotage going on in the administration from black folks.  They were doing things to, to, and Bill Henry was saying, "You gotta fire this person, you gotta, you know you gotta (unclear), you gotta do this," and I was saying you know unfortunately that's how it works, you know, you gotta, that's the only way you're gonna get people's attention.  And so I can remember Bill Henry telling one guy who had been working against him in his administration and he had to fire him right now, and Sawyer says this guy grew up in his neighborhood in Arkansas [sic. Alabama].  His mother [Bernice Mauldin Sawyer] knew this guy.  He said if he fire him his mother would call and say why did you fire (laughter) John Henry, John Henry or whatever his name was you know (laughter) and he just, he didn't want to fire, I mean 'cause he, he knew all these people and he didn't want to fire anybody and we were saying you gotta get control of this and he never--
Speaker 2: That was the part of the downfall you believe because not having the--
Speaker 1: Yes, that was definitely because he didn't--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --he didn't fire enough people.  I had to fire--I mean to show you how split the government was one of my people was on radio on a talk show pushing Evans [Timothy C. Evans] and talking against him, and we recognized her voice and you know I recognized it and some of security recognized it, 'cause she was one of these people I'd inherited from--
Speaker 2: The previous administration.
Speaker 1: --the previous administration.  And so I called her in and it was the first time I had to fire somebody.  It was a horrible experience, but you know what I told her, "Look we're supposed to be his spokesmen, so we're, our job is to make him look good and you're on the radio pushing the other guy and this will not do."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, and so I, I, I, I had to fire her, and it was a horrible experience, but--
Speaker 2: Speak about a contradiction of opinions.
Speaker 1: Right exactly, right exactly, right exactly, but I mean that's how divided everything was.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 581193
Speaker 1: But I mean, but it was exciting.  I mean the campaign we, we went to, we, we, we went to Atlanta [Georgia] to the 1988 Democratic National Convention and--
Speaker 2: And that's when Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] was the keynote speaker I believe.
Speaker 1: 'Cause Jesse Jackson has been the keynote speaker so many times.
Speaker 2: No wasn't it the congresswoman in Texas I think Barbara Jor- Barbara Jordan.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but see the problem with Atlanta was the convention hall--Atlanta is really too small a town to handle something that big, and so there weren't enough seats to accommodate all of us, so we had to rotate who could go to what with the mayor you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --between his advisors and his press secretary and his staff.  So, it was a rotation going on.  It was, it was, it, it wasn't that great.  And thing is, I, I, I, I ran into Nina Totenberg.  Nina Totenberg who is a, who now covers the [U.S.] Supreme Court for NPR radio [National Public Radio].  She's--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah, but she and I had worked at The National Observer together and I asked her if she remembered me, and she said yeah she did, but she was busy working and that was typical Nina.  But anyway (laughter), but it was nice that she remembered.  Anyway--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --but, but, so, so then we're into full blown cam- campaign.
Speaker 2: Could we pause for one second please?
Speaker 1: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: So we're in full blown campaign mode and we were like, I mean then it was really just nonstop.  I mean and, and that had been the only downfall of the job from my perspective is because my kids were so young and you know I, I really wanted to be with them--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but there was this excitement, but right after I took the job for example one day my older son, Scott [Scott Anderson], says to Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] he says, "Mommy does Daddy ever come home anymore," because I would literally be gone before he woke up in the morning and would be home after--
Speaker 1: He went to sleep at night.
Speaker 2: --he went to sleep, and so you know I was, I was an absentee father.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, I ha- you know what I had hoped is that Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] would get reelected and then I was gonna get out six months afterwards or so, anyway I had planned to get out because I just couldn't you know I mean--
Speaker 1: You were neglecting your family.
Speaker 2: Exactly, I mean had my sons been teenagers it would have been different (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It would have been different right.
Speaker 2: --'cause they'd care, they wouldn't care (laughter) whether I was home or not--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --but at that age having a father around and I knew how important it was for me--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when I was that age with my father [Monroe Anderson, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --so I was feeling guilty about that.
Story_ID: 581194
Speaker 1: But anyway so the campaign's on and we're, then it's really intense, I mean we're, it's seven days a week, we're at black churches, we're at events in various ethnic, other ethnic communities you know whether Hispanic or Asian or Polish or, you know on and on like that and this just goes, I mean what was really great about it is I, I, I got to see what ethnic Chicago [Illinois] was like and you know it's interesting people have all these stereotypes about people you know because all my life I'd heard that the Mexicans looked down on blacks, the Indians looked down on blacks; everybody looked down on blacks, nobody liked black people.  Well, what I discovered in the position I was in is that nobody likes people without power, but everybody likes powerful people.  Because these people were (unclear) for Mayor Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] and for me to some extent because we were in power and, and, and all these people who supposedly did not like us was very easy to talk to 'em.  I have some friendships that last to this day from, from out of that and, and, and I got to talk to them and, and they have the same issues that we have.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: You know, I mean they want, they want to be successful.  They want to get to--
Speaker 2: Autonomy.
Speaker 1: --yeah, they want to be recognized.  They want everything that we want, and it's no, and, and it's, it's no difference.
Speaker 2: A human need and human functions (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah exactly, exactly and, and, and I, I came to understand it with greater clarity than ever before in that position.  So, anyway Sawyer loses and my, my life in power is over.
Speaker 2: I wouldn't say that because you went to CBS and that's, that's--
Speaker 1: Yeah right well okay what happened was out, the, the day that Daley's [Richard M. Daley] sworn in as mayor and I, I attend that and we've arranged where I drive my car home, my city car home and I leave it out in front of my house and they come and pick it up and that's the end of that (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 581195
Speaker 1: I interview a couple of, for a couple of jobs.  One of them I'm approached by [HistoryMaker] Cardiss Collins who was a congresswoman at the time, and she wants me to come to Washington [D.C.] and be her chief of staff, so, not chief, her, her press person, sorry her--
Speaker 2: Okay right.
Speaker 1: --press person yeah, her media person and you know I've talked to a couple of newspapers but it's, it's not quite what I want to do and, and I'm not sure how interested they are, you know they're talking to me, but you know I'm having interviews, but it's, I'm not, not sure what the situation is.  And so I call Johnathan [HistoryMaker Johnathan Rodgers] up and I say, "Johnathan," I said, "I'd like to meet with you just to pick your brain on my next career move."  I didn't ask him for a job right.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so then I come in, go to his office at CBS and you know dressed up and everything.  He says, "Oh you dressed up just for me," you know (laughter), and so then we, we talk and you know and I tell him that Cardiss is interested, et cetera.  He says, "Well that's not gonna, that's," he says, "you don't wanna do that."
Speaker 2: For what reason would you not have?
Speaker 1: He says, he says, "You don't want to be a career politician."  He says, he says, and then he tells me he says well, he says, "Give me a few days and I may have a job for you as, as director of station services."  He says, "Now it only, it doesn't pay that much.  It only pays in the forties [$40,000]," and now I'm silent.  You know how he had been, been silent, I mean because as press secretary--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I, I was making seventy-eight [thousand dollars]--
Speaker 2: Double, triple that.
Speaker 1: --yeah right seventy-eight and before, even at Newsweek I was making more than in the forties, so this was way too way back, far, far back.  And so then I don't say anything and he says, he said, "Well let me see what I can do," he says but, he said, "but you gotta understand you gotta step back sometimes, you gotta step back to move forward."
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so I said okay well, and so.  Then he calls me and he makes the offer, and the job is better than in the forties thank god.  It was not, it's not as high as I was making, but it's better than in the forties--
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly.
Speaker 1: --and so I come to work for him.
Speaker 2: But still a part of the media, CBS.
Speaker 1: Yeah right exactly, no and I'm, I'm, I'm in management, and he said, again Johnathan in all his wisdom he says to me, says, "The advantage to taking a position like this is you're at the table and you get to see how, how, you get to see how these decisions are made and you get, and, and you get to understand TV," he says, "and you can take this and translate this into something else."  So, I'm there, the department head, I'm sitting there with everybody else who's in charge of the TV station and, but, but, but I'm still, I mean I, I--because, because I've been on TV interviewed day in and day out--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in some instances with Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer], I mean I am very well known.  I mean I can't walk two blocks down the street without people stopping to talk to me.  So, he and I were going to lunch one day to a restaurant a couple of blocks away, we're walking and somebody stops me and get into this conversation with me and you know he's sort of waiting on me and so I, you know I, I didn't want to be rude, so I talked to him for a couple of minutes, but I tell I really gotta go with my boss to lunch.  And so I catch up with him and I apologize I said I'm sorry I said you know they wanted to talk politics with me.  He says to me, he says, "You're in TV now, talk TV," (laughter).  And so, you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --which is what I, I did.  Johnathan got promoted from general manager to president of CBS--
Speaker 2: Oh okay.
Speaker 1: --all TV stations.  He was over all the general managers, and he hired Bill Applegate.
Story_ID: 581196
Speaker 1: And Applegate [Bill Applegate] comes in and that's when I got my TV show.  He decided I should be (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --he, he promoted me to director of community affairs and I get to host and produce 'Common Ground.'
Speaker 2: Now how did you come up with that name, 'Common Ground'?
Speaker 1: 'Common Ground' again this, the program, sorry, 'Common Ground' had been around since the late '60s [1960s]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --when they were having the race riots and so they were, they were trying to figure out a way to get blacks and whites together to discuss race relations and to meet a common ground.
Speaker 2: I get you.
Speaker 1: So, the program had been around for twenty years--
Speaker 2: Twenty something years.
Speaker 1: --twenty years when I, when I, when I got there to take it over.  And it was basically a, it was a public affairs talk show, half an hour, where you have a couple of guests in or, or sometimes three and have varying opinions about whatever, you know what, whatever topic it was.
Speaker 2: Local guests or national?
Speaker 1: Local and national.  It would depend on--for example I did, I did one, I did one version where I had an audience.  This was special, but I had an audience and I had Emmett Till's mother [Mamie Till-Mobley] and Rosa Parks--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as my guest.
Speaker 2: What a--
Speaker 1: And some kids in the audience.
Speaker 2: What an accomplishment.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That is probably unheard of in any other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right, but on another--
Speaker 2: --segment of history.
Speaker 1: Right on another show I had Larry King who took over my show (laughter) basically because he was a better host than I was.
Speaker 2: Now--
Speaker 1: I mean, I mean the thing with being in TV because I was never trained in TV and I, I'd been on a lot of TV interviews, but not trained as a TV host and so that just, just jumped in the water and did it.  And so I was never good.  At best I, I got to being mediocre (laughter).  I started off bad.  I mean, but the thing is I mean I was bad reading the script.  I was, I mispronounced a lot of people's names, although I would try to remember them and everything and I'd spell them out phonetically in the script, but then when I was interviewing I would forget.  But, the thing is because I'd been a journalist for eighteen years I was very good at interviewing people and so those who watched the show because I was a good interviewer, but I was not a good host as such you know with the script part of making the transitions in and out of commercials, and I never got, plus I never was comfortable 'cause I always felt that to be a good TV person you really have to be a ham.  You know you have sort of--
Speaker 2: Throw yourself out there a minute.
Speaker 1: --yeah, yeah throw yourself out there and it's almost like acting and since I'd got in the framework of being a serious journalist it was, there was a, a--
Speaker 2: And a press secretary.
Speaker 1: Yeah right exactly, yeah, but I didn't, but I never was comfortable with that part and so, I mean I would watch the show and I'd cringe watching myself on TV sometimes, but--
Speaker 2: Were you responsible for bringing the guests or was that an outside--?
Speaker 1: I was, well no, no I would, I did all that.  I  mean, actually I had interns and I had one producer and so we had meetings and I would decide what the topic was gonna be and I'd tell them who we should get or try to get or sometimes somebody was coming through town [Chicago, Illinois] and they'd call us and want to be on the show--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that's a good thing about having a TV show. People contact you to do it.  You know I, I had Ann Landers [Eppie Lederer] on for example one time.  She told me my number. I had [HistoryMaker] Carol Moseley Braun on the week before the election.
Speaker 2: So there's a political forum as well (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, oh yeah now I could do whatever I wanted.  So I did a show, for example right after Magic Johnson--
Story_ID: 581197
Speaker 1: So as executive, executive director of the public affairs talk show.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well executive producer.
Speaker 1: Executive producer (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was executive producer of 'Common Ground,' and I was the, I was the director of station services and community affairs at WBBM-TV [Chicago, Illinois] okay.  As (unclear) as, as the host I obviously was on air and what have you, but as the executive producer I got to make the executive decisions on what topics we'd do.  So for exa- for, when, when, when, when Magic Johnson announced that he had AIDS I did a, a show on HIV /AIDS [human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] and I had this local doctor on who was treating a lot of AIDS patients, and we were talking about--and you know back then it was a death sentence and the thing was Max Robinson, I don't know if you know who he is, but--
Speaker 1: Yes, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] journalist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well he had been Max--no Max had been, well Max had been an anchor in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], that's when I met him when I was at The National Observer.  I met, I met him and Bill Raspberry [HistoryMaker William Raspberry] and other local journalists there because even back there before the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] was founded we were having meetings.
Speaker 1: He also passed away with AIDS yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah AIDS.  He died of AIDS.  He had been, he had been, he became the first network anchor when ABC had this experiment when they had an anchor in New York [New York], an anchor in D.C., and an anchor here in Chicago [Illinois].  He was an anchor they moved to Chicago.  And then he had become an anchor here in Chicago, and he had gotten AIDS and he died from AIDS.  And so this doctor, I think he was from Northwest Hospital, Northwestern Hospital [Northwestern Memorial Hospital, Chicago, Illinois], but anyway I had him on my show and between breaks when we were off the air he told me that he personally has treated thirteen women that Max had given the virus to that had AIDS, 'cause I knew Max.  I mean Max was a player.  I mean Max was a player in D.C., and when he got here, I mean he was just, he was an incredible womanizer.  I mean he just really was just outrageous, and so he had infected all these women.  Okay--
Speaker 1: And that was during the early stages of, of the, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah right exactly.  Yeah, no this was--we're talking about--
Speaker 1: Prior to, prior to Magic Johnson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, no this was right, this was, yeah when, when--
Speaker 1: During that same time.
Speaker 2: --he died, yeah.  Oh yeah no Max died, I'm trying to think, well, well he got AIDS while I was at Newsweek, 'cause during that time when I was at Newsweek I taught at Columbia College [Columbia College Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] too.  I was teaching journalism at Columbia College.  I would do that and, well I started when I was at the Chicago Tribune and I, I continued until I became press secretary [for HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] throughout my Newsweek years I was there.  And I would teach after work, teach a class you know after work, and one of my former students told me that Max had been hitting on her.  You know she was about twenty-two years old or something like that--
Speaker 1: Gee.
Speaker 2: --and she said he didn't look right 'cause he had HIV.  I mean and she was young, but she had enough to know that--she knew enough to know that he didn't look healthy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 581198
Speaker 1: But, anyway that's to say that I would pick my topics frequently like a newsperson.  If it was something in the news I would try to do something from that. I had, and I'd use interns.  I had interns, and I'd let them book the show so they'd get--I had the only internship, the best internship I think because my interns actually got to produce the show and they would, they would make the calls.  I would let them do the first draft of the script and then I'd rewrite it because first of all they couldn't write that well.  Secondly, since I didn't read that well I had to write the words so they would come out my mouth halfway reasonably.  But, also that's when I also became involved with the National Association of Black Journalists.  Now I'd been--when the Chicago Association of Black Journalists [National Association of Black Journalists - Chicago Chapter] was formed in the mid-'70s [1970s] I'd been part of that starting that up.  I was one of the founding members of that, but, but I hadn't been active with the NABJ.  I got on the board in the '93 [1993] I think it was or something like that and I was on '94 [1994], and I was on for, I was on the board for five years, five or six years representing what was then region five, which was also very interesting I mean all, all the things that we, we, we'd have the convention at a different city each year and I, I have photographs of myself with, with President Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], you know I was just, you know the board was there, they took our pictures, but still to have your photograph with a, a sitting president is, is, a nice thing to have.
Speaker 2: Remarkable.
Speaker 1: Also I have a photograph with Gore, Vice President Gore [Al Gore].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Not as good a photograph actually, but, but anyway I mean being on the board was fun and interesting too, and we, I got to help shape things.
Story_ID: 581199
Speaker 1: And I went through during the--I was there for thirteen years at CBS [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  I went through five different general managers.  It was always changeover and one guy was worse than the next.  And then Joe Ahern [Joseph Ahern] who had been a long time news director at the competition station, the ABC station [WLS-TV, Chicago, Illinois], had left town.  He was brought back to try to save CBS, and basically what he did he swept out every, he, he, he took out every manager and brought in his own people and you know, and so fortunately for me I was fifty-five and therefore eligible for retirement and I, I had written a novel that, that was I was trying to get an agent for.
Speaker 2: What novel?
Speaker 1: It, it, the novel, 'The Corliss Column or A Generic Suicide Note' ['Sweetspeare's Sirens: A Tell-All Memoir by Pierce Trotter,' Monroe Anderson].  It's, I have not gotten it published yet.  I hope to soon one day, but it's about the first wave of black journalists to go into mainstream media in Chicago [Illinois] back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What an incredible project.
Speaker 1: --back in the '70s [1970s], yeah, yeah.  And--
Speaker 2: How long have you been working on, on that?
Speaker 1: Well I, I, it took me, it took me five years to actually do it.  I started it in 1984, and everything I read about writing a novel it said you had to be disciplined.  You had to set a certain block of time, two hour block of time and you had to do the same block every day and you had to do it, and so what I'd do because of my schedule I was working, I'd, I'd get up at five in the morning and write until seven for about three days, and then I'd fall off the wagon.  And three or four years would pass, then I'd say I gotta do this and I start it again.  Well, I turned fifty and it occurred to me that if I didn't do this novel soon I was gonna be on my death bed talking about the novel I was writing.  And, but I was still trying to figure out how to do it.  I was at another one of Bill Kurtis' parties and Scott Turow was there, and you know read, you read something in, in the newspaper and it doesn't necessarily connect as a conversation and I had read that Scott Turow had written 'Presumed Innocent' during his commute into work as, as an attorney, but then I'm talking to him and I'm asking I said, "Well how do you, you know I'm having trouble with this discipline," and what have you, and he says, "Well you know I wrote 'Presumed Innocent' during my half hour commute into work," and I thought half an hour that's all he spent and he got a novel done.  I said I can find a half an hour--
Speaker 2: Right every day.
Speaker 1: --in a day to write.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and so rather than trying to do the top, sometimes I'd do it in right after I got--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --home from work, sometimes after the kids [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson] had gone to bed, sometimes when I woke up in the middle of the night, and you know sometimes that half an hour would turn into an hour.  But, after five years, but I finished the first draft in about a year and half and I spent the next three and a half years rewriting it and it's, it's five hundred words [sic. pages] long.
Story_ID: 581200
Speaker 1: I went through a process several years back of trying to get an agent, and that was the most brutal experience I've ever had.  I mean these people it's like you get rejection letters.  Those who read it sometimes, sometimes they just would, would, would just read a little bit and they had some assistant reading it who would try and give me lessons you know saying well all the characters should be real instead of fictional or you know you got some because some of my characters for obvious reasons are fictional and some are real characters.  I have a mix and for effect for I want to do.
Speaker 2: I understand.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I had some, some twenty-two year old just out of literature, lit, getting an English major trying to tell me how to do it.
Speaker 2: Well are you looking more in terms of a popular press or academic press?
Speaker 1: Now, that's why, I wanted popular press, commercial because I thought I needed the money.  Now, I mean, now they do that, but, but the truth of the matter is, it's, it was one hundred twenty thousand words, five hundred pages ['Sweetspeare's Sirens: A Tell-All Memoir by Pierce Trotter,' Monroe Anderson].  I think it was too long for a first novel, I mean because the people that read it and, and liked it, agents they said it was well written, the characters were well developed, but and usually was just too big, which, which meant it was too long.  So, I'm gonna cut it down.  But anyway, I, I, I, I, I wrote the novel and, and I was starting the sequel.
Story_ID: 581201
Speaker 1: That's what I was doing in, in my retirement.  That was a plan to start the sequel, so I was trying to get an agent for that ['Sweetspeare's Sirens: A Tell-All Memoir by Pierce Trotter,' Monroe Anderson] and I was working on the sequel when I got a call from [HistoryMaker] Hermene Hartman who I've known since the '70s [1970s] since, since when I first got--she used to, she, she was with PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] and she would come to parties at my house that Christine [Anderson's first wife, Christine Harris] and I would have when we lived in Prairie Shores on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], and so she would come to parties there and you know we had talked and everything and I, I've known her over the years.  Occasionally we'd get together for lunch, and she had, I had written--while I was at CBS [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] between my Sawyer [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer]--right after Sawyer I'd been contacted by some editors who were putting together a book.  It was called 'Chicago Elects a New'--'Renaissance 1989: Chicago Elects a New Daley' [sic. 'Restoration 1989: Chicago Elects a New Daley,' Paul M. Green and Melvin G. Holli], and they asked me to do a chapter about Sawyer.  And so I wrote a chapter for the book about Sawyer and Hermene liked it so much she, she ran the whole thing, almost all of it, the, the space providing in her new publication she had started N'DIGO.
Speaker 2: So 'Chicago Elects a New Daley' is--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Re- 'Renaissance 1989: Chicago Elects a New Daley' and basically, my chapter is called "The Sawyer Saga: A Journalist, Who Just Happened to be the Mayor's Press Secretary, Speaks" (laughter).  And I--
Speaker 2: "Who Just Happens to be--"
Speaker 1: Yeah "Just Happened to be the Mayor's Press Secretary, Speaks" (laughter), and I told, I, I from my per- perspective I talk about what happened during Sawyer--
Speaker 2: Were you the only African American writer in that, in that book?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 2: And how were the other writ- writings in comparison to yours?
Speaker 1: Oh my chapter was the best.  And I, I say that, no I say that objectively, I mean because I was the only prof- well no there's was like maybe one or two other journalists who wrote for it, but they didn't have the advantage of being on the inside writing out, and the other people were politicians and they wrote from or professors--
Speaker 2: Outside.
Speaker 1: --professors or academicians, but--
Speaker 2: From an outsider's point of view.
Speaker 1: Yeah right exactly, but I, I wrote from the inside, but as a professional journalist and so you know it was, I mean I, the, the editors talked--I was controversial you know because I, I told, I told, I talked out of school.  I told tales and, and I defended Sawyer because I thought he, I thought he needed to be defended and so the, the Evans [Timothy C. Evans] people and still I mean one, one, one person was telling me he used the book in his class, Paul Green, who's now at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], but he was one of the editors and he used the book in his class, and he said black students who were still operating on the myth of, of Tim Evans being the heir apparent would just like explode you know just for once so.  I mean it had an impact and it, and, and it still holds up very well.
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: Yeah it still holds up.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) 'Chicago Elects A Mayor Daley.'
Speaker 1: --yeah, but anyway she, she, she, she had excerpted that.
Story_ID: 581202
Speaker 1: And then also I'd been featured a little later as with several other journalists as the next, the, the, the emerging new journalist in Chicago [Illinois] you know and, and you know so we had a relationship.  And any way she, her, her editor was, was leaving and she needed a new editor, so she called me and asked me, well she calls me and says, "What are you doing?"  I said, "I'm retired."  She said, "No I mean what are you doing?"  I said, "Well I'm writing," and she said, "No I mean what are you--?"  I said, "I'm retired."  She said, "Well how would you like to come work for me?"  I said, "Doing what?"  And she said, "Ed- editing N'DIGO."  And I knew the editor, David Smallwood.  I'd known him for years.  I mean it's a good thing about being in one place for as long as I have is you know everybody and everybody knows you.  So, I said, "Well what's David doing?"  She told me well he was gonna be, he was gonna be going home because he wanted to work from home, he had a small kid and his wife was a nurse and, cause I, I didn't want to take anybody's job.  I mean I was, I, fortunately I'd, I'd done well in the stock market, so living a modest life I was retired and so anyway--
Speaker 2: And how long were you at N'DIGO?
Speaker 1: I was at N'DIGO for, from, for--I started March 15th of 2003 at N'DIGO.
Speaker 2: And being editor you were just basically in charge of overseeing the articles within this magazine?
Speaker 1: Oh no I was doing, no it's only--
Speaker 2: It's you only for everything (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) it's like, it was me, and then I, Janese Drake [ph.] who was the managing editor and the two of us put out the paper every week.  And it was, it was, I mean it was fun and I, and I wanted to do it to help, well this is actually I wasn't gonna go do it.
Speaker 2: 'Cause you had to cover so many grounds, apartments, music, fashion.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah right exactly and I wasn't gonna do it, but I mentioned, after Hermene [HistoryMaker Hermene Hartman] got off the phone, I mentioned to Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] that Hermene had asked me to be editor and she says, "Well you really ought to do it."  I said, "Well you know I'm happy here doing nothing."  She said, "No," she said, "it will be challenge.  I really think you should do it."  I said well I, I told her I'd think about it.  A few days passed by. Hermene calls me again and asks me well what am I gonna do, was I interested?  I said, "Well I'm still kind of thinking about it, but I'll, I'll get back to you in a couple of days I promise."  So, I told Joyce I said, "Hermene called and she, she wants to know what I'm gonna do.  I said I don't know."  I said, "You know what if I don't like it."  Joyce says, "Well I think you should it, it will be a challenge."  She says, she goes then, she says, "And you can always quit," she said, "you're, you're at home not looking for a job, you could always come back home not looking for a job," (laughter).  And it occurred to me at that moment that she was trying to get me out of the house.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I hadn't thought about that, but the problem was she was, our kids were now grown you know, and she was getting a chance to do her art again, get back into her art, but I was getting in her way--
Speaker 2: And she needed privacy and peace.
Speaker 1: --because I was home, exactly I was home, home right exactly, well not only that I'm home and I'm going we're married, I'm home, you're home we can play (laughter) and she's trying to work and so she just wanted to get me out of the way.  So, I said okay, so I, so I started doing N'DIGO and, and it was fun.  It was a lot of work, but it was fun.  I really got into it.  The only problem was Tuesday nights we would be there anywhere from, from like ten at night to three in the morning putting out the paper, two in the morning or something--
Speaker 2: For Wednesday morn- for Wednesday.
Speaker 1: For yeah, yeah, and so I missed my birthday that year because I was, you know we didn't get to celebrate my birthday 'cause it happen to fall on a Tuesday.  I missed Kyle's [Anderson's son, Kyle Anderson] birthday because it happened to fall on a Tuesday or--.  But anyway so that was a problem.
Story_ID: 581203
Speaker 1: --The meantime Her- one day Hermene [HistoryMaker Hermene Hartman] comes to me and says she, she bought Savoy did I want to be editor of that?  National publication (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Savoy this is named after the famous ballroom [Savoy Ballroom] in, in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Exactly and it had been, it had been published out of New York.  First it had been Emerge magazine.  Bob Johnson [Robert L. Johnson] had owned, of BET [Black Entertainment Television].  He sold it and it was changed.  It became Savoy.  It was published out of New York, and it had a following, but it went bankrupt.
Speaker 2: Now Emerge was--
Speaker 1: Was more political.  George--
Speaker 2: It was from way back in the '70s [1970s] up until--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no--
Speaker 2: Not that far back.
Speaker 1: --it was, no it was in the '90s [1990s] also Emerge yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Thought it was before that.
Speaker 1: No, no.  Anyway [HistoryMaker] George Curry had been the editor of Emerge.  When they sold it, and went to New York [HistoryMaker] Roy Johnson who became editor of Savoy he had been with Sports Illustrated and so he did that.  It went out of business.  They had several editors after him because he had fights with [HistoryMaker] Keith Clinkscales who is the publisher, and went bankrupt.  Hermene bought it out of bankruptcy, so we re-launched it.  So, I hired Terry Glover who I had met.  She was an editor at Playboy magazine and Playboy was right across the street from CBS [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois] and I ran into her, so we became friends.  And I hired her and the two of us put out Savoy.  The first time, Savoy had been put out by twelve people.  This time it was three people putting it out including the, the, the art director, so it was a lot of work and, and after four editions it just was, Hermene didn't have enough money, so it went out after four editions.  And, and she tried to get more money, but was unable to, so I was back home.
Story_ID: 581204
Speaker 1: I was trying to think about what I should do and, and I, I happen to run into Michelle Stevens who was, who was an editor at the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times].  I ran into her at Costco [Costco Wholesale Corporation], and she was asking me how I was doing and what I was doing and you know.  I hadn't officially stopped at Savoy.  I, I knew it was in trouble and probably wasn't, so I told her I said, "Well you know I'm still doing Savoy," and the Sun-Times had done a piece on us about Savoy, so she knew that, I said, "But I may need to talk to you."  And at the time my mother [Norma Scott Anderson], this was in maybe October or something like that, and my mother was, had Alzheimer's was in a nursing home and had fallen and broken her hip and was not doing well at all, and so I was going to Gary [Indiana] frequently to see about her.  She died December 18th of last year, 2005.  And so after her death and after dealing with that, then I decided that I didn't wanna just be fully retired.  I, I realized that I'd missed the action during my--as much as I enjoyed being at home, I'd missed the action of journalism, so I called Michelle and asked that we go to lunch and we went to lunch.  I told her my interest in writing a column for the Sun-Times, and so she said she'd talk to Steve Huntley who was the, the editorial page editor.  Called me back a couple of days later said he's interested.  So, I went in to talk with him, and he says, "Okay well once a month on Sundays."  I said, "Well I need at least twice a month because--." I said, "I'm doing once a month is gonna feel like a hobby, not a job."  So, he said, "Okay fine every other week," and I started doing that and then by June I decided that I'd talk to him about doing it daily.  They said fine, so I'm on the controversy section in the Sun-Times every, every Sunday.
Story_ID: 581205
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the difference between when I wrote for the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and writing for the Sun-Times [Chicago Sun-Times] there, there are a couple of differences.  Well, first of all back then I was new and Leanita [Leanita McClain] and I would have these, these comparisons on what we should do, sort of buoy each other up, you know watch each other's backs.  And that went on until she committed suicide.  She--I was, which is something I probably should go into.  I was Leanita's co- personal confidant.  We became very close.  She was married to [HistoryMaker] Clarence Page.  They got divorced, but I, I'd had known them for some time.  I mean we all were at the paper together starting off, and I was, she was, she would talk to me about committing suicide.  At first I wasn't taking her seriously, but then the more she talked the more I realized it was serious, so sometimes I would spend hours in her office talking, trying to talk her out of doing it, asking her, you know I'd tell her I said, "Leanita there are women, black women who would give their right arm to be in your position.  You, you're on the editorial board of a major metropolitan newspaper."  I said, "You have your own column."  'Cause she said, "But I'm not happy."  And we went back and forth and a, a couple of things happened.  She attempted to commit suicide by taking an overdose of pills, and she called me the next day she was in the hospital and, and she had call, called Clarence, although they were divorced maybe estranged, maybe, I think they were actually divorced by then.  But, she had called him and at the last minute and they were able to pump her stomach.  So, afterwards she, she was then telling me that she was such a failure she couldn't even kill herself correctly, and I'm saying no, no, no I said you know I was trying to talk her out of it.  Memorial Day of 1984--I mean she, she went to my father's [Monroe Anderson, Jr.] funeral.  My father had died in January.  She went to my father's funeral.  Memorial Day--I mean we were so close that she would, I mean we literally talked every day, over the weekends, just every day we'd have a conversation of some sort.  Sometimes when she was in crises, she would call at two o'clock in the morning and Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] would answer the phone and she'd be hysterical. No she'd be calm when she was talking to Joyce, she'd be calm, "Hi Joyce is--"
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: "--Monroe [HistoryMaker Monroe Anderson] there?" Two o'clock in the morning.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Joyce would hand me the phone and then she'd be hyster- hysterical.  You know and I'd be trying to calm her down.  The, the weekend of Memorial Day 1984 she didn't call, I didn't hear from her.  I come in the Tuesday after the holiday and stop by her office and newspapers are stacked in front of her office and it's dark, office is dark and I, I just had this horrible feeling.  So, I call Jim Younger [ph.] who had, who had worked for the Tribune and was at that time the vice president in charge of public relations at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and he had a house not far, he's a neighbor of hers.  They both lived in Lincoln--in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  So, I ask him to check 'cause I had called the house, no answer.  So, he went by there and knocked on the door, no answer, but he just happen 'cause Leanita was selling her place, he just happen to know the real estate person and so he, he got the real estate person to open the place up and they go in and they find the body.  She had committed suicide.  He called me and said she did it.
Speaker 2: She had been there for four days, three or four days?
Speaker 1: Maybe, we aren't sure two or three, we aren't sure of when she did it.  But, she had, she had, she had prepared, she had cleaned the house.  She had written these, these little notes for all her friends to tell us good-bye (unclear) it was.  She had, she had laid out her funeral, so.  But anyway yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Too bad yeah.
Story_ID: 581206
Speaker 1: But anyway she [Anderson's friend, Leanita McClain] had helped then--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the thing is when I wrote my columns back then this predated emails, so you get this hate mail, we'd get this hate mail from these people 'cause they didn't like you know, some of them would be with crayons and they'd call you nigger and it was just ugly stuff.  The thing I've noticed in this modern day is that because people send emails they don't send letters and the emails has their name and what have you, they're a lot more civilized.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: They still don't like what you say--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they let you know, but they aren't calling you racist names and what have you--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they just ar- argue with you and so that's a refreshment.  And the, the one last thing I'd like to say about, I don't know if I mentioned this, but the difference between having a talk show or a column, I enjoyed the talk, the column more is because when I wrote my column for the Tribune [Chicago Tribune] and would be out on the streets I'd run into people who would want, who would say, "Oh I read your column and it was really interesting," and could discuss in detail what I'd written about.  But, I had the talk show ['Common Ground'].  People would say, "Oh I love you on TV, I saw your show," and I said, "Well which one?"  And they couldn't remember.  They just knew I was on TV you know because TV is so ethereal--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --it just goes and it's gone.
Story_ID: 581207
Speaker 1: And if you do a search of, of her name you can see the piece that ran in The Washington Post.
Speaker 2: So how did the death of Leanita McClain affect you?
Speaker 1: Oh I was, she was my best friend and so I was devastated.  And what really made it bad was I had to write a column talking about our, her, you know sort of an obituary column and it was the hardest thing I ever wrote.  I mean I just, you know because I just wanted it to be perfect and I wanted and, and I was emotional and so I just kept, I, I, kept working on it and I just having all kind of--but I, I, I got through it.  And then what was really strange is again because, because of my column and because a lot of people knew how close we were I was getting calls for interviews about her death and so I had to talk about that.  Because, well Leanita had written this piece called 'How Chicago Taught Me to Hate Whites' that ran in The Washington Post and in this piece she had mentioned that I was pretty easy going, but that I was freaked out by all the racial hatred going on and sometimes I'd come to her office and just flop down from, from the ca- campaign trail and just have, all the wind would be out of my sail.  And so she had mentioned me in this piece and she had talked about wanting to kill white people, and so the perception was that she had killed herself because of racism in Chicago [Illinois], that's why she killed herself.  Now the truth of the matter was she was bipolar and that's why.  But, and, and so I was being interviewed and everybody wanted me to talk about how racist Chicago was, but I was interviewed by some reporter out of London [England], you know some international radio and everybody wanted to, you know that this was the story they were looking for, discussion was how she had killed herself because of racism and I, I, I didn't want to go into the personal details of why she had done, but I said no that wasn't it.  But anyway, but I was in this situation where I had, I was grieving and had to discuss it at the same time and I didn't find that cathartic at all.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's a difficult situation to be in--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --very, very, very difficult situation to be in and then something so suddenly, although you always think that you could expect things like this, you never, ever know until that, that, that bitter moment (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right no, but I never thought she'd go through with it, you know, I mean and so, I mean what I've, one, one lesson I took out of that is that when people talk about killing themselves--
Speaker 2: Take heed.
Speaker 1: --then take heed, take it seriously because they're, you know if they're talking about it, they're thinking about, or thinking about it there's a good chance that they may eventually do it.
Story_ID: 581208
Speaker 1: Well how do you feel about the way that, that you have lived your life and what is important to you right now in your life?
Speaker 2: My family.  And I have accomplished much more than when I was first entered into journalism school at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] that I ever dreamed I'd accomplish.  And obviously there's much more I could accomplish, but you know, but if I get hit by a bus on the way home today, then I mean I will be nothing to be ashamed of.  I'd like to live another twenty or thirty fruitful years and I'd like accomplish a lot more, I mean because I can do that and, you know but I, but I'm, I'm, I'm happy and the good thing about at fifty-nine right now and the good thing about being this age and, and, and I've been a millionaire since I was, since 1998 and, I mean I live a, I mean and that, that was through investments and living carefully.  I live a, a middle class--I've, I've had a Honda, I've driven a Honda Accord since I, since for the last twenty something years.  I don't live fancy.  And so living on a modest middle class lifestyle, living on a modest you know I, I figure I can live to seventy-five without bringing in a penny and then I'd be on the streets.  I'm not streetwise, but up until that time I'd be fine (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And the sequel.
Speaker 2: And so, and so, and so the point I'm making is I'm in, you know knock on wood, a very comfortable position of being able to do what I wanna do, living my life as I want to, and that's a very good place to be and so I'm doing the column [for the Chicago Sun-Times].  For some reason or another I stop, I'll do something else, or I'll do nothing at all.  I'll do--but I'm a writer and I can pursue my writing and do it comfortably and, and you know my, my sons [Scott Anderson and Kyle Anderson] are still at home, so we enjoy them.  Joyce's [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] career is jumping off real well as an artist.  She's finally getting recognized for all the talents that she has and so that's going and so I get to pick and choose and that's a good place to be.
Speaker 1: And she's a graduate of Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] and, and--
Speaker 2: Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: --Yale.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And Howard's the school that you originally thought that you would like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right--
Speaker 1: --to attend except they ignored your, your letters.
Speaker 2: Exactly I'm still waiting to hear from them yes.  Yeah or we could have met back then, although things happen the way they happen for a reason.
Story_ID: 581209
Speaker 1: Well what do you still want to do that you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay I wanna get my novel pub-, I still wanna be, I still wanna be a novelist (laughter), so, so I, I have four other novels that I wanna write.  So, I wanna do that.  I, I, I'm, I'm gonna, that's what, and I, I'll do it one way or another.  Third World Press [Chicago, Illinois] has ex- expressed an interest in it, so I may go that route.
Speaker 1: That's in New Jersey isn't it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's here.  It's Haki--
Speaker 1: It's in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: --[HistoryMaker] Haki Madhubuti--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he's a publisher, Don L. Lee, he's a publisher of that.
Speaker 1: There's the press that Amiri Baraka--
Speaker 2: Yeah that was, that's different yeah.
Speaker 1: That's another Third World?
Speaker 2: No it's not Third World.  They published Baraka.  They published, they publish Baraka also 'cause Haki who was Don L. Lee by--in the '60s [1960s] and Baraka were, were contemporaries and, but anyway I'll get it published one way.  I can even, I can afford to self-publish if I want to--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I mean I could--so it will be published sooner or later.  I'm still, I'm still holding out hopes that I can go commercial, but if I don't then I'll do it the way I do it and move on to the next project.  And that's it.  I'm just from now on I'm, I'm a writer.  You know I may, who knows I may end up on a TV show or something like that at some point, or a radio show, but, or I may teach again. I, you know the thing is I have choices, I have options, and that's a good space to be.
Story_ID: 581210
Speaker 1: Well is there anything that you have done already that you would like to have done differently or are there any regrets (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, no the list is too long.  I'm not Frank Sinatra (laughter) you know.  I could look back at my life and see all kinds of missed opportunities and mistakes, you know but the thing is being philosophical about this you never know.  You know had I gone that way instead of this, then I could have hit some dead end where I just fell off a cliff or something.  I mean I am who I am, I am where I am because of the opportunities I took, the opportunities I, I missed, the choices I made, and overall I'm happy.  I mean obviously, I, I made a lot of mistakes and part of being, coming up through the '60s [1960s] and being a black nationalist is that I was too distrustful of white people in my early years and that didn't, didn't serve me well.  I've become, I mean I, I now see them as human beings and not as the enemy, and so things--I get along a lot better with them and they get along a lot better with me than back then.  And so, I mean had I, had I not been through that and been afraid of being, thinking of myself as a sellout or something like that, I would have gone further.  If I'd moved around more, I would have done, gone further in my career, but I love Chicago [Illinois] and, and now that I've been here for, since 1972 my roots are deep and broad and so I can take advantage of that and make that work for me.  So, I am where I am and overall I'm happy and that's, I mean how many people can say that?
Speaker 1: Fantastic, not many.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Not many.
Story_ID: 581211
Speaker 1: Well how do you want to be remembered?  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a, as a, as a good writer, a good, a good, good father, a good husband, and somebody who cared and made a difference every chance he got.
Speaker 1: And finally what would you like your legacy to be for other African Americans that would choose to follow your path?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I, I think you want to, you want to try to leave your mark on the world, do something important or positive so that people know that you passed through here and part of that is I think right now too many of us are preoccupied with making money and material things and that's good, I don't knock that, but you also have to make some contribution to the efforts of those who came before you.  You know because I wouldn't be where I was if people hadn't made sacrifices to, to knock down doors and make opportunities available for me and a lot of people who have, who are doing good now wouldn't be where they were except for the battle scars that I have and I would hope that they would appreciate me for that as much as I've appreciated those who fought the battles before me for what they did, as much as I appreciated them.
Speaker 1: Well believe me I'm certain there are many people out there that appreciate you, your contributions, what you've done and--
Speaker 2: And hopefully I'm not done yet.  This is HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And I thank you myself.  Thank you so much for your gracious time that you spent with us during this interview.
Speaker 2: Oh no it's been a pleasure and you were very good.
Speaker 1: And thank you for the contribution and everything that you've done.  You got, you have that approval from, from the world.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Story_ID: 581212
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in January of 1988 when--the day I was named Mayor Eugene Sawyer's [HistoryMaker Eugene Sawyer] press secretary.
Speaker 2: This is Mayor Sawyer and me at a press conference.  You can see the seal of the City of Chicago [Illinois], he's standing behind the podium and I'm there to help him out.
Speaker 1: This is me at the Chicago Tribune.  There are front pages, front pages of various investigative stories they've done and the one behind me is a, a front page from our auto repair series.  It says, "Legislatures to Probe Auto Repair Cheating."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  An approximately date.
Speaker 1: This, this is 1976, probably summer.
Speaker 2: This is at Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois] when Mayor Jane Byrne had moved in.  I think it's 1981.  I was one of the journalists on the death watch.  We watched this every day, her come out to make sure she didn't commit news by getting shot or, or furniture dropped on her head which they would do in the public housing projects.
Speaker 1: This is the mayoral debate.  I'm one of the participating journalists on the panel.  Next to me is Harry Golden [Harry Golden, Jr.] of the Chicago Sun-Times legendary city hall reporter.  That's Harold Washington.  Out of the picture is Jane Byrne and Richard J. Dale- Richard M. Daley who gives a three way debate between them.  This should have been 1982.
Speaker 2: Another shot of me as press secretary at City Hall [Chicago City Hall, Chicago, Illinois] with Mayor Sawyer.
Speaker 1: This is, this is at the, the mayor's back office at City Hall. Well they're in the mayor's office. This is the mayor's chair there and that's Coretta, Coretta Scott King we're having a meeting with her.
Speaker 2: That's me with Ann Landers also known as Eppie Lederer.  She, we were at a dinner for the king and queen of Sweden.  They were visiting Chicago.  I was press secretary at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is me at PUSH [Operation PUSH; Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] annual convention.  That's [HistoryMaker] Jesse Jackson, Jr.  This is when I was at WBBM-TV [Chicago, Illinois].  I think it's around '95 [1995], 1995, but I'm not certain of the year.
Speaker 2: Another picture of news press secretary at a press conference with Mayor Sawyer.
Speaker 1: This is Mayor Daley, Richard M. Daley and me at a, at that time was called Chicago Clean Streaks event [sic. Chicago Clean Streak]. It's now called Keep Chicago Beautiful.  This was when I was at WBBM-TV.  My guess is that this is around 1992 or '93 [1993].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay this, this is the day I was named press secretary, Mayor Sawyer's press secretary.  This, this was taken of the two with two of us.  This photograph ran in Jet magazine.  This is summer of '68 [1968].  The Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois], an intern with Newsweek magazine.  This is right across the street from the Hilton Hotel [Conrad Hilton Hotel; Hilton Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Michigan Avenue had a line of National Guardsman trying to keep the protestors, the war protestors from going across the street to the Hilton and I'm there on the side of the war protestors because I'm, I'm interviewing them and obviously I was a little bit intense.
Speaker 2: This is, this is in September of 1988, Mayor Sawyer's birthday.  Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] did a, a portrait of the mayor and we unveiled it for his birthday.  Our younger son Kyle [Kyle Anderson] was just a baby, so he's in tow.  Scott [Scott Anderson] was at school.  This happened noon-ish or something like that.  Scott our older son was in school, and that's it.
Speaker 1: This is again when I was press secretary and I have a Chicago works button on there, that's what that button is, but anyway I'm with Mr. T.  I'd interviewed Mr. T eight years, maybe eight years earlier when he was still a bouncer at a local disco here, but he was, he had just auditioned to, to for a role in 'Rocky' and his life changed after that.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay this is at the 1988 Democratic National Convention in Atlanta [Georgia] talking with Mayor Sawyer.
Speaker 2: This is on the campaign trail.  We're down at, we're, we're down at the "L" [elevated train] underneath.  Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] is, is, is, is campaigning for Mayor Sawyer.  I'm in the background with the Eddie Bauer arctic, subarctic survival coat on with the fur, coyote fur collar.
Story_ID: 581213
Speaker 1: Okay this photograph was taken at a party given at journalist Bill Kurtis' house.  I wanna says this is probably 1994, yeah 1994 somewhere around there, 1994.  I'm working at Channel 2 [WBBM-TV, Chicago, Illinois].  Joyce [HistoryMaker Joyce Owens Anderson] worked with Donna La Pietra, Bill Kurtis' significant other and Bill, so she's been friends with him since then and we usually get invited to their party.  They took the photograph as the guest came.  They had a photographer taking photograph of the guests as they entered the party.
Speaker 2: This, this is, this photograph was at the wedding of Janet Treuhaft.  Janet Treuhaft was my producer for 'Common Ground,' and she married John Conlisk. This was, this was probably '93 [1993], 1993 I think, '93 [1993] or '94 [1994], the summer obviously in Chicago [Illinois].  This, this, this was, they got married at the, in the Prairie Avenue District [Chicago, Illinois] in an old mansion there that was owned by Clarence Darrow's niece, Joy Darrow, and John Conlisk ironically was--John Conlisk is the son of the police chief, John Conlisk [sic. James B. Conlisk, Jr.], Mayor Daley, Mayor Richard J. Daley's police chief whose police force beat me during the 1968 convention.  John and I are very good friends.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is Joyce and I.  This is probably 1990, and we had a black tie event.  I went to many back when I first started at WBBM-TV, but I can't remember which one this was.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This, this is my, my mother is, is on the right hand side, Norma Jean Anderson [Norma Scott Anderson] in the dark suit with the hat on, and I'm standing in front of her I'm about four years old, so that would be 1951.  My father is standing on the other side between the two women, Monroe Anderson [Monroe Anderson, Jr.], and this is with the Leverts [ph.] who were, my father was in the [U.S.] Army with. I can't remember his name, I always call him Mr. Levert I think.  But anyway it's, it's friends of my parents.
Speaker 1: This is, this is at the DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] at a fundraiser in, this is right after I, I started at, at WBM, BBM, so it's probably 1990, the summer of 1990.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this is at a, a fundraiser at the DuSable Museum.  It's when I was working for WBBM-TV.  From left to right is Linda Artope who's a salesman at Channel 2.  Cynthia Johnson who is, who has her own business.  She's a Chicago businesswoman.  She owns Johnson and Associates [Johnson and Associates Business Interiors Inc., Chicago, Illinois] which is, which is an interior designer for offices.  [HistoryMaker] Johnathan Rodgers who was my boss.  He was the general manager at Channel 2 at the time.  And that's me and then Joyce Owens, my wife.
Speaker 2: This picture was taken at Chicago State University [Chicago, Illinois] at a student black journalist event circa 1996, '97 [1997].  Left to right [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett, the columnist Vernon Jarrett, me, [HistoryMaker] Mary Mitchell, who's a columnist for the Chicago Sun-Times, that's the president of Chicago State University, her name escapes me right now, TV, Channel, NBC, the NBC owned and operated station [WMAQ-TV, Chicago, Illinois], station here some anchor, [HistoryMaker] Warner Saunders, and Cliff Kelley [Clifford Kelley], a former Chicago alderman who is now a talk show host on WVON Radio [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: This is a portrait of me taken when I was four years old, four or five years old.  It was one of my mother's favorite.
Speaker 2: Okay this is a photograph of [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis and me.  It was taken in Gary, Indiana.  He was being honored by a church there.  I can't remember which one, and I was the emcee.  This is when I was working for Channel 2 and my guess is it's around 1997, '98 [1998].  And I reminded him during this that, that I'd interviewed him many years earlier and he'd been gracious enough to grant, grant me another interview when my tape didn't work (simultaneous).
