Story_ID: 26947
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Illesanmi Adesida.  And my first name is I-L-E-S-A-N-M-I.  And my last name is A-D-E-S-I-D-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's Illesanmi Adesida, and the origin of that is from the western part of Nigeria, the southwestern part of Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be with the Yoruba?
Speaker 2: Yoruba ethnic group in the southwestern part of Nigeria.  My first name is, "My family is good to me", Illesanmi.  And Ille literally means house, but in this context, it means family, and Adesida is, it translates to something like "the path of crown is smooth."
Speaker 1: The crown is smooth?
Speaker 2: The path of crown is always smooth.
Speaker 1: The path of the crown, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, always smooth.  Unfortunately, I have no crown so (laughter), so I am in Champaign [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Something to savor that, if you have a crown and things do go a little bit smoother for you--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: But you are, you are the provost which is the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, provost, yeah.
Speaker 1: --which means--yeah, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's May 15, 1949. May 15, 1949.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in a town called Ifon, I-F-O-N, I-F-O-N, Ifon and the state in Nigeria is called Ondo State, O-N-D-O, Ondo State in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your title, your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: Well, my--presently, I occupy the position of vice chancellor for academic affairs and provost of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign [Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Vice chancellor for academic affairs and provost.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, but your training--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My, my--(simultaneous)--that's my administrative title.  My academic title is professor of electrical and computer engineering--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Professor of electrical-- that's my home department.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a professor, you have a home department.
Story_ID: 26948
Speaker 1: Before go into depth--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there are five, lightweight questions we ask--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure.
Speaker 1: --as kind of a warm up.  And they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I have favorite food.  Sure, it's Nigerian food, call it dodo, D-O-D-O.  It's fried plantain.  It's something called plantain.  It's a big, like a big banana.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, I like eating that quite a bit.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: You just have to go and walk out the starch (laughter).  Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Color, light blue.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why I'm wearing my light blue shirt (laughter).  I like light blue color, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I'm a summer guy.  I like warm weather, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It brings out colors, laughter and everything.
Speaker 1: All right, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination?  I have to think about it.  I've been everywhere.  Where do I like most?  Actually like, I like going back to Nigeria, although I have not gone back for awhile, but Hawaii is a great place because of the weather.  I like Hawaii and the water.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The favorite phrase?
Speaker 1: Yeah, or a saying?
Speaker 2: Or saying.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I--let me see.  My kids would tell me I have some.  Let me see (laughter), now you've stumped me.  I have to think about that carefully.  What I've been saying over the last couple of days, "Perfection is the enemy of good enough".
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, "Perfection is the enemy of good enough" because some people like to be perfect, and that slows you down sometimes when you want to do something that is good enough, which can actually at some point, lead to perfection 'cause in the university sometimes, we are so bent on being perfect that we don't, we don't move, yeah.
Story_ID: 26949
Speaker 1: So I'm gonna ask about your family history now--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side.
Speaker 2: My father's side.
Speaker 1: But we'll ask about 'em separately, and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: So, can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name, the first name is Victoria, and the, the middle name is--I'll spell it for you.  O-M-O-T-O-M-I-Y-E.  That's, that's a particular language to my, the dialect of my area within the Yoruba ethnic group
Speaker 1: Omotomiye.
Speaker 2: Omotomiye, yeah.  Omotomiye means--
Speaker 1: Oh, Omotomiye, okay.
Speaker 2: --a kid, your kid is, your kid becomes family, okay.  It means that the Yoruba's give names which has meaning, okay.  They give names that has meaning, at least at the time of your birth.  And Victoria Omotomiye Adesida.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: We don't really know.  You know, in those days in--but she died on, in the 19--in 1996, and we've--estimation would have been sixty-something years old, yeah, maybe seventy--let's say seventy, seventy years old because they got married very early in those days.  But that was the estimation, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  Well, what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Well, my, my mother's father, who I never knew--he died, because in those days, in Africa, they have, have caste system-- was not, not great.  I didn't, I didn't know him.  He died, but they were farmers and hunters.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a farmer, big time farmer in his village, and a hunter.  In those days, you hunt and sell the meat, and you go to the farm and produce food which you can sell around the region, which is--yeah, he was a farmer and a hunter, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, okay--
Speaker 2: And the mother was, our mother was a--although here they call it business person, but it's trader.  You can trade.  You can take food to the market, I mean, not like supermarkets here, but open-air market--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you've been to places like Egypt and all these places, you see open-air markets, the bazaar, but in--
Speaker 1: So is she what they would call a market woman in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, market, exactly, market woman, yeah.  Most--
Speaker 1: What did she specialize in?
Speaker 2: Food.
Speaker 1: Fruit and vegetables (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Food, that's what I term vegetables--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But she cooked food herself?
Speaker 2: No, no, you go to the, go to a farm, get food, tomato, onion and other things and sell, or you buy from neighbors and sell, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so produce and, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, produce, yeah, market woman in produce I guess, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Just call it market woman or trader (laughter).
Story_ID: 26950
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind, behind how she [your mother Victoria Omotomiye Adesida] got her name Victoria?
Speaker 2: Oh, became a Christian.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that wasn't her original first name?
Speaker 2: No, no, np.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't it was.
Speaker 2: No, during--she was, she was already much, grown up, oh, maybe forty-something before she became a Christian and started going to church and took that name, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what denomination did she join?
Speaker 2: You don't have them here.  Its called Cherubim and Seraphim.  It's more, Cherubim and Seraphim, C-H-E-R-U-B-I-M--
Speaker 1: Now, those are two kinds of angels--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cherubim and Seraphim, but there's a Cherubim and Seraphim Church in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they're, Seraphim, yeah, S-E-R-A-F-I-M--P-H-I-M.  And that's, yeah, but they're more on the--if you look at these days in the African American church, clapping, and yeah, they would [snaps]--
Speaker 1: More like a sanctified church or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that you can see things, you can speak in tongues and all this stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's, when I look at it, it's--
Speaker 1: Pentecostal or what do they call it?
Speaker 2: Maybe they're actually, maybe they're--yeah, I would say they're pretty close to the Pentecostal, Pentecostal, yeah.  When I see the Pentecostal in terms of clapping, dancing, speaking in tongues, yeah, that's been going on for a long time in Nigeria--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) Yeah. They (unclear)-- The colloquial--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The colloquial term is holy rollers and--
Speaker 2: Holy, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and that kind of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they've (done?) nice.  They have, I would say they love the--Pentecostal here, but when I look at the--that was not the Christian churches in the olden days.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: They were more conservative.  But my feeling is that they love--the churches overseas brought that to Britain [United Kingdom], I mean Britain [United Kingdom] and the U.S., yeah, that's my feeling, that the African churches maybe when in the Caribbean and because of the African religion and dancing brought into Christianity and that sort of seeped back into countries like this place.  That's my theory.
Speaker 1: I think you're right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter), Yeah, that's my theory (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) you are correct.  So, the church, they had a lot of activity, I mean people--
Speaker 2: Oh, people just dancing, singing, enjoy, (unclear), enjoy, I mean enjoying life, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, well, the Yoruba religion--
Speaker 2: The Yoruba religion which actually, when people say it's pagonistic, it's completely incorrect, okay.  The Yoruba religion when you look at Yorubaland, there's only--there's a belief in one God, whereas the Christians say, "Okay, you go to, you go through one--you go through Jesus," okay.  In Yoruba religion, you go through many gods.  Okay, you can call it gods if you want, and you relate the gods (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Orisha--
Speaker 2: Orisha, you related God to what you see in your environment, okay.  There is a supreme God, which we call Olorun, the owner of the heaven and the earth.  But before you get to that place, you can go through--we always say, "Many roads lead to the market".  So you can get to God via various paths, not just okay, the Christians says through Jesus, and the Muslims says through Mohammed, okay.  Yoruba, when you look at the religion, it's--and if you go to Brazil, you'll find that the Yoruba religion and Catholic been mixed together, Santeria.  So the, we believe in icon.  And when you worship those, they say, you have pagan, but so do the Catholics, okay.  The Catholics do the same thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Santagria, they use the same icon-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They use same icon--
Speaker 1: --just given a different name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, give it different name.  So when I hear all this and somebody say, "pagan", it's just--it's, as far as I'm concerned that's nonsense.  Yeah, you just--what is religion?  You have to believe in something.  If you go to Japan, you do this for five minutes [clasped hands], you're done.  You go home.  It's just an affirmative of, that something is bigger than you, and you believe in it.  And whatever you call it, that's fine.  That's my belief, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I believe in Yoruba religion, seriously, that there is one God and there are many ways to reach it, and in my own, in my own essential home, we--as I said, you worship God, relating to what you see in environment according to your trade.  So my great-great-grandfather, they were like the blacksmith of the town.  So you worship the god of iron.  You may call it god of iron, but so, maybe that's why I became an engineer, I don't know (laughter).  Yeah, Ogun, Ogun.
Speaker 1: That's Ogun?
Speaker 2: Ogun, yeah, that's Ogun, yeah, when you worship the god of iron, but the god of iron can lead you to the Olodumare, which is the owner of everything, the earth and the, and the, and the, and the heavens.
Story_ID: 26951
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Victoria Omotomiye Adesida] have a chance to go to school in that day?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, she--she tried to go to adult school after I was all grown up in high school.  But she--my mother was not educated, and I was the first in my family to go to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother tell you about what things were like when she was growing up and what they were like when you came along?
Speaker 2: Well, things were, well, in those days, villages and not too much, no roads, not as such.  So this was African villages, you walked by, mainly, you walked to the early part of the century.  So that's, there were not too, not too many facilities around in those days.  But it's mostly rural, African villages, you walked from, along--you walked from village to village and long distances.  And you rely mostly on your, on your own energy to find food and do things, yeah, farming, going to fetch water for yourself.  So there were, of course, kings in the local area, okay.  So there were system of government, Yoruba had system of government, and there were, to some extent, urbanized in the Yorubaland, but, of course, villages also.  She grew up in the, in small towns and village.
Speaker 1: Now, Yoruba City, like I was amazed a few years ago.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I was reading about the City of Abeokuta.
Speaker 1: Abeokuta. Abeokuta, Ebado, Akure, those were the, Yoruba's are likely urbanized.  But they also have villages because we're out, yeah.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they also have these big urban center--
Speaker 1: The urban centers, yeah--
Speaker 2: --that are big.  I mean Abeokuta had two hundred thousand people in the nineteen century--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Long time ago.
Speaker 2: Now, it's millions of people.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: These are huge places.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Ebado, Abeokuta, Ifa, yeah, which is the ancestral home of the Yoruba's.  Those were big--now, you call them city, okay.  Those were urbanized areas, so if you read the history of the Yoruba's, urbanized.  Even when you say urbanized, you still have villages, okay, you still have villages.  So, there is an, the Yoruba ethnic group has always been urbanized, at least as far as we can remember, but you still have the outposts that are villages where you get all your produce, farming, bring them to the town to sell and all that stuff, trade by barter, and barter in those days.
Speaker 2: And you also have a lot of subdivisions of Yoruba, I mean the Aagba-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and different--
Speaker 1: There are subdivisions.  I am from Owo area.  So there are, the--and that's when I say, Omoto, when I measure my mother's name, that's peculiar to the sub, sub--what is it called?  Sub-ethnic group of the Yoruba's, yeah, 'cause the languages, the Yoruba language, there are dialects of that.  And the Aagbas, the Ejigbos, Ondo, Ekiti, (Ijejas?), Oyo, yeah, so there are big elements of--and then the Yoruba's are not only confined to Nigeria.  If you go to Benin Republic, okay, southern part is Yoruba.  You go to Togo [Nigeria], it's only when the colonialist Europeans came and chop, chop, chop, divided people up in 18--18-something in Berlin, Berlin [Germany].
Speaker 2: In 1888, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Berlin.  That's when the, what is it called, the scramble for Africa, just take the map of the--according to this longitude and this, here German, you have this (laughter).  And (unclear) (laughter), you're French, you have this.  So it didn't matter that they cut across ethnic groups.
Speaker 2: So, as a result, Nigeria is a state of many languages--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Nigeria is like Switzerland, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Like at least three major nations.
Speaker 1: There are probably four of them, yeah, Yoruba's, the Igbos, the Hausas, and Ijaws, they are big, and where you find all the oil.  Yeah, those are big, but they're all over, they're all over the place, yeah.  So, Nigeria has a multinational entity.  And the main thing that connects people together is, I'll say the color of skin, not the culture, per se, 'cause there are many--in the north, the cultural image is very different from Yoruba.
Speaker 2: Right, I mean it's almost--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And it's different--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --it's separate, about as separate as you can get.
Speaker 1: Separate, and for me, I speak Yoruba.  I can understand some words of Ibo, but I don't speak Ibo, and I don't speak Hausa. (Unclear). I can understand some of the words, but I don't speak it.  So it's, so I guess, a multi--very, very heterogeneous.  After the three or four, five, large groups, the (planet?) (unclear) of two hundred or more.  And the languages might be completely incomprehensible to the other, to that person.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Nigeria has the largest population of any--
Speaker 1: In Africa.
Speaker 2: --of any country in Africa.
Speaker 1: Keep saying, it's 140, 160 million but I have a feeling it's probably up to 200 [million] because, no (senses?), but nobody really believes the numbers for sure.  In terms of populations, I think probably every one fourth, African or sub-Saharan African is Nigeria.  Yeah, it's a big, it's a lot of people, yeah.
Speaker 2: Lagos is the largest city in Africa, isn't that right?
Speaker 1: No, maybe it's Cairo.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But Lagos is big, and actually, there's Ebado, it's is really bigger than Lagos.  Ebado is the, used to be the capital of the Yoruba's in terms of the olden days, yeah, but it's big.  It's big, (unclear) Ebado and Lagos, those are big cities.
Speaker 2: Okay, I just wanted to raise that, but your mother was raised in a small village?
Speaker 1: Yeah, my mother was raised in a small village, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, and, you were born in that same village?
Speaker 1: I was born in Ifon [Nigeria], yeah.
Story_ID: 26952
Speaker 1: Well, let's go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Well, it's Joshua, the father's name is Joshua who was also became a Christian, although he was not really practicing, Joshua.  And--actually, we took, I--we took his middle name, okay, Adesida was his middle name, okay.  Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: You took the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we took his, we use--they use that name for us when I went to school, and it stuck with me, but his father, his last name was A-L-A-D-E-K-O-Y-I, Aladekoyi.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And don't know exactly what that means.  Alade means the owner of crown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Aladekoyi, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, is, I mean in terms of last names, last names amongst Yoruba, do you ever really go by last names, like Europeans do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we go by our family name.
Speaker 1: Did that do that before--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did that before, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the last name, so why didn't you go by the name of Aladekoyi?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know why my--when they took me to school (laughter), when I started school, and they just made, they used his middle name, and that was it for me.  And we stuck with it, I stuck with it forever, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I don't know why, but that's, it just happened.  So that's, when I went to grade school, and--
Speaker 1: Was it just a question of just trying to do the easiest thing?
Speaker 2: Maybe it was just for him to do the easiest thing, but I never asked, yeah.  I never asked.  But usually Yoruba's use family name.  Some other, some other ethnic group like in the north, they actually use the name of their town, okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, as their last name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a last name, yeah, but I--not too long ago did I realize that it was Abubakar (so-so-and-so?), and you find out it's, you know.  So the first prime minister of Nigeria, Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, Tafawa Balewa was the name of village he came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it means Abubakar from Tafawa Balewa.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what's your father's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know the date of birth, but he died in 1999.  We think he was middle seventies, way into the seventies, or towards eighty, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was your father born?
Speaker 2: Same place, Ifon [Nigeria], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, father, in those days the same thing.  The, the-- mainly, the people were big farmers.  I mean in those days big farmers and because when you look at how do people exists, how do you eat.  So you have to--most people farmed.  It's probably much like this country that 67 percent used to be farmers.  Now, it's down to two percent because of all the technology.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But in those days farmers do things and--
Speaker 1: Farmers (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Have a lot of family members to help you on the farm, yeah.  Most of them are farmers and women also were farmers, but from being market women they were farmers also.
Speaker 1: But you do have like weavers and shoemakers and--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, we have weavers, shoemakers, yeah--(simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (simultaneous) metallurgists, all those kind of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But even those people still, they may not be a major farmer, but they still have their own farm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so maybe weavers, different, different trades in the, maybe walking in the king's palace which in those days, you can call them civil servants, or the kings would have chiefs.
Story_ID: 26953
Speaker 1: So you may have areas of the town, okay, like what you call subdivision-- subdivision here.  Okay, you have subdivision in which you have a chief 'cause the chief is like the ward, like alderman, okay--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --of that area.  So that's--the governs--the Yoruba's have a very well defined governing structure before Europeans came. King, what is it called?  Chiefs and they have hierarchy like a, maybe the king himself, they have a prime minister, okay, Bashorun and all the--they have names.  And they have, they have--and it was, I mean, it was replicated in the Yoruba towns.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's really, from what I read, it's really complicated too-
Speaker 1: Yeah, complicated.
Speaker 2: --and participatory.
Speaker 1: Very participatory, and if the king doesn't behave, he's gone.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He'll be (laughter), he'll be--
Speaker 2: I think the British, I was reading that the British once were really concerned with Henry Townsend, Townsend was in Abeokuta he was concerned--
Speaker 1: Abeokuta, yeah.
Speaker 2: --that the king didn't have enough power 'cause he wanted the king to have more power so he could make everybody do what he wanted them to do.  But--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the, in the Yorubaland, a little bit more different than in the north.  The north had the kings or the (army?) had more power because they had the power, and also, the religion, like the, the king there was also the keeper of the religion, so they have more power, apart from the temporal, also sacred, okay.  So you find that when the British came, they left the kings in the north alone.  So it was called indirect rule, okay, because they could go to the king and achieve what he wanted to do.  In the south, you couldn't because the power is more distributed, okay.  So it was more for direct rule, okay.  And in the east, it was even more for direct rule, the Ibos.  They don't have this govern--they are, they were more republican in nature.  So even if you had a king, forget a king (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So forget a king.  They are more republican, yeah.  But in the, in the west, there was a structure, but it, but it was very participatory.  And if a king does not behave, it can essential, the chiefs can get together and tell the king, you have to abdicate and go.  The next person, the next king may come from this same family, but a person has to go.  So there was a different structure.  You can have the king, prime minister, war minister, all these things, yeah. So there was a, Yoruba had a big structure.
Story_ID: 26954
Speaker 1: So we're talking a very complex society here--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --we're talking about.  We're dealing with the Yoruba, and this is, your mother was, I guess, most of her life was spent under the colonial rule of Britain, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it was, in Nigeria, yeah, it was--well, maybe not most of her life.  Nigeria was independent in 1960.  And she died in 1994, 19--yeah, 1996.  So she lived quite a bit of, forty-something years beyond, beyond--thirty-something years before, beyond the colonial era.  So you could say half colonial, half non-colonial, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father have a chance to go to school or anything?
Speaker 2: Not really, no, he--and that's one regret he had the rest of, I mean, for his life, yeah, because I think he wanted to go to school, but his family said, "Well, we have farming to do (laughter).  We have things to do in the house and the farm."  So, that's one regret, he never, he never got over because there were already some schools when he came along because, as you said, in Abeokuta and other areas there were already schools, yeah.  But, so he didn't get to go to school.
Speaker 1: Did he get a chance to learn how to read or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, he could speak English to some extent in terms of, learnt what I call colloquial English, but he didn't--but he was a very, very smart guy, not--knew many more languages than I ever would because he went a lot around Nigeria, yeah.  So he could speak fluent (Olsa?), and (Ekpe Igbo?), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your father have any special talents?
Speaker 2: Yes, very good in language.  Yeah, he was very, very good in picking up languages.  I didn't get, my junior sister is very good in language.  She got, she got her talent from him. Can listen to people and within a year or so, can talk with them, can speak the language.  I can't (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, is there a story about how your parents came together?  Was their marriage arranged or--
Speaker 2: Well, marriage arranged, yeah.  In those days, you, you--families, you have people who go between family--I won't say broker marriage, but at least investigate families and see which matching, yeah.  (Unclear) That was the traditional way of getting married, things were arranged.
Speaker 1: So did they get married fairly early in life compared to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty-something.  In those days, by the time you get twenty, twenty-one, starts, they start looking at you.  What is he doing?
Speaker 1: Well, in this country farming was the biggest thing.  People start looking to get married at fifteen.
Speaker 2: Fifteen, yeah, yeah, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Fifteen, sixteen, seventeen, yeah, always, yeah.  In those days, because they didn't need your age, just when people thought you were mature enough in terms of puberty, puberty, they said, start getting married.  So they got married early.
Story_ID: 26955
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their talents, their--what they look like, what they walk like, talk like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mom [Victoria Omotomiye Adesida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, my mom, a little bit of facial with my dad [Joshua Adesida Aladekoyi], but my, yeah, probably a mixture, but more of my mom, yeah.  My daughter looks like my mom (laughter).
Speaker 1: In what respects are you like her?
Speaker 2: In terms of mannerism, I think, yeah.  I would say, a little bit quiet, but relentless (laughter), (unclear) relentless, yeah.
Story_ID: 26956
Speaker 1: Tell us about your siblings, you know, who you-- and where do you fit in the order?
Speaker 2: I'm the top, I'm--
Speaker 1: Eldest?
Speaker 2: --the oldest, from my father [Joshua Adesida Aladekoyi] and my mother [Victoria Omotomiye Adesida].  I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: Then who comes next?
Speaker 2: My, I have a sister, I have a sister, and then a brother and then a sister.  That's from my mother.  But in that, Africa in those days, you could have many wives.  So my father had a couple of wives, so--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you have brothers and sisters--
Speaker 2: Half-brother, yeah, half-brother and half-sister, yeah.
Speaker 1: By two other--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, two other women, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, do you treat them the same as--
Speaker 2: Treat them, yeah, treat them the same, yeah, yeah.  My sister--yeah, and mostly, in Nigeria, yeah, mostly in Nigeria, but in those days when you-- when the healthcare was not that great, so a couple died in those days, yeah.  And I'm a survivor (laughter).  I'm a survivor.  In those days, I don't know what the percentage that survived, but that's why farming families were big because you never, you take your chances, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I was, I was a survivor.
Story_ID: 26957
Speaker 1: Well, can you describe where you--now, did you grow up in the village of Ifon [Nigeria]?
Speaker 2: No, I--well, I was actually just met somebody from my hometown, here, last week because his, their son is doing various work here.  And I grew up in my village until maybe third grade, okay, third grade and then went to live with my aunt who was a teacher because they wanted me to go to school and--
Speaker 1: Now, is this your mother's [Victoria Omotomiye Adesida]--
Speaker 2: No, my father's [Joshua Adesida Aladekoyi]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Your father's sister?
Speaker 2: --relation, yeah, relation to my dad, yeah. (Unclear).
Speaker 1: And where does she live?
Speaker 2: Well, she lived in--we moved around in Nigeria.  The first place I went to was a town, well, it's a city now called Osogbo.  You probably hear about Osogbo Osun.  They worship Osun.   If you go to Brazil where they worship Osun, the god of these--goddess of the sea, yeah, that's where--that is almost like (hot water?) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Osun, oh, yeah, Osun.
Speaker 2: Osun, oh, yeah, Osun.
Speaker 1: O-S-U-N?
Speaker 2: O-S-U-N, yeah, (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Sometimes (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But Osogbo is O-S-O-G-B-O.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's the town.  And I went--yeah, she was a teacher there for a while, so I went to school there.  I went to third grade and fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Now was this your first--this is not your first school then, right?
Speaker 2: No, I had gone to school in my hometown in Ifon, for about three years.
Speaker 1: So there's a school Ifon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I started school there.
Speaker 1: So you're the first person in your family that's-- to go to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my immediate family.
Speaker 1: Immediate family, yeah.
Speaker 2: Immediate family to go to school.
Speaker 1: Because your father's sister had gone to school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my father--not the sister exactly, the daughter of a sister, yeah.  So it's, he didn't go to school, but the daughter of his sister became a teacher, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: But in my immediate family, when you say my family, the sister, yeah, I was the first one.
Speaker 1: You started school in Ifon--
Speaker 2: Ifon, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your school?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Anglican school, one of these missionary schools.  It was called St. Barnabas School.  I think it's still there, B-A-R-N-A-B-A-S.  It's an Anglican school.  I don't know what you call Anglican here, Lutheran, Protestant--
Speaker 1: No, it would be Episcopal.
Speaker 2: Episcopal, yeah, yeah, the one linked to the Britain [United Kingdom].
Speaker 1: Yeah, they couldn't say Anglican after the Revolutionary War--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, they changed it (simultaneous), okay--
Speaker 1: Then they started calling it Episcopal.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: It's the same church, same church.
Speaker 2: It's the same church, yeah, I went to, yeah.  And then from there I went to Osogbo and the primary school was Methodist, Methodist school.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that one?
Speaker 2: Osogbo Methodist, Methodist Primary School.
Speaker 1: Oh, Methodist Primary--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Methodist, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, I thought you were just telling me the denomination (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: That's the name of it, the Methodist Primary School.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Anglican, St. Barnabas Anglican Primary School and Methodist Primary School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then I moved--we moved again--
Speaker 1: So you were third grade there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, third and fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Third and fourth, okay.
Speaker 2: And then I went to, I went Benin City [Nigeria].  It's a town called Benin City which is huge actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Benin, yeah.  Then I went to St. James Anglican Primary School there.
Speaker 1: St. James Anglican.
Speaker 2: St. James, yeah, St. James Primary School in Benin.
Story_ID: 26958
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Kept me out of the farm (laughter).  I didn't like farming, so I loved school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the primary crop on the farm, I mean for--
Speaker 2: Well, for, I mean--when I was growing up, the commercial, commercial product in the farm was coco for chocolate, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was big one in that area, but apart from that, of course, the primary is yam, corn, cassava, it's all there, yeah, yam, corn, cassava, tomato, all the--but yam was big, big-time, coco yam.  There's something called coco yam, C-O-C-O, Y-A-M.
Speaker 1: So what kind of--is it a yam or a cocoa?
Speaker 2: It's a yam.  They call it coco yam, yeah, but it's yam.  It's, you get it from the--it's a tube.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah. But cocoa, that's--you pluck it from the tree, yeah, for making chocolate, yeah.  That's it, that was their commercial--that was big when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it's no longer a big deal there?
Speaker 2: Well, Nigeria fell out of favor and Ghana probably took over.  But when I was growing up, the middle-class people actually, apart from the educated ones, were cocoa farmers, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because they really grew large cocoa plantations and--
Speaker 1: Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: In the primary school, it was geography.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wanted to know about the world.  I was eager to, learn of things about the world.  I loved geography.  Yeah, in high school, my favorite subjects were chemistry and geography.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.  Now, were there any special teachers at the primary level?
Speaker 2: Not really, just--
Speaker 1: These are like British model schools?
Speaker 2: They are British model school in the grade school, primary school, and then you finish.  From there you go to high school, okay.  The structure of the--if you go to Nigeria now, the structure of education is changed.  When I was in school, you went to primary school.  You could go to some intermediate school called modern school because things were being--you see, we were moving from old times to new times when I was growing up.  My generation was probably the, what I call transition because we were the first, in my age group, were the first to actually go to school en masse.  Lots of us went to school because there was, in my region, Western region, in those days, Yoruba, there was a, a leader, our law where these people wanted to make sure that people were educated.  The three main things were health, education, agriculture.  Those were the three main stuff from, I mean going backwards in our region all their manifesto of what they wanted to do. Those were the three things.  And they wanted to send a lot of people to school, and I was one of those first generation that went, lots of us went to school.
Speaker 1: There's a University of Awolowo now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Obafemi Awolowo University in Ifon [Nigeria], yeah.
Speaker 1: Obafemi Awolowo.
Speaker 2: Obafemi Awolowo, O-B-A-F-E-M-I, Awolowo, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I say it a lot slower than you (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I say it a lot slower than you, Awolowo.
Speaker 2: Oh, no problem.  Awolowo. Awo mean a healer has (unclear), Awolowo, yeah, a heal--somebody who heals, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now, when you were growing up, now, by the time you get to fifth grade, Nigerian, Nigeria gets independence in 1960?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty, [1960], yeah, I was getting to, yeah, I was getting to primary, what they call primary six, finishing primary school.  From Benin, I had moved to another town called Owo, O-W-O to finish my primary school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Owo.
Speaker 2: Owo, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, were you moving with your--
Speaker 2: My aunt.
Speaker 1: Your aunt?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As she would take a job, you would--
Speaker 2: She would take a job, yeah, I would move, yeah.
Speaker 1: So was she your teacher all the time--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --or some of the time?
Speaker 2: Some of the time, yeah, but mostly different teachers, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Is it--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You sure don't want your aunt to be your teacher (laughter), or you'll get in trouble (laughter).  No, luckily, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd be in trouble.
Speaker 1: What did she teach?  What did your aunt teach?
Speaker 2: She was teaching, teach in those days, teach some grades.  I think she was only teaching somewhere, fourth grade, primary--
Speaker 1: Oh, fourth grade.
Speaker 2: We used to call it primary four, yeah, primary four, primary five, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I did, I did fall into her class once before, and that was no fun (laughter).
Story_ID: 26959
Speaker 1: You're in a special position, I suppose.  You're part of this next generation that's being educated?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the generation that actually became educated, yeah, just--because previously, not too many had access to it, but there was a new government in the Western region, and the stuff was education, education, education.  So they made, made it--not everybody went, but at least they made it bigger for, in terms of making sure that each town, each village had a school, yeah.  So, so there's a rush, and there was the, the convincing people that, don't let the--I mean, you go to school during the week days and go help your parents during the weekend, go to farm.  Okay, so that was, so they could at least live, parents could work out of field but on week days you, you went to school.  Yeah, so that was something that was actually deliberately, let me see, canvassed all along because I remember waking up, people go like a town crier, you know, people go around four or five a.m. and try to wake people up and "Okay, your kids must go to go to school today."
Speaker 1: Oh, really--
Speaker 2: Yeah, instead of-- Because the kings will, when there are important things to do in town, you can a town crier go to the town and announce things at the top of their voice (unclear).  So in those days, (they would?) saying "Okay, now, there's a new regime in town that you need to go to school," and all those things.  So instead of huddling the kids, all the kids to farm, you try to preach to them to go to school.
Speaker 1: Were people excited about the chance to go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, people were excited.  Some people, their kids didn't go to school, but many parents told their kids, "You will go to school."  And they made we went to school.  If you don't go to school, you get, you get whooped, (laughter) gotta go, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Because people saw it as a way to progress--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --okay, a way to move, to move away from what you are used to, but it will, bigger stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, did you think when you look back on it, did you think that that's why Islam and Christianity spread because they had a literacy associated?
Speaker 2: Well, they have literacy associated, especially Christianity, yeah, a lot of literacy associated with it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And the--it depends on which country colonized people.  If you look at the history of Africa.  If you go to Congo, okay, the Belgians still want people to go to school, okay.  So, where the British--
Speaker 1: The Belgians are probably the worse--
Speaker 2: The worst of them all, the Belgian's and the Portuguese.
Speaker 1: Slaughtering millions of people at a time, for rubber.
Speaker 2: Yeah, for rubber, yeah.  But the British, the British sent some of their best people to be colonizers, okay, [University of] Cambridge [Cambridge, England, United Kingdom], [University of] Oxford [Oxford, England, United Kingdom].  So when they came, they came with what I call intellectual bent, that, "Okay, now, we've set this system up.  Can we bring in the natives to train and take over some of these middle level jobs."  Okay, so, so it was, so the British, I don't like colonialism, but they were more, what is it called?  More egalitarian in terms of what they wanted to do in education.  So you find that British colonizers around the world were reasonably educated, India, Hong Kong, all these places, Pakistan, reasonably well educated, yeah.
Story_ID: 26960
Speaker 1: So in 1960, the--
Speaker 2: [Nigerian] Independence.
Speaker 1: Yeah, independence, there was--
Speaker 2: I was, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --the first president, Nnamdi Azikiwe.
Speaker 2: Nnamdi Azikiwe, yeah, president and then the prime minister was Tafawa Balewa, yeah, yeah.  So I was getting, well, ten, eleven years old.  So I was beginning to see things, and because I loved geography, I studied quite a bit reading about all those things.
Speaker 1: Now, did you go to any of the--did they have a big celebration where you were?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You were in Owo [Nigeria] when--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was in Owo and we had a big, every school had to--they don't do it here.  You march, all the school children are arranged in their file.  You marched to a government, stad--well, that was not a stadium.  It was like a stadium, but mostly the field where (unclear) primary school and either the king or the local official came to read things there and proclaim the day and all the stuff.  And I remember there was festivities all over the place on October 1, 1960.
Story_ID: 26961
Speaker 1: Now, you're in the sixth grade, I guess, then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, sixth grade.  From there you go to high school.  You have to take, in those days you took, you took exam to get to high school, and then just work, go to your neighborhood school and go to high school.  You take exam, and if you pass, you go to high school.
Speaker 1: Otherwise, if you didn't pass, you'd just got to work, right?
Speaker 2: You go to work or go help your dad or go become an apprentice and learn something, mechanical, yeah, yeah.  So you have to, so it's not as difficult now, but in those days you actually, it was a pyramid.  Many people here, select, selected, selected, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, it's --
Speaker 1: So, I know, from what I understand of the British system, there're two tracks you can take.  There's one--
Speaker 2: Academic or can take the trade, yeah.  In those days, they may have some stuff called trade schools.  They came later, meaning if you don't, cannot go to the secondary school, you can go and learn how to be a mechanical or be electrician and other stuff, yeah, in the trade school.
Speaker 1: Now, even in the secondary school, there were tracks too, right?  You could either go math and science or (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, in those days--
Speaker 1: Or did you do that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, in those days, well, you could do it, you could do it, but there was no such track for somebody.  You pick your classes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the fourth, in the, what you may call seventh to tenth grade, you studied everything.  When you get to the last year, you selected eight of the subjects.  I don't think they do that anymore.  But that was the British system.  You selected eight subjects what you want to do.  And you could be heavy on sciences or you could be heavy on humanities, yeah.  But you have to take English.  It's compulsory, and you had to take math.  It's compulsory, so, but beyond that you could take chemistry, physics, biology.  So, like me I--to finish my high school, I didn't take biology.  I did, did biology all the way to the last year.  I just couldn't memorize too many things.  I like to understand something rather than memorize it.  So I didn't do biology, but I did physics, chemistry.
Speaker 1: Biology in those days was more memorization of parts and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: -- of fibers and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you have to actually memorize too many things.  And I, I didn't fancy that.  I would like to be able to understand, (unclear) first principles, so that's why I became an engineer, not a doctor.
Story_ID: 26962
Speaker 1: For those of us here in the United States, we don't know much about Nigerian life in those days, but what was cultural life like when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, terrific, yeah.  You would find that there was a--I won't say there was a lot of things, Western and traditional, all things together, which brought tremendous, I mean highlife music in those days--. Yeah, those were terrific days of making new type of music, so people invented a lot of things in terms of cultural.  The traditional was still there, but people taking opportunities to invent new--
Speaker 1: Who were some of the musicians, the highlife musicians that you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, (Philla?, (Philla Asumkute?).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, what is it called, oh, there was I.K. Dairo, was a little bit earlier, Victor (Lyev?), and then because the British, what is called British West Africa, okay, Nigeria, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Gambia, where you could easily move around, especially between and Nigeria and Ghana.  So you found that there was a lot of musical trends between Nigeria and Ghana that's very uniform.  So if it was-- highlife was very common to Ghana, it was also very common to Nigeria.  So people knew about E. T. Mensah from Ghana, Uhuru Dance Band, Ramblers Dance Band, all of us, knew about all those people in Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the musicians were all playing together.
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Cultural life was great.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, now was soccer big growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a religion (laughter).  Yeah, soccer was big, yeah.  As far as I can remember, at least for me, soccer was big, yeah.  We, soccer was--but when we're young, you are not supposed to play soccer.  It didn't make money, okay.  So it was not a way get out of poverty.  Now, people use soccer and become multi-millionare, when I was growing up, no, school, school, school.  It was if you could play soccer just for fun in school, but you don't come home and playing soccer instead of doing homework.  You get your head whacked off (laughter).
Speaker 1: Was cricket big during that time or--
Speaker 2: Not too much in that, there was, in the big city like Lagos [Nigeria], there was cricket, but cricket never really took off in Nigeria like in--when you go to India or Pakistan, cricket was big over there, but in Nigeria, it was more of the soccer that, that was big, yeah.  We took to the soccer rather than cricket.
Story_ID: 26963
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the politics, did you--were there, I know that, as were saying, Nigeria had like three or you say about four major--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were major groups, yeah--
Speaker 1: --groups, ethnic groups, but they had political parties too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the political parties which is NPC in the North.  Northern People Congress, they call it.  There was AG in the West, Action Group, and then in the East, it was NCNC, National Convention of Nigerian Citizens, I don't know what.  They changed the name a couple of times, yeah, it was national something, yeah.
Speaker 1: So are, so are these groups main representative of the people that they, I mean the ethnic group that they're in?
Speaker 2: At some point, NCNC actually originated in Lagos which was southern, but at some point, it broke up, AG got created in the West.  So they became identified with regions.  When I was growing up, there were regions, North, East and West.  That was it.  The North NPC was dominant.  In the East, NCNC was dominant, in the West, AG was dominant, okay, although they have formed alliances, but these were the, their regions, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There were some minor parties, but those were the three big ones when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay, I--now, I'm not sure of the trajectory, what happened to [Nnamdi] Azikiwe.  I know he was the first--
Speaker 2: He was the first, was first president.
Speaker 1: President, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, president then was more a figurehead rather than power.  The prime minster was the one with the power, okay, because that, he actually operated the government and everything--
Speaker 1: And that was [Abubakar Tafawa] Balewa.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Balewa was the power because the North, because the North won, essentially NPC became the--won the bigger election and formed the, with the collaboration with the NCNC at that time, formed the central government in Lagos--at that time, it was in Lagos, yeah.  But Zik [Azikiwe] didn't have the power, okay.  Maybe if he had the power, (unclear) would have been different from what it is now.  But you never know.
Speaker 1: But pretty soon, I mean--I don't wanna jump too far ahead, but I know the Biafra War starts, what in the--
Speaker 2: In '67 [1967].
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967], yeah, (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, from '60 [1960] to '67 [1967], lots of topsey turvey in the country in terms of who controls what and who becomes dominant, which was nonsensical, but there was a lot of infighting.  And then the military came in 1966, and toppled the government.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I could say, Nigeria went downwards from there to some extent.
Story_ID: 26964
Speaker 1: We were just speaking off camera about the level of talent in Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There's so many talented people--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that, and then the, some of the government struggles that made it hard for--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Made it very hard, yeah.  There are many, many talented, talented--there's no--I don't think there's any country, you don't go in--I mean you go into the world that you don't find top-notch Nigerians, yeah, from all over, probably mostly from the (unclear) South, but I would say from all over, that if there is a way to extract them and put them in Nigeria, there'd be a tremendous, tremendous upliftment of the people if they can--we can actually walk together.  That's the problem.  I think that-- I mean this is my own bias view that if Nigeria continued on the path it was before the military came, and if the regions, the North and the East and the West had been allowed to, gone and developed at their own pace, just keep developing at their own pace, Nigeria would have been much better than trying to turn into what I call a unitary country, in that because culturally, they're different.  Culturally, We're-- Nigeria is different.  It's like Switzerland, I mean, you have the German, the Italian, the French part, and they sort of run themselves.  That would have been the best thing for Nigeria 'cause after I was--when you get to a certain level, and to go see that, okay, you can start unifying and talking, that'll be fine.  But, yeah, they didn't.  That was a tragedy, that's--excuse me, that's the tragedy of Nigeria.  It's a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --terrific country.
Story_ID: 26965
Speaker 1: Now when you were, I guess in high school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were you--I mean, well, when in your life did you think about becoming a scientist?
Speaker 2: Actually, once we starting getting to around, what I call ninth grade, I became very interested in science and just trying to see how things, how things behave, chemistry, physics.  I was good in some of them, maybe not so great, but was good, and well, I had in what we call from (unclear) which would be your ninth grade here, I had, what is it called, Peace Corp teachers, Peace Corp, yeah, because we had a couple of Peace Corp in the 1960s in the high school I went to.
Speaker 1: Were they good?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, they were very good, very, very good.  One of them was a chemical engineer, and it was one that first started talking to us about engineering.  And we knew he was a chemical engineer, young, very young, tall guy and taught us calculus, physics at some point and chemistry at another point.  So, that's, after they introducing us to all those things, a couple of us (agreed?), "Well, this looks like a great path."  And I was not a great math student before then.  I was okay, but after, okay, asking, "What does it take to become an engineer?"  "You have to know math, you have to know math."  So I hit the books, and became avid math, started working on my math seriously.
Speaker 1: This is great, I'm glad the, you know--I've heard a lot.  I know some of the old Peace Corp people and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, they've, they were very good, they were very good.  This guy, I don't know, we've tried to, we've tried to--his name was Mike Farrick (ph.).  He was tall.  He introduced us to basketball, which we thought was naughty because usually in Nigeria, there used to be a game called net ball, which was by women, played by hand, okay.  We played soccer, so playing a game by hand was hmmmmm, not for men (laughter), for us, not for men.  So (laughter), the first time we started making a net, I said, "No, we don't play this.  This is for women, for girls." (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: And so that's interesting. (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, he took us (unclear), we thought that, "We don't play net ball.  We play soccer.  So he introduced a couple of us to basketball."  But he was a, was a science teacher.  He was the one I actually remembered very well, but there were others.  Yeah, he was the one that really turned on the light bulb in a couple of us, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were in school, now, were you aware of Sputnik and satellites going up and all--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, yeah.  We heard about it, but we didn't, we didn't know too much about it.  We didn't know exactly what it meant, but we heard about it, but some things in the sky floating around, doing something because of these people, yeah, because of these people in terms of what had gone on before, before with the satellite or something in space.  But, yeah, something.
Speaker 1: You began to concentrate more on math then--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I con--yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: --because you wanted to be an engineer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to be an engineer, we--'cause then I did not, for me personally, there were kids in my class who were brilliant in math.  So I just started working with them.  I said, "I want to, I want to know more about this too."  So I said, around ninth grade, tenth grade, I turned to math to really study very hard, and physics and chemistry and calculus, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did you make any connect-- any sort of connection between the oil drilling and--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --engineering in those days?
Speaker 2: No, not in those days, no, I was in love--but actually, my first love was, my first thing was I wanted to do chemical engineering because the guy was chemical engineering, and I was good in physics and in chemistry.  So the idea was, and the first thing was, okay, if I become a chemical engineer, I come home and start producing chemicals because we're using them in the chemistry lab and other stuff.  So you become industrial engineer and industrial chemistry and all this stuff, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, as you passed your test and stuff, you moved on through the academic track?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  We moved, yeah, we--in those days, the academic, in high school, you're academic.  There was no-- that track.
Speaker 1: Well, you wouldn't even be there, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it just, yeah, it just moved.  A lot of us expected to--well, in those days, if you finished high school, you were a big shot (laughter), a big shot.  There were only three or four universities, so, not everybody got go to university, so if you finished high school.  I have friends who, I mean I just met one of my classmates this past weekend, yeah.  He was in town, yeah, from Nigeria.  We started school, high school and finished high school together.  He never went to university.  He went to the bank and worked in the bank and rose up through the bank, banking system.
Speaker 1: But he's still the big shot in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he's retired now, and I told him, "I'm, I'm sorry, I'm still working." (laughter).
Story_ID: 26966
Speaker 1: When you were approaching in high school graduation--now, did you have to work in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: You didn't have to?
Speaker 2: No, in those days, you're in the boarding school.  In the British system in those days, many of the high schools that were around, many of us were in the boarding School.  You actually, when you are twelve, thirteen, you're bachelors, you go to school.  You stay on the compound, yeah.  So you only came home during vacation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see the British system, boarding school, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was, was it difficult to, I mean did your family have to contribute any money to it or--
Speaker 2: No, well, you paid school fees, but we, we're all expected, we're always, I mean we're always happy to go to school, yeah, 'cause we wanted to, I think we were conditioned to it.  It was expected.  Once we start doing that then, and then for us in those days, when the kids came back from school, speaking English and speaking, talking about Latin and chemistry and physics, boy, (laughter) we wanted to be like them (laughter), wanted to be like them, yeah.
Speaker 1: How often did you go back to your, to Ifon, you know?
Speaker 2: When I was in school, I went back to say hi to my family, to visit parents, yeah, in those days.  When I finished high school, I didn't go back as often, but, yeah, I did go back, not as often, yeah.
Speaker 1: So would you go back and spend the summer or just come back and visit?
Speaker 2: I'd come back and visit, yeah, during vacation, yeah, because you have vacation from school.  You go home and go, return to school.
Speaker 1: So in terms of your upbringing, your aunt was more important than your parents--
Speaker 2: Yeah, my-
Speaker 1: --in a sense, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my aunt was very critical to my schooling, although my parents were the ones paying for me to go to school, but, yeah, but my aunt was--because she was a teacher.  So I had imbibe that academic culture, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But going to--she didn't go to secondary school.  She went to teacher training.  In those days, you had different, different, before, yeah, there was teacher training.  People, they trained to be teachers who could teach in grade school, okay.  That's, so because a lot of people went to school at the same time.  So they needed people to teach them.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So they created all these different avenues.  If you wanted to be, wanted to be able to go to university, you go to the second school.  If you wanted to (learn to?) teach in the grade school, but they are still, as I say, highly competent people.  I--
Speaker 1: That's the way it was in the United States--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) I see.
Speaker 1: --well, down South, not that long ago--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --where before the Civil Rights Movement, you would, a person would go to school for two years, get a normal degree--
Speaker 2: Okay, normal degree and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --or associates degree.  And they could teach--
Speaker 2: Teach.
Speaker 1: --or sometimes high school would be enough in some areas because they didn't have anybody else.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to teach, yeah.  The same thing in Nigeria when I was growing up, yeah.
Story_ID: 26967
Speaker 1: When you were on the verge of graduating, now, what was the name of your high school?  Was that still--
Speaker 2: It's still around--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Methodist--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's a, it's more of a community high school like, Imade College, I-M-A-D-E--
Speaker 1: Community College high school?
Speaker 2: No, Imade College, no--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Imade College, okay.
Speaker 2: Imade College.  Yeah, in those days, it was owned by the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, I mean there were people, put money together and said, "Okay, we're going to build a secondary school so that our kids can go to secondary school from primary school."
Speaker 1: Okay, so Imade College was the high school?
Speaker 2: Was the high school.  In my whole--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We would call it high school.
Speaker 2: In my whole local area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?
Speaker 1: That's what we would call a high school, but it was called college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in those days, we called--yeah, the first time I came to this country, I found college. I thought they were high schools (laughter) because Imade.  Now we call them grammar school or we call them high school or college, but at the beginning, they call it college.  So you find the schools around Owo [Nigeria]. American grammar school, Imade College, Aquinas College, Owo high school, so they came indifferent forms.  But they were the same thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what year did you graduate from--
Speaker 2: High school?
Speaker 1: College, Imade College?
Speaker 2: Imade College was 1966 because it's more--
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-six, [1966] okay.
Speaker 2: --when we finish high school, it's finish your primary school, and then you go to high school.  And it was only five years in those days.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came out in 1966, now, did you have any counseling about going on to a university?
Speaker 2: Well, no--no, in those days, you had--well, people told us you could go to university.  You could go to, what do they call it?  There's some professional schools for agriculture.  Or you could go to school--there was School of Agriculture.  You could go and become an agri-officer helping farming, like extension.  Or you could go to a higher teacher training college that people can come and teach in high schools, okay.  Or you could go to university, yeah.  But nobody really counseled us.  Or you could go to technical college, which is more, not a university, but technical college.  You become like a technologist, yeah, yeah.  So, so--
Speaker 1: So nobody really gave you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you had, or you could actually also go to--there were many parts.  You could go to--apart from the five-year high school, you could go to another two years.  In Britain, they call it GCO level or GCA level.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Nigeria in those days you have school certs and then higher school certs.  School certificates and higher school certificates.  If you finish your higher school certificate, you could go to university directly without taking any more exams.  You just--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --you apply.  If you pass, you go to university.
Speaker 1: Did you opt to do that or--
Speaker 2: I didn't do that because I had no--well, you have to pay.  My parents had no money for me to go.  So I had to go out and work.  So I work, and then during my work, I went to night school and trained as a, like a technologist, okay.
Story_ID: 26968
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what technical field were you trying to get involved in?
Speaker 2: Well, electronics, to become like electronics technician who could fix things and other things.  But I worked at the university with the professor, and you worked in the lab.  And then within the lab, you go train and become a technologist to be able to do things.  And it was, mainly at the beginning, I didn't--there was no money, and I chose that track.
Speaker 1: So what university did you work at?
Speaker 2: University of Ibadan [Ibadan, Nigeria].
Speaker 1: Oh, University of Ibadan.
Speaker 2: It's the big one, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, as a lab technician?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly as a lab technician.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you studied electronics?
Speaker 2: I was trying, yeah, I was trying to study electronics at, in the night school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's see.  Now, were there any special teachers up to this point?  Do you remember, other than the Peace Corp guys?
Speaker 2: Not, no the Peace Corp.  Yeah, once we finished, I went to Ibadan to start working, and that's, and then I think the Peace Corp left in, when I was in the last year of my high school, left there, they left town and came back to the U.S.  But the, and when I went to work at the university, I met a professor, Professor Grillo, a brilliant, engineering guy, brilliant.
Speaker 1: Greo? That's--
Speaker 2: Grillo, G-R-I-L-L-O.
Speaker 1: Okay, Grillo.
Speaker 2: Grillo.  He's a Nigerian, but, you know, it's one of Brazilian returning family.  Remember in the slaves, during slaves of the whole went to Brazil and some people came back, yeah.  So it was from that family, one of the family, Grillo family in Lagos [Nigeria], yeah, very highly educated, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, from what I understand the, there was some kind of a slave trade going on with Brazil through 1890s--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, Brazil was the last--
Speaker 1: --(unclear) (simultaneous)--1890s.
Speaker 2: Brazil was the last country to stop slave trading, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so some of--you can see, have people now that have families in Nigeria and families in Brazil because they knew each other.  I mean some decided to come back, people went, just as the slave, the slave trade was being ended and so and then came back.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: I think today, Brazil has more African people--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: --than any country in the world--
Speaker 2: Any country in the world.
Speaker 1: --other than Nigeria (laughter).
Speaker 2: Other than Nigeria, yes.
Speaker 1: I mean there's not a country in Africa with as many--
Speaker 2: It's huge, yeah.
Speaker 1: --African people.  So, okay.  All right, so--
Speaker 2: So I met the Professor Grillo as a professor of anatomy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked in his lab.  He was a very progressive guy, worked lots.  And when I think of what he used to do and what I used to hear from him, so, and the things that he was talking about is what we are doing now.  I'm not joking, all this inter-disciplinary studies, I was young.  I didn't know what, what (Grillo?) was talking about, was saying that departments are useless.  You have to bring people together to work together and solve big problems.  And so (he said?), so it was one of--I was working in his lab.  Then I met a Dutch guy who came from, who came by some program.  He said, "Well, you look like you could do well, and you need to scholarship to come to the U.S."
Speaker 1: This is from the Dutch guy?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Dutch guy helped me.  I was working this lab, and this guy came.  He was an electronic specialist, and saw that I was reasonably okay in electronics and have to get a scholarship.
Speaker 1: So is that how you got to U-C Berkeley [University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: That's how I got there.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--U-C Berkeley's a tough place to get into--
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter), yeah--
Speaker 1: --and a strong program.  So,--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's how I got there, yeah.  That's how I got to U-Berkeley.
Speaker 1: So you must have been really good.
Speaker 2: Well, I would say reasonable (laughter), yeah.
Story_ID: 26969
Speaker 1: About what year did you go to U-C Berkeley [University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California]?
Speaker 2: I went there in '71 [1971].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in 1971.
Speaker 1: Now, had you ever been out of Nigeria at this point?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --this was my, absolutely, my first time, getting out of Nigeria.
Speaker 1: It's the first time out, so was it a big cultural shock to--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --did you fly over?
Speaker 2: I flew over, yeah, flew, I just--.  It was culture shock, but don't forget, I loved geography.  So I, I studied my head off, and I used to go to, something called USIS, United States, United States Information Studies in Ibadan [Nigeria].  They had a big office there in those days.  So I had read a lot about U.S., applied to some schools like Polytechnic School in New York.  There was a Polytech Institute which was great in those days, yeah.  And I applied in those places in the late '60s [1960s], but I had no money to come.  So I knew about the Stanford, John Hopkins and I knew about all these places.
Speaker 1: So was University of California at Berkeley, relatively low in tuition in those days?
Speaker 2: Yeah, quite low, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know at one time, I thought the major schools in California would let you go for free--
Speaker 2: For free, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --if you were in state.  But tuition, yeah.
Speaker 2: I go there and worked also as part of my training, worked in the Lawrence Lab, which is called the Lawrence Berkeley Lab now.
Speaker 1: What they called Lawrence Livermore now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, no, there's one in Livermore [California]--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, one in Berkeley (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --and there's one in Berkley.
Speaker 1: --Lawrence Berkeley Lab, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Lawrence Berkeley Lab, yeah.
Speaker 1: Lawrence Berkeley, right, right.
Speaker 2: So I was, so I was doing electronics so they wanted me to do, work in the lab and also go to school.
Speaker 1: All right, so how did you do?  Did you do well right away?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did about, just, the same math everywhere, the same physics.  So it--
Speaker 1: So you were more than prepared--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: {Coughing] I was more than prepared, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was more than prepared and graduated in seventy--got my B.S. [degree] in '75 [1975].  I was older than the, many of the students.  I was prepared.  I was determined to go to school.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--I hear this a lot.  People that are educated in the British system don't seem to be very challenged by, you know, schools in the United States?
Speaker 2: Well, the--in the British system, the difference at the undergrad level, the students--because I don't know what that is to do it, I think that's to do it, when you get to the university in the British system, you take three classes.  You do three things.  If you wanted to go into engineering, you start off right away with physics, chemistry, math.  That's it.  All this history, all this gen ed [general education] here.  They didn't do it.  They didn't do it.  If you wanted to make it in chemistry, I may start the first year with physics, chemistry, biology.  Second year, I drop one of them, physics, chemistry.  The third year I only concentrate on chemistry.  So by the time I finish, I know a whole lot about chemistry than any student in this country because that's all you'd be focused on for virtually three years.  Here, you have first do all the gen ed, you have to do, yeah.
Speaker 1: So did you major in electrical engineering or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I majored in electrical engineering at Berkeley, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, any special teachers or--
Speaker 2: But, great teachers all around, but you had tremendous teachers here.
Story_ID: 26970
Speaker 1: How, how were you treated [at the University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California] in '71 [1971]?
Speaker 2: Oh, see when you come from Nigeria where everybody's of the same skin color, and you've grown up to my age and you just go there, competition, that's all.  You just--everybody may look different from you.  You just want to compete and get your damn degree--excuse my language (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you weren't that concerned about social things--
Speaker 2: It didn't occur to me, really.  It, I, not--it's only on reflection, going back and say, "Oh, this is what this guy meant.  This is what this guy meant." Because I had a friend who came to me and said, "Oh, they said there's a black boy in the class that is getting 'As.'"  I said, "Who is that?"  "Oh, you." (laughter).  It didn't occur to me.  I was the only black face in the class (laughter), but it didn't, it didn't register in my brain.  It did not register in my brain because you just come.  I said, "Okay.  I'm here for one thing, to get the damn,"--excuse my language, "Get the degree." (laughter).  So you just, so you just see everybody as, okay, either as a collaborator or competitor, just compete.  So that's the, that's--you come with the mindset, of whatever they put in your front, you're going to do it, and that's, that's what you see with people who come from foreign countries.  I can see a difference between myself and my kids because they--
Speaker 1: Well, what did you think about Berkeley, California in 1971?
Speaker 2: In 1971, a little bit different 'cause there's, you see all the--I mean you came home--I've read about hippies and all those things in 'Time Magazine' and other things, but seeing them first time is a little bit different, yeah.  So it was a, it was an interesting environment coming in the 19--around '71 [1971] because there was still--
Speaker 1: The Black Panthers were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Black Panthers were there on campus, there was the Free Speech [Movement].  It was at a tail end, but it was still very active, Telegraph Street [sic, Avenue], Shy Talk and a whole lot of stuff.  The, a couple of years later, there was the Patty [Patricia] Hearst, I've forgotten, Cinque, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all those things, yeah.
Speaker 1: Symbionese Liberation Army--
Speaker 2: Symbionese Liberation Army, yeah, I was there at that time.  Yeah, I was just down the street and watching it on tel--.
Speaker 1: I think D'Army Bailey was in City Council then, wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Who was he?
Speaker 1: D'Army Bailey.  I think he was the first black City Council member?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the guy was a Congressman was, the tall guy.
Speaker 1: Ron [Ronald] Dellums.
Speaker 2: Ron Dellums, yeah, Ron Dellums, then he went to become mayor, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, it was a, yeah, what's the name, this is--
Speaker 1: Oh, Angela Davis?
Speaker 2: Angela Davis, yeah, there was a big and George Jackson, those were big, big things going on when I got to Berkeley.
Speaker 1: George Jackson, right.
Speaker 2: Jackson, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, was there a significant Nigerian community in--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, there was.  There were, and I met a lot of Nigerians there.  There were people who had come earlier and went to Berkeley and got Ph.D. in nuclear physics, chemical engineering and so on.  They went back to Nigeria.  So there was, I met a chunk there, and then people young as myself also had started coming at that time.  So there was (unclear) common in the Bay [California] area.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you kind of bond with that community?
Speaker 2: Bond with them, and that's how I found my wife (laughter).  My wife came also in 1972, and we met, we met in 1972, and--
Speaker 1: Now, was she a student?
Speaker 2: She was a student in Mills College [Oakland, California].  That was a University of California, Berkeley at Mills.  In Oakland, there was a women's college, women's college, yeah.
Story_ID: 26971
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers that you had?  I know there were some excellent scientists at U-C Berkeley [University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the, but in the engineering, you probably won't know them.  Professor [David] Hodges, the electrical engineers, Paul Gray, (Ian?) Young, [Andrew] Nuereuther, who actually is from Decatur [Illinois].  He got his Ph.D. from [University of] Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], yeah.  My own professor was [Thomas] Everhart, and I joined him as Ph.D. for my Ph.D.  And, yeah, [William] Oldham, yeah, there are many great--Berkeley was, I mean, it's a tremendous school.
Speaker 1: Is there anyone that really stands out as a, as like a great mentor to you?
Speaker 2: Well, the guy who mentored me after I finished my bachelors and got to the Ph.D. is somebody called Tom Everhart.
Speaker 1: Tom Everhart, okay.
Speaker 2: E-V-I-E--actually became chancellor here at some point.  He was chancellor here, and became president of Cal-Tech, California Institute of Technology in Pasadena [California].  So he was my, became my mentor in my grad school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right--
Speaker 2: As I got into nanotechnology, it was through him, yeah, through him.
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your Ph.D. dissertation.  You're into nanotechnology--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --what I understand is that nano-fabrication--
Speaker 2: Nano fabrication.
Speaker 1: --process of--
Speaker 2: Making things small.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, that's, the person that I worked with is from Wichita, Kansas, Everhart--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, I see it (unclear)--
Speaker 2: From Kansas, yeah.  So he had trained in Cambridge, he got his Ph.D. from Cambridge University [Cambridge, England, United Kingdom].  And there they had established a process to manufacture microscopes, something they called scanning electron microscopes.
Story_ID: 26972
Speaker 1: What was the title of your [doctoral] dissertation?
Speaker 2: Hum?
Speaker 1: Do you remember?
Speaker 2: I think it's called 'Electron Dissipation in Layered Media.'  Looks, it looks cryptic (laughter), electron dissipation. 'Electron Energy Dissipation in Layered Media.'  It's--
Speaker 1: 'Electron--
Speaker 2: Energy--
Speaker 1: --Energy Dissipation--
Speaker 2: --Dissipation in Layered Media.'
Speaker 1: --In Layered Media.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What it essentially means is that if I shoot electrons into material, how does it lose its energy?  And how do I use that energy to do things?  And as I said, my mentor had been--when I was a student there in Bri-- in [University] Cambridge [Cambridge, England, United Kingdom], they had come up with how to make a scanning electron microscope.  So that's, you take electron focused and use it, you can move it around the way you want.  So now, since you can move it around, can you move it around to write patterns, which is what I did, okay, which is--we were doing that so I got onto that bandwagon, and then to actually going out--if I take electron, put a polymer, plastic, which is what my boss wanted us to do and what he was doing, and use, move the electron around, and then take it and do like photography.  You take that polymer and take it to a dark room and stick it in some solution like alcohol, you can actually take that polymer area and remove it.  It's like doing photography.  Once you remove it, now, you create holes around, holes where you can put things.  So you can use that electron to write those patterns and make very small, start making them nano-, nano-dimensions.  That's part of how nano-, nanofabrication started in the '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s].  And it's still done today, people are still using it, it's in the technology.
Speaker 1: Well, how small are we talking about?  When something is nano, (unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: When it's, it's tenth minus nine, ten minus nine meters [ten to the negative ninth power].  When you talk about the diameter of your hair, it's fifty micros.  That's fifty, so you can say a millionth time, the dimension of your, an average size of your hair.  Okay, so it's really, really small.  And you have to be able to make things in that dimension to get to where we are with electronics today, okay.  And in the olden days, you couldn't do things fast because the dimensions were big.  If I make something like this [gesturing with hand], electrons have to travel from here to here, okay.  It takes longer if I make it like this.  And how fast electron can go through this and time, the time is how much I can make it toggle, switch it around.  So before it was like this.  Now, with nanofabrication, I can make it like this.  So by making, how the, how far, how far the electron travels before I can do something to it, this one, instead of this, I can make my transistors move very fast.  So that's essentially, that's what nanofabrication has gave, that in the olden days your, your cellphones were big, okay.  Before even you couldn't have a cellphone.
Speaker 1: They used to carry 'em in a suitcase.
Speaker 2: Yeah, suitcase.  Now, everything is in your pocket.  It is because it can make these things so small, okay.  And many of the, many of the inspiration to do this was the space program, 'cause you have to shoot into space, have to make them small.  You cannot carry all this big weight, okay.  So that's part of the inspiration to start doing things small.  And it was actually going, okay, I'll do it in nano.
Speaker 1: Okay, and "Electron Energy Dissipation in Layered Media," what kind of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was using polymer.
Speaker 1: Polymers, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Different kind of plastic--
Speaker 2: Yeah, plastic and you can put plastic on top of silicon, yeah, which you use for transistors, yeah, start studying them, and, "Okay, if I do this, I do that, can I predict how this thing will form so I can use it in a reliable form?" Okay, which is what was the people use them now.  But before then, you didn't know.
Speaker 1: Now, were you trying to print small circuits, is that what you were trying to do?
Speaker 2: I was trying to print, not print circuit by itself, but actually do the process that people can use to make circuits.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the first thing is make sure that you know how to make these things and then start applying them, which is what I did when I got here [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], to start using them to make circuits and devices.
Story_ID: 26973
Speaker 1: Now, you earned your Ph.D. in 1979?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so what happened next?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to Cornell [University, Ithaca, New York] to work at--at that time, the federal government just created a center for something they call Submicro Facility, meaning trying to start making things smaller and smaller because the equipment to make these things are expensive, so not every school can buy it.  So the federal government created, National Science Foundation [NSF] created this facility at Cornell where we could go to and use it.  So I worked, I went to work for the director of that laboratory at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there from 1979 to '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], yeah, I was, I was doing that at the same time, waiting for my wife to finish medical school.  So it was a good, a good--so I did my research, also taught part time in electrical engineering there, yeah, like a visiting assistant professor, I taught classes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay, part time.
Speaker 2: --and did my research, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you were in re--at Cornell from '79 [1979] to '84 [1984], and now you went back to Nigeria in '84 [1984], right?
Speaker 2: I went, yeah, I went back--when my wife finished medical school, her residency, went back--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, myself and my wife and packed our kids and went back to Nigeria.
Speaker 1: So what kind of an M.D. [medical doctor] did your wife become?
Speaker 2: Oh, she's an OB, OB-GYN [obstetrics and gynaecology], yeah, yeah, she's an OB-GYN.
Speaker 1: And she was working with the intent of going back to Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Well, working with the intent of going back to Nigeria because she said when we finish, we go back and--
Speaker 1: What about you?  Did you feel you wanted to go back and stay?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I wanted to go back, yeah.  I wanted to go back and work in the university.  That was the idea.
Speaker 1: Okay, but before we leave Cornell, is there anything significant about the community there, in terms of mentors or (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had, yeah, Professor [Edward] Wolf, some guy called W-O-L-F, Wolf was my mentor there.  And it was a great place.  It was--all the toys that you needed for nanofabrication in those days were there.  So for me, it was like a kid in a candy shop doing, I really liked it a lot and worked very hard at Cornell, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there a significant paper or anything that came out of that work at Cornell?
Speaker 2: Well, there were things that we did in nanofabrication that, I mean a couple of years later, then you start--they turned the place into what is called National Nanofabrication Laboratory.  I would say that the work that we did in those days laid the foundation for that, to go, to say "Okay, these are people doing nano stuff."  And now people can go and use it from, people who wanted to use those things.  But, see, I was one of the few, I mean, where the--really establishing the base of how people can use all these things practically in the future, yeah.
Story_ID: 26974
Speaker 1: Now in, in 1985, you went back to Nigeria or to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], I went back--
Speaker 1: Eighty-four [1984], okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, and I worked there for, I became a head of department over this.  I went to a new university, in another part of the country.
Speaker 1: Now, this is named after the prime minister of Nigeria, right, Balewa?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's, that's it, yeah, that's--
Speaker 1: Abubakar Tafawa Balewa (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the university [Abubakar Tafawa Belewa University in Bauchi, Nigeria] I went to work was in this area, was in the, in this region, about--near his hometown.  So that university is actually now named after him, that I worked at, yeah, that I worked at, yeah.  So I worked there for, maybe, from '84 [1984] and then around '86 [1986], I decided I--there was, I was still very interested in research.  I was interested in the type of things that I was doing here, and, but, of course, there was no way to do it in Nigeria, so I decided I better come back, yeah.  So that's why I left Nigeria and came back here.
Speaker 1: Was your wife comfortable with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my wife was comfortable, yeah.  She wanted to, she--we decided to come back together, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, what was the state of Nigeria in '85 [1985]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984], '85 [1985], '86 [1986], well, the military were there and--
Speaker 1: Was that [President Olusegun] Obesanjo?
Speaker 2: No, when I left it was--by the time I got there, when I went to interview it was a civilian government.  By the time I got there, it was a military government, [Muhammadu] Buhari.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then [Ibrahim] Babangida toppled him.  So around that time, I left.  He toppled him in '85 [1985] or something like that.  And I left in '87 [1987], yeah, I left in February '87 [1987].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right so you came back to the United States and like, now, what were your prospects when you came back?  Did you have an idea--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, I came to--
Speaker 1: --of where you were going?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, here [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Oh, you already knew--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I came here in '86 [1986] to interview.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and the--I was supposed to come back in August '86 [1986], but I didn't come back till February '87 [1987] 'cause I was trying to make up my mind whether I should uproot everybody again and come back, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a decision to make--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a big decision, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, but, now you've been a person that's been passionate about research--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and you just wouldn't able to do that kind of research in Nigeria, would you?
Speaker 2: No, I cannot do it in Nigeria--
Speaker 1: It's not the--
Speaker 2: --not even now, no.
Speaker 1: The equipment wasn't even there, right?
Speaker 2: No, the equipment was not there, no.  And if you look at all the equipment, these are million and millions of dollars of equipment.  So it's not, it's not something that you can easily create.  There are very few countries who can really do this at this level, yeah.  So it's not as if they want to do in Nigeria.  They can do it if they want to, really put their mind to it 'cause there are other countries who are trying to do the same thing.  But, but it depends on the focus of the government, and--
Speaker 1: Priorities, yeah.
Speaker 2: Priorities, yeah, priorities.
Speaker 1: I know in '77 [1977], Nigeria spent a lot of money on FESTAC '77 [1977 Festival of African Arts and Culture]--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the FESTAC, yeah, they spent a lot of money on FESTAC, yeah.  It was a great thing to do, but I think, yeah, I think it's (unclear). Tremendous people, tremendous brain, just not harnassed the brain properly in the right places.  So I, a lot of us went, many people went back to Nigeria and came back.  I was, I came back, and I was lucky that I landed in the middle of the cornfields, and it's been great ever since--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: In the middle of the cornfields (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, it's been great ever since, yeah.
Story_ID: 26975
Speaker 1: Was that your impression of the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], like a big cornfield?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, when you are in [University of California at] Berkeley [Berkeley, California], you hear about Illinois.  When you're at Cornell [University, Ithaca, Illinois], you hear about Illinois, but you really don't know what is here until you--it's remote, okay.  It's not, it's not--it's a place where, okay, it's a state university.  Cornell is a private, so it's, it does (unclear) all the time.  But University of Illinois, you know, okay, there's a great engineering school here, but you don't really come here until you come here and see, wow, it's a lot of stuff on the ground here, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now you began as a tenured professor?
Speaker 2: I began--no, I began--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I came back, although I've had experience, I was just happy to get a job (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so you didn't start as a tenured professor?
Speaker 2: I started, yeah, I started as an assistant professor of--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --I started from scratch again when I came here, even though I had been head of department in Nigeria, I started from scratch.
Speaker 1: But you were on a tenure track?
Speaker 2: I was on a tenure track, yeah, but then--
Speaker 1: Okay, but you weren't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --then by 1990, I was tenured 'cause I had, I had some record already, so I just said, okay.  So by 1990, I became tenured, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the projects you worked on, the research projects here?
Speaker 2: Well, research--
Speaker 1: When you first got here?
Speaker 2: When I first came I was, I went back to what I knew.  I was doing electron beam lithography and nanofabrication.  That was, the first thing I came, when I came here they, the beauty for me here, Cornell already had nanofabrication going on because I was at the beginning.  And then when I came back, what brought me here was that they were going to start it here.  So I wanted to be on the ground floor here.  So there were already people doing transistors, [John] Bardeen, [Nicolas] Holonyak, and all these people here, but the process of doing nanofabrication was not established yet.  They were buying the equipment, so I just came on, joined them and I was--
Speaker 1: So you were the expertise they needed to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, needed, yeah, they have various expertise, I was the expertise for nanofabrication, and I brought that in.
Speaker 1: Now, so you achieved tenure in 1990, you said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I achieved--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, in--I have a note here that in '96 [1996], you won the 'Best Paper Award' of "Micro and Nano Engineering Conference (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, in Europe, yeah, based on what you've been doing here we presented the paper over there.
Speaker 2: So what was the paper about that won?
Speaker 1: Well, it was about making very small devices in something called silicon germanium, silicon germanium materials.  And it was the process of making it and testing it out and all the stuff, but it was based on nano, nanotechnology, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so now at some point, you became the department head, right?
Speaker 1: No, yeah, I became--after I got here there was a, NS--National Science Foundation Center.  I became an associate director for that center, working on education, working with Howard University in Washington [D.C.], bringing students in, working with Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland], just trying to take what we know about the subject matter, which is called compound semiconductor microelectronics and spreading it around with, internally and externally.  So I did that for about six years, and that center ended.  And then in 2000, I was appointed as director of what used to be called Microelectronics Lab, okay.  So the building is up on Wright Street there, but during--so during my time, we changed the name to Micro and Nanotechnology Lab, Micro and Nanotechnology Lab.  So that's, I became a director of that from 2000 to 2005.
Story_ID: 26976
Speaker 1: The graduate school here [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] is really--I have a note here that you awarded like thirty-four Ph.Ds since you've been here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, in my group, yeah.  I've had a lot of grad student work in my group, and over the--from 19--up to, I had students up to 2010 or 2011.  So my last Ph.D. students, or student is in Singapore.  Yeah, he's in Singapore, graduated in 2010, I think, yeah.  So from 1988 or '87 [1987] to 2010, I graduated about thirty-four Ph.Ds, maybe twenty-one or twenty-two masters students--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you had nineteen postdocs [postdoctoral fellows]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had a lot of postdocs, visitors and different--and worked with a lot of undergraduates in my lab.
Speaker 1: Now, what's the rest of the department like here, the department of engineering--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, electrical engineering?
Speaker 1: Electrical engineering.
Speaker 2: It's a huge department.  There are probably, when I came, probably a hundred professors in the department.  It's a big, it's a big juggernaut, yeah.
Speaker 1: How many of African descent, I mean including African Americans, Caribbean people--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you think?
Speaker 2: Two of us.
Speaker 1: About two.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So you don't have to think that long.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Two?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I probably was the--think I was the only one at one time, and then Jose [Schutt-Aine] who is Haitian in origin, yeah, is there now.  So there are two of us.
Speaker 1: That's not a lot.  That's not a lot to know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Right now, there are--yeah, I was the only one at one time, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, have you been involved or have you had time to be involved in any, I guess recruiting of minority students?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  We've, we're working on it all the time, yeah.  When I was doing the associate director of that center, yeah, I was involved in going to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], trying to recruit students, going to Morgan State [University, Baltimore, Maryland] with, recruited some students from Clark-Atlanta [University, Atlanta, Georgia].  We brought students in from North Carolina A and T [Greensboro, North Carolina].  So we've brought in students.  We've just got into these outstanding students and making sure that you mentor them well to go to grad school and get Ph.Ds.  So that's the, so I've worked with a lot of--and right now, in my present position, those are things that we are looking at very seriously.  How do we dedicate more resources and funding to be able to, scholarships, 'cause that a big, big stuff for--and also having to increase the pipeline.  That's a critical issue.  It's really critical, yeah.
Story_ID: 26977
Speaker 1: And you've really been busy writing papers--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the names on lots of papers from, you know, starting in '99 [1999] well, even before then, you know, going, what's, can you maybe tell us what the--
Speaker 2: The papers are about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you're involved in nanotechnology,
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm involved in nanotechnology, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Is there one specific part that you've been focusing on since you've been at the University [of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, over the last, well, over the last twenty years, I've worked on something called gallium nitrite.
Speaker 1: Gallium nitrite.
Speaker 2: Gallium nitrite.
Speaker 1: That has special properties, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it has special properties.  You can look at blue LEDs [light emitting diode], that's gallium nitrite.  The, previously, you saw LEDs, but never blue or blue green.  It's only--gallium nitrite came around in, I mean really got developed, it's been around, got developed before we can start making reasonable devices from it in, what is it called, in the '90s [1990].  But I started working on it just, not too long after I got here, but I was more interested in making it into a transistor rather than optical devices 'cause I'm more interested in the electronic devices rather than bring it in--bringing light out of the material.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's, over the last twenty years, that's one area that I focused on that I think I've made significant contributions.
Speaker 1: Now, gallium nitrate can be used as a circuit--
Speaker 2: It can be used for emitting light of different colors.  So you look at the display of billboards.  You find that their full color, LED, the blue and the blue-green, they are from gallium nitrite, okay.  But it's not only good for doing light, it's also good for making transistors that you can use for power, for power applications that may be in the future, your base station for transmitting for your cell phone, the transistor is there and the circuitry, there will be, probably emit from gallium nitrite, okay.  So I have more focused on that.  So you can use processes that you use for nanotechnology, nanofabrication to make those devices.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, are they, are you making these devices for--
Speaker 2: In the future, probably use it for cellphones, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, use it for cellphone, use it for palm device, use it--it has a lot of military and civilian and satellites and you can use them in high-temperature environment.  So it's mostly to, for communication.
Speaker 1: So you're exploring ways to use this material rather than discovering news forms of it, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my job work with people who make materials and see how do I use that material and in the processing of it, how does--how do I use nanofabrication to turn this material into useful devices that can be put into systems, yeah.  So that's my area--I don't do the material themselves.  I know how to do it.  I, but I don't do it.  I work with people who make the materials.
Speaker 1: What's the most exciting use of gallium nitrate that you--
Speaker 2: Well, for me it's power, power amplifiers.  Microwave power amplifiers is, you can use them for x-band, for transmitting signals at x-band which would be used for cellphone, base station.  So where you--when I'm transmitting things in the cellphone, and it goes to a base station where it has to be routed out, I can, I can make devices that would perform in a smaller area in gallium nitrite than if I make it in silicon which use a big area, okay.  So that's, and also I don't have to cool gallium nitrite down as much as I have to cool, cool silicon because of the, of the properties of the material is, it can work at higher temperature than silicon, yeah.  So those are, I'm trying to explain it (laughter) in a layman's, at least in the simplest way I can, yeah.
Speaker 1: I appreciate the (unclear) (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, but gallium nitrite is a special material.  People are still working on it.  I'm sure people will still be working on it for the next twenty years and make sure that it becomes even better.
Speaker 1: Where is it now, and are people using it?  Is it being used now in--
Speaker 2: People are using it, not as--it's not as reliable as we want in the electronics sense.  But in the optical sense, where you actually use it to make laser, light-emitting diodes, people are using it.  I mean it's a multi-million-dollar industry in that area.  So anything that you see blue light-emitting diode, that's gallium nitrite.
Story_ID: 26978
Speaker 1: In 2001, you were appointed as a professor of materials science and engineering [at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois], right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, the--because my work is a mixture of material science and electrical engineering, electronics.  So my primary home is electrical engineering, but I also joined the material science and engineering here so I can--I get students who do Ph.D. in material science, work in my group after doing, who's getting Ph.D. in electrical engineering and working in my group.  And they are working together.  So that's, that's--and based on this, you--sometimes when you've done, well, what your peers consider very good work, you get, you get--I became a, something called [Donald Biggar] Willett Professor of Engineering in 2003 or 2004.  You get a, what they call a named position, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  So is this an endowed chair or--
Speaker 2: Endowed chair, yeah, endowed chair.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's the, okay.  All right, okay, now, in 2005, they named you director of the Micro and Nanotechnology Lab here?
Speaker 2: No, 2001.
Speaker 1: Two thousand one [2001]?
Speaker 2: Two thousand and one [2001] to 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, 2001 to 2005--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And then 2005, I became interim dean of the College of Engineering.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I became interim, and then 2006, I was made permanent dean.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the thirteenth in the history of the college, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, of the college since 1870.
Speaker 1: That's, so they don't change 'em that fast, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No.
Speaker 1: --so I guess when they choose one, they expect him to stay for a while and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were some--
Speaker 1: --do the job.
Speaker 2: --didn't stay for too long (laughter).  I don't think I wanna that job for 20 years (laughter).  You grow old too fast (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a--some, there were some deans that were there for a long time.  I served as dean seven years.
Speaker 1: Now, do you like doing administrative work?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, I think--others call it academic mid-life crisis.  Okay, after you've published two hundred papers, you've graduated, I don't know gazillion of students getting Ph.Ds.  And you start wondering what next (unclear).  Some people find the fulfillment and just keep doing that.  Some people find fulfillment just how can I make other people successful, okay.  So if you (unclear), at least that's what drives me in terms of administration.  How do I make sure that the people coming back, coming behind my colleagues become even more successful than their--so you start looking at, okay, what can I do in administration so I can even a bigger impact on what I'm doing right now.  So that's what drives me within administration, yeah, if not, go back to the lab.
Story_ID: 26979
Speaker 1: In 2012, you were vice chancellor for academic affairs and provost, right?
Speaker 2: And provost, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now, was there a long search process?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was a search, national search process.
Speaker 1: With other worthy candidates?
Speaker 2: Yes, definitely.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't know what else you could say, but (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But very well, (unclear) the candidates definitely, yeah.
Speaker 1: This is a position, this is the second person on the campus--
Speaker 2: On campus, yeah.
Speaker 1: --second in command on the campus of the University of Illinois.
Speaker 2: At Urbana-Campaign [Urbana, Illinois], of this campus, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, this is the flagship campus for the, of (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's the flagship campus, for the four thousand students, billion dollar in budget, yeah, all those.
Speaker 1: Member of the Big Ten, all that stuff.
Speaker 2: Big Ten, sure this--
Speaker 1: Now, this is all football is not that good (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, football is not that good.  We do well in basketball once in a while, but they would like to pride us on the academics more than the football, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what is the--so vice chancellor (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Vice chancellor for academic--the vice chancellor for academic affairs and provost reports to the chancellor of the university, okay.  The chancellor is the CEO [Chief Executive Officer] of this campus.  So you can look at the, as the provost as the COO [Chief Operating Officer], but that essentially runs the day-to-day affairs of the campus.  Okay, the chancellor, apart from working on campus, also is the external face of the campus, okay.  So that then to raise money, do all those things, the chancellor has to be going all around.  So the, so looking at a campus, making sure that everything is moving, day-to-day moving forward, especially within the academic mission, mission of the university.  That is the job of the vice chancellor for academic affairs.  And the title provost means that you have, what is it called?  You have responsibility also for budget, okay.  So how do you use the budgets to drive the academic mission of the university.  So those are the, that's the interwoveness of that position.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, there's no such position as president here?
Speaker 2: Well, there's a president of the system, okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's like the University of California.  There are ten campuses.  There's a president of the system.  But each campus has their own chancellor.  So that's the same thing with University of Illinois, although we're only three [campuses] instead of ten.  There is a chancellor here, [University of Illinois at] Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and [University of Illinois at] Springfield [Springfield, Illinois], but for the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, there's a chancellor, which is Phyllis Weiss, presently, and I'm the provost, and she's my boss, yeah.  I report directly to her.
Speaker 1: So all those other campuses, the University of Chicago, I mean University of Illinois in Chicago--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, University of Illinois in Chicago, yeah, they have their own chancellor, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Where this is the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Northeastern Illinois University-- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Eastern Illinois, yeah, where--those ones are in the state system.  We are, we are within what is called University of Illinois system.  There are three of them--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Illinois, yeah, well, Urbana-Champaign, Chicago, Springfield.  But this is the one that was started in 1867.  Chicago used to be part of this campus until the '60s [1960s] before it became a separate university, and it's only in the 1990s that Springfield [that] used to be Sangamon State University, state college--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --became, the president here took it over and made it University of Illinois, Springfield.  It's just small, maybe four thousand, five thousand students.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so this is the flagship.  This is forty-four thousand students and still counting.
Speaker 1: I've, I read that there're twenty-two Nobel Laureates have been produced here--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --amongst the faculty--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Over, over, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --University of Illinois over the years.
Speaker 2: Over the years, yes.  It's been, we have one on faculty right now in physics, Tony [Anthony] Leggett, yeah.  So this, this has been a terrific campus.  When you look at Nobel Prize winners, you look at what many of our alumni's have done, at least many--there are many things that have been done, but at least for the public, work, they recognize people from the Netscape, Netscape were from here.  The young man who wrote the paper, they're from here.  The professor that invented LED [light emitting device]  is still here.  He's not retired yet.  He's eighty-five, okay.  I can, all the--all your plasma TV, the plasma screen is from here.  So a lot of things--when you really look at it, who started, all this, first sent things like email, yeah.  They are from here.  So if you look at the technology, yellow corn, yellow corn, yeah.  The two schools that started this university was engineering and agriculture.
Speaker 1: So yellow corn, this is something that I take for granted that has always--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You take it for granted, but--
Speaker 1: --it hasn't always been here?
Speaker 2: Yes, (unclear) no, it's here.  So, so there are a lot of things that have come out of here because I--yeah, a lot of agriculture, all the genomics of pig.  If you want to know anything about pig and how it's gonna be used for food, and you rear them, produce them, this is the school.  So we have tremendous depth in those areas, so there is comprehensiveness here.
Story_ID: 26980
Speaker 1: So is University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] considered primarily a STEM [science, technology, engineering, mathematics], you know, school in terms of science and technology--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think that's where the--
Speaker 1: --and engineering?
Speaker 2: For right now, that's the reputation of the school.  We have humanities, we have social sciences.  They are very good.  We're always trying to move everybody up so, but when you look at, if people look at us from the outside, they see a very top-notch engineering school and top-notch science and agriculture, but at the same time, we have tremendous depth in the final applied arts, music, dance.  We have Nathan Gunn who's, does a lot of opera singing in New York.  He's on the faculty here.  So we have--we are not as well known in that area, just because engineering and agriculture has dominated the landscape for a long time, because that's how the school started.  A lot of the, a lot of the land grant institutions started with engineering and agriculture, okay, so that's where their strength derives, what--we say, we call ourselves a comprehensive university where, with the proviso that anything we chose to do, we have to do it very well, okay.  So we cannot do everything, but whatever we can, we decide we want to do, we should be able to do it very, very well.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what's the toughest part of this job?
Speaker 2: Ah-hah, it's--we have forty thousand students here, and two thousand faculty.  And the provost and the vice chancellor for academic affairs is responsible for the, what is it called, the academic, for this campus to thrive academically, all the hiring of the professors, bringing in top-notch students.  That is in the purview of the provost, the vice chancellor for academic affairs, making sure that your budget fits all those missions, is the job of the provost also.  So that's, it's a comprehensive job.  I would say it's a 24/7 job.  And so just making sure that you take care of students because at the end of the day, that's the primary products, taking raw, young minds and turning them into refined young minds that can go out and help change the world.  That's, that is a fundamental mission.
Speaker 1: Now, are you the first non-white, non-U.S. born provost of this school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I think--yeah, no, at least non-white.  I don't know whether there's non-U.S. because I have not sure of the history of all the provosts.
Speaker 1: I wouldn't be surprised if you were the first--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'd probably be, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --first person born in another country.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And non-white too on top--
Speaker 2: Non-white, yeah, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, if you put the two together, yeah, I think I am, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you may be the first engineer.  Are you the first engineer, you think?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: There was an engineer before, Linda [Katehi], a woman, no, okay--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that was the first--I don't know whether she was the first engineer, but first non-native born, okay.  It's not me.  It's Linda.  She was born in Greece.  She's now the chancellor of the University of Davis--University of California-Davis [Davis, California], yeah.  But non-white, yeah.  I think I am, yeah, well, I think non-white, period, yeah.  But this is a great-- I always say that, I came here twenty-six years ago, yeah, and I always joke that because of the cold weather, I never thought I would (laughter), I never thought I'd last this long here.  But the environment, the collaboration, the welcoming environment on campus has been a catalyst for me to stick around for this long, yeah.  It's been a great environment.  It's more, good--I have five kids so this, a small town, big enough to have the culture to bring, finer from big cities, they do not get trouble as much and close enough to big city, you can go and do things and run back home.  So, yeah, so this is a great community.
Story_ID: 26981
Speaker 1: Now, is there an African Studies program here at the University of Illinois [at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a Center for African Studies, yeah, and the present director is Professor Merle Bowen, yeah.  It's thriving.  It's doing well.
Speaker 1: Also, African American Studies is here too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we a department of African American Studies here.  I just forgot the name of the head of department.  He just came in last, about two years ago, yeah, yeah.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, so those traditions are here, and do you--does--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And the Center for African Studies was started in the early '70s [1970s], probably '71 [1971], '72 [1972].  And my understanding, it was a Nigerian that was the first director.  So there's been, so there's been a Nigerian on this campus for a long time.
Speaker 1: Okay, does the university have any special relationships with any universities outside of the country?
Speaker 2: There are relationships.  We've had to create universities in India in the past.  We've had to really mentor universities in Ma-- Indonesia in the past.  We have relationships with universities in England, Switzerland and also Sweden.  We have relationships with universities in Singapore.  I go to Singapore all the time, a relationship with the universities in Japan.  We have a joint energy program with the university in Japan.  So we are, we are--this is an international campus in terms of going out and also in terms of bringing students here.  If you look at the history of the university, university, it's one of the first ones to actually bring Chinese students in the 1900--early 1900s to train here, yeah.  So it's been a--so we go to China.  If you mention UIUC, they know it, anywhere in Asia.  You just say UIUC.  You go to India, Taiwan, Hong Kong, UIUC is well known, yeah.  Maybe even more than in this country (laughter).  Yeah, UC's well known in Asia so we find out we--a lot of us go to Asia frequently.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, are there programs here on campus to bring African American students in, you know--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well--
Speaker 1: --to recruit, you know, of the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --to recruit students, to--everyday we're trying to work even better with Chicago [Illinois], especially, Chicago Public Schools.  How do you work with Chicago Public Schools?  Increase the pipeline for a top university to bring students in.  Yeah, that's a passion for us.  We've, I won't say we've done it well in the past.  But we are trying to re--see where we can reinvent ourselves and the chancellors, we were just talking this morning.  They call it diversity as one element of excellence that we need to do because when you bring different people to the same table, everybody has their own perspective.  How can you use that to really do great things?  So there is a renewed effort on our campus to really focus on diversity, bring a lot of different people, American Indian, Latino, African American Studies, Caucasian students, students from rural areas, first-generation students, and not only African American, but white kids who come from southern Illinois, coal fields in those days.  So these are things that we think--as a land-grant mission for the university, this is something we should be doing well.  And we're reexamining that.  What does it mean to be a land grant institution in the Twenty-first Century?  Those are things that we're looking at very carefully, and hopefully, we'll get it right this time again, yeah.  We've done a lot of, if you look at a who invented the LED [light emitting diode], [Nicolas] Holonyak, his dad was a coalminer in Zeigler, so in Illinois.  He said he came here in the '50s [1950s].  He says, this was the parlor to the world for him.  This is where he saw the world and it changed him, and he invented the LED.  That's big.
Story_ID: 26982
Speaker 1: So the school's [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] committed to providing the kind of service that a public university should--
Speaker 2: Should, yeah--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --for ordinary people.
Speaker 2: Ordinary people, we should, really.  The main, major problem for us as an institution at this point is the fact that the economy has prevented the state government from investing--it's not only in Illinois, but across the U.S.  The great public universities, when you look at what they've done for this country, they've been the engine that changed this country, the land grant institutions because they are big, Michigan, the Michigan--Michigan itself is under land grant, as Michigan State [Lansing, Michigan].
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Where you have the combination of that, you have Illinois, you have Davis, you have [University of] Minnesota [St. Paul, Minnesota], you have Wisconsin [University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin].  These are big institutions.  They produce a lot of people.  If you can count the number of graduates from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Stanford [University, Stanford, California], these are small, are not, these are not big schools.  But if you look at how many students you produce from here who are well trained, can compete with anybody in the world, you have to start looking at this country did something great in the eight-- nineteenth century.  I think it's Abraham Lincoln that signed the Land Grant Memorial Act that created land grant institutions.  That's, I think those, that changed the world.  And if you go overseas, as a model, if you go to China, they have all these state universities.  And they come here and say, "How do you guys do it?"  State institutions, you've been able to maintain your excellence for a long time and not, really, not spending too much money when you look at what it would take to train one student.  So those are things that Americans actually--not only in terms of the culture, but in terms of academics, we can teach the world.  How do you use education to transform life?  If there's any country that are doing it well, this country has done it well.  But although we say, I've done it well, we can even do much better in terms of opening access to a lot of people because, because of the tuition now, because of the funding of this university tuition has gone up too much.  So we really have to now rely on what I call philanthropy, be able to bring scholarship money in so we can bring students from minority areas, from rural areas to partake of, of higher education because I can tell you it changed my life; if not I'd be, maybe I'd be a farmer somewhere (laughter), a farmer somewhere.  It changed my life, yeah.
Story_ID: 26983
Speaker 1: I know a broad education is essential to do the job [provost at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois] that you're doing.  But does it, does being an engineer give you an extra boost, you know, in--
Speaker 2: I will say so, but education gives you an--understanding human beings is very important because university is very different from companies.  Professors, when you get your tenure, they had their own lookout bosses.  I cannot go to your professor, you do this, you do that.  They'll probably tell me where to go (laughter).  So having what I call the patience to some extent, knowing how to put on the throttle and slow down and put it on, making sure they can, what I call persuasion, persuading people that this is the direction that we've agreed and are willing to go.  And then that's what we want to do in terms of getting to where this university should be, which is one-to-one, one of the best universities in the world.  So having engineering background is good to some extent because engineering is about solving problems, okay.  That's--and look at any, you know, what (unclear) problem solving.  That's our own forte.  But you have to now bring the extra dimension of how do you persuade people that this is a common problem that we need to solve and that we need to solve it together and move in the same direction.  That's a tough one (laughter).  Usually it's tough, it's a tough stuff, but it's a challenge that's, it's worth taking if you want to have an impact.
Speaker 1: Now, I know you just started this in 2012, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But would you consider becoming the president of a university or the chancellor of a university?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  These are tough, those are tough jobs.  And if you've been reading the news lately, everybody's, presidents have been resigning (laughter), I mean resigning, so I always say that I consented on the job that I have on hand.  And you keep doing as well and somebody thinks you can do president, fine.  If not, I have come much beyond my own circumstances of birth, okay, because of the way I was born and have--I mean lucky for me that I've, I mean my parents taught me that hard work pays off, okay.  So you work hard.  People notice.  You may not think so, people notice, but there's nothing, there's nothing that substitutes for hard work, and I tell my kids, tell anybody.  Nobody gives you free lunch.  You have to work hard.  If you work hard, you can, you can make progress.
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: I don't know whether human beings can do that.  I think, I would say I've been lucky in my time, and although I've forgotten the golf player that says "The more I practice, the luckier I get" (laughter).  So I think it's just, no I wouldn't change anything because I, consider myself as when you look at where I came from and my parents and the, I call it very humble circumstances I was born in, I think I've--life is zig zag.  There's no smooth part.  My name, my name is Adesida, that the path of the crown is always smooth (laughter).  No path is really smooth.  So I think I've--
Speaker 1: Do you ever think about what would have happened if you had stayed in Nigeria?
Speaker 2: Definitely, worry about it all the time.  I would say maybe I've had some impact here, but if I could have done the same sort of thing that I've done here, in Nigeria, to have more impact, just because of the gap in the development, yeah, we talk about it every day because in this country, there are tons--even just in this town, there are many Nigerian doctors in this Champaign-Urbana [Illinois], yeah.  So when you look at, a lot of us that (fusion?) all over the world, hopefully, maybe I'm getting old now.  Maybe my kids can help, at least in bringing Nigerians together and helping, much like what the Indians did, not American Indians, but just the Indians that are from India.  They've been here for a long time.  They've had to transmit technology back to India and start helping, advising the country how to move up.  I'm hoping that as we move on the Nigerians can, Nigeria can take advantage of its, of its people that are overseas to help advise how, how to move a country up.
Story_ID: 26984
Speaker 1: In terms of African Americans--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and their relationship to Africans from the continent who--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --are African Americans once they come over here too (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But from two different--
Speaker 2: From two different angles, yeah--
Speaker 1: Threads.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about those relationships because I know they--those of us who pay attention to where continental Africans live and what they do in this country and stuff, there are a lot of, a lot of Nigerians and Ghanaians in Chicago [Illinois].  It's enough of 'em to, you know, they have huge associations--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --their associations.  The Ghanaians have the Gha association--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Gha, the Gha, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in Chicago.  You know, just one little group's got a huge association--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --of people that are, seem largely invisible to the African American community.
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: They live in a different part of town.  They don't have the same associations--
Speaker 2: They come to the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --some do.  I mean some come--there are some links, but what are your thoughts about the relationship between Nigerians and Ghanaians and others in the African American community?
Speaker 2: I think they're, there's not enough because I, maybe, there is some.  But I won't say intense in times of, say this area, there's actually Yoruba Association of Central Illinois.  They meet all the time in (unclear) the case when finish, when somebody finishes high school, they come together and have a party or somebody finishes college, they come together and have a party just encouraging the kids to keep rising.  I think having that, one of those networks with African Americans, would very--would be tremendous.  Yes, it would really be tremendous.  There's a movement between Nigerians and Ghanaians and Africans which come together.  But the, building a better bridge, bringing the African Americans and Africans together would be something that we should be striving for more.  It's not as, I mean we do things on one's and two's.  I mean, but really coming together as a--two communities that want to go forward together, I think that there's more work that need to be done in that area, more work needs to be done in that area.
Story_ID: 26985
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, again, what today would you say is your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: My professional legacy?  I think when people look at the university, what are the legacies of professors, I think at the end of the day, it's about people, okay.  So you find that, I mean I was going in Singapore, I was walking to a Starbucks, in what is called the Fusional (ph.) place, and I kept hearing, "Professor Adesida", Professor Adesida, Professor Adesida"  Who knows me around this (way?)?  "Oh, hi, how are you?  So I took your class in 1999."  Okay.  And he was telling me, "Oh, you were great.  You--" those are the things that, I mean I find that fulfilling because now somebody sees you somewhere, and you've made a small difference in their lives in terms of what it--so the legacies, who are the people that you've come in contact with, especially, my grad students.  Who are the people that you've taught in the classroom, and how are they taking those things to change their own lives to move forward?  That's why I always call my own professor, my own Ph.D. professor.  We talk all the time because, and my own students, when they want to get married, they call me.  When they want to change up, they call me.  So they are, they're family.  So it's how you've affected people on your way up or way down or way sideways is what for me counts the most.
Story_ID: 26986
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your family?  Now, you have, you had--
Speaker 2: I have five kids, yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Five kids, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I have five kids, three boys, one just his M.B.A.  One just got a masters in information system management, information systems.  One is doing, trying to complete his engineering degree.  I have a daughter who is third-year medical school, and the other one is an accountant, hopefully, will go and--she's a girl.  Well, encouraging her to go and do a J.D.-M.B.A.  So the rule in the house is that everybody must have a masters, no dice.  That's (laughter) the bottom line.  Everybody must have a masters before they can rest on their, before they can--they can go beyond that.  I don't care, but they basic is have a Masters.
Speaker 1: Do the other family members help financially with the or whatever with--
Speaker 2: Just myself and my wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, myself and my wife.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you make sure that they can pay for all these Masters and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, well, we've been paying ourselves, been paying all the school fees ourselves, me and my wife.  So that's, you have to make the investment on the people, on the kids because if not, then you've not done anything.  So we've, try to make sure they don't owe when they come out of school so they can start their lives.
Story_ID: 26987
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, remembered? How I'd like to be remembered?  Well, I will just say a kid who came from humble circumstances and tried his best.  That's all I--a kid who came from humble circumstances and tried his best.
