Story_ID: 450588
Speaker 1: Today we're interviewing Mr. Larkin Arnold [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold], my name is Jacques Lesure, I am the interviewer and our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name, middle name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Larkin Arnold, Jr., I have no middle name, spelled L-A-R-K-I-N; last name is Arnold, A-R-N-O-L-D.
Speaker 1: Could you state your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Okay. I was born September the 3rd, 1942 in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: And the all important question, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is July the 9th, 2007 [sic. July 10, 2007].
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview, where are we currently?
Speaker 2: We are currently in my office at 280 South Beverly Drive, Beverly Hills, California.
Speaker 1: Could you state your occupation for us please, sir?
Speaker 2: I'm an entertainment attorney.
Story_ID: 450589
Speaker 1: Now we have a few questions that we consider People magazine-ish they're just regular questions, so please bear with me while I ask you these questions (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: Number one: what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food would have to be my wife's [Cynthia Watson Arnold] gumbo.
Speaker 1: Any reasons why?
Speaker 2: Well she makes the best gumbo I would say even in, in the country, I mean she really knows how to cook it, it's, it's something that I never tire of it's, it's great.  And I can eat it for a whole week (laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year, sir?
Speaker 2: My take, my favorite time of year would be early fall, you know the fall, I, I like the fall, it's football season, I love football, and it's just a little cooler around here in Los Angeles [California].  And it's never so cold, but it's, it's a nice time of day, a year.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, blue, my favorite color.
Speaker 1: And where would you say is your favorite vacation spot or destination?
Speaker 2: I would have to say Hawaii, all the islands, I, I love going to Maui [Hawaii] and Kauai [Hawaii], but I also love Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts] and we just returned back from there a few days ago, so it's in between those two.
Speaker 1: Is there a saying or phrase or a favorite quote, a favorite quote or saying that that you might consider very important to you that you like?  Is there a favorite phrase, quote or?
Speaker 2: Yes, I don't recall where it comes from but basically it's: life is tough, but I am tougher.
Speaker 1: Life is tough but I am tougher.
Story_ID: 450590
Speaker 1: What I'd like to ask you now is a few questions about your early life, your family.  I'd like to ask you about your mother, could you tell me what her name was please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother name was Annie Crump [Annie Crump Arnold], she was born in Phoenix, Arizona and she was a housewife.  She died very early at the age of forty-two and that was one of the reasons why I later, along with my sister [Nancy Arnold Penn] moved to Phoenix, Arizona.
Speaker 1: Okay did she grow up in Phoenix?
Speaker 2: Yes, she grew up in Phoenix you know, her grandfather [sic. father, William Crump] had settled in Phoenix before it was a state, and her older siblings had been born before it was a state, while it was still a territory.  And she moved to Kansas City, Missouri to be with her sister who had married a doctor, and she worked at the hospital.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything else about her background and growing up, anything else about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Well you know from her pictures you know she was a very pretty woman you know, she had a, a very vivacious sense of life and, and a great sense of humor.  And you know she was a wonderful mother you know, a lot of love, you know and I, I'll never, ever get over losing her at such an early age.
Speaker 1: So how, you said she was very loving, how else would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Well she was warm, she was a very good cook you know, she really loved my father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] and, and I grew up in, in a home with a lot of love between my mother and father very visible.  You know they were very affectionate with each other and, you know, that stayed with me.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories about her childhood or anything she told you about her life growing up; did she share anything with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah she, she told me about how it was in Phoenix you know at the time, and her father was a, a produce and a grain salesman in, in Arizona.  He was a pretty well-off individual, and they had a lot of property, and what they would do is sometimes they'd drive up to Flagstaff, Arizona and gather fruit and to sell in his market.  He had a, one of the first basically farmers market in Phoenix, Arizona.
Story_ID: 450591
Speaker 1: Okay, how about your father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.], can you tell me a bit, what his name was?
Speaker 2: Well as, as you know, as I said earlier my father was a, is a senior, I'm, I'm a junior.  He grew up in Holly Grove, Arkansas.  He never told me that much about his childhood, I, I sort of gathered from him that it was not one that he really enjoyed so much you know.  And I think you know he was illegitimate and you know back in the South in those days it was, it was not something to really be looked on.   And I think you know segregation and the, the hardships of growing in Ark- Arkansas really took a toll on him.  So he never would speak about his childhood, but he moved to Kansas City [Missouri] early on in his life.  And he went to you know high school there and he had a great time, Kansas City you know and he, which, which he would talk about in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] a very, very booming town for black people you know.  They had Kansas City Monarchs were there you know with Satchel Paige and, and Jackie Robinson; the Harlem Globetrotters were stationed there.  Had a vibrant black economy, Blue Room [Kansas City, Missouri], you know and as you know Charlie Parker and Count Basie came there so it was a lot of jazz scene.  And I can see from some of his pictures that that he (laughter) really had a, a great time during that period.  He opened up a cleaning stop store on 18th and Vine [Kansas City, Missouri] you know right up from the main drag for black people and you know they ran that and fortunately--he also was a presser at Bessie Rose factory [ph.] where he pressed clothes all day and come to the shop at night, too.
Speaker 1: So how would you describe his personality?
Speaker 2: My father was, was a very, very nice person perhaps you know too nice for this world sometimes I think you know he was you know very caring.  I, I think some people took advantage of him you know I mean I remember him sometime with, they would break into his store.  And then the people would come in and naturally every suit or pair of pants that they took was $250 and stuff like that, you know.  So I you know and he got a little disillusioned with, with, with people because of that.  But, but he was a very kind, very religious man he was a deacon in the church you know and he converted to Catholicism and also was a very active layman.
Speaker 1: So how far back can you go with your ancestry as far as knowing?
Speaker 2: Well I can go basically as far back as, as my grandmother [Virginia Crump] and my grandfather [William Crump] you know, my grandmother was, on my mother's [Annie Crump Arnold] side really you know.  My father didn't really talk that much about as I said earlier about, about his parentage and everything.
Story_ID: 450592
Speaker 1: So you knew your grandmother [Virginia Crump] on your, on your mother's [Annie Crump Arnold] side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mother's side, right yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell a little bit about her?
Speaker 2: Yes, she, she was a, you know a very large woman towards the end, and she had arthritis but she had nine kids you know.  And very successful kids; one was a dentist you know, two were married to doctors, another was a school teacher.  One died early on in, in childhood I think, another, you know, like my mother, you know, went to Kansas City [Missouri] and, and married but--one thing about it, they were, they were very close family you know, the sisters and brothers always helped each other you know.  And, and they always made me feel very warm and welcomed I think because of, of that family you know we've been, we have a lot of doctors, lawyers, dentists you know I can't even count the number of, of professional people that we have that brings them from my mother and grandfather.
Speaker 1: Were there any, or there any ethnic mixtures or anything that you know of as far as?
Speaker 2: Well it was obvious to look at my grandfather and my grandmother that they both came from mixed parents, my grandfather's name was Crump.  You know which is, is a German extraction, and he grew up in West Virginia so, that's obvious.
Speaker 1: Now your grandfather can you tell me about him and his name and?
Speaker 2: His name was William Jefferson Crump [William Crump], you know, and he moved to Arizona in 1890 I believe it was you know for his asthma.  He had asthma, and he came out there looking for some clean air to breathe.  At that time Phoenix [Arizona] was (laughter) very clean air you know, a lot of people moved there for asthmatic conditions.  And he worked and as I said earlier you know a successful businessman you know he had a, you know had a little farmers market you know, that, the he operated.  He was very active in the Arizona territory becoming a state, you know, and you know he looked out for his kids.  I think that one of the reasons why we're all Catholic is because he didn't want his children to go to a segregated school.  And so you know he converted to Catholicism and ever since every generation's been raised as ca- Roman Catholic.
Story_ID: 450593
Speaker 1: Now when did your parents [Annie Crump Arnold and Larkin Arnold, Sr.] meet, do you recall when they met, do you know that?
Speaker 2: No I don't recall the, the day or month or anything like that, but they met in Kansas City [Missouri] as, as I said.  When my mother came out to work in her brother-in-law's hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when, when did they move to Arizona as a couple?
Speaker 2: Well they moved back to Arizona my, my mother became seriously ill after the birth of my, my little sister and she needed constant attention and everything.  So she moved back with her family you know so that she could recuperate.  And so my, one of my cousin's came up and got my sister and myself and my mother, and we took the train back to Phoenix [Arizona].  And where she stayed recuperated for about a year and a half.  My father later came you know back there, I mean he would visit, but he came back and they tried to, to make a go in Arizona.  But you know Arizona is a free trade state and so there had no union, so you know he couldn't make the living.  So they both moved back to Kansas City and since I was about to start high school you know I wanted to remain and finish and go to high school 'cause I'd been going with these same individuals since I was, like school eight, at eight.  And but you know I would take my sister back and we would go you know home every summer.
Speaker 1: Speaking of your siblings, I, I heard you mention your sister, how many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I only have one sister Nance, Nancy Ann Arnold, Nancy Penn [Nancy Arnold Penn] now since she's married.
Story_ID: 450594
Speaker 1: Let's talk about some of your early memories in Phoenix [Arizona] growing up or before if you can.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What are some of your earliest childhood memories growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I remember both Kansas City [Missouri] and, and, and Phoenix. I mean--
Speaker 1: Let's talk about Kansas City first.
Speaker 2: Okay, I remember you know I went to a Catholic school, grammar school and that's, in St. Monica's [St. Monica Catholic School, Kansas City, Missouri] you know.  Only one Catholic school in the, in Kansas City at the time.  We had one school bus which would go around and pick up all the black Catholics and bring (laughter) them down to the school.  And then after that I would walk you know to my father's [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] shop.  And I remember putting the little paper things on the hangers for, for him, that you know when you hang clothes on.  And I, and I liked Kansas City at, at you know it was, it was nice for a young kid you know.  It was, I, I lived not too far from Blue Stadium [Municipal Stadium, Kansas City, Missouri] where Kansas City Monarchs used to play.  And Dad would take me down you know to watch the baseball games and everything.
Speaker 1: Now this would've been about, about what year?
Speaker 2: We're talking '45 [1945], '46 [1946], '47 [1947], '48 [1948].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, up until about you know up to about, about '50 [1950] you know.
Speaker 1: So you spent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) At which time I went to Phoenix, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you spent the fir- the kindergarten through what grade would you say in elementary (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Through the sixth grade in Kansas City.
Story_ID: 450595
Speaker 1: What was your family life like, you mentioned loving growing up with your sister [Nancy Arnold Penn] and the family in Kansas City [Missouri] there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and even in the Phoenix [Arizona] years, what was life like in your family?
Speaker 2: Well like I said you know at home was, it was, it was very warm you know I mean and we were always conscious of after the, my mother's [Annie Crump Arnold] illness of, of not causing too much of a problem.  You know or not being too much of a distraction to, to her because she still had very serious heart problem which you know that eventually killed her at the age of forty-two.  But so, but we're close, I mean when one of the things that you know back in the day, I grew up you know before TV.  And, and you know we used to listen to 'The Fat Man,' 'The Shadow Knows' [sic. 'The Shadow'] on the radio.  And we played canasta you know, and one of the big things that we did in those days was to go riding and after my mother and father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] would pack my, my sister into a little Nash that we had.  And we'd go riding and one of the things he's used to always take us out to Harry Truman's [President Harry S. Truman] house in Independence, Missouri, you know.  Believe it or not the president you know still had his white picket fence and fence, so I remember those things.  I remember going at the early age down to Gates BBQ [Gates Bar-BQ, Kansas City, Missouri] and you know eating, eating, drink BBQ sauce and playing with the games that they had there.  You know it, it was, it was a nice time and people's finance, the street, the 18th Street was, was you know they had a black bank you know.  They had a bowling alley you know stores and you know and naturally you know the Blue Room [Kansas City, Missouri] was right around the corner, so it, it was a nice time in those days.
Speaker 1: So what was the name of the street you grew up on in Kansas City, do you recall?
Speaker 2: Well I grew up on, on two I was, I eventually came home and I lived on Brooklyn Avenue which was like I said right up from the Kansas City Blues baseball stadium [Blue Stadium; Municipal Stadium, Kansas City, Missouri].  And, and the first Gates BBQ place, then we moved to, to Highland [Avenue] you know where my father worked and rented a home.  Things were going that was, that was a nice neighborhood you know right off of 27th Street.  And then you know after my mother's illness you know things took a turn for the worse because of the financial impact of all the medications and everything.  And we finally moved, you know my last few years when I would come back from Kansas, I mean from Phoenix, Arizona we would stay in an apartment on Bourbon Way [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay let's talk about the, the Highland location---
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --or the location before that.  Can you describe the community around there, what was going on, like on your block and the neighbors, do you recall any of those people?
Speaker 2: Well I mean yeah I remember all of them, I remember you know across from Brooklyn there was a, a woman that took in I guess I, foster kids you know.  And, and playing with them Dickey [ph.] and Henry [ph.] you know then she would be my babysitter when I came home while my mother is still working.  And she was very strict you know the ones with the, take the switch off the, the tree and, and everything. Mother Carter [ph.] is what we used to call her you know that she was a, you know a good disciplinarian and, and she cared too.  And it, and it was a nice time, I mean one of the things that we used to do as a kid is when people would come to play for the Kansas City Blues, we would say you know, we go up to them when they parked their car and said, "We'll park, watch your car for you, Mister."  And they'd say, "Why watch?" "Well, you know your, your windows could get broke or anything could happen around here, but we'll watch it for a quarter (laughter)."
Speaker 1: Entrepreneurship.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right exactly 'cause some of those guys who are watching them are also the guys who were breaking the windows if they weren't paying.
Speaker 1: So there, so there was a sense of community, there was a sense of extended family--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and, and people like, like Mrs. Carter or, or Mother Carter and other people I'm sure in the neighborhood, is that correct (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yes, looked out for us you know.
Story_ID: 450596
Speaker 1: Phoenix, Arizona was, was even more of a community because you know there was so few of us.  There's so few blacks in, in Arizona, you know, and we knew everybody up, up and down the street on, on both sides of the street you know.  And you know they would look, you know if we were do anything wrong or whatever, but Phoenix was, was a great, great town.
Speaker 2: Tell me about Phoenix growing up there in Phoenix.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)---
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) How old would you have been when you got to Phoenix?
Speaker 1: When I got to Phoenix, I, the first time I well the first time was right after my mother's [Annie Crump Arnold] first illness that was like I think about six and seven.  But I only stayed about a year that time, then came back when I was in the sixth grade.  And you know basically more or less grew up most of the time there except for you know summers when I would come home.  But it was, it was a different type of, of environment it was you know not that urbanized as far as you know blacks and, and black communities.  Because you know there were very few blacks at the time when, when I was there.  But I went to you know an integrated school at an early age and everybody was very nice you know, the sisters and the nuns would looked after me.  Fact is when I came from Kansas City [Missouri], the first year, Sister Mary Margaret [ph.] would spend time after school you know catching me up so that I could be in the same level as the other people in the class, so.  But you know it's, it, it was nice, we used to like to go camping out at South Mountain [South Mountain Park, Phoenix, Arizona] you know.  Go, go mountain climbing you know, swimming in rivers you know I, I've gone to the Boy Scouts [Boy Scouts of America] so, you know, we had quite, quite an adventure of you know.  When you had, you had, you can you know in Arizona it's, it's rugged individualism and, and they teach you know independence and, and survival skills.
Story_ID: 450597
Speaker 1: So being of Catholic in, in, in religion and also going to school under the Catholic education system, if that had not been the case would you have probably have to go to a segregated school possibly?
Speaker 2: In Phoenix [Arizona] probably yeah, yes you, you would have and but in, in Kansas City [Missouri] of course you know, in Kansas City didn't really integrate its schools until the late '50s [1950s] early '60s [1960s] you know.  There's a lot of you know segregation and intimidation in, in Kansas City.  Fact is I, I recall one time walking down Troost Avenue me and my friends and you know we were set upon by you know four or five white guys.  And, and a friend of my John [ph.] was, was pushed through a plate glass window.  So a lot of things in about Kansas City that were, that were very, very rough in, in the late '50s [1950s] and '40s [1940s] '50s [1950s] and '60s [1960s] you know.  They used to bomb people when they would move across 27th Street that still stays vividly in, in my mind.
Speaker 1: That's in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: In Kansas City yes you know, but we had no, none of those problems in Phoenix so it, it was interesting dichotomy you know between the two cities.
Speaker 1: So did you get a sense of relief almost when you were in Phoenix that you were in a place where you could really grow and expand yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah I mean well first of all my living conditions were, were much better in, in Phoenix, Arizona than they were in, in Kansas City, especially after you know the illness of my mother [Annie Crump Arnold].  Which had you know depleted a lot of our family finances so, so you know we lived in a house and had a big large yard and you know the freedom to roam and everything.  And there was, I had no incidents in school you know, where I think there was like eight blacks in my, in my class something like that.  By the time I graduated from high school [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona], maybe there was thirty-four, thirty-six you know.  But there were no, never any incidents, everybody was, was, was nice and friendly you know.  It was more or less one of those 'Happy Days' high schools, you know (laughter) which it really was you know, we had little sock hops and all that stuff.
Story_ID: 450598
Speaker 1: So you mentioned after your ma, your mom's [Annie Crump Arnold] first illness--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that life kind of changed financially and also were other changes also as well as that, can you elaborate a bit more about when you say financial change.  What exactly happened?
Speaker 2: Well you know it, it she couldn't work you know hardly any, any, anymore after that and so she basically would, would stay at home.  And she required a lot of, of medical supplies you know a lot of medical, medicine which was you know, you know quite a financial burden.  And you know it just kept my father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] you know just, just really working.  And then the cleaning store closed because she couldn't go there during the day and, and, and watch out.  Plus you know they were stealing him blind and you know but you know, you know we made it you know.  The, the love was still there, the warmth was still there and it was only by comparison when I went to Phoenix [Arizona] that you know with, with the rest of my family that I, you know, see.
Story_ID: 450599
Speaker 1: So do you have any particular friends during that time period in Kansas City [Missouri] or Arizona that might stand out in your mind, your friends that became really close to you?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, and I, and I still, I still keep in touch with some of the friends you know, I mean my childhood friends you know Dickey [ph.] and Henry [ph.] like I said.
Speaker 1: Un-huh.
Speaker 2: You know and Kenneth [ph.] and John Brown [ph.] which were the sons of my mother's [Annie Crump Arnold] best friends and Alvin Johnson, I mean Al, Alvin Hawkins [ph.]  and, and John Fox [ph.] and Rodney [ph.] you know those friends in Kansas City.  We had our little, little group you know which all of us do, and then Phoenix [Arizona] you know, I had a whole another set of, of, of friends you know that, that I, we went to school with, lived in the neighborhood you know.  And Paul Montay [ph.], Verdis Tucker and John Hill [ph.] you know a number (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you seem to make friends very easily?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: You seem to make friends pretty easily growing up?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I mean you know, I guess most people it's easy to make friends when you're a kid I, I would assume.  I, I, that was never a problem you know, and it's never been a problem that I've had you know since then you know it's like you know I lived basically two, two different lives you know.  'Cause the lifestyle I was like basically middle class, upper middle class you know for a black you know, quote, unquote in Phoenix, Arizona and you know.  Just on the verge of lower middle class to, to poverty in, in Phoenix, so I got a chance to, to see both sides you know.  In other words I was in a Jack and Jill [Jack and Jill of America, Inc.] in Phoenix and wouldn't even been considered in Kansas City (laughter).
Speaker 1: I understand, what kind of child were you when you were, I mean were you well-mannered, were you mischievous inquisitive?  What kind of a child did you; did you see yourself as, now looking back?
Speaker 2: You know it's hard to self-analyze yourself at that age, but you know I was happy you know and that's the most important thing.  I was happy, I felt loved and you know, I did very well in school you know and I, I just had you know God given intelligence to, to excel.  I was in you know honor roll all through elementary school [St. Monica Catholic School, Kansas City, Missouri], National Honor Society in high school [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona].  And, and I was very competitive in, in that, that respect you know, especially in the, in the white school.  Being one of the few blacks you know I, I, was determined to show that I was just as good as, as anybody else.
Speaker 1: Now your sister [Nancy Arnold Penn], is she older or younger?
Speaker 2: Yeah my sister's younger, she's a school teacher, she's living out here, you know.
Speaker 1: So were you very protective of her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was you know, I used have to babysit her in fact is you know I would be the one that would take care of her on the train ride from Phoenix all the way to Kansas City.  And back in those days, you took the train (laughter) you didn't fly.  And we would do this you know twice a year, going once going, and once coming back, and, and yeah, that I looked after her.
Story_ID: 450600
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the school, now we say, you said that it was St. Monica's [St. Monica Catholic School]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In, in Kansas City [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Right, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And were there any teachers that really influenced you there that really stand out?
Speaker 2: Well you know they were all, all nuns and, and Sister Ann [ph.] I guess would, would be one that I that I really recall you know she was you know constantly looking for us to, to achieve you know.  That was in the days when you got your little stars you know for you know spelling and everything and you know, and I, she'd always say, "Well, Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold] you know you're, you're not number one in the stars, and you gotta keep up you know."  And I always tried to have the most stars than anybody else, it was another guy John Clark [ph.], and the two of us used to vie to have the stars going across our names for you know all different subjects.  But you know it was all black school you know and all white nuns, and, and priest you know, we used have to go to church, Mass every morning before we would walk you know to school.  Same way in, in St. Mary's [St. Mary's Catholic High School], the school and the, and the grammar school were, were connected.
Speaker 1: Now St. Mary's is in Phoenix [Arizona]?
Speaker 2: Phoenix, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay and were there any teachers there that stood out?
Speaker 2: Well like I said you know Sister Mary Elizabeth [ph.], she, she was one I'll never forget her you know because you know.  Coming from a segregated school in Kansas City to you know one of the more exclusive schools in, in all of Phoenix, Arizona I was, I was a little behind.  So she used to take her time and, and you know help me catch up you know in curricula.  And in high school there was Father Eugene [ph.] you know he was like one person, and he would, he would always tell me, "You know, Larkin you can really amount to something if you weren't so lazy (laughter)."  You know that stood, sticks with me today, you know, it's just a way to, a motivating situation, you know.
Story_ID: 450888
Speaker 1: Okay now we're back, and we've been through some changes in your life with your mom [Annie Crump Larkin] having an illness and we've also had some changes with you going back and forth between two cities that are diverse.  Two schools that are diverse, still both Catholic but, but diverse.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What was the young Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold] aspiring at that point, was he aspiring in anything in his mind that he wanted to be?  Anything that he wanted to do at all was there any aspirations or dreams that were running at that time?
Speaker 2: Well nothing specific and you know I, since I excelled at math and you know I wanted to be you know be you know an engineer.  And, but the most important thing I, I knew that from watching my cousins and uncles and, and everything that I wanted to live more their life than (laughter) than my father's [Larkin Arnold, Sr.].  And so you know I wanted to be successful you know in order to you know live the way that that I was living in Phoenix [Arizona] as opposed to the way I was living in Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: Now your family was Catholic.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were, were you all what you would consider devout Catholics and very religious a lot of church in your life?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes we were very, very Catholic you know I mean, we did all the, you know confirmations, confessions and stuff like that you know.  And you know at one time the, the bishop called me out to school in, in Phoenix and tried, and tried to tell me that the sisters and nuns thought I had a vocation to become a priest you know.  And I, I used to get that you know repeatedly and but you know, I, I didn't, (laughter) didn't really didn't want it you know.  But I guess there were very few blacks that that could speak Latin, so.
Story_ID: 450889
Speaker 1: Let's talk about junior high school, what age, what year would that have been possibly when you were in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well there wasn't no junior high school you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I went straight through from kindergarten to eighth grade, eighth grade you know straight into high school.
Speaker 1: So you had the same friends and the same teachers--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Pretty much.
Speaker 2: That's one of the reasons why I, I wanted to stay you know in Phoenix [Arizona] after I finished eighth grade 'cause all of us were going onto you know St. Mary's [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona].  And I developed such a bond and, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay now you know in school there are teachers, and there students there are friends that influence us, was there anybody else outside of your parents [Annie Crump Arnold and Larkin Arnold, Sr.] or your teachers or maybe even other students that influenced you growing up around your junior high to, into high school years?  Was there anybody else that?
Speaker 2: Well there was one guy, Tom McBernie [ph.] you know very, very smart person and we more or less had competed for, for grades since the eighth grade all the way through.  So I was, he was like my stalking horse I guess, you know I mean, I had always tried to you know compare myself to him, and try to you know get the same grades.  And, and you know that was my little measuring stick you know; he was a very bright guy.  You know and we were both pulled out after Sputnik [Sputnik 1] went up for a special intense math and, and physics courses you know.  Because they at that time they felt that the United States was falling behind in those two subjects.  So I, I was taken out of a, a class of about 120 into a concentrated group of sixteen, you know. Which from our sophomore year on we, we took very intense math and physics courses.
Speaker 1: So today that would be and advance placement course in today's terms I guess (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I, yes, I guess so right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What high school was this, at what high school did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) St. Mary's.
Speaker 1: Oh still St. Mary's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So they had the high school and the elemen-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the whole thing was there all the way through your whole--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --education?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm, in Phoenix, Arizona, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 450890
Speaker 1: Of course you got your studies, you're very influential in math, you're very good in math and science. What were your other activities that did you enjoy be it extracurricular or curricular activity, what else did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, like all kids I enjoyed playing basketball you know, but I was just av-, very average at it you know.  I guess you know for a black person, you know (laughter) but, I, I, I enjoyed that, I really enjoyed camping I mean I really did look forward to, to going out and up in the mountains and you know and down by the lakes and stuff like that.  But I stopped that about I guess four, fourteen or fifteen, you know.  And then I worked you know I mean because I was living with my aunt you know, I wanted to contribute to you know to so there wouldn't be any burden on her.  But you, know so I worked from the time I was like basically fifteen all the way through, through high school [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona], you know.  The last two years I worked at a place called the Arizona Club [Phoenix, Arizona], you know which you know, which was an influential club for all the big shots in, in Phoenix, Arizona.  I ran the elevator you know, this is a club where you know you had all your judges and then your businesspeople, your politicians you know, attorneys and doctors.
Speaker 1: A private type club.
Speaker 2: Yes, uh-huh, yeah, it would be I guess equivalent to the Jonathan Club here in, in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned our aunt was this, was this on your father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] or mother's [Annie Crump Arnold] side (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's side, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: And her name--
Speaker 2: --everybody in Phoenix was, was--
Speaker 1: Mother's side.
Speaker 2: --mother's side yeah.
Speaker 1: And her name was?
Speaker 2: Was Emily Williams [Emily Crump Williams].
Speaker 1: Emily Williams.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And was, was she your mother's oldest sister, younger sister (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes she was like the most--the matriarch of the family; she was the oldest of all of the sisters and brothers you know.
Speaker 1: How many were there in her family do you--
Speaker 2: Like I said earlier, there were nine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One had died you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you there with her, and you're working that's part of your activity.  How about church were you involved in the church activity like altar boy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah definitely, I think almost every Catholic was, was an altar boy (laughter) yeah I was, I was doing that you know and then and then our Boy Scout troop was affiliated with the church and school too, so.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that as a Boy Scout were you one of the leaders 'cause they have different levels in the Boy Scout [Boy Scouts of America].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah I made it all the way up to, to Life [rank] you know and, and it just didn't become that interesting to me.  I guess about that time I really then discovered girls so scouting and the priesthood went out the window (laughter).
Story_ID: 450891
Speaker 1: We're in high school [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona]; we'll say that we're sophomore year, junior year, we'll say.  At that point things start developing in your mind about maybe what you wanna do with your future.  We, we have determined, you said that you do wanna be more like your other relatives that that are pretty successful.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Was there any one definitive course of study or action that besides engineering was it still engineering at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah because you know by the time I had finished my senior year, I had already had differential calculus and Boolean and binary algebra you know because of the accelerated programs so you know I was my, my career set out to be an electrical engineer.
Speaker 1: So what did you decide to do, I mean so, so your senior year what did you do then how did you apply to certain, what did you do?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah, right you know I applied to UCLA [University of California,  Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] you know because I wanted to come out here and be with my cousin Ginger [ph.], who is like my almost another sister.  'Cause we were the same age and we grew up you know together in Phoenix [Arizona] until she moved over here.  University of Kansas City [sic. University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri] you know and I, by this time I was you know ready to get out of Phoenix, Phoenix was too small you know and I knew everybody.  And either I was gonna go back home or go to Kansas City [Missouri], you know.
Speaker 1: So what happened?
Speaker 2: Well what happened is Dr. Julian, Dr. Percy Julian [Percy Lavon Julian] and his wife Anna [Anna Johnson Julian], they had you know they would come out there during the summer; I mean during the winter years they had a summer home.  And you know they were made aware they were, my, my, my mo- my [maternal] aunt [Emily Crump Williams] and was very good close friends.  And I grew up with you know Percy Julian and, and his sister you know and so--Mrs. Julian had gotten in contact with, with someone, with Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] they used to talk and, and they gave me a scholarship.  So I wound up going from Phoenix to Kansas City, Kansas City to Howard University you know and, plus I, I'd already had a cousin there that was in med school.  Another cousin that had graduated, you know med school there and then so I, the family had some affiliation with the university.
Speaker 1: So let's trace it, so you're, you're there applying for colleges and Dr. Julian who was a friend of the family (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --so to speak--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And was he and M.D. or?
Speaker 2: Yeah Dr. Percy Julian is a chemist, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the foremost you know black chemist one of foremost chemist period in the country at the time he, he was very, very, in fact is I think they did just did a special on him, I mean he's a world-renowned chemist.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, so he's one of the first world-renowned black, African American chemists?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Were there any discoveries you can think of anything he did in particular?
Speaker 2: Well he, he knew, he found a way to synthesize cortisone you know so that the pilots could do it and, and a lot of, of chemical discoveries that that you know deal with different types of, of paint and everything.
Speaker 1: So that signs show, show interest to you, was an interest to you correct?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I mean he was an inspiration to me 'cause he was you know probably the best well-known black person, nationally known that that I knew personally.  And you know, and you know he lived a great life you know, he had the home in, in Oak Park, Illinois until that was bombed.  And then you know he had a summer home in, in I mean a winter in, in Phoenix.  And while they were rebuilding that you know they all came and stayed with the kids so I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So approximately what year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm trying to think it would be in the '50s [1950s] from '54 [1954] to, to '59 [1959] some, some, fifty--somewhere in that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Somewhere in those--
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Story_ID: 450892
Speaker 1: --You're there and, and the Julians [Anna Johnson Julian and Percy Lavon Julian] have entre for you to go and enroll for you to get a scholarship to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were you excited about going to D.C. [Washington, D.C.], you said you had a cousin there?
Speaker 2: Yeah I had a cousin that was in med school, but you know being out in Phoenix [Arizona], I, I wasn't really you know that familiar except to know that you know a number of my relatives have, have gone there.  But that summer, I really wanted to go to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], but that summer in Kansas City [Missouri], it just so happened that for like three consecutive weeks and you know they, they you know how Jet has a little centerfold you know.  Three girls (laughter) from Howard University and I said, "Oh wow, okay this, doesn't seem half bad, so."
Speaker 1: So for three weeks you got--page forty-three had three girls from Howard?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (laughter) right you know, do, during that course of that summer you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Plus but I'd never been, been east you know I mean but all my orientation had been in Midwest you know and the West Coast.   'Cause even when I was in Phoenix I would come over to Los Angeles [California] at an early, you know spend some time with my cousin and, and my family.  My uncle had a summer home here so.
Speaker 1: So now you're maturing into a young man what did your parents [Annie Crump Arnold and Larkin Arnold, Sr.] think about your Howard decision?
Speaker 2: Well they were glad first of all; they were glad that that you know I got a scholarship you know.  I think my father was a little disappointed that I didn't stay in, in Kansas City, Missouri but I, I wanted it you know a new experience and this was it.
Speaker 1: Now this is, your mom's health is, is stabilized at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes well it's, it's never really stabilized I mean she basically would be in and out of the hospital every other year you know with, with some complications you know end up that one, part of our growing up would be after going to see her in the hospital under the things.  When they had those big old oxygen tanks you know where they out over the, you know, the head.
Speaker 1: So now you're, you're going to Howard University?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you spend your summer in Kansas City?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're basically, what are you doing this summer to, to prepare for that, anything special that you're doing?
Speaker 2: No, I'm working I mean I'm always working you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think that last summer I, I worked at the Wyandotte country club you know as a shoeshine attendant you know.  I, I'd clean the golfers' shoes when they would go out.  The street shoes when they go out and play and then you know clean the you know their golf shoes when they would come in to clean the, the showers and the toilets, so.  You know my, my father you know believed in, in hard work well we almost had to have hard work you know.  'Cause you know that, like I said you know, we weren't that well-off in, in Kansas City so, yeah I was working.  I worked every summer from the time I was fourteen, cutting grass in, in Arizona you know in 110 degree heat you know. To running like I said the elevator at the country club [Arizona Club, Phoenix, Arizona] and, and being a shoeshine attendant in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: So your opinion was that pretty much standard for young people of all nationalities at that point to work and help out with the family and contribute toward what, was, was that pretty much the ethic during those time periods?
Speaker 2: I think you know for, for most of us yeah, it was, I mean especially those who were on, on the economic you know run that I was, then yeah.  I mean most, most of the kids that I knew around that time had, had jobs you know but, you know, not--in Phoenix, not so much.
Story_ID: 450893
Speaker 1: So you get ready to go to Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you pack your stuff, how did you get to who, how, who did you took you there, did you drive across (simultaneous)---
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Took a train?
Speaker 2: I got the train you know, I, I went with a couple of suitcases, I went by myself you know.  Because you know my parents [Annie Crump Arnold and Larkin Arnold, Sr.] didn't have the, the money to be able to afford to, for one of them to go and get me all settled and, and come on back you know, so.  So you know I'm, I'm taking the train by myself you know.
Speaker 1: So is, was this your first solo trip somewhere away?
Speaker 2: Well you know not really.  Well in a sense I was sort of by myself but I used to take the train like I told you with my sister [Nancy Arnold Penn] from Phoenix [Arizona] to Kansas City [Missouri] you know like every summer for about four or five summers.
Speaker 1: Right so now you're leaving, so now you're leaving little sister, was any separation anxiety with her as you getting ready to go across to college, what was she doing at that time?
Speaker 2: No well she was you know, she at, at this point in time she, she moved back to Kansas City along with myself, and she started school back in, back in Kansas City.  But no, you know think 'cause it's like a six year age difference between us and you know and I loved her.  And but you know and it was off to a new adventure.
Speaker 1: Okay so you catch the train were there any--'cause that's a nice little distance from--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Arizona to or Kansas City to, to--
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: --D.C., were there any experiences you could recall on, on the trip, anything that happened that stands out on the way across?
Speaker 2: No nothing of any significance, but I do you know remember coming out of the train station in, in Washington, D.C., you know.  I mean coming basically from a, a, Phoenix, Arizona environment for most of my life and, and Kansas City you know which had very few black people at all in the whole city.  I mean I think from the time I left Kansas City in, I mean Phoenix in the '60s [1960s] it probably had just a 150,000 people.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, probably less than two, five thousand blacks you know, Kansas City had a small, you know, vibrant community.  But there were, there were numbers you know and we were more or less confined in a, in a restricted area.  To going to D.C. and then seeing so many black people all over the, the whole city I mean it was, it was just amazing I mean, you know, you take a ride from the train station all the way through the, the school.  And nothing you know you see but black people, black people, black people, so it was, it was, it was quite a revelation, quite a difference than what I been living the previously eighteen years of my life.
Speaker 1: So the train pulled into, is it Union there what's the name of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: The train pulls into Union Station [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Doors open up and here you are in D.C. now people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and not just black people, but it's people everywhere now.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: And how's that experience for you just seeing people everywhere?
Speaker 2: Oh it, it was great, I mean, it, it really was a sense of, of empowerment you know for me to see so many you know black people.  And then to, to go to Howard on that campus you know at that time and see so many beautiful people, you know, so many educated people.  I mean black people 'cause like I said in my in my high school [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona] you know, there were basically by the time I graduated thirty.  And here you have you know thousands, thousands of bright and beautiful black people that it really, really was an, was an impression that I will never forget.
Speaker 1: So you have your bags and you catch a, a ride or however you get to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Catch a cab.
Speaker 1: You, you caught a cab over to the campus?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you check in and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --explain that to me now that experience how was that when you got there looking around and--
Speaker 2: Well you know it was, it was exciting and daunting and everything at the same time you know.  You didn't know what to do you know I'm here by myself most of the, the kids had sent someone, relative or something helping them you know get in and adjust.  But I remember moving into Drew Hall [Charles R. Drew Hall] which had been relatively new construction and new building so you know it, it was nice.
Speaker 1: It was called what now, was your dorm (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Drew.
Speaker 1: Drew Hall, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Drew you know, (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you go, you go there, did, did you have a roommate?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay you remember that when you walk in and see that, what was that about?
Speaker 2: Yeah it's, it I forget this guy's name but he only stayed one year, you know, he's from Orangeburg, South Carolina you know so.  We had different mindsets you know completely he was you know from the South you know.  And naturally I'm Kansas City or whatever, so but he was a nice guy you know.  For whatever reason you know he, he didn't last, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now what year was this approximately when you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is 19--September, August of 1960.
Speaker 1: Nineteen-sixty [1960].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 450894
Speaker 1: Now there, are other things occurring now there's some changes that, that are going on in society--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --that are happening racially.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But now you're in somewhat of an, we won't call it sheltered but you in an isolated environment on that campus.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because those things aren't occurring on your campus.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But was there any kind of activism going on that you got there regarding?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I mean, you know, the, we had on our campus, especially my sophomore year called the NAG, Nonviolent Action Group, which is like one of the fore- forerunners of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] as far as Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you know.  And Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was my floor mate; you know we lived on the same floor in Drew Hall [Charles R. Drew Hall].  And, and one of the most brilliant people that that I ever met you know is just, just you know great, great intellect.  And, and we would talk you know and he would, he shared with me some of his philosophies that he learned it from Harlem [New York, New York] and everything like that about Marcus Garvey and Malcolm X and you know.  And it was, it was quite, quite enlightening you know and, and the whole school I mean would, would, was black intellect.  The teachers you know, physics teachers, chemistry teachers all, all black you know which was I was unaccustomed to not having ever gone to a black school.  So, you know not ever having really a black teacher until I went to Howard so you know to see these, these brilliant minds you know and, and all different aspects of, of the field you know.  It made me feel you know really proud and you know that, you know when you're in the white school they you know you do real well in school they, they try to say, "Well you know you're an exception you know.  You must have some white blood in you." I mean this is what they (laughter) used to tell me.  But at Howard, it was, it was just great I mean because this was like pre-integration for so, you had all your best, best minds from the South you know.  They couldn't go in those days to Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] or University of Mississippi [Oxford, Mississippi], University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], or any, any of those schools, University of Arkansas [Fayetteville, Arkansas].  So all the, the, the great minds, the young youth from all over the South and, and from New York [New York] and, and Chicago [Illinois] and you know all converging and you know.  Probably that was you know I think one of the, the greatest periods of Howard.  I mean the people that that I went to school with become mayors and, and corporate chieftains and lawyers and doctors and you know that's get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Outside of Stokely Carmichael were there, was anybody else that you may, might wanna call that was in your class that that might be of note, prominent individuals now?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah well you know the president of, of Howard you know Patrick Swygert [HistoryMaker H. Patrick Swygert] was in my class you had [HistoryMaker] Dennis Hightower who became, became a chief executive with Disney [Walt Disney Television and Telecommunications].  I think was a couple of years ahead of me; you had Togo West [HistoryMaker Togo D. West, Jr.] you know, was in my class who went on to become secretary of the [U.S.] Army.  And I mean and then Shirley Franklin who was like a few classes behind me the mayor of, of, of Atlanta [Georgia] and, and [HistoryMaker] Sharon Pratt you know was you know who became mayor, mayor of D.C. [Washington, D.C.] I could go on and on if I just took some time to think of about it, but you know so many have done, done some well, so, well.
Speaker 1: Now earlier you mentioned Stokely Carmichael having conversation with him, do you recall anything in particular that he told you that really made you think something different.  Or, or wakened your senses to what was going on or caused you to action, was anything that he said that really rung a bell with you?
Speaker 2: Well a, a couple of things, one, one that that he said one of the, the problems that that we have as a people besides being divided on social economic lines was the, the color line that existed within our own race you know.  Which at Howard at that time, was, was quite apparent you know.  You had certain fraternities you know which were only for light skinned men certain, sororities which were only for light skinned women and you know.  We had that that whole racial divide you, you know splitting us you know about the, you know whether you were lighter than a brown paper bag.  Or whether you joined this you know group or not that group and, that was, that was one thing that was very, very you know.  He told me we have to get rid of that which you know he later you know enunciated more you know when he became head of SNCC you know black power and stuff.  And then another thing that that has guided me in, in all my, my work and in, in the fuse that you know you have to have an undying love for your people you know.  That was one of his famous remarks and, and, and I tried to do that and exhibit that in all, in all my, my work.
Story_ID: 450895
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned a fraternity, did, did you pledge anything yourself when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no--
Speaker 1: --you were there--
Speaker 2: No, I--
Speaker 1: --or get involved in any of those--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, I was, I was involved with SNCC, you know.  Plus you know for the first two years and then I, you know and then I got a job, so, I, I had you know little time left.
Speaker 1: So, so for the benefit of those who may not know, could you explain, explain the acronym SNCC, what that stood for?
Speaker 2: Yes, Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee you know.  It, it derived on, at least on Howard's [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] campus out of the Nonviolent Action Group basically the same people according, Courtland Cox, Stanley [Stanley Wise], Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture], Fred Mangrum and a number of others.
Speaker 1: Was Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] involved with that at all, did he come to Howard and you know?
Speaker 2: No, unh-uh, Dr. King was basically you know, was out of Atlanta [Georgia] and Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] you know and so he, he didn't have any.
Speaker 1: Was it, this was running simultaneously at the same time that his movement was going in the South?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, um-hm, I mean you know [HistoryMaker] John Lewis was, was I guess the, the head of you know SNCC, in those days (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Congressman John Lewis?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know he's out of Atlanta you know was Morehouse based.  So it, it had a number of, of chapters on, on different black schools, you know, across the country.
Story_ID: 450896
Speaker 1: At this time had you declared a major for yourself?
Speaker 2: Yeah, like I said I, I definitely went into engineering, you know, that's what I had my scholarship with.  But I, you know so I was good with, with math and I was, I was, I was very advanced and everything.  Unfortunately, I couldn't draw a straight a line with a T-square so (laughter) my engineering thing, when they would tell me to draw the, the topside view of the screw, I mean I, I couldn't do any of those things you know, so.
Speaker 1: So did, well who were your friends, your closest personal friends, people you were meeting on campus?  Now was there any, any young ladies or anybody in particular male friends that you were associating with now?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah well I had a number of, of friends you know at Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] you know male and female you know over, over the years.  And different you know from different backgrounds you know, there were different social economic levels you know that I used to associate with you know.  One Tom, Tony Johnson [ph.] you know his parents were out of New Rochelle, New York, and, and Jackson [ph.].  So I would go and spend you know Christmas and Thanksgiving my first year or two you know with these, these different guys.
Speaker 1: Now how long did you stay at Howard?
Speaker 2: Well I stayed at Howard up until '64 [1964] and then I transferred to the American University [Washington, D.C.], which I graduated from.
Speaker 1: Okay what, what was the motives behind doing that, what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well at, when I was, was there you know of my, I partied a little too much and so my scholarship was lifted after my sophomore year.  And so I had to get, get, get a little work, so my first year, the summer you know I was gonna come home.  But my father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] told me there were no jobs in Kansas City [Missouri], but there are jobs in Atlantic City [New Jersey].  So I didn't even know where Atlantic City was you know, but he I, you know you should you know consider going up there you know.  I took my little thirty dollars and bought a Greyhound ticket and went to Atlantic City and spent six dollars for a rooming, boarding house and start looking for a job, you know.  And you know I was, I was sort of petrified 'cause you know, I'm, I'm still only eighteen years old, and I'm in a strange city with, with no support group.  But, but I, I, I you know after a lot of difficulty, I left, I left Atlantic City a man.  I mean because I, I got my own job and you know saved money and I was able to go there not knowing a soul.  And take care of myself and, and come back you know with about three hundred and fifty dollars which back in those days enough to pay my first semester tuition.  And I had survived you know on my own, I knew then that I could do it.
Speaker 1: So the scholarship got lifted did, then you told your parents, what did they say about that or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know everybody was disappointed and they were saying I was up there having too much of a good time.  Which I was I mean you know I have to admit I was you know having a great time.
Speaker 1: So you had a great summer job in Atlantic City, what were you doing, what was that job?
Speaker 2: Well the first job I was a bus boy you know I had to you know clean, bus the tables you know take, take you know.  And wash the dishes at, at a little restaurant on the boardwalk you know, so I had that for about four, four or five weeks.  But it took me about a week or ten days to, to find it you know, which time my money was down, I was eating you know lima bean soup for lunch.  And a submarine sandwich I'd budget myself to a dollar a day 'til I got the job.  And then I got the job and you know things changed and, but I lost that job 'cause I couldn't get up at to be there at seven o'clock in the morning.  Especially after I met a few girls up there so, but at, you know turned out for the best.  'Cause I later got a job as a bellhop which was really a great job, I mean bellhop at one of the you know nice hotels.  And, and then I didn't start work 'til eleven o'clock you know at seven so I mean I was (laughter) it was great.  I went to all the clubs I Hat [ph.], the Top Hat [Top Hat Club, Atlantic City, New Jersey], you know and Atlantic City was, it was a great experience.  I mean it's terrifying at first, but at the end it was all worth it.
Story_ID: 450610
Speaker 1: So you worked in Atlantic City [New Jersey] now as a busboy (simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and also bellhop and through tips and wages you bring enough money to go back and pay for your own semester of your, what year would that would've been?
Speaker 2: Sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Your sophomore year.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: So what happens then, you go back, you back, you saved your money, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: You pay for your tuition, then what happens?
Speaker 2: Well you know then I, I start school [Howard University, Washington, D.C.], by this time I realize I have to change majors you know.  Because you know engineering and I are not working out together, and it's pretty you know uneventful life 'til the end of the semester coming.  And I'm realizing that I'm basically out of money and so I go for, a friend of mine was getting appointments at the United States post office during the Christmas season you know to earn some extra money.  And I was asking how you get there, he said, "Well you get a, a ninety day you know presidential or congressional or senate or congress appointment you know."  So I said, "Oh, okay well let me try."  So I went to see Senator Symington [Stuart Symington] to get a, a ninety day appointment to work at the post office.  And while I was there Mr. Stanley Fike [Stanley R. Fike] you know was interviewing me said, "Well may, maybe Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold], we have something else for you."  And I said, "What?" And he said, "Well how would you like to, to work at our, in our office you know doing mailing and, and signature writing and everything like that.  And, and running an, an elevator, you know?" I said, "What," he said, "Yeah," he says, "so we have, it just so happen we have an opening in one of our patronage jobs where you can be an elevator operator.  And after that come over and work the signature machine and things for the senator."  And he said, I said, "Well of course I would love something like this," so he took me in, in to Senator Symington you know, 'cause I'm from Missouri.  And, and he says, "You know, Senator this is Larkin Arnold, someone I think can take that recent patronage job," you know and--
Speaker 1: So can you explain that program because I don't think a lot of our viewers will understand, so back, maybe still 'til this day you're able to go in and you're a student or something and--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --go actually see your senator, your state senator.
Speaker 2: No, yeah right state senator.
Speaker 1: Right, right to see your senator and they could give you summer appointments for, for work?
Speaker 2: Well at the post office, they can give you nine, ninety day point- appointments to work at the post office, or they have what they call patronage jobs--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know that, what the first one I think most people know about are pages you know that work on you know the [U.S.] Senate floor, the White House floor.  Then the next is like the elevator operators you know and which basically you are paid to run automatic elevators you know.  And then the third one is, is like the [U.S.] Capitol Police, this is back in the '60s [1960s] so.  Most of the people that got these jobs were either the, you know sons of governors back in state, or state legislators.  Or big influential lobbyists, or business people and you know the kids were going to Georgetown [Georgetown University, Washington, D.C.] or Catholic University [The Catholic University of America, Washington, D.C.] or George Washington [George Washington University, Washington, D.C.] and everything like that so.  It was like a political pay-off job for you know sons of big influential people like, like in the states.
Speaker 1: And so they had to give a few out, also to others?
Speaker 2: Yeah well I, I don't know why what they saw in me why they chose me you know 'cause my father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.] was, was not anybody of any significance in Kansas City, Missouri.  I mean he'd been a lifelong Democrat but you know he didn't engage in politics.  Didn't contribute in politics you know and was not you know any type of ward person or whatever.  But you know they gave me the job and I started working there on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] as the first black elevator operator that they ever had you know.  And it was, it was a great job.
Story_ID: 450611
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How that experience?
Speaker 2: It was, it was really enlightening and illuminating you know because this is my second time being, in fact the second time running an elevator, as opposed you know hands-on, but being around people of, of such power and, and prestige you know, worldwide, you know.  The senators from you know when I was there, you know, Lyndon Johnson [Lyndon Baines Johnson] was the vice president.  And so he was you know [U.S.] Senate chairman of the Senate pro temp [pro tempore], you had Fulbright [J. William Fulbright], Eastland [James O. Eastland], you know Senator Dodd [Thomas J. Dodd], you, you had all these great minds you know.  Kennedy [John Fitzgerald Kennedy] had just left, you know, for the White House and it was just another stimulating, interesting situation.  So you got to know all about you know how politics really runs, and especially the Senate, it was you know Dirksen [Everett Dirksen] from Illinois was there.  And but you also got to see the other side of, of politics you know; I mean I was there where you had the Quorum Club [Washington, D.C.].  And you know and at The Carroll Arms Hotel [Washington, D.C.] and Bobby Baker [Robert G. Baker] who was like you know big influential you know lobbyist.  And, and just have all these parties and you know these people to you know influence the senators and stuff.  So you know I, I've always been very observant you know, I've always seen and learned and by this time my major was political science, so it was just a natural, you know.  But there was, there was a little you know tension between me and, and my supervisors you know.  Because I was the first black and you know they didn't want any of us there, and they made it kind of rough for a while.  But you know Symington [Stuart Symington] would you know back me up in any conflicts that I had with, with any of the people.  And, and it was a great job, I mean you know, in those days when the [U.S.] Congress would adjourn which it would in, in the '60s [1960s] like in August or you know the latest.  You go home you know you would split the remaining time from August to December and you'd work half and, and you get paid for the other half you know without working.  So it, it was, it was a great time you know.
Speaker 1: It allowed time for studying?
Speaker 2: Allowed time for studying but, but education and contacts you know and, and experience and knowledge you know, I mean, yeah.  So I, I you know and then I'd come into the senator's office after six o'clock and run the signature machine you know.  People don't normally see there's a machine that you run--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --that that signs you know the senators' and congressmen's names on all these letters.  So I just put them in and do that, but you know he was a great man you know and his wife [Symington's first wife, Evelyn Wadsworth Symington] you know.  And I, I worked for him from '62 [1962] to '69 [1969] you know in, in different capacities and after I became twenty years old he appointed me as the first black capitol policeman.  So you know I'll show you that peep, picture, so it was great, I mean you know the people that I worked with you know, the other students, you know were very, very smart you know.  From some of the best universities in, in the D.C. [Washington, D.C.] area and when we would be walking and be together we would talk and you know and philosophy majors and.  I remember one thing, one time when this other policeman, well student policeman and I were walking the beat outside of Union Station [Washington, D.C.].  He was telling me, "You know Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold], at one time in the future garbage collectors will be paid twenty-five thousand dollars a year."  I said, "Awe come on Tom [ph.], that's ridiculous, twenty-five thousand dollars a year to pay, to pay garbage," he said, "Yes," you know.  I couldn't believe that 'cause basically at that time, you know five thousand dollars was a good, good salary for you know the average person, you know.  You could buy a home in Kansas City [Missouri] for fifteen thousand.
Story_ID: 450612
Speaker 1: It was just a great, you know--I was there when Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy], you know, was assassinated I, I worked you know the crowd control during that situation.  I was there during the Cuban Missile Crisis you know and all the information about that, also during the March on Washington you know, I was there in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] during that time this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Tell us about some of those experiences; let's start with the Kennedy assassination--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You were there and actually in a law enforcement or crowd control--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --security type role.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: What was that like, what was the, what was the feeling, what was the climate, what was happening around the, around on the Hill [Capitol Hill, Washington, D.C.] at that point?
Speaker 1: Well you know, I, I almost, well I guess everybody remembers where they were when that happened you know I was at work and you know and the news had, had come over.  And the people were flocking into the offices to watch TV you know.  It's just a tremendous you know disbelief, because the country and, and especially where the black people had, had so much hope in, in John Kennedy and the change.  And, and that he and his administration might, might bring.  And so there was you know I, I remember the tears now people running down the halls.  And just, just the shock and, and then when they, he laid in state you know I, I guess, I can't remember twenty-four, thirty-six hours, whatever.  As part of my, by this time I'd left the elevator situation and become a capitol policeman.  And I was part of the you know the crowd control that, that you know kept all the people in line as they you know streamed in, in the Rotunda [U.S. Capitol Rotunda] to view his body from you know the [U.S.] Capitol grounds [Washington, D.C.] and--
Speaker 2: So you were there, actually that's a very big part of history.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: A few years later, Malcolm [Malcolm X] was killed.
Speaker 1: Yes and that's what, well Malcolm was, was, was bad and, but that was not that catastrophic as, I mean it was you know disappointing for us as black people but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it didn't impact the city like when Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.
Speaker 1: And then the riots came, you know.
Story_ID: 450613
Speaker 1: And now you were there during all these 'til '69 [1969] so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so, so, so you were there during Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassination (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's exactly right---
Speaker 1: --April 4th, nineteen--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: Right, exactly so.
Speaker 1: And can you tell me about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah well that you know, I mean during this time you know I was, I was also involved in, with SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee].  Now you know, [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry was, was the former mayor of Washington, D.C. was my field secretary.  So I was like a policeman's, quote, unquote, policeman, 'cause you weren't really a policeman, more like a glorified guard.  And working for SNCC at, at the same time, I, I would go down and work underneath him.  So the people in SNCC were sort of leery of me you know.  Because they didn't know what I was you know and then the other, the police, white police you know who I was working with you know were, were definitely leery of me.  'Cause I had my little black panther sym- symbol on my car, but, but I you know that, that was just part of what, what I had to undergo.  But the riots were, was something else, I mean people you know, so naturally we were called upon, have to work you know like a sixteen hour shifts to guard the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] and you know.  People were coming by and shooting and everything like that, and so it was, it was quite terrifying to see the city burn down.  But I also saw you know the might of the federal government you know and all those people who were talking about the revolution and everything you know for them to see how they brought all those machine guns and [U.S.] Army soldiers to guard the Capitol.  It was quite obvious that there was no way that armed struggle in America would, (laughter) would take place.  But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what year are we talking about right now, what--
Speaker 2: We're talking about right after the--
Speaker 1: Dr. King assassination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 450614
Speaker 1: Prior to that also around the country, even before that, there were things going on, as I recall the Watts Riots were in?
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And I know the Detroit's [Detroit, Michigan] were in '67 [1967].
Speaker 2: And yeah and Newark [New Jersey] was, was happening you know.
Speaker 1: So what was the climate with all these riots, what was your relationship?  Now here you are an African American police officer, quote, unquote security guard.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You, you're there, you're seeing all these different policymakers walk past you everyday--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they're dealing with these things back in their community and on the nation as an average, on a whole--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --so how are you, how are you reacting or, or what is your treatment at that point?
Speaker 2: Well you know I mean naturally I'm, I'm very angry, I mean to see you know my fellow people being attacked with dogs and water hoses and everything in the South.  And beaten, you know, and other students you know thrown out you know of buses and of you know little what, these lunch counters where they went you know.  And then Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] was, was also now you know 'cause Stokely [Stokely Carmichael; Kwame Ture] was, was on the civic scene and his, his situation.  But he made me so proud, I mean because he was, he was, once he took over as the leader of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] you know.  And espouse the black power theory which shocked and scared them you know a lot of white people.  But I knew him, I knew him personally you know and but just to see him handle the press you know and, and all the questions where people trying--I remember when he was on 'Meet the Press' with you know King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Whitney Young, Roy Wilkins, Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and you know, and whole, some of the black leaders.  And you know he was quizzed by about ten or twelve newspaper reporters you know who really trying to embarrass him you know.  And show him up you know as opposed to the moderate leaders and he more than held his own.  I mean he was, he was magnificent, I wish I could get a copy of that press conference.  But I was so proud of him and, and, and I knew then about my own intellectual capacity to deal in, in a white world.  Because even though I had lived in it and worked in it, I mean there was still questions of doubt about, you know, really, you know, you're, as a black person.  Are you really as confident, are you really as knowledgeable, can you really hold your own, but here this is someone my own age you know.  Someone I've known you know for years who gets into--in an environment you know where he more than bests, some of the best journalist in the, in the country.  And you know and where I was not quite as brilliant as, as, as Stokely, I didn't feel I was that far apart you know so, that sort of gave me a lot of confidence.
Story_ID: 450615
Speaker 1: At this point, you've already made some transitions educationally and you've off, you actually also graduated.  So let's go back a bit and let's deal with the transition from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] to American University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Oh okay, well when I changed you know when I got the job of course I had to, to change schools because of my work schedule.  American University at that time was, was a place where you could go to school from, you know in the afternoon, and you know get all your course requirements.  So you know Howard, whereas you know that school would close at five.  So I was able to go, transfer to the American University and take you know courses at you know six, seven o'clock at, at night you know when I was running the elevator in the morning.  And so--
Speaker 1: And you, you were a political science major (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --at that point, okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a great place to be political science major especially in D.C. [Washington, D.C.] because during the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration, they, they brought down a lot of brilliant minds from, from Ivy League schools you know.  And while they were working you know in the government they were, some of them were also part-time teaching in the various universities around the city, so.
Speaker 1: What would you say, say the racial makeup was at American University?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'd say five thousand to maybe fifty you know, if that, you know.
Speaker 1: So, so for the first time since St. Mary's [St. Mary's Catholic High School, Phoenix, Arizona] I think it is--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now you're in a minority situation (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Again, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: After all these years.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So now how was that for you, that school?
Speaker 2: Well it's good you know in a, in a funny sense of, for some reason I competed better in that environment than I did at Howard.  I mean at Howard I, I you know sort of slipped off and just having fun, but at American University that old competitiveness came out you know and, and I, I did very well you know at the school.  And very well enough to get a scholarship to law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], so.
Speaker 1: And you graduated in '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: With your bachelor's of science in political science.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 450616
Speaker 1: We mentioned a few, we'll call them negative things, but they just were historical things that occurred with the assassinations and things.  But also there was some scientific things going on with the Apollo [Apollo program], and there was all kinds of things happening.
Speaker 2: The--yeah, moon (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Were your, were your mathematical and science things challenged at that point be, did you think again well, wow, well maybe 'cause, because all of the computer stuff was coming into play now.  Did you have any second thoughts about your major and say well possibly I should go into technical?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  I knew I'd made the right decision, I mean like I said before, you know I couldn't draw.  And political science was, was much more, I mean I'm, here I am I'm working on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] you know, I'm working around you know some of the greatest you know political minds you know in the country.  You know and I'm having dinner with, with Senator Symington [Stuart Symington] you know Robert McNamara who's the secretary of defense was coming over, you know.  And I'm overhearing him talk about the Vietnam War, it, it was just an exhilarating time and, and the major that I was in.  Plus, you know, some of the teachers from the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] administration were teaching you know after, after work at, at AU [American University, Washington, D.C.] so it, it was just a beautiful time, you know.
Speaker 1: Now how was life at this point because you just brought up the Vietnam War, there were several concurrent, we'll call them American traumas occurring at one time.  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We'd already had the, I, you had mentioned the March on Washington.
Speaker 1: The March on Washington, the voters right act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] had just been passed.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So things were rel- things were going another direction there.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You had the feminist movement (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --getting started.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You had the Black Power movement going.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: You had the Vietnam War; these were all running at this concurrently.
Speaker 2: Right, within these, these period of time yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what was life for you as a student, as a young man with all these different things to pay attention to?
Speaker 2: Well you know it, it, it's, it was you know when you ask these questions it makes me think at certain times, I mean I'm generally on the, the other side of the force that I'm of prese- representing you know.  In other words, when they would have the demonstrations against the war at, at the [U.S.] Capitol [Washington, D.C.] you know.  And all the protestors and everything coming to demonstrate, trying to close down the Capitol, I well; my sympathies are with the, the protestors.  'Cause I'm against the war naturally but you know, as, as a police officer, I've got to do my job you know.  And, and remove you know; help remove some of the protestors you know, same thing with the, the March on Washington.  I mean I'm, I'm naturally as a black person in sympathy with, with the march and everything, and I want to, want it to succeed and be peaceful.  But you know here I am also as, as, as security police officer, you know guarding the Capitol because people didn't know if the march was actually gonna be peaceful or you know could turn into a, a whole scale riot.  So you know so I'm, I'm safeguarding the, the, the administration and, and the establishment but my sympathies lies with, with more or less the rebels.
Speaker 1: So were, were you mistrusted by some of the other officers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yes--
Speaker 1: --during that time period--
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: --because of that?
Speaker 2: Yes um-hm of course, of course, 'cause you know, 'cause I'm out, outspoken so I mean it, there was no secret as to what, what I thought, and what I felt you know.
Speaker 1: Or were there any actual incidents you can recall or any confrontation that you might wanna?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I mean what they would do the serg- since the serg- since it was a patronage job, you know mostly all of the sergeants were from the South you know.  They hire officers 'cause that means that they had been on the force you know longer you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And so they you know had more seniority than everybody else, but so they used to give me some of the worst post possible, you know.  They used to put, put me in the worst positions for the weather you know, would you know at, at how, where the wind was blowing, where it's cold.  I remember one time they had the Valachi hearings, you know, when he was coming to the mafia so, you know they stuck me up in the attic you know.  It's freezing cold and, and nobody couldn't even come and they say well, you know, "Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold], you, you gotta go up here and guard against somebody assassinating him."  I said, "Well nobody's gonna get up here in the first place and one you know the, the, the place where they're having the hearings there's no clear you know line of sight for anybody to shoot."  Well so, they didn't care, they just stuck me up there anyway, but so they would always you know do those types of things: give me the worst assignments, put me in the worst posts, you know, but, you know, I don't care.
Story_ID: 450617
Speaker 1: Now you graduated from--so, now you graduated from American University [Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you got a scholarship to go to law school.
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was that, did you apply for that or was it just given to you to come?
Speaker 2: Well basically at that time the Ford Foundation [New York, New York] was primarily giving most of the incoming classes at, at Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] you know a scholarship you know.  To, to turnout more lawyers you know.
Speaker 1: So, so now you're at American University now though so, so.
Speaker 2: Well no at, at American University I'm, I'm paying my own way.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because I'm working you know, I, I have you know a good job you know 'cause this, this police force job [U.S. Capitol Police] now is, was paying me what like fifty-two, fifty-four hundred dollars a year you know.
Speaker 1: So I guess my question is had you decided to be a lawyer on your own at that point or, or was it something that just kind of fell in your lap and you said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It sort of more or less yeah I mean after, towards graduation, a couple of people that were in class you know in my class and went ahead of me you know because of my transfer and other, other situations had gone onto law school you know.  And I used to think wow, you know, this is such a, you know difficult you know school to go in.  But once I saw that 'cause some of my friends had already gone into law school and, and hadn't been kicked out.  I said well hey this is something that I should do, plus when I, the job offers that I had gotten upon graduation weren't paying me hardly any money, more than what I was already making as, as a, as a police officer.  I just decided to go on to law school you know, by this time, you know, I'm, I'm married you know.  And I have my, well no my first kid doesn't, he's not born until my, after my freshman year in law school.  But you know I have a wife, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's back up a minute there, you, you got a wife while you were on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Yes my, my first wife you know, Adrien Smith [Adrien Smith Arnold], she is from Dallas, Texas.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Another very attractive, very bright you know woman and you know and we you know fell in love as kids and got married and then you know.  And then we worked and, and had a son and--
Speaker 1: Was she working on the Hill by chance, was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no, no.  She was, she wasn't working at this time you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: But then later on she, she got a job at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and you know my first son, Kevin [Kevin Arnold] was born I think he was.  He was born in February of my second year in law school.
Speaker 1: So that would've been about 1970?
Speaker 2: Yeah, let's see, wait, no--I know exactly, he just turned forty this year (laugher).
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: So that was 1967.
Speaker 1: Sixty-seven [1967].
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay he turned in '67 [1967].
Story_ID: 450618
Speaker 1: Your family, your mom [Annie Crump Arnold] and dad [Larkin Arnold, Sr.], what's going on with them at that time?
Speaker 2: Well you know my mother's dead already.
Speaker 1: Okay, which year did she pass?
Speaker 2: She died in my, end of my sophomore year, you know.
Speaker 1: Of at, at American University [Washington, D.C.]?
Speaker 2: No (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No at--
Speaker 2: At Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: At Howard, okay.  So now did that have some impetus on, on did that have some effect on you and changing and possibly your studies?  Was it kind of a, kind of a psychological (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I mean it, it really you know, like I said she, she, she'd been ill for so many years and, and finally the illness you know overtook her and, and she was, she was so young.  I mean you don't really realize how young she was until now I think you know my son [Kevin Arnold] is, is forty, you know.  So it's just a year or two younger than she was when she died and, so I went back you know, drove back and saw and stayed you know with my you know the house, and I think I came back one more time but after that I didn't ever went back to Kansas City [Missouri] again 'til my, you know I graduated.
Speaker 1: And your father what did he do at that point?
Speaker 2: He, well you know he, he really missed my mother you know, he stayed you know continued to work and raised my sister [Nancy Arnold Penn], you know.  The two of them are back in Kansas City together, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay and he's still living or did he?
Speaker 2: No, you know my father died let's see about twenty years ago, yeah twenty years, twenty-five years ago something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 450619
Speaker 1: Back to, up to the law school, so now you've been accepted with a full scholarship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well tuition, yes.
Speaker 1: To, to Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], or back to Howard now?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: But now you're in the law school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So the young man that lost his scholarship before is now back getting ready to enter law school?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that like what was the tone because they knew you; a lot of people probably knew you around there.
Speaker 2: Well yeah I mean I knew a lot of the guys you know in, in my class, but there were also you know a substantial portion that, that, that weren't.  But I knew some that had gone before you know in, in class, so it was good.  I mean it was very, and again very challenging and interesting situation, and it appears that that you know, I, I just had a, a knack for law.  I think all your math you know and, and logic that you take in school I mean basically you know reasoning and, and that's what the law is you know.  That being able to argue and reason so it, it came you know, so I would, I would go to school from you know from eight in the morning to two [o'clock] in the afternoon.  And then I'd race to, to Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.] in a car and worked on the police force [U.S. Capitol Police] from three to eleven you know.
Speaker 1: Do you see a line drawn possibly with as you were saying earlier that you were sometimes on opposite side of the issue, career wise--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --because you a police officer enforcing the supposed law or whatever needed to be done at that point, you still having the, having empathy for the crowd (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --or sympathy for the crowd.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and their issue so which is sometimes in law, in lawyering that's what occurs sometimes you might have an opinion about something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but you still have to represent the law.
Speaker 2: All at the same time right.
Speaker 1: So I'm wondering did those, do you think that it might be that job and that discipline to be able to do that and maintain that composure in those things has helped you as you go into law school now.  Because it's going to be challenging your first year has quite a bit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So do you think you are more disci- is Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold] more disciplined now than he may have been a few years prior?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah without question I'm, I'm much more disciplined, I mean you know I, I've finished American University [Washington, D.C.] with, with great, great gave, great grades you know.  Enough to get, get accepted to law school you know I have a wife [Adrien Smith Arnold] and you know I'm more settled and more mature, so yeah.
Story_ID: 450897
Speaker 1: We're in Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] and you, you're married [to Adrien Smith Arnold], you have a child [Kevin Arnold] and tell me about what's going on now in, in law school for you, as you, as you go through it?
Speaker 2: Well I mean it's it was quite a, quite a task you know like I said I'm working you know forty-eight hours a week and try, and going to school and trying to study.  And you know being a husband and, and, and a father you know, especially after my son was born.  So it was, it was quite daunting, but in, on the other hand, we had su- such brilliant professors you know.  At the time that I was there we had a lot of visiting professors that that, deans from other law schools, especially in my freshman year.  So they gave me a really, really great knowledge of the law, which you know when I went to work you know later came in handy.  I, I didn't feel, because I didn't go to Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut] you know, that I was any less prepared.  But you know my last year especially what, second years like I had to, there were some courses that I, I couldn't get before three.  So I had to go to school more in, in the afternoon, so that was probably the hardest part, I had to work at night from eleven at night to seven in the morning.  And then go to school from eight to, to four [o'clock], and then try to come home and grab some sleep and eat and, and study you know.  So that, that was, those, those were really, really trying.
Speaker 1: So as they say you're on the grind at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean much more so, I mean it was, all, it was a grind all the time; I mean 'cause then like I say, I've been working all the time.  But you know when you're working at that graveyard shift and then try to make it to school and, it was kind of rough.
Speaker 1: Okay so you're, we're, we're getting through now, we're moving through, were there any notable events really super notable events that you can recall in law school that standout?  Any people or influential people?  That that we might know or a situation that you want to talk about now that really made you say okay this is the direction and I'm in the right place at the right time?
Speaker 2: No, I mean I'm still getting most of my influence from, from my work in Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], I mean there, but there were great minds at, at the law school.  I mean really which is you know, we had a great dean.  You know we had Havenhurst [ph.] and, and a visiting professor you know another Professor Lane [ph.], of torts.  We had a lot of greats, great, great students and, you know and I had some friends sometimes who would, who would help me. 'Cause sometimes I couldn't make it to the library you know and help me with some of my, my research 'cause it was.  You know I'd have to speed off the work.
Story_ID: 450898
Speaker 1: You graduated in 1969--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from, from Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], and you're there, the--we're going into the '70s [1970s] now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what is life look like for [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold at this point, what is his next step?  He's getting his J.D. now soon--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and he's moving forward, he has a wife [Larkin's first wife, Adrien Smith Arnold], he has two children.
Speaker 2: No just one at this point (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Just one, one at the time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Kevin [Kevin Arnold], only?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what's the next step for you now?
Speaker 2: Okay well my last year in law school a friend of mine that I'd gone through American University [Washington, D.C.] with had been asked to take over this nightclub you know.  Which is like a great disco nightclub, 'cause after the riots the, the audience wouldn't come down, downtown D.C. [Washington, D.C.] So this guy Ross Fields I knew him from, from AU so he knew I was in law school, I saw him, he said, "Well, listen can you help me come down and review some papers and you know help me in this takeover," you know that he's trying to do.  And so I, I would do that I, you know helping out and he sort of gotten into taking over the club on, while he's assuming the debt.  And he starting booking acts in there, I mean we were booking in Martha, I mean The Marvelettes, [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler, the Duke of Earl [Gene Chandler], Patti LaBelle and the Bluebelles and all that stuff.  And so and I was working at this point I'm back to my three to eleven [o'clock] shift so I go to the club from you know from 11:30 to two or three you know I'd go home and go to school in the morning, so.  When, and Jerry Butler was playing and, in town and we were talking and he says, "Well, you know, you going to law school, huh Larkin?"  I said, "Yeah," he said, "Well have you ever thought about entertainment law?" You know, well in '69 [1969] I, I, didn't even know what entertainment law was you know.  That, there wasn't you know it wasn't being taught in our, in our law school, wasn't probably being taught at many law schools as I said.  He said well you know, I said, "Well, what is that?" He said, "Well, you negotiate recording contracts, songwriters' contracts and, and producers' contracts, you know."  And he says, "You know," he says, "I've seen you working here and you seem like you like the music," you know.  "So it's a field you ought to consider so," I said, "Oh okay," well this is what I was going to do.
Speaker 1: Jerry Butler, better known as the Iceman.
Speaker 2: That's him, exactly.
Speaker 1: And now do you think that he may have brought this to you because he saw something in you and also because he may have been the victim of somebody else's attorn- entertainment lawyer at some point.  Maybe with his, with his royalties or things of that nature, do you think that he was saying well now, wow, we need some representation in the African American community?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Because most times I don't think at that point if there were any entertainment lawyers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, not black ones.
Speaker 1: --they definitely weren't African Americans.
Speaker 2: Right, right, exactly, not doing it full-time on any basis.
Speaker 1: Right and there were, there were a lot of things happening I think, those guys were started going to the disco era, music is moving into the disco era-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and now money and the royalties is becoming a real issue (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --at this point, and, so it, do you think that might've been part of the problem?
Speaker 2: I really don't know what, what his mindset was; I do know that that he wanted more of us to get into that field you know.  And since I was on, in law school and already working in the music business, you know he, he, he suggested it to me.  And, and until he suggested it to me I never heard of it, and so I, I thought that this is the vocation that I would follow.
Speaker 1: Because at that time there were a lot of groups coming into play, The Jackson 5 were, were, rolling into their, their heyday, and it was a lot of the music scene was changing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, I mean all, all of a sudden it, it was, it was black music was becoming more universal, recognized and, and bought and accepted in, in the country than before.  It was no longer just race music; thanks primarily to [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy and the Motown sound, but--
Speaker 1: So what did you think when he told you what, what was your reaction when he said?
Speaker 2: Well I, I thought it was a great idea, I mean I didn't know you know exactly what, what it was but then, you know once I started investigating  it seem like yeah this is something that that you know what you wanna do.
Speaker 1: So the nightclub, the club that you were helping--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --really I guess, I guess you were kind of like a retainer to help him legally?
Speaker 2: Well legal management I more or less was windup being mostly management.
Speaker 1: So, so were you, you able to as artist came in able to negotiate what was gonna happen to them on that supposed engagement?  Were you involved in those kinds of hands-on?
Speaker 2: No I mean basically the booking agent would, would, would deal with all that you know.  And we were the buyers of the talent so it was more or less you know this is what they get you know take it or leave it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: There wasn't a whole lot of negotiating (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) There wasn't a lot of room.
Speaker 2: I mean sometimes we could, but you know they had their set price for so many days.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay great.
Story_ID: 450899
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler mentions you being an entertainment attorney, what happens next for you?
Speaker 2: Okay well so I'm thinking about, you know, entertainment attorney and, and so at, at this time, Stan Gortikov [Stanley M. Gortikov] who was the chairman of Capitol Records you know had come to Washington, D.C. to deliver a, a job.  I mean a speech to the black disc jockeys association, you know telling you know that it's time for more blacks to be hired in other areas in the music business besides just promotion.  They need to have more black you know accountants, lawyers and business affairs people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And his name was what again now please?
Speaker 2: Stan Gortikov, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly, so you know and it was reported in The Washington Post and I took the little article out, put it in my wallet and filed it away, you know.  But, but it more or less convinced me that this was the way I should go.
Speaker 1: So this time blacks were pretty much either in promotions or talent?
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: Tho- tho- those were the two, the two biggest (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those were the only two, you know I mean there might've been a secretary here or there.  But primarily they were you know promotion people taking the records to, to radio stations.  And most of those people really were, were white taking black music to black radio stations, you know.
Speaker 1: Well they call advance man or something at that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Promotion.
Speaker 1: Promotion.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, now so you have the article in your pocket.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You, you heard his speech?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what do you do from there?
Speaker 2: Well after I graduated [from Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I, I went to New York [New York] you know to try to find a job, and so you know I went looking for a job like I had a job.  From nine to five [o'clock], I went to all the different law firms, you know, I went to music companies, I went to the TV, you know, headquarters.  'Cause, the studio was here, but they were there.  So I looked for a job like for three, I stayed with, I stayed with a friend of mine and nothing happened.  I couldn't find a job, got a lot of great lunches you know I mean 'cause I had a, a great letter of recommendation from Senator Symington [Stuart Symington].  So I'd showed that to them and so they would take me to lunch you know, you know at the 21 [21 Club, New York, New York].  And, and different clubs and then they come back and say, "Hey, listen we got this brilliant young man you know.  And he's really qualified, needs a job, we don't have any opening here, so but I'm wanna send him over you know."  So I'd go over to the next one and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How long was this going on?
Speaker 2: Oh this is going on for; well I graduated in June, so it's going on until October you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, end up having you know they would go to you know then they'd call me and I go to lunch with another guy, same, same situation would repeat itself you know.  My wife [Arnold's first wife, Adrien Smith Arnold] and son [Kevin Arnold] are, are back in, in D.C. and, and so like, I'd go down occasionally to visit them.
Speaker 1: So, so are you feeling some pressure to hurry up and find, find a job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah you know, it been, so by this time I, I have you know run, gone all the way around you know all the different places you know twice.  So, so one of the guys that I was interviewing with, he said, "Well, you know--," I was telling him about my problems.  He said, "Well you should try Los Angeles [California] you know," so I said, "Okay," he said, "'Cause there're a lot of you know entertainment music situations opening up in L.A.," you know.  So I had a friend, Margo Bouchee [ph.], who was a stewardess with Pan Am [Pan American World Airways] and she was able to get me a ticket, you know, on Pan Am as, as being a relative of.  So I flew you know at that time Pan Am could not fly, fly domestic, so on their New York to Hawaii run, they would stop in Hawaii, I mean Los Angeles and go on to New York.  So as, as an employee, I got a ticket, I bought from her I think for fifty-eight dollars or so.
Story_ID: 450900
Speaker 1: So I came out and, and, and stayed with my cousins that's why you know this, I can never say enough about my family, you know, my extended family.  Like I told you before, my aunts and uncles, cousins and stuff (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now who was this cousin that you--
Speaker 1: Marlene.
Speaker 2: Marlene.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Marlene Scott you know, Crump Scott [Marlene Crump Scott] (unclear).  So I slept on her couch you know, and I started the whole process all over again.  I went looking for a job you know like I had a job from nine in the morning to five [o'clock] every day, every day, every day you know.  She let me use her car, made all the rounds, this time I've extended past entertainment you know.  I'm out at Mattel [Mattel, Inc.], you know, trying to get job, you know I'm trying to get any type of job I possibly can.  So it's like now after Thanksgiving you know, getting close to Christmas.  I'm getting desperate you know, little money I've saved runs out and stopping--so for some reason, now this, this is unbelievable, but this is the absolute truth.  I pull out this little article that I had kept from The Washington Post, Mr. Gortikov [Stanley M. Gortikov], chairman of Capitol Records.  I called his office you know and I, I talked to his secretary, I said, "Hello, my name is [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, I met Mr. Gortikov at the speech that he gave for the bless- black disc jockeys association.  And I told him I was going to graduate from law school, and he said if you ever out in Los Angeles [California] give him a call, you know."  Well I never met him, I just copied it, so his secretary being ever efficient she says, "Oh yes, he's told me about you, you know.  I'm sure he would like to meet you," so she set-up an appointment for me.  I go and, and interview with him, showed him the letter from Symington [Stuart Symington] and show him, tell him about my grades and he reads my resume.  And he sets up a meeting with the general counsel so, but before he does that you know he says well how--you know, he asked me how things are going.  I said, "Well, you know, I'm very depressed, I mean I'm very down Christmas is coming, I have no money, and I have a wife [Arnold's first wife, Adrien Smith Arnold] and a kid [Kevin Arnold] and everything.  And I won't be able to get them for Christmas and anything like that."  So he said, "Well, let me you know give you some money," I said, "No, I'm just gonna, I much rather have a job," he said, "No well that's, that's not excluding the job, you know."  But anyway, so he wrote me a check for three hundred dollars, gave me his business card, and took me to the bank and then set up an appointment with Bob Carp [Robert E. Carp] that's the general counsel.  So I leave there, I don't even need an elevator to get down you know I'm so high, I'm just floating.  And so next week the general counsel calls me and he hires me and I start the first of January in 1970.
Speaker 2: So this is a serendipitous moment for you, you're there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: --now and all of a sudden this almost surreal occurrence occurs--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Do you call your wife, do you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh yes, I mean I'm calling everybody, I'm, I'm, I'm excited I'm, I'm you know, I'm, I've found a job you know in the field that I'd chosen you know.  I have a little money you know to tide me over, and you know it, it's, it's, it's great, so.
Speaker 2: Did she believe all of this was occurring did she, did she, what did she say when you told her that you just walked into Capitol and got this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well you know she knew me you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: She knew that, that you know I, I would do something I mean but you know desperation is, is like they say you know a little of invention or necessity, whatever, one or the other.  But it's, it seemed like throughout my life or just part of my life, like I said the, the chance, job at Senator Symington's office, you know, just occurred, you know, out of the blue.
Story_ID: 450901
Speaker 1: Now here you are, you've been given a job and it actually came through the, the chairman [Stanley M. Gortikov], so to speak--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --of, of a major label.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: People all 'round the world know the building just from seeing it on television (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: Have aspirations of coming to California--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to get in that building for, for either a job or their or their talent (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Career, right.
Speaker 1: So you walked in and gotten this and had the, and had the, the chairman even give you some advanced money--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for your life.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Take a direct interest in you.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you started this job when, now?
Speaker 2: I started in January of 1970.
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy [1970], January starting the year off (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --in 1970.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Beginning of a new year.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And a new life.
Speaker 1: A new life.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now you're fresh out of law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --so you're gonna be having to apply two things, new lawyering, a new lawyer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and apply those things that you've learned over the last three years or so.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but now also you're in a relatively undeveloped area of, of entertainment law at Capitol Records, but they have, they have a department.  But for you as an African American it's a new, it's a new, it's new territory.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I mean no, you know it's like going to work for one of these companies is like discovering you know the Dead Sea Scrolls you know.  'Cause this is information that have been kept from us as a people for generations and generations.  Just basically you know what you could actually get from, from a record company you know, what did the, what are the conditions you know, what are the perks, what are the, you know.  What the true royalty rates you can get you know, I mean how you can define, you know, protect you know the artist?  So I mean did, it was like unbelievable wealth of, of information that was laid at, at my feet you know.
Speaker 1: So you come in to the, to the building in this, in this building that everybody knows--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you have your own office?
Speaker 2: Yes, had my own office, had my own window and secretary you know.
Speaker 1: And how many staff attorneys were there at that time at Capitol?
Speaker 2: Well there were about I'd say eight, seven, seven or eight you know.  We had a general law section, which basically is comparable to what you have in any corporation basically doing patents, trades, lawsuits, you know.  Trademarks, you know, purchasing equipment, briefs you know that thing, and then a certain section of about three lawyers that just dealt with nothing but recording contracts, songwriting contracts, publishing contracts and stuff like that.
Speaker 1: So which division did you go into?
Speaker 2: Well I started off in, in the general law section you know, I mean, and that's that was buying and selling, leases, equipment and handling lawsuits.  Applying for trademarks and copywriting things and everything of that--
Story_ID: 450902
Speaker 1: So now you're the first African American to be hired by any entertainment company as an attorney?
Speaker 2: I believe so, I mean there may have been one that I didn't know about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) By a major company.
Speaker 2: Right, by a major company, right.
Speaker 1: Okay now you get introduced to these people you get, other attorneys come in, this is your first day at work [at Capitol Records]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --what happens that day, you come in and you, here you are, [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, these, these maybe senior counsels have been there for a while.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How do they treat you, what is the reception, what happens that day?
Speaker 2: Well you know surprisingly it was, it was warm and welcoming, I guess they knew that that the chairman [Stanley M. Gortikov] had you know had interceded, got Bob [Robert E. Carp], you know, the general counsel behind me.  But it was very intimidating I mean you know they, most, most of the people there had either gone to school at, at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [Yale Law School, New Haven, Connecticut], Boalt [University of California Berkeley School of Law, Berkeley, California], Stanford [Stanford Law School, Stanford, California], USC [University of Southern California Gould School of Law, Los Angeles, California] you know, these top notch law schools.  And here I am coming from Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] which most of them out here didn't even know you know about it at all, so.  And, and it was, there was, there was a lot of question about you know my competence and my knowledge and my ability.  And I, and I questioned myself too, I mean here I am you know going up against you know with some of the, you know minds that come from the great law schools in the country--
Story_ID: 450903
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the wealth of information, you said it was like tantamount to the Dead Scree- Dead Sea Scrolls sometimes.
Speaker 2: For as for the people, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the first informative things you learned or myths that you had dispelled when you got there that you may have had about the industry?  Now that you're on the inside looking out what, what are some of the things that you discovered immediately?
Speaker 2: Well you know one of the things, I used to work you know and stay after everybody left you know.  So a lot of the stuff was basically, 'cause I'm in the general law section.  And my whole ambition is to get into the, the artist section, but, but I still working so, so I'm staying late and I'm Xeroxing all these contracts you know.  I'm Xeroxing the Apples [Apple Records]--The Beatles' contract, I'm Xeroxing Glen Campbell's contract you know.  And, and, and versus [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson, you know, so I'm reading and comparing and just to see the great disparity in, in the, the rates and the monies and advances and everything that, that were taking place.
Speaker 1: So you say that they and now you're eyes are open to something (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: What occurs inside of you is there, is there something you said why it, I mean do you get involved in this and try to change this or?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I mean so I'm, so I'm, but I'm, but I'm doing this now for about maybe in general law section about two years.  But it gives me a very, very knowledge about the company you know, I get a chance to in, interact with all the different department heads.  You know that the head of manufacturing, the head of, of sales you know, the vice president of promotions, vice president of marketing and everything.  Because you know they would always be legal issues in a in a general law area that I'd have to help them out you know.  Negotiating and buying, you know, new pressing plants you know, the legalities of certain sales contracts of the, the, requirements that they have to go to protect you know the copyrights on, on the, the marketing stuff as far as with the logos.  So it gives me a chance to, to work throughout the company and, and know all the people.  And then, you know, I'm eventually moved over to the artists' law contract.  And then I start negotiating contracts.
Speaker 1: Okay you were there at Capitol [Capitol Records] from '70 [1970] to '74 [1974] at which point did, did you change over into the artist side of things?
Speaker 2: Well I worked at Capitol from '70 [1970] to '78 [1978]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did, I did the legal work from '72 [1972] to '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And '74 [1974], yeah that's right.  I changed over about '72 [1972], you know.
Speaker 1: About '72 [1972] you went over to the artist side.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 450904
Speaker 1: One of the things was to see you know some, some of the black people who come in representing black artists, you know their lack of knowledge.  You know, about what they should be asking for, their lack of knowledge about you know the intricacies of the contract.  And, the fact that you know they, they, we, they can give you something on page one and take it off completely away on page, page ten you know.
Speaker 2: Now were these people attorneys or people just who well-wishers or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well they, some were attorneys most were, were managers you know, but you know they just, they just didn't know.  Because they didn't, they didn't know what was possible you know, they were so concerned about getting the deal you know they didn't wanna you know ask for too much.  'Cause they were you know the, you know they were afraid they weren't gonna get the contract.
Speaker 2: So once again [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold is on both sides of the issue?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yes, right, right.
Speaker 2: At this point now here you are representing Capitol Records--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --however, you have an empathy for this person who has absolutely no knowledge or what's going on (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 2: --and this is affecting their life.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: How did you handle that?
Speaker 1: Well I couldn't you know I mean I had, legal ethics, so I really couldn't tell them what to ask for, and stuff like that.  But so one of the things that I did do is that I gave, I, I met a few other black entertainment lawyers you know around the country.  Like you know, David Franklin [David M. Franklin] out of Atlanta [Georgia], Joe Porter [Joseph E. Porter, III], Louise West, is in publishing, I'm trying to think who else is.  But, so I gave a seminar at the National Bar Association [NBA] you know first entertainment law seminar that they ever had, so.  So I could teach you know in an academic setting what I could not do as a, advocate for the company.
Speaker 2: So where did that idea come from, or did it just come in your, in your sense of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right--
Speaker 2: --I should do this--
Speaker 1: --exactly 'cause I mean I, I just kept seeing you know people not, not getting what they should, should be getting.  And, and I, I couldn't you know tell them and I knew it's just because they didn't know what was happening you know, so.
Speaker 2: So here you are among these other lawyers, you're and you're teaching, were their eyes big, open wide to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah-
Speaker 2: --whatever--
Speaker 1: It, it was the first one that the NBA ever had and it was you know jammed packed you know.  Everybody was interested and everything you know.  And, and out of that that, did that group that that we had together, I helped form the Black Entertainment and Sports Lawyers Association you know, with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So not just entertainment, but sports also?
Speaker 1: Well sports came later, but initially, yeah, our, our focus was on, on, on entertainment and primarily almost exclusively on, on music you know so and.
Speaker 2: Now word travels fast in America and the world so did, so did word get back that that Larkin Arnold is teaching at--did Capitol did it get back that that you were having seminars helping people understand what it is, was being done to them?
Speaker 1: Well I mean yes and no, I mean the one, the one situation was just a one, one-shot seminar.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, that was the NBA so, that didn't get any, but later on with, with the, you know, black music and black entertainment sports lawyers association statement.  But there was no, there's no problem 'cause they were doing it, I mean you know, you go to the ABA [American Bar Association] they have all these forums on entertainment law, you know.  And then they have you know these different seminars with the law school, I mean so it was nothing that that was unethical you know.  What, what was unethical was for me to sit and say, well listen; you can get more money if you ask for it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: You ask more you know that, so we never did that--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know it, it's, it was a very, very guarded society back in the '60s [1960s] there were very few lawyers that were doing that.  And even very few white lawyers that that were doing that at that point in time.  And it started with the rock explosion basically is when things started changing, you know.  The white rock musicians started, you know, asking for and getting better representation.  And, and breaking the mold and you know and changing the standard really 'cause the leverage started going you know in their direction as opposed to the record label.  So record companies started giving up on some of the things that they used to holdback like you know, and holdback all your publishing you know, and not give you that much.  So the rocks, rock bands opened up, you know, the whole contract world for everybody--
Story_ID: 450905
Speaker 1: You're at Capitol [Capitol Records] between, well your first couple of years between '70 [1970], '74 [1974], we're gonna look at that first part there (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, right.
Speaker 1: Were there any, any we'll, we'll say celebrities that you dealt with, that you saw and you witnessed come in as maybe very fresh.  And all of a sudden now they're superstars, is there anybody that you saw around there?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, but not, but not black at, at (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --that time, I mean you know black, basically you know at Capitol we had just a core group you know that was you know Cannonball Adderley you know [HistoryMaker] Nancy Wilson and Lou Rawls, you know, that was primarily, you know.  We weren't at that time, time successful in the R and B areas, primarily more of a jazz and pop situation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the black artists there.
Speaker 1: And so after '74 [1974] an amazing thing starts to occur, [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold becomes the vice president of Capitol Records.  Please tell us how that occurred?
Speaker 2: Okay in '74 [1974], I, I get an offer from Motown Records to come over there to work with them.  And so I go and tell the chairman, you know, who was Bhaskar Menon at this time.  The chairmanship had changed and, and now Bhaskar Menon an Indian has been sent over from EMI [EMI Music Worldwide] which owns Capitol Records, you know.  And he took a, you know a liking to me you know as, as you know secretary, you know as a lawyer you're secretary of certain corporations that I have to (unclear) you know.  So he was you know an Indian from India you know, and he would tell me sometimes I'd see him, "You know, Larkin you and I are the only black people in this company (laughter)."
Story_ID: 450906
Speaker 1: Okay so now it's about 1974, so somewhere in, in that regard you've been at Capitol [Capitol Records] about four years and you were saying that that you got a call from Motown [Motown Records] about coming over there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: An outright recruitment?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Explain that to me please.
Speaker 2: Well you know there were very few of us like I said that that were doing this type of work, you know.  And Motown being black you know they called me you know for an interview, and so you know I go tell the chairman [Bhaskar Menon] I'm thinking about you know leaving.  Well you gotta remember now this point in time you had EEOC [Equal Employment Opportunity Commission] you know and everything going around trying to make certain that major companies had a certain quota of black people and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Affirmative action.
Speaker 2: Right (cough), you know so they have to fill out these reports about how many black you know executives you have, and how many black you know clerical, or whatever you know so.  I'm about the only black executive of, of any sort, but they have a few in, in the promotion department you know.  But outside of promotion and actually administrative situation you know that is about the time the guy that I used to work with you know is gone over to, to Motown, you.
Speaker 1: Now Motown still, is [HistoryMaker] Berry Gordy still at the helm or has it been sold yet?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no he still here, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is right after their move from Detroit [Michigan] out here [Los Angeles, California] you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so, so, so I tell you know the chairman and he says, "Well Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold] you know, are you sure, you know, you know we don't wanna lose you, you know."  And he says, "Well you know what, what are you thinking about doing?" I said, "Well you know we've had these previous discussions about you know about this."  'Cause he would invite me and my wife [Arnold's first wife, Adrien Smith Arnold] over to his place for dinner and you know, and we'd talk and you know.  And I said, well you know, about you know Capitol's inability to penetrate the black music market that, that's changing now to R and B.  He says, "Yeah," and then he says, "Well, why don't you stay here and, and, you know conduct this you know study as why we haven't been successful in that area and maybe you know we can talk about something, you know, a little later."  So I'm, I'm saying okay you know, I, I really you know, I like it nice so, so I, I don't take the offer.  I go out and do a field study about why, you know, Capitol had been ineffective and, in becoming you know selling this new type of music you know.  They've been you know with the, with the R, with the jazz type, you know with Nancy [HistoryMaker Nancy Wilson] and all that, but you know nothing like what Motown had or, or what Chess [Chess Records] had or what Atlantic [Atlantic Records] had.  They took this; we had no R and B artist there that were successful.
Speaker 1: What were some of the reasons you found, discovered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --as to why?
Speaker 2: I found that there was a lot of structural things that that the company wasn't set up to do you know, black music was basically the type of music where you had to, was singles music you know it was it's, it.  And, and mom and pop black stores were in- instrumental in, in making, reporting the records and selling the records.  And sometimes you have to sweeten the pot to get them to actually sell your records, in other words give them some free records to, to make them report your records, and sell your record.  Well, you know Capitol was an album selling business, so they weren't really into that you know.  Two our relationships with the black community in, in as far as the black stores and the black radio stations were very poor you know.  You know our people basically had stopped going there to even visit them you know.  And they paid little or no attention to them, it did no advertising there, they, they helped them with no contests or anything like that.  And three you know, we just really didn't have the quality of music to compete you know.  Because it was like the A and R [artists and repertoire] people, you know, it's just like a little stepchild for them and then some, sometimes it's just a manner of giving their friends you know some money.  You know they come in and they'd say I got this black artist and you know, here's sixty thousand dollars for a master and you know.  And they buy it and you know and then, and they would, they'd toss it aside and nobody would pay any attention to it, you know.
Story_ID: 450907
Speaker 1: At the same time, the careers of, of Cannonball [Cannonball Adderley], I think he passed somewhere shortly (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --shortly around there--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, that's right.
Speaker 1: So even the jazz market at that point--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was, was on a decline, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly you know.
Speaker 1: So black music at Capitol [Capitol Records] was gonna pre- pretty much soon be relegated to noting.
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah, which was happening exactly you know, and so that's why you know he [Bhaskar Menon] asked me to.  So I did that, I mean I went on the road, I went to you know Dallas [Texas], Houston [Texas], Florida up the East Coast to you know D.C. [Washington, D.C.],  Baltimore [Maryland] in- interviewing you know going to our branch offices and asking them what, what you know what the problem was you know.  What, what do they think we need to do, going to the radio stations talking to the music directors and di- and the disc jockeys.  Going to the, the retail stores and talking to them and, and so and then all up to New York [New York] and make the whole circuit, come back to Chicago [Illinois].  So I'm on the road about you know ten, twelve days doing all this.
Speaker 1: Your haul, your own demographic research.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You figured out what was really going on.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, you know.
Speaker 1: So, so you get your data together--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you come back.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What happens?
Speaker 2: So I write up a report for the chairman, you know and about you know what why we had failed you know, what, what steps we had to take to you know to be successful.  And you know, you know I gave it to him.  So after that, you know he said, he said, "Well listen, Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold]," he read it you know, and brought me up.  Said, "Would you be interested in, in heading our entry into, into this field," you know.  And I said, "Well, I really have to think about that," 'cause see, you know, I didn't know anything at all you know realistically about the music business.  But you know I had made the report and then I, and I thought my report was pretty good.  And I said, "Well if I followed the steps," but it was very agonizing 'cause here I'm stepping out of something that I had known.  Something that I was comfortable into a whole new world of, of you know the black music scene you know, and I had no connections.  No knowledge outside of what you know I had done and, but I decided you know yes I, I thought I could do it.  So I made, I made the change.
Story_ID: 450908
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So he [Bhaskar Menon] named you vice president at that point?
Speaker 2: Well no, I started off as just a general manger you know and basically it was just me and my secretary and, you know a couple of little local sales reps that we had around in, in Detroit [Michigan], Chicago [Illinois].  One in Texas and you know and, and commenced to, to strive to start to you know put together a, a black division.
Speaker 1: So you, your secretary and, and the, and the varying salesmen around the country?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That was the black division?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: So what's the first thing you did?
Speaker 2: Well you know the fi- one of the first things I did you know in which one of the most important things that I did is that I looked around for a consultant you know.  And I found Mickey Stevenson [William "Mickey" Stevenson] you know, who used to be head of A and R [artist and repertoire] for Motown [Motown Records], you know.  So I hired Mickey you know to advise me and you know, to introduce me into, the black music world you know.  And he did an excellent job, I mean you know, he was well-known and well you know liked and respected from the, his time with Motown.  And he you know then he'd call me introduce people and say you know.
Speaker 1: So he was your leg it, your legs and ears for you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: More or less my connections you know tell people that this was a, a valid situation.  Then one of the things that I did, I had to differentiate you know my product from among the other little junk stuff that going out.  So I, I changed the label you know to black, red and green which was a black thing, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, I remember that.
Speaker 2: And then told the people but, but more importantly I, I, the company paid for me to have a, a, a conference with, with all the disc jockeys you know, that I could the head music men.  So I you know to show that we were committed and we're willing to spend money on them, so I contacted them.  Mickey contacted about fifteen of them and from Baltimore [Maryland], D.C. [Washington, D.C.], Detroit, Chicago you know Houston [Texas], and we flew them all over to the Bahamas you know.  And we sat down and Mickey introduced me to them you know guys like you know Rocky, I mean, you know, Jones [Rocky Jones], you know from Chicago, Gary Bouldin [ph.] from D.C., Al Jefferson [Albert N. Jefferson] from Baltimore, boogaloo you know from Houston and everything.  So we, we wined and dined them for three of four days.
Speaker 1: Was this prior, prior to Jack the Rapper [Jack Gibson] conventions occurring?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly it's prior, prior to that, you know.  And in fact Jack was one of the in, invitees that we did, we did, but he, he didn't make it you know.  And so then I told them what, what our plan was and this was you know an example of our commitment to change our whole attitude regards to, you know them and, and their stations.  And, and that we were willing to, to work with them and they would work with us you know that you know.
Speaker 1: Now how was their reception, here's for the first time some, some deejays getting flown by Capitol Records--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to the Bahamas--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to have a conference.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What was that reception, you're at the helm, how did they feel, what was their (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you know, a lot of them at first initially were a little leery you know I mean they were, they didn't know, some of them, a number of them declined our invitation you know.  Because they didn't wanna go, but see, you know they were wonder whether you know the, the payola or something like that, so.  And then they didn't, they had no relationship with the company you know.  But thanks to Mickey you know, he was able to persuade a number of them that this was on the level and everything.  So we stayed at this hotel on Paradise Island [Bahamas] and we had, had a ball you know, we you know motor-scootered, we talked.  I got a chance to meet them you know and they got a chance to meet me, my wife [Arnold's first wife, Adrien Smith Arnold] you know and, and their wives were there.  And you know and told them what we, was, what was doing, and in the meantime, I played them some, some records that, that I had already signed.  And that I'd be coming out with you know in, in a few months, and be look out for it and, and you know give me, a, a hand.
Speaker 1: I recall in, in Detroit there was, was it Donnie Simpson at that point?
Speaker 2: No, it was Al Perkins.
Speaker 1: Al Perkins?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Perculator.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly, yeah.
Story_ID: 450909
Speaker 1: Now you have--you have these, these artists that you have signed.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who, who are some of these artists, now who was the first person that you said, you know what, this is gonna be good for this label?
Speaker 2: The first one that I had was Tavares you know that's that, 'Check It Out,' you know.
Speaker 1: And they were the all-male group?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly out, out of Boston [Massachusetts], you know, New Bedford, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And it was very good because you know the manager was white and he was friends with the head of pop promotional department, so that.  Then I signed, I had three other, two, three other acts that I can't even remember their names now, but they were okay, you know.  I think one of them was Mickey's [William "Mickey" Stevenson] act and, but you know, they were just my first initial you know samplings and then.  'Cause when I first got the job, I mean everybody thought then, "Here's the new sucker in town," so you know people were bringing me old tapes you know with you know.  You could tell fried egg on them you know, they been sitting in the closet and everything, you know.  And it was amazing you know 'cause people would offer me money you know to, "Well here Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold] you know you can buy this, this song you know these two songs for twenty-five thousand dollars.  And, and I'll give you five thousand you know back," and all these different temptations for me you know to, to you know, to, to sign their acts to this label you know.
Speaker 1: How about Carl Anderson?
Speaker 2: Well Carl came much later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now we'll get into that, that's way over at Columbia Records, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, make a long story short, after two or three records, I released Tavares and all the guys came through you know like they, like they said they would.  This is one record that they could get and 'Check It Out,' you know, went on to be number one.  And I never will forget the first time I, I heard you know my first record on the radio you know, it was, it was like an exhilarating high.
Speaker 1: So you heard your record on what Tavares, you done some groups like, like group, group; was it a group called Reflections [The Reflections]?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Or was it an album called Reflections?
Speaker 2: Yeah, maybe more than one album, but after Tavares, then you know I signed Peabo Bryson.
Speaker 1: About what year would that have been?
Speaker 2: That would've been '75 [1975] I think, you know, something like that.
Story_ID: 450910
Speaker 1: Now in '75 [1975] you also signed a very famous person, Miss Natalie Cole (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Natalie Cole yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Oh that was, that was, that was great.  Well, Natalie you know was son of Nat [sic.] but, people say built Nat King Co- Nat King Cole built Capitol Records.  She had been produced by, by these two guys, Chuck Jackson and Marvin Yancy.  And I knew them from, from a group that that they had formed in Chicago [Illinois], and I was very familiar with their work.  One day I come in and I see you know, back in those days, these, this a, such a, show you how old--the only way they could give records was on a reel-to-reel so you know.  I mean it's like you there was no cassette, there was no disc, there was no, nothing, it was like reel-to-reel.  You had to hook it up to reel-to-reel player, so there was this little box with, with, with Natalie Cole it.  And you know and I saw Chuck you know and, and Marvin, you know, I was trying to think of the name of that group that they had.  Anyway they had a great song out, called "Leaving Me" that I used to like.  But so I, I played it, played it later and you know it's really you know some good stuff on there.
Speaker 1: And she was on the track, she was singing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was singing their song you know, and so I, I wanted to sign her, well there was a lot of hesitancy you know on the part of the company about me doing this.  Because you know Natalie had had some problems you know--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --being busted with drugs in Toronto [Canada] around this time and, and they didn't want to, to take a chance with her and they didn't want you know any conflict with her and her father, and things not working out.  But you know, but I, I was determined and, and you know went, went to Chicago and met with all of them.   And you know got together the album that was 'Inseparable' you know.
Speaker 1: Did you ever talk with her one-on-one to see where she was at in her person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah you know more or less, she said that you know that was incident that that part of her life was behind her.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know she was, she was okay and you know and she was, this was she really wanted to do and you know, it took a little while you know.  I mean for not only for me but for a lot of other people to believe that she was you know more than just Nat King Cole's daughter.  But a, a viable great singer and entertainer on, on own self.
Speaker 1: So you kind of have a hit, you had a hands-on with her, you were able to talk to her and get a good feel, and also let them explain.  Understand your position, the great risk you were taking was, was, was that, was that, explained to them also that you know, your position (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know it, it wasn't, had to be explained, everybody knew you know, I mean that I'm just starting out.  So you know I don't have room for a lot of failures, but you know, so I think yeah people came before Natalie, and Natalie came.  And then--
Speaker 1: How was she as a person, Natalie Cole?
Speaker 2: Oh great, you know I mean, I like, I liked her then, you know we toured Europe together you know, that was of the first times, one of the first tours I went you know.  We toured Belgium, Holland [the Netherlands], Scandinavian countries you know, Switzerland and, and Denmark you know.
Speaker 1: There were a couple of hits on that one album 'Inseparable' and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --and, and, "This Will Be," ["This Will Be (An Everlasting Love)"] if I recall.
Speaker 2: Yeah that was one that was the one song which I felt we were missing you know when I went to Chicago, and, and I was telling them about I love ballads.  But we need the, you know this, this up temp, an up tempo song to break it with the, and Marvin got on the piano and started playing the keys to, "This Will Be."  And then that was it.
Speaker 1: If my memory serves me correct, correctly wasn't Marvin Yancy one of her husbands at one point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes he eventually became her husband.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  All right so she stayed there at Capitol for a while, now what was the spirit there, because her father was legendary.
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: Then, did she ever express to you that she had a feeling of having to carry a cross or anything in order to do this?
Speaker 2: No, not really well I mean think the, the main thing that you know she was concerned with was, was whether people would view her as more than just Nat King Cole's daughter.  That that she was a, a great and viable talent you know in and of herself, you know.
Speaker 1: Right, 'cause she also had an uncle; she has an uncle, Freddy Cole.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Who also I think had some of the same challenges and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and wanted to be, be different.
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly and, and he didn't make it.
Story_ID: 450911
Speaker 1: What was the next thing after Natalie [Natalie Cole], so Natalie's doing well now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --so, so what--
Speaker 2: Natalie's dong well, Peabo's [Peabo Bryson] doing well, Tavares is doing well, you know.
Speaker 1: So the urban market has now been penetrated by Capitol Records?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly and then we, and, and we sta- starting you know turning out hit record after hit record.  Then I think next came Frankie Beverly and Maze and you know, I think that was like in '76 [1976] something like that.
Speaker 1: And 'Boogie Fever.'
Speaker 2: Yeah, The Sylvers came after that you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], then Taste of Honey [A Taste of Honey], I may be missing one too, but we were you know we were rolling.  I mean we took a, a department that was losing about $5 million a year and my last year there at Capitol you know we were at, had turned a net profit of $25 million.
Speaker 1: Wow and then they were, what was the, what, what was being said to you by, by the chairman [Bhaskar Menon] and those people that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh everybody was elated you know I mean, everybody was you know, I don't think they really expected it to, to happen you know.  Because they had failed so many times, and this was all new found money and, and you know we were one of the hottest you know labels in, in that field.
Speaker 1: So now this market is probably fueling a lot of the what's going on at Capitol now, becau- because of what you're bringing in currently.
Speaker 2: Well yeah I mean it was, it was a sizeable income for producers, especially net income producer because you know all of these were new acts.  So you know they, they weren't you know being signed for a large guarantees or a large royalty rights you know.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the other artist at, not of African American, not an urban rocker, who were some of the other white artist at Capitol Record (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh you know--
Speaker 1: --during that time period?
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly, well naturally they had The Beatles--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --you know they had all The Beatles you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But they're going toward the end of their thing now, they're starting to split up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah but, but individually they still had them, and I mean they still had Paul McCartney and Wings, they still had you know George Harrison, 'My Sweet Lord' and--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Plus they had Helen Reddy, you know--
Speaker 1: 'I Am Woman.'
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly, they had Glen Campbell you know, they had Anne Murray, and they had a few rock acts you know, they had Grand Funk Railroad, I think Traffic, you know so--
Speaker 1: So they had two sides going now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So it was kind of smooth operation going on both sides now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 450912
Speaker 1: So now you're there and you got Frankie Beverly, you got Natalie Cole, Tavares, The Syl--let's go back to The Sylvers for a minute (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: I always found them interesting because they were like the other side of The Jackson 5 (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: When you saw the group and said okay it's five family members, what, what did you first think, did you think that is, this is not gonna work or this will work?
Speaker 2: Well no, I thought it would work, I mean I thought that that they were very talented, I mean you know, they, they, they had you know they could sing, and they could dance you know.  And, and I saw the show, oh yeah I you know so I was, I was, I was elated.  Plus you know I got a friend of mine from school you know, Freddie Perren [Frederick J. Perren], you know to produce them you know.  Who also went and produced, you know a lot of hits on Tavares, he wrote and produced 'Reunited' with Peaches and Herb.  'I Will Survive' for Gloria Gaynor, you know, and so we were at school together you know.  And, and one then, one of the last acts I signed was A Taste of Honey, you know.
Speaker 1: Which is very unique group, because it was a all-girl instrumental group (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, well they weren't that was, that was marketing.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know they were originally just a four-piece band, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 2: But I had been over in France you know and saw this female act called Bock Rock [ph.] you know, and they were two girls you know who were singing disco songs.  So I tried to you know persuade the group, I said well, "Hey listen let, let me put the guys in the background and just focus on the girls."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Give them some instruments.
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly and pose them with the bass guitar and, and the guitar you know and left the guys off the cover completely you know and this, and marketed.
Speaker 1: And it worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah it did work.
Speaker 1: Because, because we all identify that now as, as the, as Taste of Honey being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --bass player, guitar player--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --with evening gowns on.
Speaker 2: Exactly, so you know in four years you know I had discovered two best new artists for the Grammys [Grammy Award], you know.
Speaker 1: Now your personal (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Natalie--
Story_ID: 450913
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, your personal life--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --'cause you discovered Natalie [Natalie Cole], and you got Grammy Awards now, things are happening in your personal life, how's that going now?  Because now you're back to where you wanted to be, so to speak, economically and things, things are going good for you at home now?
Speaker 2: Yeah they going, they going good, but there's, but there's also you know little strains toward the end you know.  My wife [Arnold's first wife, Adrien Smith Arnold] had her career, I'm spending a lot of money you know, a lot of time rather on the road, you know, we, we have another son [Derek Arnold] you know by this time.  You know nice home, but you know I'm gone most, most of the time you know.  And so she married a, a, you know an attorney and wound up with (laughter) a music guy, you know so.  You know things, things were, were sort of you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It strained.
Speaker 2: Strained yeah, exactly and so we wound up you know splitting.
Story_ID: 450914
Speaker 1: So now in 1978--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --something else happens.  You get hired to go somewhere else now, now before that happens there had to be some kind of reason for it.  Or, or an offer somewhere as you were going to Arista [Arista Records].
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: What, what caused that?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because you're doing so well at Capitol [Capitol Records] now.
Speaker 2: Well okay, one of the things that I realized you know is that you know you're in a big company, and you know hits are coming out, but nobody knows who's responsible for it you know.  And so I started using, putting my name on the record as executive producer you know so, you know.  I mean, every one of the hits you know, [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, executive producer.  So Clive Davis, who is to me probably the ultimate music man you know had been working with Columbia [Columbia Records], CBS and, and he was you know let go from that.  So he started Arista Records, and he started seeing all these hits coming out of Capitol.  And with my name attached to them, so, so he called me and you know we met, and he offered me sus- you know, a substantial amount of money.  Plus one of the things that I wanted, you know a piece of, of the record sales.  So that's what I wasn't getting at Capitol, and I wasn't really getting you know, I mean he offered me double you know my net.  Plus you know a opportunity to take a part in the, the sale of the records.
Speaker 1: And you, and you're, and you're done, you'd what you were supposed to do at Capitol (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So was it wasn't an ill feeling--
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't.
Speaker 1: You, I mean--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You so, you, you didn't see yourself leaving as a failure from Capitol?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: This was a chance to step--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly--
Speaker 1: --step it up a little bit.
Speaker 2: Right, plus he you know, he hired me as senior vice president; I ran the whole West Coast office operation for him.  Besides you know the R and B area, I ran the whole pop division, the whole marketing, the whole thing.
Story_ID: 450915
Speaker 1: --Seventy-eight [1978], to now--this occurred in '78 [1978].  So now you, you, you leave Capitol [Capitol Records]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and you leave on a good note--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and you go to Arista [Arista Records], now you have a new responsibility because now you're, this is kind of a start-up for, it's kind of a start-up thing now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's right, exactly.
Speaker 1: You don't have the comfort--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of, of the tenure of Capitol.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you do have the tenure of Clive Davis everywhere up under you and offering you this and seeing this in you.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What's the first thing you did at Arista?
Speaker 2: Well you know I mean by this time, I'd made good relationships with, with all the disc jockeys you know around the country.  All the retail stores you know because I made certain that, that the company, you know do right by the guys you know.  And, and I did right by them you know, I'd, I'd take the acts in and we you know do shows for free you know, and I would hire some of the different disc jockeys to cut radio spots for me.  And you know and you know we would you know advertise on the radio you know so we were, they knew that I was fulfilling my commitment to quid pro quo for them.
Speaker 1: So it was a two, it was a two-way street--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --of, of them feeling, feeling that you cared about what it was they were doing.  And, and in turn they cared also (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right. They looked out for me--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean my, my product you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean I could fly into it was, it was so great; I mean my relationship was so great.  I could fly into D.C. [Washington, D.C.] you know, where I went to school and, and we had WHUR [WHUR Radio, Washington, D.C.] you know the, the one of them, one of the radio stations.  And I knew Jesse Fax so I could, I could go in there and I could give him my record and I could get in my car and drive to Baltimore [Maryland].  And I hear in my car, my rec- my record on the, on the radio on the way to Baltimore and going to see Al Jefferson [Albert N. Jefferson].  And then you know meet him same, tame, same record and we'd have conversation and I, and I'd hear my record on the radio station from Baltimore.  And up, up to Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and going into you know WDAS [WDAS Radio] and see Georgie Woods and, and Butterball [Joe "Butterball" Tamburro].  Same thing to New York [New York], same thing you know and I could get back on the plane in like four days and my record is burning up from D.C., all the way to New York.
Speaker 1: So you would say that the importance in whatever business it is, is relationship (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --is--
Speaker 2: Without question.
Speaker 1: --is very important.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, definitely, I mean you have to take of your customers you know, and your customers will take care of you.
Speaker 1: A lot times we feel like we're doing something, but it, but it's a dependency on everyone to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --work as a unit--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to make things really happen.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 450916
Speaker 1: So now who was big at Arista [Arista Records] when you were there, what happened at Arista?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, Phyllis Hyman, you know, I started working with her, the first big act that I signed over there was GQ, you know, and 'Disco Nights,' you know.  Which went platinum I mean, 'cause I had a relationship in this, in, in the height of the disco era.  And so that was the first platinum selling record.  I worked with [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick over there you know, with Raydio, and but more or less I would, I was helping set-up their infrastructure you know.  I was, I was educating their sales force of, of because everybody was (unclear) how to do business in, in this marketplace you know.  And, and establishing their promotion department you know just helping to really get them structurally sound.
Speaker 1: Because it, so wasn't there a young Whitney Houston soon to come to, come (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well I was gone by that time.
Speaker 1: You were gone by that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But the structure was being set up--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: --for these kinds of things to smoothly--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --take place.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly yeah.
Speaker 1: And Dionne (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The foundation was being laid, yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you said you had Dionne there, she was her, so there was some relationship there--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --already.  So you stay there two years--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --from '78 [1978] to '80 [1980]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and now you are considered [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold, music executive--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --throughout the industry?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess so.
Speaker 1: And you're, you're, and it's been going on now for approximately ten, ten years, this has happening in, a in a very fast.  If we look at terms of what we think we think executives do--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --very fast time now.  So in ten years you've, you been at two labels--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --two labels you have been, a vary, a varied of positions.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So now you're gonna, you, you get a call from Sony, CBS/Sony [CBS/Sony Records Inc.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well you know it's, it's one of the things it shows the importance of maintaining your relationships, because an attorney that used to work for Capitol [Capitol Records] had gone over to CBS/Sony, Dick Asher [M. Richard Asher].  And he ran our international department at, at Capitol, and now he was over as chairman of or vice chairman of, of CBS/Sony.  So he saw you know what I was doing and recognizing, and they were Sony, CBS/Sony had a lot of success you know with, with affiliated labels.  You know they were distributing stacks and they were distributing Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], international, but they really didn't have a number of, of in-house acts.  You know outside The Jacksons and, and Maurice [Maurice White], and Earth, Wind and Fire you know, and maybe few Deniece [Deniece Williams], you know.  But they had a gigantic overhead you know in, in their black music department--
Story_ID: 450917
Speaker 1: Okay, the year is 1980 and you said that you had an offer to go for, from a past, past relationship, a friend, to go to CBS/Sony [CBS/Sony Records Inc.].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And we discussed that they had in roads distributing some other labels that were going different directions, but they didn't have their own in-house music being put out at this moment in the urban (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well they had, they had a few acts, but yeah not, not compared to the amount of outside material they were releasing you know.
Speaker 1: I also see that you were, you were given, but before we get there, you had to tell Clive Davis you were leaving.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: How was that?
Speaker 2: Well it was o- I mean it was okay and not, not, not, not and not the best, I mean, but you know Arista [Arista Records] at this time was, was basically an independent label you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They didn't have their own distribution sit, situation you know they were distributed by you know one stops and wholesalers around the country.  And they didn't have the international affiliation that I had been grown accustomed to at, at Capitol [Capitol Records].  And, and so you know, the offer once I explained to him what, what it was I mean again they, they doubled my salary and they increased my percentage, on, on the sale of the records.  And, and you know lessened the amount of cross collateralization that I, that I would have you know, he understood.
Speaker 1: So, so in ten years, from the time that [HistoryMaker] Jerry Butler said you should consider this--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --now here you are now getting ready to go to Sony--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as a senior vice president.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now you also were given the charge to do something, now from what we know that before you've been made to take things from nothing and make them happen and occur.  Now you've been given the charge to cut some personnel and overhead.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you had to go in and kind of act as the axman now, explain that going in the door.
Speaker 2: Okay, well you know when CBS you know first entered into black music area, you know they staffed up a lot of, a lot of personnel.  And you know somewhat similar to their pop thing and you know the product load didn't really didn't merit you know all the number of people that they would have.  And plus there was a lot of conflict you know between you know so many new personnel in the, in the field offices.  You know it's this racial tension is going on, 'cause you gotta remember now you know this is still, this is during the time of busing.  And--
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighty [1980] yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the busing and you know racial sentiments are, are high on and everybody you know.  People are hearing black power and they looking at you know all these black people coming into the company all of a sudden.  And you know and unfortunately weren't, weren't that that skilled in, in knowing how to be an executive.  'Cause here we are the first generation of blacks to really you know, know how to work and function in Corporate America.  You know our parents never had that opportunity.  So, so there were was a lot of, so that, they had to cutback, then there was a problem with, with stacks you know and some big investigation that came payola and all this stuff.  So they, they were you know forced to cut, cut, cutbacks and overhead and they saw that I had been able to maintain the volume of sales with probably you know one quarter the number of person you know.  And so they asked me more or less to, to oversee you know their downsizing situation.
Speaker 1: So how did you feel about it, this is your first time you really had to go in and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well the plans were already in work--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean they, they were already in, in, in, in progress before I got there you know, so you know I wasn't the main one.  I mean that who came up with the idea, I mean they were gonna cut these people regardless, you know.
Speaker 1: And they and they made you the bearer of, of the news (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well yeah well we basically worked it out so that most of it was done before I (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Before you got there.
Speaker 2: Before I got there, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know.
Story_ID: 450918
Speaker 1: At this time, you know, they put me in charge of both, you know, the Columbia [Columbia Records] and the Epic [Epic Records] label, so I'm running two labels now you know.
Speaker 2: Running two labels simultaneously.
Speaker 1: Right, um-hm.
Speaker 2: Now what was the difference between the Columbia and Epic label, what was the major difference artist wise?
Speaker 1: Well Columbia probably on the white side had more of the big, more established pop acts you know.  I mean Barbra Streisand, Neil Diamond, James Taylor, the rock acts, you know Janis Joplin, what's some of the.  I mean they had, they had an extensive, Julio Iglesias--
Speaker 2: And they had a classical cat- in a jazz catalog, right?
Speaker 1: Right, yeah and a jazz with Marsalis [Wynton Marsalis] and stuff.  But I mean they were like so dominant in the, in the pop area, you know that had Blood, Sweat and Tears, you know and so that was.  Epic was more of a, a newer start-up label for them and since that, that grown out of a need to, to put another label.  'Cause they had so many acts on, on Epic, you know, I mean on Columbia, so Epic was a little, you know, younger, little more rock heavy.  You know they didn't have the, the old standard so much and, and it was more or less their cutting edge you know type of label.
Speaker 2: Now from your, your recollection in the industry overall, are there more black executives now this ten year period that have, that have gotten in different labels now are there more?
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, yeah without question, I mean after, or I won't say after but simultaneously with my going into Capitol [Capitol Records] and moving into this transition area of A and R [artists and repertoire] and, and black music marketing, a lot of the other companies were ratcheting up their, their divisions too.  RCA [RCA Records], you know, Warner Brothers [Warner Bros. Records, Inc.], Atlantic [Atlantic Records] you know like I said before they had a whole black music department over there at CBS/Sony [CBS/Sony Records Inc.].  So yeah the number of other executives coming and you know and with, with the budget and the degree of autonomy being you know varying from label to label.  You know I was able to, to have the autonomy that I did, because you know I was, I was a trained negotiator by the company at Capitol.  So they couldn't really tell me I can't negotiate my contract you know, 'cause I was doing it for them for two years.
Story_ID: 450919
Speaker 1: So as you get there, you're running two labels Columbia [Columbia Records] and Epic [Epic Records], now I can recall that Wynton [Wynton Marsalis] was coming over around that time, with, with Dr. George Butler would produce (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, yeah he was already there.
Speaker 1: He was there already?
Speaker 2: George, well George was already there--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Running their jazz division, yeah because Miles Davis was, was, was there, George was working with Miles.
Speaker 1: So now did George have to go through you in order to get this, get the, to really present this issue of Wynton.  Because straight ahead music jazz as we know at that point, Columbia was kind of torchbearer along with the Blue Note [Blue Note Records] and few other people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But did, did he come through you with the idea of Wynton Marsalis and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, George more or less was left to function on his own.  I mean jazz was, was more of a status than for the income bearing, except, except for Miles you know, and a few other acts.  But you know it, you know it's almost viewed liked our classical department--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know it's like niche marketing you know, because you know jazz is starting to wane--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --like, like at Capitol [Capitol Records] except for you know occasional superstar like, like Wynton Marsalis or you know.  Who else did he have over there but, it, it, it was not really a great, great profits in it, you know for the most part.
Story_ID: 450920
Speaker 1: Okay so you there, with, with, Epic [Epic Records] and you got Columbia [Columbia Records] going, those two labels at the same time.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now you so you there in nine--1980--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you, I guess for two years what did you basically do, basically just ran those labels or?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I mean I you know first of all I reviewed the roster you know, I mean they had a lot of acts that they, they didn't need, they weren't selling you know.  So with the cutback in personnel, we had to cutback the number of acts, 'cause there were a lot of acts that were, you know non-functioning.  I had to help restructure you know the company and how it dealt with, with black music, because it was such a, a gigantic organization.  You know that a lot of times things would just get lost you know, records would come in and people wouldn't you know the administration, administration that wouldn't pay the bills.  And these guys you know the black guys they would just you know forget about they were you know low on their totem pole.  So it was, it was quite a struggle there you know, I mean to try and get people to do the job you know.  'Cause you know I like Capitol [Capitol Records] you know, Columbia, didn't really need you know black music to be popular you know, so I mean and although it was, you know and, but the overhead was making it such that net wasn't that great.  So with the racism that then, that was existing in, in, in the company and in the country at that why it took time I had, I had to get, you know allow these people to, to take you know me seriously.  You know 'cause I'm an outsider and pay attention you know to my outside producers and you know when, when they need the bills.  And, and how to restructure you know 'cause lot of times you know normally when you deliver a master sometimes if you're white, you know you pay for it and then deliver.  But most, lot of blacks acts can't afford to, to you know to put the whole money out so.  And you know they, then they submit bills, and the bills wouldn't get paid 'cause these guy you know didn't you know the accounting department had you know thousands of blacks that they were dealing with, well hundreds of them.  So they were just you know indifferent to these guys, so a lot of times the product wouldn't be finished or, or just be halfway stalled out there.  So I had to you know help restructure the inner workings of the company, to be responsive.  And so we worked out a system how you know be one third, one third, one third you know, the guys would get paid.  But then we, they have to deliver a third of the product so you know so that's.
Speaker 1: So, so that, that would add, that avoided the person being signed, nothing really happening.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or kind of--
Speaker 2: Or, or producer well you know producing bill you know the record--
Speaker 1: And you never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the bill's not being--
Speaker 1: Got paid. Right.
Speaker 2: --paid, yeah exactly.
Story_ID: 450921
Speaker 1: So now one artist that you did keep, I think we all know who he is was, is Michael Jackson.
Speaker 2: Well yeah, The Jacksons were already there, you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And they had you know, had, had you know a lot of success but nothing like the success that they had, had enjoyed in Motown [Motown Records] you know.  But they were growing now, they, so they wanted to be a little situation, so by the time I, I came there they had I guess the 'Victory' album or something like that.  The 'Triumph,' 'Triumph,' you know, but, but they really weren't busting through on the same level that they had at, at, at Motown.
Speaker 1: So what did you think about that, did you say that it's time to do something different with the group, and they, and suggested a restructuring of the group to them?  Pulling out the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well no, I mean by this point, Michael, this was inner family thing, so Michael's wanting to pull away you know anyway.  And go more independent by himself, so you know, I, I just you know but I, when I got there, they had already done 'Off The Wall,' you know, which was a great, great album.  But really you know was not to me marketed to, to the extent that it should be you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It wasn't you know really promoted you know, 'cause to me, and a part of my deal you know that I had was you know, besides the acts that, that were already there.  You know I mean far as the acts that I signed, which I get you know profit participation.  Any acts that were there that I improved their sales, you know, I would get paid on that too, so you know.  So I knew that you know Michael could, could've sold a whole lot more albums you know than what they did.  But I knew that they hadn't really fully marketed it.
Speaker 1: So what was your relation a one-on-one with Michael at the company as far as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know Michael was, he was independent, I mean he more or less had, had you know had grown up by this time you know somewhat.  Was doing his own thing and, and you know he had this relationship with Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] which, you know, the two of them you know basically just delivering products so.  He had very little to do with the company and at this time he was very disappointed you know in, in the sales of 'Off The Wall.'  We went and had, had lunch with his mother and father [Joe Jackson] and Katherine [Katherine Jackson] and he was telling me about certain things that wouldn't--that weren't done about the you know video that he had on 'Off The Wall' that, you know, they didn't, didn't allow him to release or finish and you know.  So he was, sort of disenchanted.
Speaker 1: So this is probably like in '82 [1982] he was little bit disappointed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: --disappointed and 'Off The Wall' is urbanely is a well-appreciated record, but the sales were not backing up the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, I mean they sold 5 million, but you know to me, I thought the record was just as good as 'Stayin' Alive' ['Staying Alive'] you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And then that was my target on the next al- album you know, I was gonna market you know his next album to the same audience that, that--
Speaker 1: The Bee Gees, right?
Speaker 2: Right that that bought 'Stayin' Alive' 'cause you know I was familiar with that project 'cause you know Tavares was on it, you know.  Yvonne Elliman, so you know there was still this disbelief, a question whether we're white people would really, really buy an audit backed by an album by a black act the same way they would buy a white album.
Speaker 1: So at that point he really, he really wasn't the pop icon he was a black musician (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly--
Speaker 1: That we knew from The Jackson 5?
Speaker 2: Exactly, right, that's--
Speaker 1: He wasn't the pop status?
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, that's why I guess he was in (laughter) he was allowed to be in my department (laughter) at that point in time.
Story_ID: 450922
Speaker 1: You're sitting there, you're realizing this, what's the next move, how, how does 'Thriller,' 'Thriller' come about, how does this (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well you know by this time, I'm, I'm really trying to reestablish my, you know myself, my identity, I mean you know Columbia [Columbia Records] is, CBS [CBS/Sony Records Inc.] about three or four times the size of Capitol [Capitol Records], so.  You know I'm here, I'm based on the West Coast, I didn't wanna go back to the New York [New York] headquarters.  So you know, I'm, I'm basically an outsider inside the company, so I, you know like I said streamlining the acts, I'm looking for new acts trying to build you know the roster on, on the things.  And I think by this time, I think I had signed Luther [Luther Vandross], I'm not, I'm not certain, but I believe I did sign Luther in '81 [1981] '80 [1980] something like that.
Speaker 1: Well, 'The Night I Fell in Love,' came out in '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: 'The Night I Fell in Love' came out in '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Well, 'Never Too Much' was that, was that 'The Night I Fell in Love' album?
Speaker 1: I think, "It's Over Now," "I Want to Love" [sic. "I Wanted Your Love"], "Only For One Night," "If Only For One Night" that was on that album.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but no the album I'm talking about is, is, "A House Is Not a Home," 'Never Too Much' and all of that.
Speaker 1: Yeah that, that I think that would've been before that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah it was before so I'm saying I think it came out like in '82 [1982].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you got, you got Luther and Michael [Michael Jackson] now.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Two different styles.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, but, but I'm also you know working 'cause I'm trying to balance the, balance both, both labels you know.  We had Michael you know as the superstar, black superstar for Epic [Epic Records], so I'm looking for a comparable person for the Columbia label, so.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: People you know, a friend of mine contacted me that Marvin Gaye was disenchanted with Columbia and he was look, looking for a new label, you know.  And I said wow, this will be you know a perfect counterbalance you know to Michael, so on the Columbia label, you know.  So I start going after Marvin Gaye you know and I negotiate you know for him, I fly over to Belgium you know, we talk you know.  'Cause this time there were a lot of people that thought his career was over you know he, he had taken his, his kids and, and left you know with wife [Jan Gaye].  And, and, and was living in exile in, in Hawaii, then in England and then you know he had all his drug charges and, and income tax things and you know.  The last album that he did the 'Here, My Dear' album you know just was basically you know nothing more or less a throw away 'cause you know it's part of his alimonies settlements so anyway.  So I'm, I'm, I'm interested in Marvin you know, I'm, I'm trying to see what I can do 'cause I you know.  To me his 'What's Going On,' album is the best album he's ever made you know.
Speaker 1: Marvin Gaye is a superstar--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and in the minds of everybody, even though he wasn't recording (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, exactly yeah I mean his last you know two projects, more or less failed.  So I go over to Belgium and we sit and talk you know, and I'm you know asking him what's happening you know and why he wants to leave and you know.  And he gives me these different you know reasons and stuff like that.  And I'm saying, "Well you know you, are you sure you going to be you know together again you know," 'cause then the price tag for him, was a lot of money you know.  So I'm putting my, you know career on the line.  And he said, "Don't worry, Larkin [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold], you know, I won't let you down," and so I agreed to this $2.5 million deal for him.  So I'm working on this and the same time Michael then starts working on the 'Thriller' album.
Speaker 1: Let me ask you a question, now that 2.5 million was basically was to help him, you really straighten out a lot of stuff pretty much too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it was to payoff Motown [Motown Records]--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know get him out of his deal you know, give him some money to, to take care of his tax situation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And charges and things.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, right and then to pay for the recording of the album, you know.
Story_ID: 450923
Speaker 1: So you got Michael [Michael Jackson] and you have, you have Marvin [Marvin Gaye] now.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Luther [Luther Vandross], right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And Luther, you, you got three black male artists--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --all different.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what's your next plan of action?
Speaker 2: Well you know I mean my, my main (laughter) problem was basically you know Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] and, and Michael basically took care of the whole recording process on that.  I, I, you know I had little and no involvement you know just to go by and see that you know progress was being made you know.  And that the bills were being paid and you know and everything was done, but you know I didn't have to really do anything.  Quincy bas-, basically shepherded that whole project from beginning to end so.
Speaker 1: Now, how about Luther and Marvin (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well Luther you know Luther, I'm, I'm, I'm going over his material I'm picking you know the songs out of his repertoire you know.  And, and I'm, I'm overseeing that, that that whole project.  Marvin, and but, but Luther is pretty dependable you know, we go in we; you know he comes in he plays me some, some demos you know.  I pick the ones that I want, you know, he goes in the studio and records it you know and, and now I just oversee the marketing promotion of that you know.  Marvin in the meanwhile, is like I don't know you know, progress is not being made.  And you know money is being spent you know, he, he's not you know recording you know 'cause he's you know having marital difficulties you know.  So you know I'm flying back over to Belgium and we have a number of little conflicts.  I'm saying, "Marvin you know you got to get this done, my ass is on the line you know," I had a battle, so you know.  So that's just, and then Natalie [Natalie Cole] comes over you know and she, she's, she's disenchanted with Capitol [Capitol Records], so she comes and so I'm dealing with that.  Not to mention all the other acts that I was you know dealing with that were already on the, Earth, Wind and Fire and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) [HistoryMaker] Dianne Reeves was she coming over--
Speaker 2: No, not when I was there, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, Deniece [Deniece Williams], you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: The Emotions, you know, all the other acts that were, that I kept you know trying to get them to go and, and keep it moving you know.
Speaker 1: Teena Marie, was she ever there?
Speaker 2: Not yet, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 450924
Speaker 1: So Michael [Michael Jackson] and Quincy [HistoryMaker Quincy Jones] bring you 'Thriller'?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you listen to it?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: "Billie Jean" is on there--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: "Billie Jean" is on there, "Thriller" is on there.
Speaker 2: Right, "Beat It" is on there (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) "Beat It" is on there, what do you think?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Yeah he had "P.Y.T." ["P.Y.T. (Pretty Young Thing)"] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So what do you think about this when you hear this music for the first time?
Speaker 2: Well first time I heard it, it wasn't mixed properly so I was like you know little dis, disappointed.  But I been there enough during the recording sessions to know but, but I, I had violated one of the company's [CBS/Sony Records Inc.] rules.  That is that you don't release a single until you have the completely finished product and in hand.  But in order to make the, the time schedule 'cause Christmas release, I had to take a chance and go ahead and, and release it you know.  And I had an argument with you know, well not argument, discussion with their managers to which, which record should come out first you know.  They wanted "Beat It" you know, I, I definitely wanted "Billie Jean," you know, so I was in position.  So I was able to get "Billie Jean," 'cause you know I, I'd listen to some of the other material that that Michael had done and that The Jacksons had done.  And they didn't seem like they, the company or the people had released the right singles you know.  Like on that 'Triumph,' the song, you know, I think that song "Heartbreak Hotel" ["This Place Hotel"] was, was, was the classic song.  But they wouldn't release it as a single, so.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So anyway I persuaded the management to allow me to make that as the second single, the first single we went out was "The Girl is Mine."
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know because you know, by this time you still had all this you know musical and political and racial unrest you know with taken place you know in the country.  The white pop, the pop stations, the white stations stopped playing black music, stop playing disco music you know.  Remember they had the, the burning of the records, disco records?
Speaker 1: Oh right.
Speaker 2: In Chicago [Illinois], Comiskey field [Comiskey Park, Chicago, Illinois] and running them over with you know 'cause you know they were concerned about you know women and the whites coming you know.  And blacks and so the male disc jockeys sort of rebelled.
Speaker 1: So there's a lot of tension.
Speaker 2: Yeah exactly you know busing was going on you know with the, you know.
Speaker 1: The Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: We're going into.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: So, so--
Speaker 2: So they released "The Girl Is Mine," 'cause it has Paul McCartney you know to get on the pop play you know and so you know.  That works to, to a degree to get some situation.  But 'cause to show you that the, the problem that we have you know, when I finally did get Michael, I mean Marvin's [Marvin Gaye] album released you know, and you know we released "Sexual Healing" they, the company you know wouldn't cross the record over to the pop stations you know.  They, they refused to take it to pop stations, they said the record was too black you know, it's too dirty or whatever you know.  So I, you know we, I had lot of disagreements with, with some of the other management in the pop side you know with regards to Marvin.  But, but the record was so strong, they couldn't stop the record.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I mean it's just you know, it crossed over by itself you know, people calling, banning the record and everything so.
Speaker 1: So you got it rolling now, you got Marvin's out, he finally got the record to you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: 'Thriller's' out and it's taken off.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: It, it's, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Luther's [Luther Vandross] becoming the male balladeer of all time.
Story_ID: 450925
Speaker 1: You got Luther [Luther Vandross], you have three successful things going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, that I  was, you know, right.
Speaker 1: So now what does [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold thinking at this point?
Speaker 2: Well I'll tell you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About himself?
Speaker 2: Right, well I tell you with the success of, of the 'Thriller' album you know because you know I was able to do certain things because you know I, I had a lot of power.  And I wasn't afraid you know to deal, lot of times blacks in Corporate America, at least at that point in time were afraid to speak up, you know.  Afraid to, to argue their point of view, were afraid to advocate you know for their artists and you know in, in a conference room of all white people, you know.  But I was not intimidated you know because you know I'd worked on Capitol Hill [Washington, D.C.], I been around senators.  You know so I could be just as comfortable in a honky tonk in, in Alabama as I was in the chairman of the board's office.  So you know I would speak up and you know and argue my point of view, and you know and argue for my artists you know percentage of the resources of the company [CBS/Sony Records Inc.].  And so, so that was happening I mean and, and things were starting to really pop, and then when 'Thriller' really exploded and bust off and wide, worldwide.  'Cause see I, I had sent you know, we, we had a net, we had a conference of, of international A and R [artists and repertoire] people you know.  So we met in Puerto Rico and I told some people that were coming up, so I sent direct copies of, of Michael's [Michael Jackson] record to Africa.  To Australia, to Brazil and not worried about going through our, our European office in, in London [England], 'cause lot of times they would sit on the records you know.  They wouldn't release, at least the black records, so you know I, but I just DHL [Deutsche Post DHL Group] them straight through with the alter copy and everything.  So now it's busting and number one in, in Brazil, number one in Africa, number one in Australia and then just the whole world starts going wild.
Speaker 1: Is it safe to say that Larkin Arnold was at least influential in the shaping of what we now call a, the pop artist career with Michael Jackson.  Being, being the entre into it, 'cause now there are a lot of people that whole type of, of format is used nowadays.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were the innovator of that.
Speaker 2: Well I think that that, that because of my position and, and personality and, and experience, I had the, the knowledge and the resources to be able to, to marshal our company's assets to promote Michael to a, a bigger audience than he had been on 'Off The Wall,' you know.  I mean I would do, demand that the publicity department do its job you know.  That they, they had that old stereotype that the if you put a black person on the cover of a magazine it wouldn't sell, so they wouldn't go after.  Or you know they wouldn't, you know they won't play MTV [Music Television; MTV]; I said well you know we have you know all these other artists leverage you know.  And I talk to the chairman you know, but you know now is the thing is like you know success has many, many fathers, and, and failures and orphans, so.  Yeah I mean I think that I remember sitting that, that what we had reached you know a certain number that all the different attributes that God have given me.  And the experiences that I had enabled me to, to promote that project to within the company within the world to go to this extent.
Speaker 1: Do you feel the Larkin Arnold has the ability even though people might be somewhat troubled, because some of your artists have been known to be somewhat troubled?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: For instance Michael Jackson and his troubles, Marvin Gaye, he, Marvin passed in '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, something like that.
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [sic. 1984].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Natalie Cole has had her struggles (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --and troubles--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but the, everybody we just mentioned has have been some of the most highly talented individuals also, so, so you think Larkin Arnold has an ability to see behind peep, people's personal stuff.  And it really bring out the best of what their really about?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I think I'm more tolerant you know 'cause I, I, realized that you know these artist have you know tremendous gifts from God.  And, and sometimes with, like with any gift you know you, you have burdens you know and some can overcome it, some you know.  All of us have our, our, you know personal demons you know, I have them myself you know.  So I, yeah I'm a, I'm a little bit more patient you know and more drive than, than I appreciate their, their, their gift and their artistry.
Speaker 1: Patient can we use the word patient, can we cay maybe empathetic is that a better word we can?
Speaker 2: Yeah I, I, guess so you know I mean like with Marvin would, would tell me why he had tax problems you know because he didn't wanna pay taxes to a racist government, I could you know.  I could understand and emphasize with him and empathize with that, you know.
Story_ID: 450926
Speaker 1: You stayed there [CBS/Sony Records Inc.] for maybe what eight years?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You stayed there for eight years, you had a lot of success with a lot of different artists there, and we could go on and on about all the artists.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what you left in '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you went to and started your own--
Speaker 2: Management law firm.
Speaker 1: Your own management law, and law firm.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you been doing that now for, for quite a while.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Because your ten year experience of people really coming, I mean explain how that is now, now that you've been through all the labels, you been through.  You've been a staff attorney, just in a general counsel department.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You gone through the A and R [artists and repertoire] parts, you been executive producer.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You've run whole divisions.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now you're, you got all the tools necessary to be for Arnold and Associates [Beverly Hills, California].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: From '86 [1986] to almost to present, so now what, tell us about this experience and how this is helped?
Speaker 2: Well this is, it's been very good, I mean I was quite active from '87 [1987] 'til about '90 [1990] I mean to about 2000, 2001, you know.  Which I started thinking, thinking back, but you know every act that I managed to you know, we went platinum.  Whether it was, you know, After 7, you know, Karyn White; let's see, Ralph Tresvant, you know, Teena Marie, you know it just we had just went, we had, we had a great, great, great run you know.  Mint Condition, we went gold with, you know and, and--but you know it, it was, it was good, everything went good, then I realize as I'm getting older you know like the last, I just more or less you know stopped the management part.  'Cause I, I don't like to travel as much and the music is changing again, the whole industry is changing you know.  I mean its downloading more stuff like that, and then it's the whole rap thing you know and that whole environment, so.
Story_ID: 450650
Speaker 1: So now we're here and it's 1988 and you've decided to get out of the, we'll call it the commercial side of working for the record companies.  And you, you've already started an organization, what was the name of that organization that's been running for a while you were the chairman of?
Speaker 2: Oh, Black Entertainment and Sports Lawyers Association, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was a group of, of agents and representatives and attorneys--
Speaker 2: That, that group of attorneys, those of us that were fortunate enough to get in at the early on in the entertainment business and spread the information that that we have, you know, acquired and stuff.  I was the chairman of that for like eight years.
Speaker 1: Approximately how many members were there in that organization or are there now?
Speaker 2: Well now I would say it's close to three hundred and something you know, when we started there were barely you know twenty-five (laughter) you know.
Speaker 1: And are you actually now doing hands, more hands-on or are you weaning away from, from actual hands-on management?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I'm completely you know, gone on, just leave that alone you know.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I'm, I'm a certain age the travel you know going back you know to the award show, you know, for the (unclear) time (laughter) that's no longer in my life.
Speaker 1: Right so, so you're, are you doing more consulting now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) More consulting, legal work yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you have many awards NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Executive of the Year award, the Outstanding Graduate of Howard award [Outstanding Graduate Award of Howard University School of Law].  Are you active with any of those, or those alumni groups now--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah I stay, I stay active with, with my school you know with the Howard University law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.], I'm on the board of visitors there.
Speaker 1: And how about the, the NBA [National Bar Association], the, the national (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I mean no, no that was a local, you know, chapter award--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --but yeah of course I'm, I'm involved with the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The bar association--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: And you talk about, your list goes on, you, you're, you're a former Los Angeles [California] zoo commissioner--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Oh and you're a board, you're on the board of visitors for Howard law school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 450651
Speaker 1: So you sit on many boards and you know as we go, as we continue this conversation, could you tell me, what are hopes for like, say the African American and the African American music industry, in the next few years.  What are your hopes and aspirations for?
Speaker 2: Well you know I'm, I'm very proud to see that that we have a number of black executives you know in the industry now you know.  Not only a black departments but of major, major labels you know, we got you know L.A. Reid and Sylvia Rhone and, and you know that's, that's very gratifying to, see, to see them actually head-up you know the, the entire label.  And I'm hoping that more of that happens, but you know music business is, is a decreasing business.  The, the volume sales, CDs is gone down for seven straight years, you know, downloading has had a tremendous impact.  I think the, the industry's laid off two or three thousand employees over the last four years.  So it's, it's, it's a very difficult road you know for, you know, I mean we've lost labels you know that have, you know so many labels that I, that used to be around when, when I was there.  Now just basically templates that they put on you know some other records, but they actually don't have you know functioning personnel.  You know like A&M [A&M Records], Geffen [Geffen Records], you know Capitol [Capitol Records] almost just becoming an imprint you know Elektra [Elektra Records], a lot of these labels are, are just basically disappearing, you know.
Story_ID: 450652
Speaker 1: In general work ethic terms, do you have any advice for the young person who because you're, you're--your track record is impeccable for work ethic, thing that you had to do, challenges you had to make.  Do you have any advice for the young executive in general as he's climbing this, this particular ladder, the corporate ladder?
Speaker 2: Well yeah I mean basically I mean you know the old cliche about work hard you know be the first to arrive, the last to leave you know.  And learn every, everything you can about your particular area and, and establish relationships, you know.  It's, it's amazing to me in my career how a lot of people who are parallel to me or above me or even below me you know have moved on you know to different levels and different companies you know.  And, and the relationships that you establish, so try to establish relationships with as, as many, good relationships with many people as you possibly can.  'Cause you never know when they may be in the position to help you somewhere down the road.
Speaker 1: Okay and any advice in general just as far as managing corporate life and your personal life?
Speaker 2: Well I mean you know everything has got to have a balance you know it's, it's difficult, corporate life you, you got to understand that that's, that's that's, that's a work. Don't let it become your life to the extension of your, your personal life.  'Cause you, sometimes you can wind up losing both of 'em.
Story_ID: 450653
Speaker 1: How would want [HistoryMaker] Larkin Arnold to be remembered as a person, corporate or outside of that? How do you wanna be, in the future, to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well I, I, I hope you know that you know people can say that I, I tried to do my best you know for our people you know in, in every capacity which I had an opportunity to, to help them and aid them.  To try to show an example of, of how to you know exist in the corporate world and also in, in your personal life.  And that you know I, I, I had a fortunate year to discover a lot of, of great artists that we have produced as a race, and give them an opportunity.
Story_ID: 450654
Speaker 1: Could you speak on the importance of family?
Speaker 2: Oh yes I mean family is, is without question the thing that has helped me you know, I mean I, I been involved with my, my second wife now for over twenty-five years.  And she's been a rock you know, Cynthia [Cynthia Watson Arnold] in my, in my career, and in my life and you know.  And gives me stabilizing influence and you know it keeps you grounded, and you know, it keeps you out of trouble you know.  And I don't think that you get as greater choice from anything as to see your, your offspring, your children you know.  Kevin [Kevin Arnold] and Derek [Derek Arnold] both you know turned out to be fine upstanding and productive citizens.
Speaker 1: Are they in the music industry?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, but one works in the motion picture industry, and the other works in, in the cable industry.
Story_ID: 450655
Speaker 1: Any closing remarks, advice, anything, anything that you'd like to give the viewing audience, especially the young people that'll be listening to this just in general that you might have to say to?
Speaker 2: Well you know I, I, think one of the things that that I would say this has been helpful in my career is be willing to take calculated risk, not, not unnecessary risk but calculated risk.  You know to, to don't be afraid to dream your dream and you know within, and work as hard as you can.  And, and, and if you put out positive vibes, 'cause when I look at my career as I've said earlier, so many fortuitous things have happened along the way that have aided me in my success I've had.  And I think a lot of that is from, from being positive and thinking the positive thoughts.
Speaker 1: Mr. Arnold [HistoryMaker Larkin Arnold], I want to thank you for a beautiful, wonderful interview.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much, Jacques [Jacques Lesure], I enjoyed it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 450656
Speaker 1: --This is a picture of my two sons Kevin [Kevin Arnold] and Derek [Derek Arnold] out here in Los Angeles [California] in our first apartment, taken about 1974 something like that.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This picture here is my [U.S.] Capitol Police picture that we all had to have for identification when I was starting.  Taken in Washington, D.C. when I was working on the Capitol Police force.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh yeah, I remember this picture; this is me on again, as a capitol policeman standing outside the Atomic Energy Commission.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my high school graduation picture from St Mary's high school [St. Mary's Catholic High School] taken in Phoenix, Arizona in 1960.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my mother [Annie Crump Arnold] and father [Larkin Arnold, Sr.], my sister [Nancy Arnold Penn] and myself in Phoenix, Arizona.  This was taken probably around 1956, '57 [1957].
Speaker 1: Oh this is a picture of Gregory [Gregory Hines], excuse me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Hines.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay, yeah. This is a picture of Gregory Hines and Luther Vandross were in the studio where Luther is producing Gregory's album, taken in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh this is a picture of me (laughter) when I started off in the A and R [artists and repertoire] department taken at Capitol Records with Paul McCartney and his wife Linda [Linda Eastman McCartney].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next.
Speaker 2: Oh this is a picture of me in, in grammar school taken at St. Monica's [St. Monica Catholic School], in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good, next.
Speaker 2: This is another picture of my sister and myself taken outside my [maternal] aunt's [Emily Crump Williams] place in Phoenix, Arizona where we stayed.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year approximately?
Speaker 2: This would be in 1954 to '56 [1956], '58 [1958] something like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay in the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: In the '50s [1950s] right.  Oh, this is a picture of me at Howard University [Washington, D.C.] on campus with a couple of my friends, this was taken about 1962.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of my family; this is my wife, Cynthia [Cynthia Watson Arnold] and son Kevin, stepdaughter Tiffany [ph.] and my other son Derek, at Kevin's wedding.  This is a picture of my [maternal] grandfather [William Crump] and my grandmother [Virginia Crump] and my aunts and uncles taken at a family home in Phoenix, Arizona.  This was probably taken in 1914, '16 [1916] something like that.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is pretty obvious, this is my baby picture and it was taken I guess in 1943 in Kansas City, Missouri.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in my office at Arista Records; this was taken probably in 1978.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Natalie Cole and Bill Cosby and myself taken probably around 1977 I think at the Ambassador Hotel [Los Angeles, California] when Na- with Natalie's show.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Michael Jackson, my wife Cynthia, my son Kevin and his wife Lenita [Lenita Arnold (ph.)].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is taken the night that Michael won his ten Grammys [Grammy Award] for the 'Thriller' album.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Good next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Eddie Murphy and myself at, after the Luther Vandross show at the Greek Theatre [Los Angeles, California] this was probably taken in 1982.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and Congressman Dymally [Mervyn M. Dymally] after I'm receiving Congressional Black Caucus award.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, got it.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me taken at my home this is probably taken in 2005.  This picture of me I had come back from a successful fishing trip off the waters of Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts].  And this was taken in 2007.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, good.
Speaker 1: This is the copy of the platinum album that Marvin Gaye received for the 'Midnight Love' album containing the "Sexual Healing" hit.  This was in 1983, '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next please.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead sir.
Speaker 1: This is a copy of the plaque containing gold and platinum albums that Michael sent from the 'Thriller' album.  It's a personal note that he sent to a few of us, for their work on that project.
