Story_ID: 467672
Speaker 1: My name is Jacques Lesure and I'm the interviewer. Daniel Tripoli is the videographer today and observing is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, could you please state and spell your full name for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Linda Allen. My name is spelled, L-I-N-D-A, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is May 3rd, 1961 and I was born in Los Angeles, California. And my middle name is Marie because everybody is Linda Allen--there's a lot of Linda Allens out there. So, it's really [HistoryMaker] Linda Marie Allen.
Speaker 1: And today's date, please?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 5th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview? Where are we right now?
Speaker 2: We are at my home in Hollywood, California [Hollywood, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: And your current occupation.
Speaker 2: I am currently a--I am currently an interior designer slash lighting specialist.
Story_ID: 467673
Speaker 1: Now, our next series of questions are what we call our People magazine type questions. These are our questions that allow us to know who you really are, a little more in detail. Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I love it. You know what? This is like eHarmony or something. Okay. My favorite food is (laughter), my favorite food is Indian food and spicy food. I love spicy food. I love Vietnamese food. I love exotic foods.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year are the holidays.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is Peacock Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination are the islands outside of the United States, anything South Pacific or African Seychelles islands. My favorite island is La Digue [Seychelles] in Africa.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Do you have one?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Right. Okay, we understand.
Speaker 2: No, my favorite phrase? Let me see, my favorite phrase is actually, got it.
Story_ID: 467674
Speaker 1: We're gonna go into some background of your lineage. Could you please tell me about your mother? What was her name or is her name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Eleanor Angela Allen [Eleanor Allen]. She'd be so proud of me (laughter).
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in New York [New York].
Speaker 1: And where did she grow up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in New York and then moved out to Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Now when you say New York, do you mean New York City, New York State?
Speaker 2: I mean New York City, New York.
Speaker 1: What do you know much about her background as a child growing up?
Speaker 2: Wow, you know, I would have to call her on some of it, but she was a child of, I think it was seven children and--
Speaker 1: Can you name all your--all her siblings?
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay, there is, all of them including the deceased, my Aunt Olga [ph.], my Aunt Dorothy [ph.], Aunt Mary [ph.], Uncle Walter [ph.]--oh, god, she's going to kill me on this one. Okay, there was Wendell [ph.] and there was--anyway, I don't remember the fifth one and then her. I think there's six. Is that like--okay? I can call her up on the last one, I feel really--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --Randolph [ph.]. I'm sorry. (Laughter) Sorry, Randolph. Okay, (laughter) Uncle Randolph.
Speaker 1: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother is very eloquent. I have a lot of character, I guess, nuances from my mom. My mother is a good person. She's very giving. My mother will give her last dime. And my mother loves children. She loves children. My mother--this is my mother. My mother lives in Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California], which I grew-up--and she doesn't have a whole lot of money and she bought my sister's [Lisa Allen] kids two horses. And she doesn't even have the money to do it, but she did it.
Speaker 1: Very giving (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So they can have the lifestyle that she never had--the same way that she did with my skating.
Speaker 1: Very giving lady?
Speaker 2: Very giving.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you about her life growing up, personally what she went through or things that she experienced?
Speaker 2: No, not everything but I do know that she sacrificed a lot. Her father owned a liquor store out there in Compton [California] and I used to go out there all the time and I remember going to get our favorite candy at the liquor stores and my grandmother [Mary Gregory (ph.)] would be there. My grandmother was the stern person, the person that was really almost head of the house and she helped my grandfather with the liquor store.
Story_ID: 467675
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your father. What- what's his name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Edgar Allen. And--
Speaker 1: Where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born actually out here in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 1: Did he grow up in Los Angeles?
Speaker 2: He did grow-up in Los Angeles. He actually got to see Billie Holiday in downtown L.A. with--in one of those small, smoke-filled rooms that you might know about.
Speaker 1: In the Central Avenue days, probably?
Speaker 2: In the Central Avenue district.
Speaker 1: What do you know about his background growing--his background growing up?
Speaker 2: Well he was one of--oh, gosh, eight or nine kids as well. And I do know that they have a very interesting background. My grandmother is half Japanese and half black. And so during the World War II [WWII] era, especially when the Japanese were I guess brought back to go into concentration camps, they would have to hide her. And before that they actually--she would actually get the hotel rooms at the hotel, like there would be the motel rooms that you would go to and she be the one that would actually get them.
Speaker 1: We're going to actually come back to her momentarily, but tell us a bit more about your father, his personality. How would you describe him?
Speaker 2: My father, Edgar Allen, is the nicest man. The older he gets, the more he's set in his ways, but he as well has given everything to his family. He's actually a--I would say for the record, one of the best fathers that I could ever imagine. Even more than probably a mate to my mother, he is just a very giving father.
Speaker 1: Now how far back in your lineage can you go? I've heard you mention your grandparents on, on either side, but how 'bout further than that? Can you go back to great-grandparents? Do you know anything about them, or what do you know about your lineage?
Speaker 2: Wow, the only thing I know is my grandmother's mother.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be your great-grandmother, on which side, the maternal or paternal?
Speaker 2: The paternal.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Paternal.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you know her?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay. What do you know of her?
Speaker 2: I know that she was a Japanese woman that had my grandmother with a black soldier back in World War I [WWI] and that she had to give my grandmother up to an orphanage in Washington State.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, Vancouver [Canada]--in Vancouver.
Speaker 1: BC [British Columbia, Canada]?
Speaker 2: BC.
Speaker 1: To continue that lineage then--so now you have your grandmother. And what was her name?
Speaker 2: My grandmother, her name is Hela Allen. She is ninety-six.
Speaker 1: Hela Allen? And what can you tell us about her? What kind of person is she?
Speaker 2: She is--she's a very detailed person. And she is very much into etiquette and very much into her pride as a woman and she is very giving, as well, and always put my grandfather first. She used to give him baths and call him Daddy, and the whole thing. But, she is very much the old-fashioned husband's wife and mother of all of her children.
Speaker 1: You mentioned your grandfather. How 'bout--what was his--what's his name, what's his name?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's name was Harry Allen [Harry Allen, Sr.] and he was black American, as well. He--his lineage--I--he's a light-skinned man, so I think there was some white with his parents, but I'm not exactly sure. I don't know if they were full white or not.
Speaker 1: So this is on your--on your father's side. Do you recall any incidents or great stories or experiences with your grandparents that you can recall, anything that stands out?
Speaker 2: Yes. Actually I do. My grandmother met my grandfather, Harry and Hela, on a steamship in Vancouver, I think, and that's how they met. And they moved out to--either it was Vancouver or Washington and then they moved out to L.A. together and that's how they started courting. And those are some of the things I remember her telling me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As a little girl do you recall anything in particular that, that really stands out in your mind in observing them or even being told things by them?
Speaker 2: Hm, churchgoers. A lot of respect for your elders, a lot of family gatherings with my grandmother and my grandmother made the best chocolate--I mean, I'm sorry, my grandmother made the best oatmeal cookies, the real crispy ones.
Story_ID: 467676
Speaker 1: How about on your mother's [Eleanor Allen] side--your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: My grandmother is a black woman and she has some Indian [Native American] in her, I think some Cherokee, but she was dark-skin black.
Speaker 1: Her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is--oh, my god, I can't believe--Mary Gregory [ph.]--Mary, Mary Gregory.
Speaker 1: And this is on your mother's side. And do you know your grandfather on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Her name has gotta be Mary Gregory. I'm sorry. I have--I might have to correct, I might have to make a phone call (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's okay. And--and your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, his name is--
Speaker 1: This, this is on your mother's side now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I always called him Grandpa. Can I get back to those two names (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That'll be sufficient. Grandpa will be just fine.
Speaker 2: Okay. Grandpa Gregory [ph.] (laughter). I think it's, it's--I'll find out. I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: So what kind of personalities were those two? And as far as--from what you could observe as a child growing up, what kind of people were they on that side?
Speaker 2: Yes, my grandmother and my grandfather on my mother's side were both very giving people as well. I remember that they were family-oriented people completely. A lot of kids around their house, they didn't have a lot of money. Both of my grandparents on both sides didn't really have a lot of money and they were all very giving people.
Speaker 1: Do you recall their professions on either side? What, what they did? Were they general laborers or things? What were--were they professionals, what, what were their occupations? Do you recall?
Speaker 2: Right, well like I said, my, my grandfather on my mother's side owned a liquor store and my grandmother worked in there with him. My grandfather [Harry Allen, Sr.] on my dad's [Edgar Allen] side used to be an elevator operator and then he did something else. I forget what he did but he was a, a service person.
Speaker 1: How 'bout your parents' occupations?
Speaker 2: My father is retired and my father was the records--City of Los Angeles records manager for the City of Los Angeles [California]. So any personal records and city records were archived by his division.
Speaker 1: And your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother worked at a savings and loan [association] for a while and she now works, and is about to retire, in the HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] department downtown.
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory growing up that you can recall (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wait, let me back up. My father actually developed the city records division with Mayor Bradley [Tom Bradley] during his reign.
Speaker 1: Okay. So he kind of put that into the form that it's in now?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 467677
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory growing up?
Speaker 2: Being three years old.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: (Pause) I remember that I got a spanking (laughter) and I didn't--I, I was crying and I remember my mom [Eleanor Allen] and dad [Edgar Allen] were arguing about that. That's one of my earliest recollections and--
Speaker 1: Who administered the spanking? Your mother or father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother (laughter). And then I also remember--oh, my gosh, okay. I remember I was afraid of the dark and so I was in the room right next to them and all of a sudden they would be sleeping, I'd go, "Mommy," (laughter) and they'd be like, "You get her." "You get her." "No." "Yeah." "Daddy, (laughter) Mommy, Daddy." And they'd have to run in and get me, you know, and my mother would end up sleeping with me or something.
Speaker 1: What was the spanking about? Do you recall? Something you'd done possibly or whatever (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was probably something I did.
Story_ID: 467678
Speaker 1: Can you describe what your family life was like in your family?
Speaker 2: My mother [Eleanor Allen] stayed home with me up until I was around five years old and--no, I take that back. My mother stayed at home with me and my sister up until around eight or nine years old. So, she would be a family person. I remember my mother would take me around her friends' kids and I had a pretty good childhood that way.
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned your sister. How many siblings do you have?
Speaker 2: I have one sister.
Speaker 1: And could you give us her name, please?
Speaker 2: Her name is Lisa Allen.
Speaker 1: And you said you grew up in Leimert Park, which is a very famous section of Los Angeles [California]. What street did you live on?
Speaker 2: 6th Avenue and Rodeo [Road].
Speaker 1: Can you describe your block and the community around there at that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, my gosh. My block had a few children that were approximately the same age, including myself, and we would have one of those garage types of dances where we would like do The Jackson Five, you know, and so it was really kind of fun to do that.
Speaker 1: What was--what was some of the--go ahead.
Speaker 2: I was going to say that we used to all play in the neighborhood and go to each others' houses and bake cakes and cookies and a lot of us went to the same schools.
Speaker 1: So this would be late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] we're talking about, correct?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the sights around there, the sounds, the smells around your neighborhood that you can recall, around Leimert Park at that time?
Speaker 2: Well we lived right around 6th Avenue School [6th Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], which is now Dublin School [sic.], and I remember if I was sick and I'd have to stay home, I always remember the children playing, the sounds of the children playing. And, I remember the peach tree in the backyard and I remember the avocado tree that we used to have. And there was also the sound of the tether bar- the tether ball that we had in our backyard.
Speaker 1: Are there any other special memories you have about--about your community and those things at that time, anything else that just really rings out loud to you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--we were next door neighbors with one of my still best friends, Michelle Mouton and she is six months apart from me and we grew up together. And, actually I consider Michelle one of my sisters as well because my sister was actually adopted when I was six and she was five. I've known Michelle when I was three.
Story_ID: 467679
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: 6th Avenue [6th Avenue Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], which is now Dublin [sic.].
Speaker 1: And at that school, at 6th Avenue were there any teachers that really influenced you that stand out, any teachers at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have to embellish that, because--or add to it. Um, what I did was after 6th Avenue, I went to kindergarten and part of first grade and then I ended up at Transfiguration [Transfiguration Elementary School, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay. And, so I went to Catholic school from first to eighth grade and in first grade I remember--in fourth grade, I remember Mrs. Sewell [ph.], who was a lay teacher. She was not quite a nun, and she was great. And I also remember a nun, I, I forget her name, but I remember the experience of going up in the convent and baking cakes with the nuns and I decided at that point, I wanted to be a nun (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was very quiet. I was an A student.
Speaker 1: Perfect to be a nun, right?
Speaker 2: Perfect to be a nun. That's how my sister [Lisa Allen]--was like Tasmanian devil, she'd troll in there, and so--
Speaker 1: So what kind of--you said you were a very well-behaved child, an A student?
Speaker 2: I was very quiet, very quiet child.
Speaker 1: Now when you say quiet, does that mean you were quietly mischievous or quietly well-behaved?
Speaker 2: I was shy. So, I was just someone that--I never really spoke up. I was always on my mom's [Eleanor Allen] leg, you know.
Speaker 1: Now outside of the aspiration of being a nun, were there any other dreams or aspirations you had in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a mermaid.
Speaker 1: Wanted to be a mermaid.
Speaker 2: Now you mentioned that you--that you were going to Transfiguration and that you had--your family had a strong church background. Did your family attend church on a regular basis?
Speaker 1: My family did attend church on a regular basis.
Speaker 2: Do you recall the name of the church you went to?
Speaker 1: Yes, we went to Transfiguration [Church of the Transfiguration, Los Angeles, California] (laughter). Okay.
Speaker 2: Because that's where I went to Catholic school and my father [Edgar Allen] is still a--he still does the tithings at twelve o'clock Mass. If you were going to go over there right now on Sundays, my dad is there religiously.
Speaker 1: And your experiences there were that of the baking the cakes with the nuns. Any other experiences in the church that you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember that I was an ugly duckling. I was someone that was not very popular because I was shy. I didn't really know how to dress myself or anything. I remember in second grade I had scratched my head (laughter) and the picture of me in second grade is atrocious. My hair is all over the place (laughter) and I'm smiling this quirky-like smile, like (background noise), you know, so--
Speaker 1: So that was from the first to the eighth grade at Transfiguration. Where'd you go to junior high school? Well that was--that included junior high, correct?
Speaker 2: That included junior high, seventh grade up through eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Now besides Michelle Mouton, who were some of your friends during this time period, maybe in school? Do you recall anybody? Did she go to the same school with you--Transfiguration?
Speaker 2: Yes. No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No. Michelle went to public school--
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: --and she did not go to the same school as we did.
Speaker 1: Who--
Speaker 2: But, I also had another girlfriend who, uh, my father saw at Transfiguration just a couple of months ago, and I'm in the process of trying to contact her again. Her name is Lynn Collins and she is my best friend in grade school.
Speaker 1: Lynn Collins.
Speaker 2: Lynette.
Speaker 1: Lynette Collins [ph.].
Story_ID: 467680
Speaker 1: So now you're in school, you're--you've gone through the first through eighth grade at Transfiguration [Transfiguration Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], and now you're going--what activities did you participate in, outside of the normal elementary school. Were there any extra side things that you were starting to develop?
Speaker 2: Yes, well I have to back up because that's kind of where my skating came in. Um, when my sister [Lisa Allen] and--when my sister was adopted, the social worker had suggested that we get into a sport and so because I wanted to be a ballerina or a mermaid or whatever I wanted to be and my sister wanted to ice skate--because our neighbor, Denise Swanson [ph.], was taking lessons at Culver City ice rink [Culver City Ice Arena, Culver City, California]. And, so my parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] decided to put us into ice skating at Culver City. And we--our coach was Mabel Fairbanks who's actually the first black coach and also the first black ice ballet skater. So, it was very memorable and we started--my sister was seven to eight and I was eight to nine when we started skating. So, I was still well into grade school at Transfiguration.
Speaker 1: This, this would have been early '70s [1970s], possibly (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: So now this sport comes up, ice skating, did you have any input, did you pick from several things? Did they offer you the ice skating or, or did they just take you and decide, and say you're going to Culver City--let's get you in some skating? How'd it happen?
Speaker 2: Well, because my sister was kind of the priority child in those days, and so they put a--gave--my parents gave her a lot of attention and, I always say, and I don't know if it's true or not, but I became the overachiever because my sister was getting all the attention and I was really trying to get that of my parents.
Story_ID: 467681
Speaker 1: So, you've got various influences and things going on now. You have a new--you have a sister [Lisa Allen] that's being, being--as you said, she's being monitored heavily, heavily, and her activities are being focused upon. So, you have a new sport that you're gonna go get involved with and you're--you wanna be a nun and a mermaid at this point also during this year along with whatever--during these years. Who else was influencing you? Were there any relatives who influenced you? Did you have any uncles or aunts that really were--stand out--stand out right now that you really liked and admired quite a bit?
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother's sister, Mary [Mary Gilbert], my Aunt Mary and my Uncle Stan Gilbert, who is another musician and those people I admired. They really gave me some opportunities to get into the music industry a little bit. I--as I got older, I would actually work with Stan Gilbert while he would play stand-up bass and I would sing--I would sing the--what do you call it, the notes and practice my singing, because I wanted to be a singer in the midst of my skating at one point. But--and then my, my Aunt Mary was there mentoring me and she--I would go skating in Paramount [Paramount Iceland, Paramount, California] and I would stay at her house that evening. And then my--my other aunt, Aunt Patsy [ph.] and Uncle Donald [ph.] are also my favorite aunt and uncle on my father's [Edgar Allen] side. And my Aunt Patsy is, like, the utmost in etiquette and we always go to teas to this day, and she's always been doing the girly-girl things for me and her packages were the best wrapped packages and still are to this day. I mean they're boutique-looking packages, (laughter) she's quite talented.
Story_ID: 467682
Speaker 1: So, you're in elementary school, you know these different influences going on, you're learning the art of etiquette because from what we hear your grandparents, your aunts, they're very much into that, all the ladies are, and you're getting into ice skating. Tell us about your first experiences with that.
Speaker 2: I remember that once I started skating, I really liked that sport. It was something that I can get involved in emotionally. Being that I was still young and that I was shy and that I had not reached out yet, personality-wise, I could reach out in a physical way that I found out that, you know, with music, I loved music and the fact that I just loved the art and thrill and challenge of ice skating.
Speaker 1: So your first time meeting Mabel?
Speaker 2: Mabel Fairbanks.
Speaker 1: Your first time, you're going to Culver City [Culver City Ice Arena, Culver City, California], you're in the skates, you're learning the sport in its rawest form. Did you take to it instantly? Were you deemed a natural?
Speaker 2: I was not a natural, my sister [Lisa Allen] was a natural.
Speaker 1: Talk to us about that a little bit.
Speaker 2: My sister was quite talented in almost anything she did. You know, she was just very witty and she picked up things, and she still does, very much. She's very intuitive. And she would just be very--she was--she was very coordinated. So--a little more coordinated than I. I kind of had a growth spurt there and she just was proportioned growing up, so when you're doing the jumps and, and you're getting into that type of sport, it was much more of a natural inclination for her. But, I had the passion for it, and that passion sustained me and she had passions for other things that most kids her age do and she ended up getting out of skating and I continued.
Speaker 1: So, you're skating and for the viewer, this is not just a--at this point, it's not just a pastime. It's becoming, quite a bit of your time is spent in this particular sport. Is it fair to say that?
Speaker 2: It is very fair to say that the time became very intense as a child even. I remember at Transfiguration [Transfiguration Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], by the time I had gotten into ninth grade my parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] had switched me out of Catholic school and had placed me into schools that would allow me to transfer PE [physical education] for ice skating.
Story_ID: 467683
Speaker 1: So, what were your av- average days or weeks like, say in elementary school [Transfiguration Elementary School, Los Angeles, California], prior to high school because we're going to move there momentarily, but what were your elementary days like? Was it school and skating?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was school and skating. Just like that. Let me--no, it was skating and school. (Laughter) It was skating and school. For example, I would get to bed at 8 or 9:00 at night. I would wake up at 4:45. I would throw my clothes on. My mother [Eleanor Allen] would take me to Culver City ice rink [Culver City Ice Arena, Culver City, California] for a 5:30 skating session.
Speaker 1: 5:30 in the morning?
Speaker 2: 5:30 in the morning. And I am around twelve or thirteen at this time, maybe eleven. And then we would--I would skate until 7:45 and my mother would sleep in the car or my father [Edgar Allen], whoever would take us, and then they would proceed to take us and drop us off at school. And then they'd take--and then as we got into junior high school, we transferred to Culver Junior High [Culver City Junior High School; Culver City Middle School, Culver City, California], where we could walk to the rink afterwards (laughter) because they got kind of smart on that one. They were like, you know, "Get them close to the rink." So, my mother would take me and drop me off in the morning and--for a skating session and then I would walk to junior high and then I would walk back.
Speaker 1: Now with this kind of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To the rink.
Speaker 1: --with this kind of schedule or rigorous timeframe that you were--that you were in, did you all know at this point that this is something--that this is something that you wanted to do professionally or even for a--on the--on the amateur, amateur level did, did you know or was this just how you occupied your time? What was the purpose of all of this skating?
Speaker 2: The purpose was to compete and to become an Olympic star, to become an Olympic champion.
Speaker 1: When did you decide this would be the route, or when did you even know about an Olympic champion skater? When did you get this information? When did you decide this?
Speaker 2: It was a dream, you know. It was something that I dreamt when I first started skating. I used to see all the other kids on the ice that were competing and Mabel [Mabel Fairbanks] was great in exposing us to these practice sessions. Um, Tai Babilonia and Randy Gardner grew up with me. We were all nine, ten and eleven years old and upstairs in--we called it the warm room, because it was the room outside the cold rink, and we would walk across this ballet room, basically with Mabel telling us, "I am beautiful. I am gorgeous. I am lovely to behold." (Laughter) And that was--that set the tone for our positive thinking, for us to really know in our hearts that we were going to become champions.
Story_ID: 467684
Speaker 1: You're in a sport that is not a traditional, we'll call it--not a traditional black sport. How many other--well you, well you mentioned a few people, but how many other people were there--were--absolutely African American who were taking skating at this time?
Speaker 2: There were a handful of children, however, not many of them made it past a certain level, because it was a really expensive sport. And, I do remember Bobby Beauchamp, who was another skating, Ice Capades star. He was in the show with me and he competed and grew up with us. Tai Babilonia, who is basically black, part Filipino, and Richard Ewell and Michelle McCladdie, who were ice skating pair champions that went up to nationals [U.S. Figure Skating Championships]. And then there was Fionda Tiard [ph.], who actually went into Ice Capades. However, they did--they, they were good. They were good, you know. I mean, they all had their fame in certain areas. So, I can't say I was the only black, you know, but, I mean, this was during the '70s [1970s] and this was at a time where there was a, you know, a lot of more integration going on in the skating rinks and things, and so I was very lucky to be exposed to Culver City [Culver City Ice Arena, Culver City, California]. It was very mixed, so that was great. However, once you got--after part of a certain level, like, there were only, like maybe two or three of who I named that actually got up to a national level. All the others, they just kind of did their own thing.
Story_ID: 467685
Speaker 1: Now you mentioned the expense. For the viewers, tell us about what it takes--what it took then and possibly what it takes now, in regards to learning figure skating.
Speaker 2: Well back in those days a pair of boots were three hundred dollars, you know. A custom ice skating outfit was three to six hundred dollars. I mean now--I mean you can go to Bob Mackie [Bob Mackie Design Group Ltd.] and get an outfit for thousands of dollars. I mean, my mother [Eleanor Allen] was great, in that she used to go to Holman Church [Holman United Methodist Church, Los Angeles, California]. After Transfiguration [Church of the Transfiguration, Los Angeles, California], they, they--my mother went to Holman and she and Reverend Lawson [James Lawson] actually put together a group called the Friends of Linda Allen [ph.]. And these--this group of people actually helped pitch me and got funding for me to assist in the skating expense. And actually even, I think, were a part of the forerunners of getting me in a June issue of 1977 for Ebony magazine, which was this big five-page spread that I didn't even know if I wanted to be in at the time.
Speaker 1: So you had endorsements?
Speaker 2: I had some endorsements through Holman and Mr. Reverend Lawson--Dr. Reverend Lawson.
Story_ID: 467686
Speaker 1: Now we've seen things--now, of course you did say that the racial tensions had kind of subsided in the country. Things were more open now across the country. A lot had happened, so you're into the '70s [1970s] now and we'll say things are pretty--are, are less--are less heated now. But, did you still find an undercurrent--as you moved up the ranks, was there an undercurrent of racial, like, "How did you get here?" "Why are you here?" Did you--did you notice any of that?
Speaker 2: Yes. Twofold, I did notice it. I remember Lorraine Bouchard [ph.], she had a birthday party and this was when I think I was eleven, maybe, or twelve, and all her friends who were my friends were invited except me and she said that she couldn't invite me because her mom thought that I would feel out of place because I would be the only black there.
Speaker 1: And so you recall that and, and was that a--was that something kind of painful for you at that time? Was it kind of painful for you?
Speaker 2: It was very painful.
Speaker 1: And, and you talked to your parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] about it? And what did they say?
Speaker 2: Well, they said, "Don't you worry about it," you know. But, my father is a great man, in that he always kept discrimination at bay with me. I mean in saying that, he always never--he never wanted me to feel there were barriers to keep me from raising the bar. And, so I never really learned about discrimination very much. He felt that he didn't ever--he felt that he didn't want me to have an excuse not to do my best and that there's so many people out there that feel that they have barriers and that they can use segregation as an excuse for not making it in life.
Story_ID: 467687
Speaker 1: Tell us about your first victory in competition and preparing for it and then actually doing it at whatever level it might've been.
Speaker 2: My first competition, I was in white and--
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: I was probably ten. And I was in preliminary girls. And, I skated to some classical music and actually I skated to Tai Babilonia's old record (laughter). And, I was always into the adagio theme, which means that I was really practiced on being graceful. And I just knew--I wasn't afraid, I wasn't afraid, you know. And, I was a dedicated, young skater and I did not win, but I did get third, so. And that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you placed?
Speaker 2: Yeah. And that was an All Year Figure Skating Club, which is now--was the sponsor for, I think, the Olympics, like, a couple--I mean, All Year Figure Skating Club has, like, gone up. I mean, I think it was like--at nationals [U.S. Figure Skating Championships]--it was at Staples Center [Los Angeles, California], All Year Figure Skating Club was, like, on the ice. I was like, "Oh, my gosh, I was brought up with All Year Figure Skating Club."
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so--
Speaker 1: So you recall--so you--so you're in a competition. You placed third and that's great. So, now you're--you have the bug now--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --for, for competition.
Speaker 2: I had the bug. And I used to sit in my living room with headphones on--those big old headphones. And we would do things like splice music together. I had one of those, those machines where you could pause and then start and pause and stop. So I used to end up splicing my own music together and that became a pastime for me.
Speaker 1: You were mixing.
Speaker 2: I was mixing.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was mixing and so I would mix. And I mixed classical music. I mixed the slow and the fast, because you had to have a fast in the beginning, a slow, an adagio, and then fast again, in order to get all of your elements together, 'cause you had technical merit and composition and style. And so, I used to do that--I used to sit, I was quiet. I used to sit in the corner in the living room and mix music.
Speaker 1: Now television was, was in effect then. Did you watch Ice Capades on television when you--when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: I used to watch competitions, and I used to watch anything that had to do with ice skating.
Speaker 1: And did you notice things that--I mean, in particular as you're in a sport, or in a particular craft, you see things differently from everybody else. Did you notice things differently and say things like, "I can do that," or did you ever have those kind of moments?
Speaker 2: I always have those, I can do that moments, you know. I mean, I, I am a dreamer, you know. And so I've always thought that I could do that.
Story_ID: 467688
Speaker 1: So, you're moving up now through high school. What high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to a couple of different high schools, because by this time I was well-involved in skating, so my parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] actually took me out of full-time high school and I went to University High [University High School, Los Angeles, California]. Well from, from Culver City Junior High [Culver City Junior High School; Culver City Middle School, Culver City, California], I went to University High because they would allow me to go to school part-time and because my skating was so extensive, that was points that added to my total curriculum. But--and then after that I went to Crenshaw High [Crenshaw High School, Los Angeles, California] for just like one or two semesters for the SWAS program [School Within a School program] they called it. And it was basically a correspondence--internal correspondence school for, for talented kids, I guess, where you could kind of go at your own pace. So--
Speaker 1: So at this time--this--these were very novel and unique programs that allowed children that were endowed with other skills to still get their academic education, but really focus on their craft.
Speaker 2: Right. And then my last year of high school my parents took me out of school completely and I was going to correspondence school--Santa Monica correspondence, and that was--or Santa Monica Professional [ph.], which was a correspondence school for actors.
Speaker 1: So, basically you were--you were making sure that you were self-educating yourself to a certain point? You had the correspondence--so, you really didn't have a lot of teachers. Did you have a lot of--
Speaker 2: No, (laughter) I didn't. I mean I got some sense of high school. Junior high was more full-time, I remember that fully, where I took my sewing class and all of that. But, by the time I got into high school, I basically took the basics and then everything else was skating.
Speaker 1: Now you're competing heavily now in high school. You're--
Speaker 2: I'm competing heavily.
Speaker 1: You're--what level would you say you were on at this point in say your first couple of years of high school?
Speaker 2: Well there are eight tests that you take in figure skating and I actually passed the eighth test. After you pass the eighth test, you're considered a gold medalist, not just when you place first in a competition. So, I got up to a gold medalist--
Speaker 1: How old (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) status.
Speaker 1: --how old were you?
Speaker 2: I was around sixteen.
Story_ID: 467689
Speaker 1: Okay, now here you are in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]. You all were still living in Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California] area at this time. You--and your life is little bit different probably from everybody else in the neighborhood and those that you would consider your friends. What was being said, what was going on with you during that time period? You were--they're seeing you grab these boots over--and skating. What were the comments from the neighborhood kids?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Especially as a teenager, because there's teenage things that go on and you're not really in it.
Speaker 2: I was all over the map. You know, I have to tell you, my parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] were great where they kept us socialized in my neighborhood, as well as socialized in my skating crowd. So, I still had a little bit of socialization in Leimert Park and my--I remember my neighbor, Michelle Mouton, I remember her telling me, "You can't do that. You can't--you can't do that, Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Marie Allen]." I mean, but, you know, and placing limits on that. Or also, people telling me--people not really supporting me that much in my neighborhood, you know. I really navigated towards the kids that I skated with. I didn't have a whole lot in common.
Speaker 1: Do you think, you know, if we look at some of the people now, like, Venus [Venus Williams] and Serena [Serena Williams], do you think it was the same kind of feeling sometimes with them having to work as hard as they did and do--can you relate to what I've heard them say they've gone through playing tennis all the time?
Speaker 2: Yes, I can relate to that. You know, I mean, you're in a bubble. You're in your own world really and I mean it was not something that I had a lot of things in common with kids that I grew up with, except the past.
Speaker 1: How many hours a day were you spending now skating and practicing?
Speaker 2: Uh, this time I'm spending from 5:00 in the morning 'til 10:00 in the morning with a break until 12:00 and then skating until probably 2:00 or 3:00 in the afternoon.
Speaker 1: And then competing at various times over, over a month or whatever (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and I would do that around five days a week.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Five to six days a week.
Speaker 1: So it's skating, skating, skating?
Speaker 2: Skating, skating, skating.
Story_ID: 467690
Speaker 1: And wh- what was your sister [Lisa Allen] doing at this time?
Speaker 2: My sister decided to get out of skating probably when she was around fourteen, because she was a troublemaker (laughter), and so she would get herself in trouble and hang around all the kids that would just make a ruckus in the rink and so my parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen], like, pulled her out (laughter) and told her to--you know, they put her back in Catholic school and then she was being the, the, you know, mischievous Catholic school girl and they pulled her out of there and they said you're going to Fairfax [Fairfax Senior High School, Los Angeles, California] (laughter), until you can prove yourself. And so that's what she did and--
Speaker 1: How are you and her relating at this point? Because now she's Miss Talented and you're Miss Determined. How are you all relating--and now you're, it's a big deal about you now? As a matter of fact, you get to go to funny kinds of schools. You don't have to go to regular school. What's going on between you and her now?
Speaker 2: She--you know, interesting enough--I mean, yeah, I think there was some, a little bit of jealousy there probably, as I think about it now. I mean, but also my sister was very smart. My sister was the person that decided that she didn't wanna study in class and took the proficiency test and passed, and didn't have to go to, like, the end of her high school year. So my sister--yeah, my sister was a manipulator, too, but she's sweet for the record, sweet girl, I love you, um-hm.
Story_ID: 467691
Speaker 1: A lot of times people ask this question what, what were you thinking you wanted to be? You knew now--at this point are you going to be a professional skater?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely. At this point, I am going to be a professional skater and to the level that I was hanging around the future stars of Ice Capades and, and ice skating. You know, not only was I competing at this point, and having practice sessions with Tai [Tai Babilonia] and Randy [Randy Gardner], but also with all the other Olympic hopefuls, like Dorothy Hamill would skate at our rink, and, you know. Um, gosh, I remember so many, so many skaters Brian Boitano, all of 'em--they all used to skate at Santa Monica [Santa Monica Ice Capades Chalet Rink, Santa Monica, California].
Story_ID: 467692
Speaker 1: So I think we all now have a sense of what it took to get to the competition. We could go through a lot of the competitions. I'm sure there were glory moments. Let's talk about the big highlight for you. What was the biggest highlight? You--you're in high school now, you're high school age. You're moving through your teens, and now you're becoming a young adult and skating now. You've been doing it for now, maybe, what almost ten years now--or more? And what's the next step for you now? You're, you're coming out of your, your so-called high school years, moving into another area of your life. What happened next?
Speaker 2: Right. Well I have to back up just a little bit. There were two moments in my--not only in my career, but in my life--something that changed my life.
Speaker 1: Let's hear about that.
Speaker 2: All right. When I was around fourteen or fifteen years old, I had two coaches. There's a technical merit coach that works on your jumps and spins and there's a composition and style coach that works on your style and your ballet moves and your presentation skills. And the composition and style coach, Lila Morgan [ph.], was someone who had told us about this book called 'Inner Tennis' ['Inner Tennis: Playing the Game,' W. Timothy Gallwey], and she had me read this book--and along with Mabel Fairbanks telling us, you know--having us look in the mirror and telling ourselves how wonderful we were. And with Lila Morgan placing this positive thinking in my head, I went out, I read this book and we actually practiced on ice that I had already won a competition before I won it. So, I went to Visalia in California for a competition and I was the underdog for this competition. I remember almost being brainwashed to the point of knowing that I was going to win this competition in practice, to the level of actually winning it, and I was not supposed to win it and--
Speaker 1: You were fourteen?
Speaker 2: And I was fourteen. And so, you know, how people talk about 'The Secret' [Rhonda Byrne] now and all these other positive thinking types of things, those are things that I was brought up in and they're just kind of, like--they're emerging once again, recycling. But, these are things that allowed me to get to the next level of my career.
Speaker 1: So, you won that competition at fourteen--
Speaker 2: I won that and--and that set the tone.
Speaker 1: And what was--and what was the benefit of winning that particular competition?
Speaker 2: The benefit of winning that, that competition was regional visibility. So the, the people in that region that actually, you know won the Visalia competition that was--that was good for visibility. It all added up to--
Speaker 1: So that region being California?
Speaker 2: California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: California. However, it wasn't the main competition, but it was--it was definitely something that set the record, set the tone of how I would continue my competitions and my competitiveness and my frame of mind in the future.
Speaker 1: So what happened after that?
Speaker 2: Right. So, then I actually started skating with the kids that were making their marks in skating and I knew that I could, because inside I knew I could, you know. Like, you have to go into a jump knowing you're gonna land it before you land it. So, that's exactly what I did. And I actually got up to Pacific Coast [Pacific Coast Sectional Figure Skating Championships] and I was short of being in the nationals competition [U.S. Figure Skating Championships], but I got right up there. And I think--I was the forerunner for Debi Thomas at that time.
Speaker 1: So the nationals weren't quite made, but you--but you got right as close as you could?
Speaker 2: I got as close as I could. And the only reason why I didn't make it to nationals this one year is Gary Visconti. He was my coach at the time and we were practicing and practicing and practicing to get into this one competition and somehow, someway they failed to get my application in before the deadline and I was excluded that one year that I was poised to win, and I couldn't make it.
Speaker 1: Do--how did that--how did you feel about that at that--
Speaker 2: I felt devastated. My parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] were completely devastated. I mean, I forget what they did. They did everything short of, you know, probably--
Story_ID: 467693
Speaker 1: So, you're seventeen years old. You've made it through quite a few different ranks in the skating world, and you're at the nationals [U.S. Figure Skating Championships] and there's an application that was supposed to be sent in that didn't occur that, that preempted you out of the com- competition. Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, this competition is the competition that is the forerunner to nationals and the Olympics, so you've got your regional competition, your sectional competition, which is a little bit more of the states, and the nationals, which completes the whole entire--and then of course, worlds [World Figure Skating Championships] and Olympics. Well, it was the regional one that I got--that I didn't get my application in, which was not good because it wasn't like I had passed regionals to get to sectionals or, or nationals. I mean, I was at a point where I couldn't even, like, get to the next step and so it was really (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So now is it the coach's [Gary Visconti] responsibility to do that for you?
Speaker 2: Well, he is a coach. And my parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] were there--I was told once about the deadline and I was just so busy skating. I mean I didn't know and he forgot to tell my parents about it, I guess. And my parents--I mean my, you know--I mean, I'm not going to say it was his fault, I'm just going to say that it didn't get in.
Speaker 1: Okay, it didn't get in and you were somewhat disappointed behind it--very disappointed, devastated was the word you used a bit--
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: --you used.
Speaker 2: --I was devastated.
Speaker 1: So what did you decide to do at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, what we decided to do at the point was--my coach, his name is Mr. Nicks, we all called him Mr. Nicks, John Nicks, and he's the same coach for Tai Babilonia and Randy Gardner and for Sasha Cohen and a lot of people that had names in skating. And he set up to have me sign a contract with Ice Capades and go into the show.
Story_ID: 467694
Speaker 1: Okay now Ice Capades, this was the traveling ice show. As a young man I can remember the Ice Capades. I can remember being told that you're going to the Ice Capades. As a young man, I can remember my reaction was okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So tell me about this, now this is a professional, touring ice show. How, how did you feel about being in that?
Speaker 2: This is the first time--at that time I was--it was '80 [1980] to '81 [1981] that I was in the show. It was the first time that I actually got paid for skating. During those times you couldn't actually get paid and keep your competitive status. If you did, you would forfeit that. But nowadays--today it's different.
Speaker 1: So you decided that, "Okay, I've skated in this competition. I've skated in that level before. Now I'm going to do something different with my skating." Why did you decide that?
Speaker 2: Because skating is extremely political and because there was a slot for me and, like I said, it was devastating for me not to get in that slot [at the Pacific Coast Sectional Figure Skating Championships]. That was the year that I was going to win. That was the year that I was at my peak to win, physically, as well. So, when that didn't happen I got disillusioned and I was always very good in competition and style, meaning my performance was always at a higher rank than sometimes my technical merit, so I was nice to watch. And it was interesting in that in the show--a lot of times the skaters that have technical merit aren't really the best performers, and so the next step that one always takes is to go into the show. And sometimes even the best skaters that were really, really good in competition don't really do all that great in the show and they end up kind of fizzling out. But, I had a great time. They decided to give me a solo and a--basically I was a principal skater as well as a line skater.
Speaker 1: Let's back up a moment. Now at this point, this is in the--you're nineteen, twenty?
Speaker 2: Eighty [1980].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're about eighteen, nineteen years old, somewhere, somewhere thereabouts, and the Ice Capades at this point, had how many African Americans, at this point?
Speaker 2: They had one other.
Speaker 1: So you were the second?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had one, one other girl in another company and three--there were three touring companies in Ice Capades. There's East Company, those are the East Coast. There's West Company, which is the West Coast. And there's Continental [Continental Company] that does all the little cities that nobody wants (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to East Coast, okay, 'cause I wanted to do New York [New York], Madison Square Garden, the whole thing, which I did. I was in East Coast. There was a girl in West Coast, her name was Robin [ph.]--oh gosh, I, I should be shot for not knowing her name, but anyway, she was someone that had a--I don't--no, she didn't have a principal. She was--she was a line skater with an understudy. So, yeah, I was really one of the few that was out there doing Ice Capades at that time. It was--
Speaker 1: In the history of Ice Capades, how many black skaters have they had, in the history? 'Cause you got in, the Ice Capades had been going on for how many years prior to you getting in?
Speaker 2: Right. In the history the Ice Capades had probably been going on since--well there's Ice Follies first and then Ice Capades kind of came along, so I'm not exactly sure, but probably the '50s [sic.] or something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, yeah, you can count 'em on one hand.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was one of the blacks that you would count on one hand.
Speaker 1: So what, did your parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] say? Okay, you're no longer gonna be in the competitive part. Now you're gonna be in the show. What did your parents say?
Speaker 2: My parents said get it out of your system while you're young. Go have a great time and, you know, I think it's good for you to have this opportunity to do this.
Speaker 1: And what did your sister [Lisa Allen] say?
Speaker 2: My sister was cool. You know, she, she really--my sister didn't care. My sister was all about her at that point, so (laughter). No, I mean she was supportive. I mean she thought it was great.
Story_ID: 467695
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're in this touring company. Was it--I'm sure there was an audition process and you got the spot, and how are you accepted by the other skaters that were in the show and the people that ran the show?
Speaker 2: Wow, you know, that was intense. That was intense (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about it momentarily.
Speaker 2: I was one of the few blacks, you know. That's where I felt it, you know, and I had an understudy role which turned into a principal role, all in one swoop. There was a girl that hurt herself and I basically took on the principal role of Kismet. And I was the sorceress of Baghdad.  And I did a solo, basically for most of the year, which I was--it was basically my role. When we were in Chicago [Illinois], when we were in small towns, neighboring towns in--around New York [New York], Mondays were dark, okay. And Mondays were--was the PR [public relations], the media when the newspapers would actually get us.
Speaker 1: So, in theatre terms, we'll say there was no show on Mondays.
Speaker 2: There was no show (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For those that don't understand the jargon.
Speaker 2: There was no show on Monday.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I was always pulled into PR, I was always pulled into this media day, you know. And, I remember actually in Chicago being pulled in once again, because--I couldn't--that was like my only day off, okay. And the only reason why they would film me was because I was black. Now, I have to back-up on this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've had a learning curve in my life on what being black is all about. You know, I mean, I don't know how you wanna--like, I forgot to kind of put this in there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, you know, when I was younger I was never really taught about discrimination, remember? And so I always wanted to achieve things just based on my own worth and, and curriculum and who I was. And I never realized that being black American was something that enhanced my life, and I started realizing that after that. When I was in Ice Capades I was still young, I was twenty and I was around a lot of whites and so, I always tried to kind of suppress the black side of me until a few years later when I realized that it was really something special and wonderful. So, at this point, I--in my life, I had felt that I was taken into these media days that were taking away and were discriminating against me. Okay? And, so I complained. I went to my bosses and I told them that I didn't feel comfortable that I was being in their local papers as a black ice skater. You know, to me that was something that was negative because why wasn't I placed in there based on my own merit?
Speaker 1: So you didn't wanna be a token?
Speaker 2: I didn't wanna be a token. That's what I thought it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, so and I remember a lot of comments being made to me at that time about being black in the show.
Speaker 1: Like, by, by, by people in the show? Or--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just by people who were ignorant in the show, you know. They--line skaters who never really had a career that would, you know, go up to me and just, you know, ask me if I tan. Or, you know, just stupid stuff. You know, just--
Speaker 1: Or, or you became--did you become the, the liaison of blackness to explain to them black--what goes in the black world?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I was--exactly. Black--yeah, exactly, exactly. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you can go more into that. They asked you silly questions. Give us an example of some of those silly questions, like tanning and what else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, tanning. I--one question is that my genetics are different than their genetics and that I'm naturally more athletic. You know just some weird stuff.
Story_ID: 467696
Speaker 1: Now you traveled the country and the world, or just the country?
Speaker 2: I traveled the country.
Speaker 1: Okay. How were you accepted when you went to these different--these different coliseums and places? How were you accepted by the fans?
Speaker 2: I was accepted pretty well, because nobody knew what I was. I mean, I wore a wig and when I have a wig on--and I was playing a Middle Eastern and I was playing in Kismet. So, I guess because of the color of my skin it could have, you know, I could be whoever, I mean.
Speaker 1: Now we know in productions, especially long-term productions, the band, the people that could be together quite often, there's a camaraderie that's dealt with. Those, those troops become family almost. Did you feel kind of separate and by yourself on these tours?
Speaker 2: In the beginning, until Tai [Tai Babilonia] and Randy [Randy Gardner] came into the tour towards the middle of the tour, and since we grew up together, all of a sudden they got, you know, all of the prime media attention and I was one of their best friends. So, all of a sudden I was someone to be sought after (laughter). So it was--it was kind of fun. I mean, I thank them for that part. But, I think I held my own. I mean, I've always--I've always paved my own paths, and I think it was something--it was a big learning curve for me and a great experience to be able to go into the show [Ice Capades] and to have to think on my own terms--I was forced to think on my own terms. I did know that after a year in the show I didn't wanna stay in it.
Speaker 1: So you, you were there about a year or so? And prior to you deciding this though, had you been--had you traveled, traveled away from home much prior to this?
Speaker 2: Only once. My parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] allowed me to go to Vienna, Austria for a ice skating competition.
Speaker 1: So prior to this--this was your first time on your own away from home and having to deal with, as an adult, so to speak, right? So you did that for a year and then you decided this was not going to be a long-term thing for you?
Speaker 2: Right. I was in Kansas City, Missouri. I remember looking out at this bleak window, calling my father and asking them if I can go back to college (laughter). I just didn't wanna be in this bubble. And he said, "Yeah, yeah, go back to college."
Speaker 1: So you wanna go back to school. Now you said go back, had you already enrolled slightly before that or did you decide (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I'm thinking going back, like from--like take a plane back home.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Back to home and start all over again.
Speaker 2: And start all over again.
Speaker 1: So, you're thinking this out of this window. You're looking at--you're--you've had enough of the skating thing. You had your fun, as we say, your fun and fame. Oh, how were the salaries back then? It's curious to see what, what, what was an athletic salary back then for that?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Nothing. Oh my, god. You know, not much. We had--we had the worst, the worst union. Our union sucked. But, you know, the other unions--like, we roomed with 'Seven Brides for Seven Brothers' [Lawrence Kasha and David Landay] and their union was great and that guy, you know, at the time this little, little kid that, that--oh, and also 'Evita' [Andrew Lloyd Webber]. There's a little kid that comes out in 'Evita' in the very, very beginning. He was getting at the time, like, eight hundred [dollars] a, a week you know for (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which, which was good money back then.
Speaker 2: Which was good money back then. I mean, we were getting like three or four hundred a week, I think.
Speaker 1: And your accommodations and things of that nature?
Speaker 2: Yeah, accommodations were highly discounted.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And a couple of other things, but other than that, we were basically on our own.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 467697
Speaker 1: So, you had enough of that and you decided that you wanted to go home and do something different?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, what I felt was a lot of the people that were in the show, they lived in a bubble. They lived in this berm. I mean, they could only breathe in this bubble, and I really wanted to breathe outside of it. I knew that there was so much more out there for me and I really wanted those experiences to be able to do that. And I think this is because of the opportunity that I had that crossed over it in my high school years, knowing that, you know, I had the social life a little bit in junior high [Culver City Junior High School; Culver City Middle School, Culver City, California] and high school and growing up in Leimert Park [Los Angeles, California] and then knowing what my skating group was about, too and then the show group. The show group was, was kind of a different thing. It was a little bit separate than the competitive group, you know.
Speaker 1: So you wanted to be Linda [HistoryMaker Linda Marie Allen] and not just a skater?
Speaker 2: I didn't wanna be defined by my skating--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --only at that time.
Speaker 1: So what were you thinking you were gonna do in college?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to--I used to sit backstage and watch the ice skaters on the ice with all the colored lights on them, and I was always into the senses, so there's always the orchestra on the side, if you remember the live orchestra. Well, I would be backstage, standing next to the live orchestra because I loved the music in my ear and I would be peaking out of the backstage of the curtain and I would see all these great colored lights on the skaters and I decided at that point I wanted to be a lighting designer.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And so when I talked to my father [Edgar Allen], I said, "I think I wanna be a lighting designer, Daddy," you know. And he's like, "Okay, well, you can go to school. You've gotta stay at home, but go to school," and that's exactly what I did. So I went back to school and I went to Santa Monica College [Santa Monica, California], which is a two-year college.
Speaker 1: What did they when you say when you told 'em you're--, "I'm out of the show, I'm out. I'm leaving," what did they say at the Ice Capades?
Speaker 2: They had no allegiance to me. You know, that's how I knew that I was really out of there.
Speaker 1: They were very ambivalent about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and you know what else they did? They replaced me with another black girl.
Speaker 1: What was--what's her name? Do you know?
Speaker 2: I'll find out in a minute. Robin [ph.]--oh, my god, why can't I think of her last name? Anyway, Robin.
Speaker 1: So Robin got the, the, the black spot?
Speaker 2: She got the Kismet spot, the black spot. 'Cause she didn't make any--you know, she didn't make voice. I--I pissed them off because I didn't wanna do all that media, being a token black for all the publicity. So, you know, I don't know what to say. I mean, I was out of there.
Speaker 1: So, you come back home and you enroll in Santa Monica College for two years. And, and what was your--was it just the undergrad stuff right then, you were just dealing with that? And then you--now, light--is lighting design--what are you doing at that point?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, because I was still an ice skater, so I would--I would perform in Knott's Berry Farm [Buena Park, California] ice skating shows in their winter sessions and in their summer sessions. So, I would go to school and do Knott's Berry Farm winter show and go to school, Knott's Berry Farm summer show, Knott's Berry, you know. So it was really fun.
Speaker 1: And at that point, I would imagine you were like a big deal at Knott's Berry Farms because you had been, been to Ice Capades already. So they said we have Linda Allen here. So that was a big deal for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was fun. I mean, I didn't have to work as hard. I mean, they were just, like, these small, little shows that were like forty-five minutes or so and--yeah, I was noted. I had--I had my status, you know, as a gold medalist and in the show.
Speaker 1: So you're going to school for two years at--Santa Monica and--are you in the interior design curriculum? Or--
Speaker 2: Yes, I started in the interior design curriculum and I decided that I wanted to specialize in lighting design. The psychology of lighting was extremely fascinating to me.
Speaker 1: So what did you do after that?
Speaker 2: So then I transferred over to Long Beach State [California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California].
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And I transferred into the environmental interior and architecture program.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Environmental design program.
Speaker 1: And you stayed there now--you stayed there for how long?
Speaker 2: I stayed there 'til '88 [1988], when I graduated with a bachelor's [degree].
Speaker 1: Tell us about your college experiences because now you've been--you had years of disciplined skating, so discipline is not a bad thing for you. You know how to be disciplined at this point, because you've done it for a long time. So was college pretty easy for you?
Speaker 2: It wasn't easy, but it definitely--I definitely knew the dedication to my career based on the dedication to my sport, you know. I knew how to finish the project. And I think a lot of people that may not have discipline in life, may not finish what they start, and so finishing in a polished way, you know. And I was very polished and I was very--I, I finished everything.
Story_ID: 467698
Speaker 1: Now, let's think about this. You've been involved in some things that were not, not quite what we would call the average African American was involved in, like ice skating. Now here's a young African American woman who wants to be a lighting designer and you--how many were in this program at this point?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Just you? And what was that like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting--there was one other girl in my class, Brenda [ph.], who wanted to be an interior designer, 'cause we were in the interior design program and I wanted to specialize in lighting design. So, outside of her there really wasn't anybody that I went to school--and then after I graduated I was the only black, of course, that went to be mentored by lighting companies--lighting design companies.
Speaker 1: Were the teachers supportive of you at Cal State Long Beach [California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California]? Were they--
Speaker 2: Very much. I actually got most likely to succeed at Long Beach State. As a straight A student, I got co- scholarships, and this was all 'cause of my skating background. I was extremely dedicated, extremely polished.
Speaker 1: So you would say sometimes one profession can open up a door to other things (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) If, if I was gonna tell any parent in the world, I would tell them to put their kids in a sport that would allow them coordination and allow them dedication to their career.
Story_ID: 467699
Speaker 1: So now you begin your career. You graduate [from California State University, Long Beach, Long Beach, California]--you graduate with, with your degrees, and then what's the first thing you did career-wise?
Speaker 2: I went to work for a lighting design firm, Lite Source [Lite Source, Inc.]. And it was so funny, I didn't even know how to interview. I just kind of went in and told her when I could start (laughter). She's like, "I haven't hired you yet." But I think she got a kick out of me, so I was hired, and I was an, an assistant (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Part of that positive thing. You saw yourself there before you even got started.
Speaker 2: I didn't know, I was like--
Speaker 1: You already had the job you thought.
Speaker 2: I already had the job I thought (laughter). She's like (laughter)--but she did hire me. She did hire me.
Speaker 1: And, and how long did you stay in that position?
Speaker 2: I stayed in that position for probably around three years or so.
Speaker 1: And what did it entail for you? What did you have to do?
Speaker 2: At the time, it entailed working on overseas lighting design projects, Hyatt Hotels [Hyatt Hotels Corporation]. A lot of the hotel industries will hire lighting design- designers as a specialty that they can afford, which was great.
Speaker 1: Give us a few of the places you traveled to during this--during these three years overseas.
Speaker 2: Well I didn't so much. And the reason why I didn't is because I was the young kid, right out of school, you know. They usually have the project managers travel, but I did go up--back and forth to Seattle [Washington], where their company was based and I mean, I used to just go, "Oh, this is so cool. I'm going up to Seattle for the company party." (Laughter) And, I'd come back down and, yeah, it was really--it was really fun. But, I worked on a lot overseas, learned a lot about metric systems. So that part was really good.
Story_ID: 467700
Speaker 1: So you're doing this lighting thing [at Lite Source, Inc.] for three years and did you have any other creative callings? Did you say, "Well, you know, maybe there's more to it than just this?" Did you have anything else you wanted to do at all besides lighting? Did you start seeing things differently?
Speaker 2: I was jealous of the interior designers.
Speaker 1: And why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, because there was this company called Hirsch Bedner [Hirsch Bedner Associates] and the lighting designers worked on the interior designers' plans, you know, and I started thinking, you know, I went to school for this. I wanna be an interior designer. I mean, now that I have a little bit of lighting background, I mean, why don't I design some of the places and light them, too. I wanna design some of the places and light them. I can do that.
Speaker 1: So what'd you do?
Speaker 2: So I started over again. I started--I worked for a commercial design firm--got myself a job at a commercial design firm in downtown L.A. [Los Angeles, California], one of the largest, actually. And with my portfolio--my little polished portfolio of my lighting design, I worked for this company, ISD [ISD Inc.] doing space planning and design for them for offices and I would go in and field measure and design. And I met a lot of people that actually are real well-known interior designers now from working there.
Speaker 1: So you worked there for--like, this would be in about--what year would this have been possibly?
Speaker 2: This is early '90s [1990s] now. This is '90 [1990], '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay. And how long did you stay at this company?
Speaker 2: I stayed there for a couple of years, and then there was the recession, if you recall, back in the early '90s [1990s] so everybody got laid off.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, hey, I know, I'm a lighting designer. (Laughter) So, I went back and worked with the lighting firms.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then they went like okay. So, I consulted with them and then I'd come back and then I'd work for another interior design firm and then I'd come back and I'd work for a lighting design firm. So, I did that for a bit and ended up at a company called Murray Alcorn [Murray Alcorn Associates (ph.)], which I worked for probably another two or three years, or so, in more commercial installations.
Story_ID: 467701
Speaker 1: So, in 1996 you're working for--who are you working for in '96 [1996]?
Speaker 2: So, then in 1996, I started working for a company called Interprise. By that time I was a project manager and I actually project managed it--I project managed office space planning and design.
Speaker 1: And it's at that point in '96 [1996], if my research serves correctly, you ran into Earvin Magic Johnson?
Speaker 2: That was great.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Uh, it's serendipitous because back in--actually in '95 [1995] I was working for this company that decided to close its L.A. [Los Angeles, California] arm. It was--I think it was from Texas, this company, Interprise is a Texas-based company, well-known. And I was project managing a office for Magic Johnson and the company went to fold and they were gonna--since the project was kind of small for Earvin's office, they were gonna let go of it, and I fought to keep the project. And so I actually talked to Earvin Johnson--Magic Johnson--and let me back up for a minute.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I actually got the project for the company. Okay, because I was the project manager and I would actually go in and I was being marketed to Earvin Magic Johnson and when he talked to me the same as he talked to you, we were about the same age and we just started having like this great camaraderie and so he hired me. I just happened to work for the company. So when the company closed, I went back to him and they hired me back as my own company [Linda Allen Designs, Inc.].
Speaker 1: So, so did he tell you basically, maybe you should just start your own company and don't worry about it? What did he tell you?
Speaker 2: He said, "Yeah, get your insurances (laughter)."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: His business manager said, "Get your insurances and we will support you."
Speaker 1: So now you have--you have your--out of the clear blue sky now, you have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have a celebrity project.
Speaker 1: You have your own, first--well, not--we won't say it's your first project. But it, it basically is now on your own and your first project is working for one of the greatest names in sports.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who's, who's now converted to a businessman.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So what exactly did you--did you do for him?
Speaker 2: Well, I helped give him an image for his new businesses. He was developing Magic Johnson's Development [Magic Johnson Development Corporation] at the time and under the umbrella of Magic Johnson Enterprises [Magic Johnson Enterprises, Inc.], which is still going on right now. And I had an opportunity to work with, with him and Ken Lombard [Kenneth T. Lombard] and I had another opportunity to work with some wonderful art consultants, Allie Toscavetti [ph.] is a good friend of mine. And I had a wonderful opportunity to work on a full-service design project that when I was at Interprise was only tenant improvement. So when they hired me, they hired me full-service.
Speaker 1: So basically you did his whole offices and his things over?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean basically I got to develop a high-end project, which otherwise was thought of as a low-end budget project.
Story_ID: 467702
Speaker 1: So now you have your own business [Linda Allen Designs, Inc.], so to speak, and you've made a major transition because this has nothing actually to do with skating. However, it has everything to do with inroads and things that you've made up to this point. What are your parents [Eleanor Allen and Edgar Allen] saying about your career now?
Speaker 2: My parents are proud of me. My father, however, felt that interior design may not be a real career. You know, he's from the old school and, "Why didn't I go to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California] like my cousin and get a degree in broadcasting or something?" You know, I mean (laughter), "Get secretarial skills because that's like the basis for keeping a job."
Speaker 1: But, he was cool with the skating, but now interior design wasn't as stable as skating (unclear).
Speaker 2: No (laughter)--that's an artist's, that's an artist's career, you know. And so he felt that--you know, and I was struggling a little bit. I mean it wasn't like the best paying thing, and especially being on my own, that one project alone didn't sustain me completely.
Speaker 1: You had to find clients and, and--
Speaker 2: You had to find additional clients.
Speaker 1: And so what--how long did you just stay freelance?
Speaker 2: I stayed freelance for maybe--after that project was completed, which was like a year later, I stayed freelance for maybe another six months or so.
Speaker 1: And then what happened?
Speaker 2: And then I, I decided to go back into another commercial interior design firm and I was hired as a project manager, a lead designer for a, for a few projects. American Golf [American Golf Foundation], I actually helped design that and some other companies in, in the Bay Area [San Francisco Bay Area, California], and that was during the tech [technical] stock boom, so a lot of techie companies were hiring me to do a higher-end design. Because what Magic Johnson's offices did for me was pull me out of tenant improvement work, into full service, high-end interior design on a commercial level. And, so therefore, when I was hired again, I was hired as a full-service interior designer with specialization in lighting design.
Story_ID: 467703
Speaker 1: And now your resume has some--has a pretty big project on it--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) at this point that you can use also.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell me about Walt Disney.
Speaker 2: I got bored. I got bored. I was really--you know, I was really--it was not a passionate thing for me to be completing commercial projects after awhile. So I decided to--I used to walk around the streets of Melrose [Melrose Avenue, Los Angeles, California] and look at these high-end boutiques going, "I wanna shop here. It would be fun to have, like, a residential project and everything. This will be really nice." And so I wanted to kind of do more residential design but at the same time, I don't know. So, anyway I had all those thoughts and then I thought I wanna be a set designer, you know, I also wanted to do that. I definitely didn't want to stay in commercial. So Disney Imagineering [Walt Disney Imagineering Research and Development, Inc.] heard about me. They were looking for someone with--that was an interior designer with lighting design background. I was perfectly suited for that, to the point of just being hired, like, right away (laughter). And it was like--it was a ghost position. Like, I didn't know I was being interviewed with them, until I actually came there, because they don't let you know that you're being interviewed for Walt Disney Imagineering. They get your resume first and if you pass the resume point, it's like then you go to their offices. So, I was hired in the set design department as--with lighting design specialty and I would design custom light fixtures that would tell the story for their theme parks. I started with Tokyo DisneySeas [Tokyo DisneySea, Urayasu, Japan], which opened a couple of years ago, probably--no, it opened like probably four years ago now. And then I, I was going to stay on that project and there was a project called Disney California Adventure [Disney California Adventure Park, Anaheim, California] that was just starting up, and so I talked to my bosses at the time and I said, "You know, I'll--I know that Disney California Adventure isn't--doesn't have as much budget as the Tokyo DisneySeas, but I think I wanna go here," because this is my hometown. I felt that I could really make my mark for the rest of my life, my fixtures will be there and I wanna go into the field and get field experience.
Speaker 1: What year is this now (unclear)?
Speaker 2: This is like, '99 [1999]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --going on 2000. So, I was transferred over to Disney California Adventure where I project managed designing the light fixtures for the entry where you get your tickets, and then also for the Coney Island area called Paradise Pier. And from then--and that was on the drawing board, and then only two people went out into the field, it was myself and my boss, Kristin Appleton and we went out there and we managed the whole entire park. Our fixtures are not--I mean we managed all the drawings, so--but my designs are actually in Paradise Pier, I designed a twenty-foot seafood chandelier, which is amazing and I worked with vendors on creating fixtures that were off the wall. You know, like, creating fixtures--light fixtures out of straw hats and also getting, you know, getting fire department approval, and you know, all the fire retardant sprays and stuff you need to do for that, so--and then also my fixtures can be seen when you get your tickets. There's these leaf lampposts that are kind of Alice in Wonderland-like. I was very, very good at seeing what the interior design was and working with the interior designers and creating a story. I was--
Speaker 1: Which is, Walt Disney is all about storytelling.
Speaker 2: Right. Well I had a lot of friends in set design anyway and I had a lot of friends in the interior design department there, too, and I would actually go and a lot of people thought that I was in the interior design department because a lot of my friends were interior design. And I would like, actually go to the vendor meetings for the interior designers and in set design. I actually learned a lot of things about set design there, too. And Disney Imagineering was great in that it was one of the few disciplines where we got to work with--well, it was, it was one of the few companies that I got to work with a variety of disciplines. So, for example, the scent--you would have scents, like scent cannons and things like that, graphics department, the sound department. So I learned what the magic was about and the magic was about being immersed in a berm and working with the five senses. If all of the senses are attached to--if you're immersed in an environment and all of the senses are part of that environment, then you'll pretty much feel the way they want you to feel. And that was really the magic to me and that was great.
Story_ID: 467704
Speaker 1: So, now we've mentioned quite a bit of work over the years. You've worked quite a bit from skating through, through, through this current position going--going into the millennium. There had to be some personal life with Miss Allen [HistoryMaker Linda Marie Allen]. Would you like to care- share--did anything happen personally along these times that you might like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Oh god, a stumbling block on my dating and all of that kind of stuff. Well, I ended up--I ended up--while I was working for Murray Alcorn Associates [ph.], I met my future husband, Keith Godard [ph.] and he was great, because I remember him--actually I would look at a rose and keep going and he would talk about the detail of the rose, you know. And those types of things I really admired. And I learned more about detail by working with him, he was another side of me that really enhanced who I was, truly. And we--
Speaker 1: Was he a designer, also?
Speaker 2: He was not. He actually was a computer-techie guy and he works now for IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], but he worked downtown [Los Angeles, California] and--at the gas company he started with and then started working for the tech [technical] stock companies. And we had a long run. We had a wonderful romantic relationship--a long run. We got married in Fiji and I mean the whole thing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What year was this?
Speaker 2: This was '97 [1997], ninety- I'm sorry, '92 [1992].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, he was--he was--
Speaker 1: So he was around for the Magic Johnson thing?
Speaker 2: He was there supporting me while I was crying, looking at a contract for the first time, going, "Oh, my god. They marked it up," (laughter). So yeah, yeah, he was there for that. We lived in Venice Beach [Venice, Los Angeles, California] in a little rent-controlled unit that overlooked the water and it was wonderful. So from there we actually purchased our home that we're in now. And we separated sadly enough only because, because I romanced my life, I romanced my interiors. I was looking for the romance that had kind of dissolved in our relationship. Even though we were friends, I still wanted that romantic interlude. I just didn't go on the rest of my life having a roommate.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: So, we parted as friends and we're still friends now, to this day. So, I speak highly of him all the time.
Story_ID: 467705
Speaker 1: So you're, you're working for Disney [Walt Disney Imagineering Research and Development, Inc.].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you're doing the set designs, but there still seems to be this other passion to work for yourself and do your own thing. So what occurs at this point?
Speaker 2: Well, being Disney what it is, when I was finishing up on the project, which they call post-production work and I was in the field, it was explained to me that I wouldn't have a job once this--once the park [Disney California Adventure Park, Anaheim, California] basically was, was open and I was done with some of the post-production work. So I had already, like, a few months prior--I had already started gathering information to start my own business focusing more on residential, 'cause that's what I always really wanted to do, and I just always had all of this formal training and I did everything else that I was supposed to do. So I--one of my friends who's a set designer at Disney, got me a project for a Disney exec [executive] and I, I designed his home and then I got his next door neighbor's home. And then it was six degrees of separation where I lived next to a very well-known designer, Michael Berman, who actually helped me get into the Pasadena Showcase House of Design and the charity women actually knew some of the Magic Johnson group and saw my portfolio, which was above and beyond some of the residential designers. Because in interior design, if you have commercial design experience that's more formal training. Like if you have residential design--you can have the formal training, but that's why there's some of the decorators mixed in with some of the designers. So, I had all this formal training, so it worked very well for me to get in and plus I was brought in by Michael Berman. So, I did the Pasadena Showcase House 2002 and from there they had their media night. And there were companies like E! Entertainment [E! Entertainment Television, LLC] that came through, there were a lot of publication editors that came through, like Meredith [Meredith Corporation] publications and things like that. And Kitty Bartholomew, HGTV [Home and Garden Television], Pie Town Productions, all those companies came through. Well, I'm a personality and I was--yes, I was the first black designer in the Pasadena Showcase House and I--I was asked to do these shows. So I did around six shows on HGTV and all of that, 'Designing for the Sexes,' and from there my career just kind of started propelling. I, I did that--I was still struggling a little bit though. It wasn't until the 2004 Pasadena Showcase House where I had this great idea. I had this bedroom--I actually wasn't going to get in the show--
Speaker 1: Now, now is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) into the house.
Speaker 1: --is this is a yearly show for the top designers?
Speaker 2: It is. It's a yearly show for well-established designers, and so this show--it's, it's a month's show. It benefits the L.A. Junior Philharmonic [Los Angeles Junior Philharmonic Orchestra] and over forty thousand people go through this show every year. It's one of the most known--nationally sought out design houses in the country. So, it was there I was the first black and I'm, I'm proud of that. And from there though I did the 2004 Pasadena Showcase House and as I said that was like really a phenomenon because I wasn't really supposed to be in it, somebody pulled out. I got like one of the largest rooms in the house and it was a debutante's bedroom. And it was called the Ingenue Room [ph.], I called it. And it was a custom designed room that was researched from the old Bullocks Wilshire [Los Angeles, California] days and I also researched old Fred Astaire movies as well as the movie, 'Down With Love' and so I had a '60s [1960s] bent in there. So, I appealed to the women, I appealed to men with feminine sensibilities and I filled- I appealed to anybody that had any romantic inclination whatsoever. And I had a marketing--I'm sorry, I had a PR [public relations] person at the time and we marketed the heck out of that place. From there I actually got noted--I actually got noted by Tyra Banks, I got noted by an amazing amount of people that came my way and I got a lot of projects.
Story_ID: 467706
Speaker 1: You were also in Essence magazine that year, right?
Speaker 2: I was in Essence magazine twice. I was in Better Homes and Garden magazine. I was in Pasadena [Pasadena Magazine]. You know, from there it just basically propelled me. I mean, and I've been working since on high-end residential designs, basically projects that don't have budgets, a lot of them. I mean, the budgets--they want me to do whatever they feel--I, I design a concept for them and they will allow me to do this. I'll come up with a budget and then we kind pf use it as a guideline but--
Speaker 1: But they have unlimited amounts of resources in order to do what they do?
Speaker 2: They'll--whatever it takes to make that--that room work.
Speaker 1: To make it happen. Which is fine with you, right?
Speaker 2: That's the way I wanna work because I, I create signature styles for people. Since I now know the magic, I can create a, I can create a specialized feeling for you in a space. And that's something that not many people can do. You know a lot of people can design architecture, a lot of people can put furniture in a room and mimic a trend, but not a lot of people can custom design an element or, or multiple elements that can create a personalized environment. And that's something that I learned from Disney [Walt Disney Imagineering Research and Development, Inc.], as well, customizing light fixtures.
Speaker 1: Without being too obtrusive, can you share with us some, some of the high design, maybe name-wise, clientele you may have done without, without being too, you know, any confidentiality problems. But, can you share with us some of the high-end projects you worked on celebrity-wise?
Speaker 2: Celebrity-wise. Well, I mean--well I have (laughter). You're gonna crack up, but Tyra Banks did hire me.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh.
Speaker 2: And we started working together, but because of some budgetary things, I--we stopped and then I did--I was hired back by Earvin Johnson [Magic Johnson]. I'm now working with him again. And I'm working with--I worked with, with one of the CAA [Creative Artists Agency] producers, J.P. Williams and I've been working with--I worked with Judy Murdock, which is Will Smith's hairstylist and--not quite Will Smith, but--the other--
Speaker 1: On the way.
Speaker 2: On the way. But, the other people I've worked with are really behind the scenes people. I work with a lot of entertainment people. I work with a lot of people that are on the backside of what--how the business is run. And I work with philanthropists. I work with retired people that have funds to create a customized environment. So, it's not all about the celebrities. What I have been finding is really being about good people that trust me and--by the way, there's no black barriers there. I mean, they like me because of me. It's not--it's not about me even being black. I don't even feel it and most of my clients are white.
Speaker 1: So would it be safe to say that you skated your way from one thing to another thing--skated right into something new, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did. I skated into one thing new and right now, I am pending in Oprah Magazine [O, The Oprah Magazine], and I can't wait for that to happen and I was in the L.A. Times Magazine [Los Angeles Times Magazine] last year. And it's some more things coming up, as in L.A. Confidential magazine [Los Angeles Confidential] in May. So, I'm--and I was in Essence magazine again in September. So, I'm really looking forward to some great visible exposure in the next year.
Story_ID: 467707
Speaker 1: Do you have any current affiliations with ice skating now?
Speaker 2: My friends, Tai [Tai Babilonia] and Randy [Randy Gardner], I still keep in touch with. I'm going to his fiftieth birthday party and it's a skating party. Can you believe that?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I can't even believe that. I can't even believe that. So, yeah, it's pretty exciting.
Speaker 1: What's the state of ice skating today for, for young African Americans from, from what you know about it now?
Speaker 2: Well now there's I, I think the opportunities are a lot clearer, meaning that the judging system is better. It's on a point system now, where before it was more political. So, I think there's better opportunities of being fair in the judging system.
Story_ID: 467708
Speaker 1: So how do you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what's important to you now?
Speaker 2: Important to me is, is still following the dream. Important to me is creating the impossible. You know, is actually--being the underdog is, is now a wonderful challenge to me and I do know that if I look up at the stars and I put it out there and I know that I've already achieved it in my mind, it will be something that will be achieved. So, I'm looking forward to Oprah [O, The Oprah Magazine] (laughter).
Speaker 1: So for those that might be going into ice skating or interior design, do you have any suggestions for that career path? You have any suggestions for them in--either category?
Speaker 2: Stay the path and finish what you start. And finish it in a polished way that sets you apart from others, only if--only, only if you follow your passion.
Speaker 1: What do you still wanna do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, I'm still emerging in my business [Linda Allen Designs, Inc.]. I'm in the best part of it, I feel. Because these are the times where we'll all look back and this is all part of the process that really creates, you know, the part where you said, "Wow, she's a star now," you know. And I, I still have more to go, you know. And with my interior design career, I wanna do a restaurant. I want to do more high profile people with budgets that allow me to design signature styles for them. I wanna stay boutique, but I wanna be specialized and acknowledged for what I've done. Also, I would like to do overseas projects. I would like to design in Europe. And I would like to actually have a balance in my life, because these projects are so intense, to be able to travel more and I'd like to--yes, I'd like to do all of that.
Speaker 1: Do you have any, any regrets? Anything you would've done differently over your life now, now that you look back on it?
Speaker 2: (Pause) No regrets. Everything has been something that makes me who I am.
Story_ID: 467709
Speaker 1: What are your hopes or concerns for the African American community in the future?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That they understand that hiring their own is a good thing. That--I find that out here in the field of interior design many blacks will hire outside of their race so that they can get what they feel is the best and that the best can sometimes be within the community, if you look deep.
Story_ID: 467710
Speaker 1: What values do you consider most important and why do you consider those values important?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I think the values that I consider important is have fun, not to take life too seriously. I think people that are dedicated tend to take life extremely seriously and they miss out on the boat. Enjoy the process. And I romance my life. I look for romance in my personal relationships and I always think of myself as a story.
Story_ID: 467711
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Gosh. How about she did it with elegance and poise and she created paths that other people may have not created and that she created feelings for people that other people may have not created. And she's a loving person and warm and kind.
Speaker 1: Well, I wanna thank you for this interview and thank you for the life that you've led and the beauty that you still add to the--to the universe and to the world. We want to thank you for that, and thank you for this interview.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.
Story_ID: 467712
Speaker 1: When I was in competition there were skating photos that had to be taken for the skating programs, and these were a couple of the skating shots that portrayed me in the competitive ice skating programs.
Speaker 2: This is me in September 1962, and my mother [Eleanor Allen] loved to dress me up and make me into a nice little girl. So, I'm basically one and a half years old.
Speaker 1: This is my sister, Lisa Allen. She is around nine or ten there. And she's a natural at ice skating, and this is All Year Figure Skating Club. She won first place, so a lot of personality.
Speaker 2: When I was talking about skating at Santa Monica ice rink [Santa Monica Ice Capades Chalet Rink, Santa Monica, California], this was one of the practice sessions. Where I'm doing a layback. And this ice rink was now turned into Fred Segal's [Happiness at Fred Segal] on 5th [Street] and Broadway in Santa Monica [California], so if you ever walk in there you can walk down the ramp and imagine being in the ice rink. And Santa Monica rink was a place where a lot of the emerging skaters skated, a lot of great coaches taught at Santa Monica.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Oh, my gosh, I love this shot. This was taken by a friend of mine, Lisa Kricks [ph.], who had a headdress and this was part of my transition years, actually, between skating and interior design. But kind of finding--wearing, wearing many hats had a whole new meaning here. So this is right after Ice Capades.
Speaker 2: I'm in Knott's Berry Farm [Buena Park, California]. I'm a black Russian, (laughter) no pun intended. And this is a Christmas show and I'm a doll--I'm a Russian doll, so it was really fun. I had a great time. I wear a wig- I wear wigs really well. I morph.
Speaker 1: This is me at Knott's Berry Farm skating show with Sarah Callahara [ph.] and--who was a lovely, lovely skater, and this is me in my opening costume and this is the period where I transitioned going to college, as well as doing that--Knott's Berry Farm skating shows.
Speaker 2: Well, this is me a few years ago. And this is as I've--actually I'm well into my interior design career, and I've actually used this shot on my website, it just recently got changed out. So, I love this shot because this shows my love for my art and my past and who I am now. And I've, yeah--
Speaker 1: This was a book ['Linda Allen Designs, Inc.,'Linda Marie Allen] that I've just published. Well, it's a non-published book, actually (cough) of my designs. This is my bedroom, Shanghai art deco. I always come up with some theme (laughter). It's fun. And it's not too serious.
