Story_ID: 650697
Speaker 1: So my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer.  Matthew Hickey is the videographer; and I'd like to have you start out by stating and spelling your name and giving your date of birth.
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Amsale Aberra, A-M-S-A-L-E, A-B-E-R-R-A.  Date of birth 1954, March 1954.
Speaker 1: Okay.  March 19- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) March 1st, yeah.
Speaker 1: March 1st?
Speaker 2: Sorry, yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], okay.  And then I'd like to have today's date also.  Oh, and wait your birth location.  Your location of your birth.
Speaker 2: I was born in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: What is today's date?  Date is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Today's date is June--
Speaker 2: Seventee- eighteen.
Speaker 1: June 17th (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Seventeenth.
Speaker 1: June 17th, two thou--
Speaker 2: June 17, 2014.
Speaker 1: Two thousand fourteen [2014].  And our location?
Speaker 2: Our location is 318 West 39th Street, New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your offices, the offices of Amsa--
Speaker 2: Okay.  My--the location is at the office of Aberra Amsale [Amsale Aberra, Inc.], where are--sorry about it, let me start again (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's okay.  It doesn't matter.  It's just slating (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The location, yeah, location is at my office, 318 West 39th Street, New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is fashion designer.
Story_ID: 650698
Speaker 1: I'd like to ask you five People magazine-ish questions, just short answers.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Hamburger (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay.  Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: Anywhere in the Caribbean--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in--
Speaker 1: That's good.  And favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Quite a lot.  When I'm mad, I have one and when I'm happy and let me just say the exciting one (laughter).  I--no, you know what?  Let me just think about it.  I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Don't have favorite (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not even with your--when you're mad or when you're (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Ah, that's what I'm try- that was the first one that--it came up but I don't want to say it, actually (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Okay.  No problem.  Okay.
Story_ID: 650699
Speaker 1: So I want to start out and I want us to talk about your mother first.  And can you give her name and her birth year, what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Ams- Tsadale Assamnew.  She was born in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.  She's deceased.  And what--it's not quite sure when exact date that she was born 'cause is really in Ethiopia, they don't keep like a perfect record.  She was born in 1943, I believe.  Wait a minute, that's an Ethiopian calendar, these are seven years behind (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're seven years--
Speaker 2: Yeah, is seven--is difference.  So she was, she was born in, when was she born?  I, you know, this information--is this going to be part of the interview or no?
Speaker 1: It is, but you don't need to worry (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This is, yeah.
Speaker 1: You don't need to worry about it.
Speaker 2: Because I really, honestly, yeah, I have to really calculate it exactly how old she is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Don't--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Don't worry about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's not worry about that.  What I'd like to just ask--if you could describe her as a person and what you know about her side of the family.
Speaker 2: What is really, what my mom, you know, I'm the only child and definitely was a very protective mother.  That she was.  But what really fascinates me about her, it just growing up to me, which is like any mom in Ethiopia, but coming here I realized how strong that she was.  How much of it that she changed her life and just very much of unlike Ethiopian women at her age who are very much of depending on their husband and the culture just very much of just puts women down and she was not.  She was, she really knew what she wants and pretty aggressive about it and making sure that it's done.  So I like, I wish today when I think about it, it just don't even have half of her in a way her strengths and de- determination just knowing the environment that she was.
Speaker 1: Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], did she talk about growing up at all?  Did she share any stories of that with you?
Speaker 2: She did not as much.  You know a little bit of that I know 'cause her father passed away when she was young, when she was young.  The--he was more like--it is again such a different era.  She's--the children are together.  It's not like you have that kind of, that much of a contact with their father, so she know little about him in a way and she really doesn't talk about him, but definitely her mother was the one who raised her and eight children.  She is one of--in, in the middle.
Speaker 1: In the middle.
Story_ID: 650700
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your father.  Now I know that, you know, your birth father you've met once; and, but you were raised by, you know--
Speaker 2: Aberra Moltot (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He, I think--oh, god, you know, I don't know how I'm gonna talk about it without joking about--
Speaker 1: That's okay.
Speaker 2: --the time but it's, I did not know that until I was seven that my--he wasn't my paternal father.  And he is one of the most incredible human beings that I can think of.  He is, he is value.  He was, and he was in a high position in Ethiopia before he become a political prisoner but very humble and so much of it that I look up to him and just an amazing guy.  And gratefully that he raised me.
Story_ID: 650701
Speaker 1: So can you talk about your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I mean earliest memory, you know, growing up I--beautiful child- childhood.  I don't even know what--I think part of it is in Ethiopia, the rules are very simple.  You go out and you play with children.  You don't, you don't do anything, something you're not supposed to and very, very simple and not complicated.  And all I, I remember just really having a really beautiful childhood, and my parents [Tsadale Assamnew and Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] were really great parents and just being I guess the only child was a--help me to have a good time.
Speaker 1: So were you doted over because, you know, what you're talking about is in the Ethiopian household, their structure and, you know, in a lot of respects, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it's structure and also the rules are pretty much the same.  Like my--what between wrong and right it--pretty much all family agree.  So if I go out and outside I did something, the neighbor is like my mother.  If she see me so it's not, it's really not confusing in other words.  It's simplicity of between right and wrong.  They make it easier and you stay away from that being trouble and you were fine.
Story_ID: 650702
Speaker 1: Can you describe the community you grew up in though in some respects for even, you know, the street where you grew up.  Do you ever have memories of that?
Speaker 2: When my father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] early on he was a principal of the school [Menelik II School, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia] so we lived in campus for until probably I was ten.  And we always sleeped in the city and--oh, I--what was the question again?  Sorry about that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, that's--I mean, you're--
Speaker 2: I mean, 'cause like--yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: No, I was just asking do you remember, you know, the area you grew up in.  So are you saying you lived on the campus 'til you were ten?
Speaker 2: Again until ten.
Speaker 1: Ten.
Speaker 2: And then my father changed jobs and, so we lived in, you know, probably two neighborhood before I came to the United States.  But all the time that I lived in Addis [Addis Ababa, Ethiopia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so on the campus there were a lot of students and things like that because he was the principal, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's--yes, it was, it was a high school, but just the--it wasn't boarding school so at night it would just be us and other faculties but in the daytime, yes, there's a lot of, you know, students.
Story_ID: 650703
Speaker 1: So in the early years, what--because Ethiopia--does Ethiopia have the--what system of education does it have?  Does it have the--no, not British, no, no, no, no.  It was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's mixed in a way because I think to me it's a British--that's how, that's how it started, but in my, in my generation, lot of, a lot of the teachers, like lot of Peace Corps were in Ethi--
Speaker 1: Corps--
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, yeah, just, you know, one amazing thing it was a black American teacher that we had so beautiful and her name was Miss Jackie [ph.].  And when I came to America at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], by--in just at the yard [Harvard Yard], I saw her.  It was the most amazing, exciting thing in my entire life just meeting someone again after so many years in Boston [Massachusetts], I mean in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  So I--we all, we all loved our--or Indians, a lot of Indian teachers that we had.  So it's, you know, I guess British, American and that went away.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So British peace corps.  Then the Peace Corps influence--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and then the East Indian influence, you know, there.  So the thing is when you're growing up there, where are you going to school?  Are, you know, when your father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] is a principal, are you going to an adjourning school and--
Speaker 2: Then I went--when my father is a principal, it was a public school I went there and actually finished through twelfth grade in the same school.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: It's called Menelik [Menelik II School, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia].  It's--
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: M-E-L-I-K-E [sic.].
Speaker 1: And, so you were basically--
Speaker 2: N-K, sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You were basically in the same school all the way through?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you have a--how many students in that school or how many students in your class, do you remember?
Speaker 2: I have no idea.  I don't remember that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what do, what do you, what are you like as a student?
Speaker 2: I was very good student.  I really, very competitive, definitely that if it was especially with my cousin who was really my best friend, and what they do in Ethiopia that they not only--that the grade but also just being first in class, second, you know, it goes on.  So between me and her is, you know, it's a very healthy com- you know competition (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Competition.
Speaker 2: Competition but studied together and--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's so cool.
Speaker 2: --anything if I done less than ten, you know, you just greedy, you know, you're number one, number two, number three, you know, of course, you know, those are the thing we get after but I'm over ten just I don't even remember me being in the class so I--I, you know, I was a fairly good student.
Story_ID: 650704
Speaker 1: So what was the young Amsal- Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra] like?  What was she, what did you think about or, th- you know, want to be or, you know, how--are you a quiet person and shy in your own way, or are you--
Speaker 2: I am a shy person even to this day.  I am shy in situation, but I'm not, but I warm up also very easily.  Growing up in Ethiopia you really are not like--here people are being told to dream or to--. When I grow up I want to be that, still it just, I don't remember thinking that way my entire, you know, time, just like you, you know, eventually you get married though, you get even job because women, you know, this is a whole different, you know, this is--and me growing up and when I was teenager in late '60s [1960s], you know, so I never really thought about career.  I knew that I wanted to come to United States to go to school, that's for sure.  Because then if you can, you know, if you have a means to go you wanted to come here but really growing up I nev- you never really think about it.  I never did.  But I know, what's so interesting, I'm always have something that I wanted to do.  I am like determined, like making my own clothes early, early on.  And looked, I looked at the magazines.  I see that you can't even find it in Ethiopia or--and often even afford to make, to buy it.  I make my own clothes.  I make a windbreaker which was like dying to have a windbreaker and I have to buy fabric, a blue, a blue one actually and with a zipper and I make my own windbreaker, having maxi coat.  And all of this thing was something that I wanted.  I was so determined, sewing it by hand, everything.  And never really, never really went to, you know, obviously never went to school for it 'cause there's no school for--
Speaker 1: Fa- fashion.
Speaker 2: --for fa- for fashion.  And I didn't even know that this a career and this is not even a joke.  Like a designer, I never knew.  I know people make clothes but not the type of designer as a profession.  I did not know until I came here so (laughter).
Speaker 1: So did you, what do you think, what fascinated you with clothes and wanting to make your own clothes 'cause that takes, you know, it does take some work.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's really the love of fashion.  Without even knowing it and that was what my interest was and I just looking at magazines and loving, loving fashion and just the interest that I have had without even knowing it, you know, this is something that I can make a career out of it.  It just like being just a love of passion.  I mean fashion.
Speaker 1: So what magazines--do you remember what magazines they were or, you know, where they--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean they could be like Sears magazines--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sears [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].
Speaker 2: Who knows?  You know one of those things like, you know, yeah--
Speaker 1: Right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't specifically remember but--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or television.
Speaker 1: Right, or television.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 650705
Speaker 1: How do you decide that you want to go--I mean I know you say you always wanted to come to the states and that was, you know, a lot of people would want to come.  But was there any movement like any of your--the people you know, are they going to England for school or going, you know, to Switzerland for school?  Do you find any--is that happening around any people from you?  Or board- or going around, away to boarding school any way, even in Ethiopia?
Speaker 2: Well, my ex-boyfriend and then he went to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And I follow him about a year later.
Speaker 1: I see (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So he'd see, you know, going abroad, it's really a matter of just the means that you--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --have so he went to boarding school in Ethiopia.  I mean in England.  And then went to Yale.  I came to go to school in Vermont, Green Mountain junior college [Green Mountain College, Poultney, Vermont].  And this is another thing, I had, I was so naive about when I think of America it's only just like one thing.  Which is pretty, it's--it, just I had no--and city, I never expect it to be this country- countryside.  So when I arrived here, in Lo- Logan Airport [General Edward Lawrence Logan International Airport, Boston, Massachusetts], I was surprised, you know, how it did not look, (laughter) you know, like what I picture in my head and immediately I got homesick and I really wanted to go home.  It was like I, you know, you're so, we were so sheltered at home, I would just like, although I was nineteen, I was like twelve in terms of mentality and just being protected.  So I--it was a shock for me, just the adjustment was just so hard so I was planning to go back like within a week. That's how I stopped crying, and then everybody just say, you know, "They didn't send you for a vacation so at least wait a year and decide."  And I did.  And Vermont is a whole different place.  Even more (laughter) the shock, yeah.
Speaker 1: Even more of the shock?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Because it's like being out in the middle of nowhere.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  Addis [Addis Ababa, Ethiopia] at least it's a city, yeah (laughter) (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 650706
Speaker 1: How did it come that you went to Gre- it's Green Mountain, Green Mountain [Green Mountain College, Poultney, Vermont]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yes.  How did you even find the school?  And were they recruiting or who made the arrangements or how did that--
Speaker 2: It's my half, you know, sister [Aster Yilma] who really is the one who really have told me about or arrange it in a way for me to find about that school, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that's common that people would, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --someone would make arrangements--
Speaker 2: Make arrangement, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and it would take--
Speaker 2: A day, yeah.
Speaker 1: --time getting the visa--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, the student visa--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and things like that.  So what was the population at the school?  And, so--
Speaker 2: I--go ahead.
Speaker 1: --go ahead.
Speaker 2: I think about six hundred girls.  So it was a girls school then and that was at one traffic light.  But one thing interesting about, I'm so glad I went to Green Mountain or--junior college and particularly in Vermont, I would have been lost in a big city.  And that small town, they were so amazing and so nice to me just by, you know, asking me whether I got a letter from my family.  So to me the size was perfect as lonely as it was.  It was also, it was also easier.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they really took you under your wing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So the question I have for you is, what is the, what is the racial breakdown of the--'cause this is all new to you.  I mean that's, you know, it's like being put in a strange--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --land in some respect so who's at the school with you?
Speaker 2: Who--okay.  Well, interestingly another Ethiopian girl happen to be there just a year ahead of me.  Her and another girl, another black girl from California and me and that's it in the entire town, literally.  Even if you go today, I bet it's the same thing.  It's just a small--we went actually went about six months ago just to visit.
Speaker 1: You did?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was really--oh, god, it was so nice.
Speaker 1: Has it changed much (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, for the--it's because I forgot I don't remember and I don't think it has changed that much 'cause it's not that much of structure so it must have been very similar.  But just been a long time and it was also new to the country so I don't have, you know, a good reference, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so those--so you were there how many years then?
Speaker 2: One year.
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, one year.  So were you, did you immediately get along with the other Ethiopian girl and what about the black girl 'cause sometimes, you know--
Speaker 2: I did to all of them, to the black girl, to the Ethiopian, definitely to the Ethiopian girl because I even was scared to stay by myself in my dorm 'cause I was by myself.  And, so many times I actually go and stay at her dorm and, so yeah, it did, she did help me, and I remember every time I get a letter from home and I get excited I'm jumping and holding her 'cause in Ethiopian we espec- very, very touchy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But just our culture to wash each other with women but not men because you really are supposed to be very private about it but with women we hold hands, we kiss and she just told me this is not how you do it.  I guess it's like girls school, now I know it's like (laughter) and I'm like jumping and kissing and she's like, "Don't do that here," you know (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: So what had brought her over here? She'd been--come under similar circumstances or, you know--
Speaker 2: No idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I wish I--I don't even know where she is now.  And I wish I knew now.  Now I have no idea.
Speaker 1: So that--you know but in many ways this is the immigrant story in a lot of respects, you know, getting there maybe being by yourself or finding other family, you know, once you're there; or, you know, trying to stay in touch with family at home.
Story_ID: 650707
Speaker 1: So you're there a year [at Green Mountain College, Poultney, Vermont]; and then what happens at that point?
Speaker 2: Four months after I got here, revolution broke out in Ethiopia (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: And my dad [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] became a political prisoner.  So I, you know, can't pay my tuition.  Went back to Boston [Massachusetts] when there were Ethiopian students and at that time, we all kids.  There were just nobody older than us or younger than--now it's a whole, it's a very big community.  So we were for all the students who were just pretty much stranded.  We were just together and helping out and figuring it out and helping out, you know, to get job, so I went back and stayed.  And it's probably one of my favorite time when at the same time as sad as my situation was but being with my friends in one room, it was still also very good, you know, good time of my life.
Speaker 1: All right. So talk about Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], that whole, how that had even happened.  Your father had--was--had risen up in the government of Haile Selassie, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about the circumstances and you know what--why because the, because I have a, I have another friend, her name is Yemi.  She goes by Yemi--but Priscilla Brown [Priscilla Sims Brown], but her mother, Mar- Marta [Marta Gabre-Tsadick], who has a project called Project Mercy [Project Mercy, Inc.] also--well, she had to leave the country in a hurry, you know, because of that but she had also been in the government of Haile Selassie.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about, you know, what happened?
Speaker 2: I don't know what happened.  I know that they were, you know, definitely they--high official, sixty people--they just massacred them almost, you know, just in a way.  And my dad, I think the tie with Haile Selassie not very clear about it and they really didn't tell me exactly.  They took him one day and for seven years he was, and he was one of the lucky one to get out.  And what was so interesting, my father--it's become more religious in a way and more spiritual than--when I ask him and, you know, "How, you know, how did you deal with it?"  How, you know, with, you know, unfairly just being in--with no, nothing that he had done.  And he just--his simple answer was it was a change and it's inevitable, you know.  People when there's a change there's, this is, this is what happens.  So he's unique in many ways, you know.  He just never, you know, he never just been a--bitter about it and moved--he got out and he moves on.  He's eighty-three years old and a very amazing guy.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: He sounds like Mandela [Nelson Mandela] (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's--I mean I hate to say, I mean I didn't wanna compare him with Man- he is that kind of person, just very, he gets it, you know, they did, they--that's what happen in--with the revolution and he moves on.
Speaker 1: All right.  Because this is--what we're talking about is 1974 I think you--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and there were riots and political unrest and people go and they're--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, going after Haile Selassie and people, you know, a bunch of people are killed--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Story_ID: 650708
Speaker 1: (Background noise) During this period of time, those seven years, how--I mean is there any contact with him [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot]?  And, you know, and what is, how is your mother, mother [Tsadale Assamnew] handling that and--
Speaker 2: There was--well, I didn't have any contact with him and my mother had--was allowed to see him once a year and just with a guard.  And that's really, yeah, that's the only contact that she had.  And, but when she came to visit and they found out that she was married to him and they stopped, you know, they put her name on at the airport.  So two days before that she was coming, he--which I didn't even know anything about it, I was so excited just to see my mom for the first time after this was, you know, five years after, you know, I had not seen her and this is when I said about my mom, you know.  They stop it and she went to everywhere she could possibly went up to the, to the minister and say why just brought her case and that he allowed her to come which is not a usual thing in Ethiopia because they just know no one listen to you, but she was determined and managed it, she turned it around and came, and came to see me.  And I didn't even know anything about it, yes.
Speaker 1: So she was able to come?
Speaker 2: She was able to come.  They were upset with her because she, you know, when she filed a form, she [sic.] said, "Are you married?"  And she said, "No."  And then that was--and they, and when they--she said, "Well first of all I wasn't married with him for a long time."  So legally--no she just like, she just fought herself, and this guy happened to be fair and nice, and he care, you know, she just like it, she just went to his office and start crying, "She's the only child, how do you deny me?"
Speaker 1: You know, so that's why you talk about her strength, too.
Speaker 2: Right.  Like I would have given up immediately say bad luck and especially in Ethiopia, especially with the junta.  Those government, they just no way that they mean, you would not wanted to fight that without even feeling that you're be in danger.  And, but somehow this guy--I went back to visit, and I thank him.  Unfortunately his turn came when the revolution, the second revolution--he went to jail when they, when they took over the new one.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: But, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause there's been a series of political (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --unrest over there.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now things are much better now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, my god, wonderful, just fantastic.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) That's what I--
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh my god, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's, that's what I hear about it, that there's a lot of things--
Story_ID: 650709
Speaker 1: Half sister--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Her name is?
Speaker 2: Aster Yilma (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As- Aster?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So she was there--so you're, but you're saying that there was just a community of other students.
Speaker 2: Yes.  All just--yeah.  All--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that means--
Speaker 2: Almost everyone under, at least under thirty, and you know in our, in our, in our twenties, early twenties (mumbles) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, that were there.  So what are you doing then, I mean, how--I just don't know how you reconcile with--you're worried, you know, and not crying and, you know, everything, but your mother [Tsadale Assamnew] came--when did she come in that process to visit?
Speaker 2: Five years after I got here.  So she came to visit me in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: So by this time--I mean that must have been a terrific surprise.  But by this time you've become Americanized in some respects.
Speaker 2: In some respects, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In some, in some respects.
Speaker 2: For sure, yes, yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For--and, you know, definitely it's some, you know, I--many times you know when something, I guess you take it.  You know, it's almost like even thinking about it and I was like, how did I do it or any one of us in that situation.  And I think when you, you know, humans we have--we're strong when things--I don't know just.
Speaker 1: You think--I don't know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Because some people don't.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, but are you saying that your--now were within your group of friends, you know, or the community, the Ethiopian community in Boston, are you saying--how many of them, of the others were--had family members that were similarly affected?
Speaker 2: Well, at least one person that I knew was in my circle who her father was also a political prisoner but most of them, their property's been taken or someone just, or a younger person (unclear) but not like parents.  But all of us, we could not go home or afraid to go home.  So just the idea just like you don't even, when you're gonna go home is probably one of the sad, you know, thing for all of us.
Speaker 1: So, Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], how did, how--that's almost like I mean in some respects being refugees.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know, I mean you came over willingly, but it's one thing to come over and not be able to sort of go back.  So what are you, what is the community that you established in Boston and, you know what, are the conversations, is a lot of conversation about, you know, the political dealings in Ethiopia or you stay away from that subject.  I mean what are the, you know, 'cause you're--well, anyway.  You tell the story.
Speaker 2: I think immediately there is a group of Ethiopian students and they join this group who is fighting the government.  I, I, I stayed away from that.  I just did not, you know, I--and, so that's not, you know, that did not--you know, I was certainly was not part of it and a few, a few of my friends too.  But that was also so young, they were.  They would just join it but without knowing what they're going to do with it.  So it kind of faded away like after two or three years.  Everybody just start living and building their own life here.
Story_ID: 650710
Speaker 1: When I go back, I think I'm one of the few people that--who decided to go home too.  I--my father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] got out of--I mean really everybody who (unclear) hope they really had some connection with the government and I did not have any.  My father got out of jail, and I got married.  And I decided that I--in the worst case I may--it's like I'll be stuck for a little bit at home and I have to go home before anything happened to my grandmother, to him.  So I decided to go home and then I panic.  Every night I have this anxiety what about five stickers.  You have to have an exit visa to get out of the country from Ethiopia.  And what about if they say, "Why did you stay in United States for this long?  What was your connection?"  All of that fear, that's why the Ethiopians did not go home.  So when I went to the airport just seeing all my relatives like fifty of them, it's like I'm head of state like all this fifty relative, immediate relatives, cousins and my grandmother, everyone.  Just at the airport.  I don't think I ever cried that hard and it warmed--I could not stop.  I mean just even when they say, "Fasten your seat belt," we're--wow, so to say that, "You're about to land in Addis Ababa [Ethiopia]."  That was just like this is going to happen.  It was almost the most amazing feeling just to go home.  And fear, so afraid the entire time (laughter).  And, but I mana- but they didn't give me a hard time.  I got my visa.
Speaker 2: So you were married at that point?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I--yeah.  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: So did Neil [HistoryMaker Neil Brown] go with you?
Speaker 1: Neil join us 'cause my mom [Tsadale Assamnew]--the wedding was here, our wedding--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --was in New Jersey.  So my mother and my uncle came.  And she also wanted to have another wedding almost like a reception in Ethiopia.  That was--that's when I went back for the, you know, for the first time.  And Neil joined us and Neil's friend joined us; and there was, it was amazing, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's wonderful.
Speaker 1: It was, it was so won- it was so wonderful.
Story_ID: 650711
Speaker 1: When your mother [Tsadale Assamnew] comes--I wanna go back.  So you--your mother comes five years after everything happened so that is 19--let me see.  Maybe 1978?
Speaker 2: Seven--yeah.  About 1978, yeah, yes, yeah, yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You know, something--1978 she comes.  So she--you don't know she's coming?
Speaker 2: No, she--I knew that she was--
Speaker 1: Was--
Speaker 2: --yes, she was coming but I did not know that they actually stopped her from coming--
Speaker 1: So you didn't know--
Speaker 2: --when they found out, exactly.  I'm really excited my mother is coming Saturday and remember this was on a Saturday and on Thursday, that's when they told us she can't leave and she never told me and she told me the story after she got here.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So how long did she stay when she came?
Speaker 2: About three months.
Speaker 1: Three months, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  She doesn't like to stay longer.  Even that, I'm not even sure if she stayed three months, yeah, but--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but she came back (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then she went back.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But your father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] still at this point, he's not out yet.
Speaker 2: He wasn't out yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in prison, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  For two more years?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And, so how did she feel about, you know, here she's seeing her baby so, you know, she just wanted to make sure that you were okay and all of that?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she was okay.  The fact that she met Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] was just--I'd make her so happy because she was, she--to know that there's--someone's gonna care for me.  Someone, just my friend.  So just seeing that environment it really made her feel you know happy when she went home and then my, and Neil went to Ethiopia after my father got out of pri- prison.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: And he was the, he--and I, even then I was afraid to go so he went and when he told me and described my bedroom, he stayed at my bedroom.  And I remember making my own, you know, I just ask him, "Okay where was the curtain? Was it still blue?"  'Cause I have this blue curtain--
Speaker 1: Curt--
Speaker 2: --red, you know, pillows and which I made my- myself and he's--it was just so, I was so happy that he was in my bed, in my bedroom and things that I missed.
Story_ID: 650712
Speaker 1: So talk about meeting Neil [HistoryMaker Neil Brown].  How did you meet him?
Speaker 2: I--well, Neil will have a different version--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --somehow slightly changed (laughter) type of my version.  I--we--I mean, I think we have similar things but his is more interesting.  I knew, I met Neil at Harvard Science Cen- Center [Harvard University Science Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts] where this little coffee shop that I used to work there and one thing that I noticed about him was all his friends were black and I thought Neil was white.  You know, just like you can immediately notice that just like a white guy with a bunch of black, you know, guys.  And we were at a party outside campus and I used to like braid my hair and put some--because I work in a cafeteria type, I have to cover my head and when I go out to this day, today, like tomorrow I won't wear makeup.  I really don't wear makeup unless I go out somewhere so, but when I go, I try even more harder so I have all this makeup, my hair is done.  He did not, he knew he knew some, he knew me, but he couldn't recognize me and that's how we met, you know, just met outside and obviously the rest is history.
Speaker 1: So you met at the party then?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Met him at the party (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And who was giving the party?  Was--
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, so he comes to the party, you meet and is it attraction at first sight or what--
Speaker 2: I think yes.  To me definitely yes.  Yeah.  And I think he's, and I think once nice thing I mean definitely attracted to him and I think also he's calmer, you know, and he is not this--you know, his personality immediately is comforting, not--yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did he--what year was he in law school [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] at that point, Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra]?  Do you know if he was in his second (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Second year probably.
Speaker 1: Sec- second year law school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He would know better, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he was second year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so he, so--what interests you about him and what besides him being calm, what are the things you're talking about and, you know, just sort of getting to know each other?  And had he--maybe I should ask, had he dated any, you know, any other Ethiopians or knew the Ethiopian community?
Speaker 2: No.  I think I was the first one.  I think what really attract- I mean to me beside the physical attraction, is his kindness and I, you know, someone that I trust and I can feel it, you know.  This is somebody--and that to me is the one I connect with him almost immediately.  And more, and he's caring, and to this day Neil is--again I am lucky not just, you know first, my dad [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] and then Neil to really have someone who you trust and you respect, you know, so much, and I think that was it.
Speaker 1: I would consider him well raised.  You know, that he is a kind--he is a very kind person like you're saying.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 650713
Speaker 1: So there's this attraction, he [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown]--you still working as a, you know, and then when do you--so tell me--your father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] is released in 1981.  Now when do you start going to Boston State College [Boston, Massachusetts]?  Are you going to Boston State College when, you know, which is now--
Speaker 2: In the '70s [1970s], yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In the '70s [1970s].  Okay.  So you're--you, so you come back to Boston [Massachusetts] and then you sort of gather yourselves together and then you go to Boston State which is now U of Mass [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And save my money and, and, and go to school.  And that was a (unclear).  That was one thing--again it's the--you know, some of the stuff that I feel like determination it just, you know, I came to go to school and I'm finishing it and the way I did it, it's just going to working and saving my money and that was--yeah.
Speaker 1: That was the journey.
Story_ID: 650714
Speaker 1: So you graduate in 1981, Neil [HistoryMaker Neil Brown] graduated in nineteen sev- no, he graduated 1979, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I know that for a fact.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he graduated in 1979.  So he goes, he goes immediately to New York [New York] though, right?  And starts--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) working?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you have a commuter relationship during that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now when do you realize that the relationship--so that's the thing your father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] gets out I think in 1980.  Did he get out the same year that you graduate from Boston State [Boston State College; University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts], does that sound right or is that wrong?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh. I think later maybe--
Speaker 1: Later.
Speaker 2: --a year later.
Speaker 1: A year--
Speaker 2: Probably yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when do you know that your relationship was getting fai- fairly se- serious?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  To me, just my mind almost to me is immediately and I always liked him.  I always--but whether we're going to get married or not was a whole different thing.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: 'Cause one is I still think about I'm going to go home.  You don't know where I'm staying but aside from that I think to me just all along that I knew it.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But--yeah.
Speaker 1: But, you know, but the other thing Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra] that you're--I mean, you know, he's of a different--when you--that's why I'm asking like when the discussion--how much is he interested in Ethiopian culture?  And then, you know, he's raised in a East--you know, he's raised in the United States.  You both though--isn't he a single, he--you both are single children.
Speaker 2: Well, his family is from Bermuda.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And that I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's--
Speaker 2: --kind of just really also, you know--she [Brown's mother, Betty Bascome Peterson] is also an immigrant, you know, in a way.  Not that there's any similarity between Bermuda or Ethiopia that just the fact that he knew, you know, he was raised by someone who was not born here.  Maybe there's some of connection there.  I think, I don't know, I really when--interestingly value when you have, I think what connect people are value and regardless of race or even religion, I think when people have similar value, they connect so easily.  I feel--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I think that's probably what connect us.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you, so he's working in New York and you're still in Boston [Massachusetts].  You get--when do you, when does he propose?  'Cause he went first to work at a law firm [Shearman and Sterling LLP].
Speaker 2: We got married in 1986.  So he proposed 1985.
Story_ID: 650715
Speaker 1: When do you come because that's--you decide though that you're gonna attend FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Correct.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So I just want to understand the real decision to go and pursue your interest in fashion.  And, you know, and how--because remember I mean when you're taking your degree at Boston State [Boston State College; University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts] you're a degree in political science.  So I'm just trying--can you--
Speaker 2: Like how did we switch, exactly?  Okay, got my degree and continued to make my own clothes and really that's how like compliments that I get from people encouraging me and now I start believing, wait a minute, this is something that I should be doing.  I should study 'cause I love it, you know.  Now I know what being a professional, you know, (laughter) having a career.  So I decided this is maybe, this is something that I should, I start dreaming that--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and to become a designer.
Speaker 1: Okay, but Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], I need to get even--you know, like you're making your own clothes. Do, when do you buy a sewing machine?  Do you buy--I mean this is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So at what point are you, did you buy a sewing machine (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean here in America, you mean?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Gosh, I wish I remember, but I know probably since after I move to Boston [Massachusetts].  And I don't know 1978, (laughter) something like that, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).  So you're--are you going to the, you know--what patterns do you gravitate to?  Is it McCall [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.] or--I mean see it's been a long time.  But I mean, what--are you doing your own--
Speaker 2: Own thing, making stuff up in many ways, you know, dresses like--yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're saying you weren't even, you weren't--
Speaker 2: You were--no, you--I use sometimes pattern but I change patterns some of them like if it is a tube top that you gather then, you know, like, you know, remember those days like you, just like you--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --gather skirt just like a tube top, you know just long one.  And I make, I get a pattern or switch it and sometimes I cut it around then and make it up.
Speaker 1: So you're saying that was from the beginning you were doing that?
Speaker 2: In Ethiopia, that's what I was doing.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: It was just like cutting--I--you know I made, I cut, I had a dress and I cut it to make it like smaller.  I got in trouble from my mother [Tsadale Assamnew] just cutting a nice dress and then to me was just I can't buy fabric is 'cause it's expensive to got and who's going to, you know, my mother is not going to do that.  So I make my own dress out of the existing dress which was--that's what got me in trouble.  But I was making, getting a pattern, switching it 'cause most of the pattern that you wanted to do they don't, you don't even have it.  You have to, you know, want what you wanted to do you use the pattern a little bit to help you but you have to add to it.
Speaker 1: But (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Am I making sense?
Speaker 1: Yes, it does, but see as someone who was horrible at sewing myself, even with a pattern, you have to have some skill for spatial and--I wanna ask you another que- I forgot an important question growing up but and I'd like to go back and ask that question, but I really--what I'm trying to understand--are you drawing as a young child?  You know, is that--are you doing any of that or how--
Speaker 2: I used to draw but again I did not have a drawing, I didn't have a training.  In Ethiopia you don't have that but I like to draw.  I think it's in your head most of the time what you wanted to do.  Even now it's just like playing with the fabric, you know, what you wanted and the sketch help you to give that idea to others, but I think you form what you wanted to do in many ways is in your head.
Speaker 1: So that's how--I mean but, you know, I'm just saying that (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean, okay (laughter).  I'm just saying it's not that, you know, if you don't have the skillset, it's not that easy, you know.
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: --yes, yes and no, in a way.  Like you know Perry Ellis, he never really went to school.  There's a lot of draw--designers never, ever went to school.  I think Charles James did not have a proper training.  I think sometimes having a proper training, its limit you.  When you don't have it, you're much more freer in a way.  You mess it up but still looks good.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So if you look at my stuff, I'm sure I'll get my grade will be very bad, but in those days I make, you know, making zippers like a lot of the stuff that I have seen it and I just like, how do I get it, you know, like having--I remember my--I saw somewhere it could be television like a zipper in the, in the center front of this big bell bottom. That's what I wanted to have.  So I have to find a way to recreate that; and you'll--you'll find a way.
Story_ID: 650716
Speaker 1: So you're saying from like 1978 when you got your sewing machine to, you know, when you end up going to FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], you're experimenting and you're making your own clothes?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now are you making clothes for other people too?  I mean--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Just for me.
Speaker 1: Just for you?
Speaker 2: Just for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I took those courses at FIT to, you know, that's for admission and both my sketches and the garment that I made, have got me in school.
Speaker 1: Oh.  So (laughter)--
Speaker 2: So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) what have you heard--so, but one--
Speaker 2: At--
Speaker 1: At this--what, at what point are you learning about FIT though.  I mean--
Speaker 2: In Boston [Massachusetts] when everyone, you know, Neil's friend, my friend and Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown], everybody just say that you should go to fashion school.  Of course, you try to find out 'cause Neil is moving I need to--FIT would just, one of them and I applied there, got accepted and when I came to FIT that's when really is actually my (unclear) like to your point, training is really is important but it's not all that, I think the interest is much more important because you've come up with stuff but then the training help me how to drape properly, how to--in a one year program, I learned so much in, at FIT--how patterns being created.
Speaker 1: Now were you learning also about the--or can you also talk about what else you're learning?  Are you learning about the fashion industry, you know, 'cause this is a creative environment that you're suddenly thrown in with lots of other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, other people.
Speaker 2: When, you know, my year out of FIT all those was one year was intense and I'm, and it's a good training for me 'cause this is how it is to this day during the collection before you prepare your collection.  It's intense.  So being in a one year prepare me to really work under pressure.
Story_ID: 650717
Speaker 1: So I got, my first job was at Harve Benard [Harve Benard, Ltd., New York, New York].  Prior to that actually for a little bit Harve Benard women is a plus size.  And that's when my first job was and quickly that they close, they just, they just close the company and Bernie Holtzman [Benard Holtzman] who is a designer of Harve Benard I went there just for advice, you know, what I should be doing and then just on the spot he give me the job and then that's when I really got the, both the train- of working in the industry and then Bernie Holtzman is another amazing guy who really taught me how to be humble.  How he makes sure pushing carts like with the rest of the staff and with help, which really kind of fit my father's [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] principle in a way.  And I--went in the fashion and when everybody was jaded and he was not and I learn a lot from him when I have my own company [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York].  And that was, that was something that I wanna make sure that I'm really part of the team.
Speaker 2: And not above the team.
Speaker 1: No, no (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not having an attitude and above the team.
Speaker 1: Not at all, this is just like never have my own office is always like an open.  I always wanted to make sure that the, the office when we paint anything, the factory and the office need to be equal.  It just nothing, you know, we have, we happen to have different job, but not necessarily there's no this pyramid that we create that I have I'm on top of it.
Speaker 2: Now how long did you work for Harve Benar- Harv--
Speaker 1: Two years--
Speaker 2: Two years (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) I believe, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So at this point in time Harve Benard it's--what point are we in the company's history, you know, because it was known for its sort of classic suits.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: At a time that when--I mean you should tell the story, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean Harve Benard that time very, very popular because they do suits, career women like, you know, for blouses and coat and sportswear.  And I was, I was really happy there just learning, you know, learning, learning the trade and my wedding is when for my wedding that's when my--the whole thing switch from sportswear to bridal.
Speaker 2: (Cough) So when you're working or you said you start in plus sizes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: And even--isn't that an interesting time for plus sizes because plus sizes were still stuck on the side, right?
Speaker 1: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Cough) You know, and they've moved more mainstream now, right?  But what--and this is also a time women are going into the workplace, you know.  And, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --so there's a fo- focus on professional attire.  But what are you learning, that's what I'm trying to also understand.  Are you learning about--or is this an extension of school [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York]?  But I need you to tell me what you're learning there about production and producing a line and, you know, what role you have and how large the organization was and--
Speaker 1: The first job.
Speaker 2: The first job.
Speaker 1: The first job.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The first job I was running both the sample room.  I'm like the liaison between Harve Benard the regular one with Harve Benard women.  We, whatever we design, has to be approved by, it was a licensee, the Harve Benard women was a licensee so we have to approve it by Bernie that, yeah by Bernie Holtzman and then we have to you know produce it.  I think what I learned is how to run a sample room.  That was, that was really from the sketch going to the pattern maker, from the pattern maker to the seamstress, the accuracy, the importance of fitting.  And those are the things that I learned from the Harve Benard women.  You know, new, you know, only a year or two, I think it's about two or could be just a year.  So was a short period but was a good, a good sample in training that I have.  When I moved to Harve Benard, that was a bigger organization and so much I--it's--it like very much of divided between production and a sample room is a clear division from even the trend.  They have their own department.  When the bigger you are they just more compartmentalize and I learn, I probably learned less there because I have to do only one little thing, sketching and speccing, you know (gestures), speccing.
Story_ID: 650718
Speaker 1: I mean I wanna understand the role of the sample room, you know. And--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Role of a sample room.  When, you know, first--when the designers, we do the sketches we present it to, we give it to the pattern makers to interpret from the sketch.  And that was on a piece of paper, you know, they, and they drape it and they transfer it to a piece of paper and it get cut and it was, it gets sewn.  And you look at it.  You do adjustment.  You try it on on a model and that's how the whole process is from sketch to the final fitting.  And sample room, people who are responsible for sample room, very important to have the pattern maker and the cutter and the seamstress, and that's our person who is actually also coordinating that, which is head of sample room.
Speaker 1: So with the, in the sample room, you were seeing all those aspects of things then.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And that's why you say it was--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, you got a good idea of how things--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --worked overall?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this, and this, and at FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York], you're trained also?  You were seeing all aspects of things--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) there too?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Your sketches, your draping and pattern, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --flat pattern, yeah.
Story_ID: 650719
Speaker 1: Was there any instance where you saw mistakes?  You know, what not to do in that ear- in those early years?  Like, you know, maybe the--didn't have the right cutter or, you know, or the fabric didn't arrive on time?  You know, are you, I mean are--were there any of those things that you learned during that time of what not to do?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head).
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not--I don't know.  I mean--
Speaker 1: So he ran, he had a good operation then?
Speaker 2: He had--yeah, yes, an excellent o- operation, yes, yes, for sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  And what did he say he saw in you though?  And how--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean I know when that comp- the Harve Benard women when it's closed, I was determined to get the right job.  And I didn't know, I didn't know how--where to look and what are my next move should be and I had, I lived with me, with my boyfriend then.  It's not like I desperately needs to pay my rent, so I was determined to take my time and get an advice.  So I called Bernie Holtzman [Benard Holtzman] to set up an appointment to talk to him about what I should be doing and really just an advice that I needed it from him.  And then he just took two second and without even me knowing it he got this guy from downstairs and--, "I want you to meet her and I really want you to find a job, you know, position for her."  And I was so shy and so embarrassed, and I didn't want to sound ungrateful for me to get a job, that was not, not my idea at all 'cause I wasn't even sure if I wanted to work there [Harve Benard, Ltd., New York, New York] because it's kind of similar in a way.  So I somehow out of just like embarra- I don't even know what it was just how end up accepting this job.  And I remember Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] still to this day he talked about it, I was in the, you know, he's on his way out to work and I'm going to the elevator like depressed.  I mean you should see like look like I lost a job.  You know, that kind of expression on my face.  And he say, "What happened?"  And then I explained to him just like, you know, I'm here and I don't even know what to do and I'm afraid to really to turn down someone who's really being gracious--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and give me this job.  And that was it.  And ended up just taking that job.
Speaker 1: This is the second job?
Speaker 2: The second job, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The second job?
Speaker 2: The second job, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what are you learning on the second job then?  You know, because you said, you know, you learned sort of less and you were, you were doing sketching?
Speaker 2: Yeah, doing sketches, you know.  I think what I learned from the second job, it really just really help me to run this--to, how to, how to, how to really I think goes back to Bernie Holtzman, his principle about being one of them and I really think it does help me a lot.  'Cause especially when we started out, we were all together.  You know, there, you know, people work from their heart.  We--we're all hours and that--that's--that support that we all in, you know, together, our mentality does help a small company to grow 'cause people were just so much of it they--you--they took ownership.   And you are allowed to give them ownership by being part of--yes.
Speaker 1: Being part (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I think I learned, yes, I learned that from him.
Speaker 1: So you were really able to build your own team well?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 650720
Speaker 1: Neil [HistoryMaker Neil Brown] proposes.  You get married and you--this is the story that you tell, you know, all the time and you're--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But, so this is 19--he proposes when in '84 [1984]?  Or do you--
Speaker 2: I think '85 [1985].  Yeah, we got married--
Speaker 1: Eighty fi--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, we got married in 1986.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, it's '85 [1985] yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he proposes in '85 [1985], so you go, so tell the story.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, I think he proposed '86 [1986] too because it was Christmas.
Speaker 1: I have '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: I think we made a mistake.
Speaker 1: Oh!  Oh, no!  He proposes and you marry in the same year?
Speaker 2: The same year (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's right, '85 [1985].
Speaker 2: 'Cause it was January.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So that there's a--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what he, what--where he proposed?
Speaker 2: God, it was too funny.  It was actually, it was (laughter) bad timing and everything, the proposal was.  We had--or maybe I--we had--(sighs), it was Christmas morning and Neil had all this present and my girlfriend came from Boston [Massachusetts] visiting and just like nothing personal.  It's almost embarrassing just like what do I get something just seems like he cares--it's not a toaster but something like that.  It was like it felt--I wish I remember what he gave me.  So I pretend like I liked it.  And then I went to take a shower because we're going to the party afterward and Neil said that you have one more present.  And I didn't even think about okay here's another toaster, whatever (laughter), you know.  So, and he had something to do Santa.  So I went and I looked in this little box.  Oh, it's Santa Claus and then I open it and then that was my ring.
Speaker 1: Oh (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So it's really, really beautiful and surprising and immediately it becomes strange because my girlfriend just broke up with her boyfriend.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: And she was leaving town and he didn't even think about that.  And then now I can't even be excited in front of someone who just--it--then (laughter), then it was the whole day I was pretending that it didn't mean anything kind of, it was like timing was off (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you couldn't really celebrate 'cause you--
Speaker 2: You could not celebrate it because you know what I'm saying.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But that's what, that's what happened.
Story_ID: 650721
Speaker 1: So then it really kicks in motion--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, 'cause you're deciding now.  What about the decision--where--your mother [Tsadale Assamnew] is home, right?  Your mother and father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot] are home--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: And, so what--the decision about where the--you know, where you were gonna get married, all of that.  What happens there and then, you know, the search for the dress?  You know what kind of service you're even gonna have?
Speaker 2: It was I think where was--clearly wasn't (unclear) New York or New Jersey because his, you know, his family are from New Jersey and our friends are from New York.  So we looked into different and into diff- and into different places but we ended up just doing in New Jersey because the church [Trinity Episcopal Church, Montclair, New Jersey] that he was baptized and he was an altar boy and all of this makes sense, New Jersey, the root.  So we decided in New Jersey and it was just a great place.  We loved it.  There was no question.  Obviously even going to Ethiopia, that was not the que- out of the question.  It took me, it was just not as--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --as--so anyway, so my mom came to the wedding.  And it was--the wedding is when--the reception is all American.  The food was American, everything except that the service was Ethiopian church, you know, Ethiopian Orthodox and Episcopalian.  Both old tradition.  It was one of the longest service anybody would have (laughter) and with no air condition.  So (laughter) but it was, really again, it was just really nice and the Eth- the Ethiopian church, you know, with the incense and all that was really, I mean there the patriarch, the ex-patriarch, who married us.  It was good, yeah.
Story_ID: 650722
Speaker 1: So what about the dress then, so you're, you were looking around for your dress?
Speaker 2: So I was getting, you know, I always knew that I was gonna make my dress, no question.  But for ideas, you know, you look at magazines and just for inspiration.  And at that time everything seems to be really elaborate.  You know, lots of beading, lots of ruffles, puffs.  And what I wanted was something simple, so I ended up, I ended up just like you know what I made, I made my own dress, but right after my wedding, I keep thinking about it was just like can't be me the only one.  I mean really if you really could go back on those dates if you look at those magazines, they just no simple thing that you can find at all.  And, so I made my, so I call Neil [HistoryMaker Neil Brown] from my office and I have an idea.  I have no business idea, I'm terrible in it.  Never, never in my life thought I want to own anything.  But I felt like this, like there's a need for it.  And he asked me, "What should I do?"  And he, and he said, "Well, first you need to know where, you know, how to talk to peop- people find you.  So call the magazine."  He did, usually he is very supportive of that because he'll take care of it and this time he just like, this is your fantasy, go ahead kind of thing and I, and I call, and I connected with this--Lillian.  She's an African American woman which is a beautiful, you know.  She also passed away.  And she was the one who really just took me under her wing.  And--
Speaker 1: So wait, you called the magazine?
Speaker 2: Yes.  For how do, how do I advertise to say.
Speaker 1: So you called Modern--was--
Speaker 2: Modern Bride (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Bride--
Speaker 2: Modern Bride.
Speaker 1: --magazine and you--
Speaker 2: Mo- and the person who is a salesperson was Lillian Caldwell [ph.], which is an African American woman--
Speaker 1: Oh, my god.
Speaker 2: --and amazing.  I mean she don't know how many times, so many times how she really guide me.  And, so she found me a photographer and then to have an, to have my own ad.  So I--we--photographer, find me a model.  So we have this photo shoot, just me and this guy.  So we took the picture and we went--I went to Ethiopia to for the second wedding.  So the photograph came.  I was so excited and did not even notice it and I call Lillian, "What do you think of the ad campaign, you know?"  And when I call the company and I say, "What do you think of the picture?"  And she said, "Well, good, but the model had a mustache," she say to me (laughter).  It was like I say I mean in those days you have to do airbrush it, you know.  And was just like my first, you know (laughter), ad and the girl had a mustache.  So anyway, so she did, she did help me a lot to really set me up in that.
Story_ID: 650723
Speaker 1: Did you fix, did the photograph--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they did.  Yeah, they--
Speaker 1: Fixed it.
Speaker 2: They--they did--they fixed it but the day the ad came out, I was like this butterfly.  You wake up in the morning.  You're not so sure whether I'm going to get one call or hundred call, either one, I'm just by myself with an answering service somewhere else.  You know, so it was just, you know, you wake up in the morning you just have no idea.  You just like, if I didn't get any call that would have been devastating.  And if it's a lot, you don't even know what to do, there could just, me by myself.  So we got, we got a call the same day.  Not many, but was good, you know.  Just the right amount.
Speaker 1: So this is--you're both--I have a question about this because a lot of people might not start with an ad. They might start with a shop, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or a place, you know.  So I wanna, so the dress that you--you had a dress?  So the dress that you have in the ad, that was the dress that you had done?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you had--did you design a dress specifically for the ad or you had, you already had that dress?
Speaker 2: No, design for the ad and also I have like five, six dresses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it's custom, you know, the ad, the ad says custom.  So I was making custom made for people.
Speaker 1: So you basically took and decided, okay I'm going to design these, I'm going to design whatever I want and one color for a line, but you design several samples?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you did this shoot in the ad.  Do you still have that ad?
Speaker 2: No, I don't have that ad, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I wonder, I wonder if, I wonder if (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I bet if I search for it, I bet I will find it too, yeah.
Speaker 1: Where--and, so how--was it expensive?  'Cause it also--Modern [Modern Bride]--
Speaker 2: It wasn't expensive at all.  It was, it was, I mean I, I know we didn't invest that much money.  We did very little.  And we took a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it took full page ad?
Speaker 2: Is a full page ad and also I did not, I work from home 'cause we had, we lived in a loft.  And we still live in the same place.  And, so that also helped 'cause my living room I turn into, you know, in the daytime to see client and, so that did work out.  So it just a very low investment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I spent a lot more hours, you know, had to do everything myself.
Speaker 1: But was this the place you were living already in while Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] was working (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: So you were living in a loft?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that actually (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --just helped, yeah.
Story_ID: 650724
Speaker 1: So you got calls?
Speaker 2: I got calls; and then--
Speaker 1: Now who were the people who called at the beginning?  They were--?
Speaker 2: At--you know, my first, my first client.  All she wanted was veil.  Grateful because like a whole dress, you know, just scary so start out with veil which is not.  So she came in and her wedding at, was at this big club, the Palladium [New York, New York] or something, which is I forgot the name or something like that.  Anyway is a huge, huge wedding.  And what she wanted was just a veil and then she added her bridesmaid to do for her.  So I sketch out the veil how, just based to what she is looking for.  And then she looked at the sketch and she loved it and she say to me, "How much is it?"  No idea.  I like had no idea.  Just no idea.  So I went, I was, I went to the back and I was so embarrassed because I don't wanted to undercharge her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Because that also shows like I don't know what I'm doing.  And I don't wanna overcharge it either way.  So I ended up coming up with a number which end up being undercharging her anyway.  And that was it.  That was it, you know, so that was my first client and then I did the bridesmaid, about eight bridesmaid for her (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) For her?
Speaker 2: For her, yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you did the veil for her and then the bridesmaids (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the bridesmaid, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 650725
Speaker 1: And then after that really just getting like editors, I mean really people who really could not find dresses; and I actually knew it almost immediately the response was great.  I mean people who came they were like my friends.  They came and just exactly the way I say is like I couldn't find this.  Everything just like--we just like they vent about how bad everything is, you know, how they can't find simple (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So wait a minute, you're saying the editors at different publications?
Speaker 1: Yes.  Cosmopolitan and there was I mean all kind of--style maker.  This--gosh, I'm so bad at remembering name, this guy really known, gosh, I wish I could remember his name but any way who is a style maker, there's a section who does style maker.  I did his wife dress and that dress put me on style maker section [Stylemakers].  And they talk about my story in New York Times [The New York Times].
Speaker 2: So, you know, but I'm sort of struck by the approach because I haven't necessarily heard this approach before.  Most people I've heard, and I may be wrong, you know, set up shop, you know, whether, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in a loft or whatever, but they set up shop and then sort of word of mouth or they participate in shows or whatever.  You're telling me that you--it's really from a, you know, you take out an ad and then you're going after the editors so how--what made you, who told you to do that?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, the editors actually is not ours and after them they came to me when they know that they--
Speaker 2: Well, they saw the ad.
Speaker 1: Yeah, then when they saw the ad.  When they saw it's custom and they know that it's going to be different.  So that was what's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Speaker 1: --that was what's happening.
Speaker 2: So can I ask this, were there many custom maybe advertising in Modern Bride?  Were there--
Speaker 1: No, I think I was the only one.  That could be it.
Speaker 2: I see.
Speaker 1: May be.
Speaker 2: But you're, but--okay so this is--what I'm trying to understand this part of this story and we'll get to the rest of it, but you had--at that point in time you had only done one bridal outfit.  I mean you had done yours.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: But then out of doing yours, then you, then decide you're going to do these samples, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], how do you know that you're things are good?  I mean this is--
Speaker 1: I did not know.  And all I know is the following.  I literally just sat down and just say it is impossible I felt that I'm the only one who wanted something simple.  Is not about even being pretty, it's simple--the simplicity of it and in those days you could not find simple dresses.  Clean and simple.  So that's what when you look at the street, people are in their down jacket.  They're simple outfit.  They're not wearing this jazzy, you know, just like they're, just like the stuff that it surprises me when in every day on the street you find people who can--that you have similarity but when it comes to this wedding thing, you don't find it.  That's what my, what encourage me that it has to be more, you know, more than me.
Speaker 2: So the press really made you take off and away, but they came to you?
Speaker 1: They came to me.
Speaker 2: So it was like the ad brought everything.
Speaker 1: The ad brought everything and then stores start calling me.
Speaker 2: Now is this--so what--
Speaker 1: So I just like real--it's everything in a reverse (laughter).
Speaker 2: --but, I know, but Amsale, in what period of time is this happening?  You take out the ad in what month of that year?
Speaker 1: I think it hit October.  It was in October the ad came out.  And I had Rachel [Rachel Brown], my daughter, in April of the next year.  So, and I was pregnant in the business at the same time, which was another (laughter), another complicated situation.
Speaker 2: Right.  Because how can you--
Speaker 1: I know.  Cutting on the floor with pregnant and then, you know, I didn't sew.  I did the pattern.  I cut, and I took just the garment, the cut garment in Jersey City [New Jersey] because I knew a seamstress from Harve Benard [Harve Benard, Ltd., New York, New York] that we know that she does stuff from home.   So I used to travel back and forth.
Speaker 2: So in those, in the first job that you had, did you make money on that job?  You know, with the br--
Speaker 1: No, of course I lost money.  On the first, the veil one, no, totally.
Speaker 2: But on the bridesmaid's dresses?
Speaker 1: It's just, no--even that it wasn't--it's not like you make money--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know, 'cause I am sure if I go out and get a job I would make much more money.  Even then I know I didn't make big money (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: But they were--it's not--
Speaker 2: It di- it didn't matter.
Speaker 1: It's really the concept but immediate reaction and people really just liking it is what really what encourage me--
Speaker 2: So when did The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) to do it.
Story_ID: 650726
Speaker 1: So when did The (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) to do it.
Speaker 1: --New York Times article appear?  Do you know if it--because that's, that must have been like a whirlwind.  You're pregnant--
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, huge.  That, you know, this was The New York Times--did it came out?  Yes, after I had the baby or before I had the baby, job came.  And another interesting come The New York Times thing.  Okay, New York Times, they call me and they wanted to write about me this in style making, Stylemakers section and they are sending a photographer to take my picture.  I'm like nervous, excited and at the same time, I was doing a dress for Katharine Hepburn niece and I didn't even know it was Katharine Hepburn.  And she say to me, this girl I'm making a dress at, you know, she looked at this dress just few samples that I have, and--, "I'm gonna bring Kate," and I had no idea she was talking about Katharine Hepburn.  And she is coming to my--the same time like one hour apart.  The New York Times guy, the photographer was a little bit late.  She was early.  They show up in elevator together.  And he is like in shock (laughter) with Katharine Hepburn.  And he--she was immediately--and I'm like I didn't even know what to--how do you deal with this two major things like at my doorstep.  And then by then what was so amazing, about Ka- he immediately say please take care of--
Speaker 1: Katharine?
Speaker 2: Miss, yeah, Miss Hepburn.  And he, and she said, "No, this is her business.  You take care of, you know, you take her picture," and then she start showing me how to pose.  She was so kind, so nice, loving my table.  Immediately made me feel so comfortable and like in three minutes like she is like my aunt now.  You know (laughter), it was, it was like she was the most amazing, amazing moment it was how easily, she was so complimentary, stuff that she see, the dress she saw.  And I told her niece and I say to her, "My god, she is so nice," and again she said, "Not always."  She say because the, it was the photogra- the florist went and have just so many presentation for her and that turn her off.  She likes my like home and disorgan- and do you know what I'm saying?  Just like she almost felt, you know, she almost wanted to help me by--because I was not pretending.  I just let the door open.  There was nothing special that I created and that must have--whatever it was she was nice to me, was so nice (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That is--wait a minute but, so your daughter's [Rachel Brown] born at that point, you think?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to figure out whether she was born or not.  I don't know.  I don't know.  No, she wasn't because there was no baby in that room.  No, no, she wasn't.
Speaker 1: Wow, okay.
Speaker 2: She wa- yeah, she wasn't born.
Speaker 1: So do you tell Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] that day about your day when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my gosh, I was in cloud nine.  I mean just like tell--I mean I want to tell the world.  It was like ama- really just nothing happen in my life before like related to this and all of a sudden two major thing, you know, New York Times photographer (unclear) New York Times want to write about me--this like my first job, you know.  It was, it was, it was pretty amazing.
Story_ID: 650727
Speaker 1: I mean what you're not talking about is your work.  Because your work had to be pristine from day one. I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That I, that I care, yeah.  I--yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean it must--so you're doing the designs and you're, and the woman from Harve Benard [Harve Benard, Ltd., New York, New York]--is she still making the, you know, the--
Speaker 2: The sewing.
Speaker 1: Doing the--
Speaker 2: I make the pattern.
Speaker 1: You make the pattern and then (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I make the pattern.  I cut the dress and then I--she only do the sewing.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, so you were even cut- you were cutting the dress though too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was just not set up to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  So then what happens at that point because--how are you--'cause Rachel [Rachel Brown] comes soon after, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, yeah, and I was--the last--so I knew I was arranging this, you know, I wouldn't take any- anybody because of, because of the--I--she was due, her--my due date was May 2nd and I was planning it--what job to take 'cause I was by myself only.  And, but then--and it was hard just being pregnant and dealing with this at the same time.  But I was managing it except Rachel came early, a little early.  She came April 10th.  So Neil [HistoryMaker Neil Brown] had to drive around (laughter) and give whatever dresses that we owed people.  The bridesmaid dresses so, but that was, you know, that was immediately after that I had to continue you know working.  Maybe I get myself two months and work from home.  Had, you know, babysitter and I get another call like I got from Bride magazine [Brides] and they wanted to do edit, yeah--editorial.  So the editor was coming to my apartment and the day that she was coming that my babysitter got sick and I have a baby and an editor is coming.  And in those days it wasn't cool to have a baby.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: Just period.  You wanted them to disappear.  It was just like you can be so not, so I call an agency to come to take care of the--although our bedroom is further back that way and Rachel because this is a new person, she start crying and you can hear baby crying in the past and I just said, you know, I--you know, first of all, I lost this editorial thing, and I don't want my daughter on top of that to be unhappy, so I just say, I told them, "Excuse me." I explain to them what happened and I grab the baby (laughter), brought her home--to the living room and they wanted the swatch and I cut it and carrying the baby, and the baby is happy now.  She's with me.  And interestingly, I got, I got the coverage.  So it was nice.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They, then--you know, my fear was they gonna just think oh she's working from home, you know what I'm saying.  You know this--I mean today's not, you know, you breastfeed in public.
Story_ID: 650728
Speaker 1: You were living on West 39th Street, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In this loft?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And this is the same street, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're, so what I'm trying to understand, so are you set up?  Do you have a little showroom in your--
Speaker 2: Yes, a little one.  Just a little.  But just a couple of things because most of it's just is really from my ideas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --from the sketches so--
Speaker 1: So when people are coming in, where are they coming?  Is there a little space or are they coming into your, to your living room?
Speaker 2: To the living room, yeah.  But it's a--even, even my living room like today, my store [Amsale Salon, New York, New York], the way it looks and my apartment is very similar.  So there is definitely, there--it's always been very airy.  So it doesn't feel like you're in someone's apartment because it just, it's really designed in a very lofty way.  So it doesn't feel, you know--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --weird.
Speaker 1: At what point are you learning about pricing and, you know, who are you--at what point?  I know the first job you don't know.  You know, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --but how are you determining the worth and how to price yourself in the marketplace?
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, this is one thing that you learn.  In the, first of all, Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] played a big role, you know.  Once things are getting serious and it really was just really in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They got serious from the beginning.
Speaker 2: --the beginning in terms of, in terms of the reaction and what people would want.  So I, you know, you--the first thing that we did in having, having an accountant.  You know, things that it does matter early on is that what we have.  It almost like I always hire things that I am not good at.  Like I can sweep and mop the floor.  I don't need a cleaning guy, but I need an accountant.  So this always (laughter) like I said the price of the company was just build and buy needs and of things that I would not, you know, my weak (unclear), for my weak part and built my strength.  That was--
Speaker 1: But he--his legal training helped some, right, from a business--
Speaker 2: And, also his business too.  And I do have the good common sense (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, that's right because we have both--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he does, he have--in a bigger scale he's help, but in a smaller thing I do have a great common sense.  I'm very good in back of and the love of calculation.  Whether something works or not but not in details.  You know, in order for us to really grow the company [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York], really having Neil has major, major, major role on the growth.  Mine is just hard working.  I work seven days--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or used to at least (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right.  But, so what--but in these early years, how long does it take you to figure out pricing?  I'm just saying this is sort--
Speaker 2: How I (unclear) pricing?  Early on, when you--we did custom, I used to--that one I have to set it up because I probably, I really looked at it just to how much roughly the material will cost me and how much would the sewing would cost me or the cutting and my time.  And I figure you know what's out there competitively, you know, if the dresses were about three or four thousand dollars in those days and mine is probably similar things.  I never wanted to underprice myself.  When people came, that is one thing that used to really, really being turned off by it.  I don't want people to come because it is cheaper.  I, like I would never allow them to say, "Here's a photograph, copy that for me."  And I would just say, "I don't do that."  I really wanted to work with people who can't find dresses.  So that, so it's very--more and more I am started know- knowing what the market prices and I was fairly competitive of that.  And my overhead was not so bad so I can make some mistakes.  I and my price also sometimes even change.  And when the people are not feeling good about that, it goes up.  I'm not even kidding you.  'Cause like hoping that they not going to come back because it's too expensive or something.  And the people that I'm connecting to and I'm just so excited and we're all excited about.  I want to make sure that it does work for us.  So I had this (laughter) flexibility what I should charge, you know, then.  'Cause I--
Speaker 1: So you're saying at the beginning years you were in the three to--did you have the large range at the beginning 'cause I mean, you had the large range still at the beginning?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what about the--where're you sourcing your fabrics and things like that?
Speaker 2: In New York [New York].  I mean and on 39th Street, 40th Street, you know, locally.  And not, you know, not, not buying it by bulk.
Story_ID: 650729
Speaker 1: You talk about the relationship with the bride to be.  You know, how it's a very special relationship.  So tell me the process like when you were dealing with, you know, I guess this is with anything custom, when you're dealing with the bride, what is that interaction?  What was the first meeting and the interaction and what questions would you ask, you know, in addition to taking the measurements to determine what, you know, what might be appropriate?
Speaker 2: When I, when I, when I used to do custom--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) early on?  First I ask them what their, what type of wedding they have?  What kind of wedding dresses that you're looking?  How formal it is?  Or if it is informally?  It all--and really just sitting down and having a conversation and they would just start telling you and they would just say, "I am getting married at my parents' home.  I--it's, there's grasses.  I don't want a train."  Whatever things that they wanted to have so I listen and I start sketching them and I'll give them a few examples of things that they have.  And when you do custom, it is hard for people who don't know, who don't, who don't, haven't seen it to take your word.  There are two things that was critical in those days.  One, I made a muslin, which is like a cotton fabric.  So there is like there--there's a process they go through that gives them confidence that they going to see it.  It's not like a dress is finished and say here it is.  That's one.  And the second thing is they search everywhere, they don't have anything.  So they really just faith.  They just trust me.  And there's this trust and the trust come from even liking each other.  You know when they see that I'm like really excited about it, I wanted to help and--it's a combination of that is what and there are people who feel uncomfortable who never came back.  And the one who we are, we are connected, you know, in both design, aesthetic and trust.
Speaker 1: So back then, how many, how many brides could you handle at any given time?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't remember (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, probably three or four a day, maybe, including fitting, I think.  I wish I remember it.  I don't--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I see.  You have to have--so you had a very active--
Speaker 2: Very much so.  I really, I really, yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: So, so you--
Speaker 2: But including fitting because they have to come back two--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --two, three times so, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 650730
Speaker 1: Then how does Kleinfeld, Kleinfeld [Kleinfeld Bridal, New York, New York]--when, when do they come?  And how does that happen that they come and, you know, ask you to purchase your entire collection?  I mean and were you doing collections at that point because this is 1989 so 1988 you have Rachel [Rachel Brown] and 1989 they purchase--
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.  So we had, then we decided to show, to put a collection.  And Kleinfeld--we took the dresses to them with a model.  I wanted to make sure that they--because it is simple, it's hard to see the dress with--well, you know, if it's not on an, on a model.  Even then, I was, I wanted to really the owner, you know, Ms. Hedda [Hedda Kleinfeld Schachter] to see it.  She basically went crazy over this dresses.  And the, the managers they didn't see it as much as she saw it.  And immediately bought the entire collection.  And not only she bought the entire collection, she also wants to give me a deposit so that you will have--you know, I guess just, you know, buy my loyalty.  To make sure that you know it's just a good businesswoman.  I don't know.  I meant to, I love Miss Hedda, she is another incredible person that to this day she comes to my show.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: And she retired a while back ago but then at--and also there are, one also was a retail store.  And then they came to see the show.  That standing ovation bought another almost all--I think they did the same thing too.  And I call Ms. Hedda and say she was in Brooklyn [New York], you know, Kleinfeld.  And I said, "I--is a Manhattan [New York] store who wants to buy my collection, what do you think?"  And she say, "It's your business but I need exclusivity.  If they going to carry you, I can't carry you."  And then I decided and said I wanted to go with her so I sent a huge flower to them with regret and that was it (laughter).  And that is my small world.
Speaker 1: So people are fighting over you.  This is what you're (laughter) telling me--
Speaker 2: That, no.  That one did not fight over me.  She send it and we (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) And that was that.
Speaker 2: And that was it, yeah.  But Miss Hedda would just say, "No, you can't," you know--
Speaker 1: You can't do both.
Speaker 2: --you choose, yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: You have to choose, you have to choose (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You have to choose, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because they wanted exclusivity--
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: --because that would give them--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a place where--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were the only one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 650731
Speaker 1: The first line that you did--so was this in discussion with--who is, is Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] consulting you or who's consulting you at this point about even how to handle the growth and, you know, what to do and--
Speaker 2: It's a combination.  A small--when it was smaller, I was really becoming good at it too, very much of it.  Because I see, I was excited.  I knew it was working.  People as I saw.  So I got involved doing trunk show, traveling.  And, so there is, there's a lot of it that I'm involved, but when it comes to how to grow it, how to work with bankers, to have lawyers, anything you really just going to set us more professional, Neil was involved.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And that's, that was--and Lillian, Lillian [Lillian Caldwell (ph.)] to continue to be, to be a person--
Speaker 1: So Lillian from Modern Bride?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, she became--yes, she comes to the show, she would--we had, you know, one of the thing that we needed in--was a salesman.  We couldn't get, you know, without, you know, the product to sell it and wholesale, you need, we need someone who is well connected and who is really good.  And I was walking the street and I saw Lillian around Macy's, and I say to her just like stressed out about just not having the right salesman or not even having one, maybe I didn't have then--someone left, and she said, "Would somebody like Peter Schiffman [ph.], would that be like you--someone you'd be looking," something like that.  And I said--it's almost like saying god, you know, just like he is the king of it.  You know, and I said, you know, "Lillian, you know, I not--yes, it would be a miracle, but I don't think I can afford him," and he worked for a big organization.  And she said, "I don't know, let me just think."  And she made a call for him.  We met and on the spot he hated where he was do- wherever he was doing.  He give me, "This is what I make.  This is what I do.  You give me the same thing.  I will start."  And that was another thing that it change my job in terms of growth.
Speaker 1: So it--did that happen before or after Kleinfeld [Kleinfeld Bridal, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: After Kleinfeld (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 650732
Speaker 1: So I wanna go back to your--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) (Unclear).
Speaker 1: No, to your original show so--'cause you look at the shows and you think oh, my--you know, you look at the video of the shows, okay, and you look and you're like wow, you know, what amount of work does it take to have a show and how many items do you need to have on the show.  And, so bride--in the bridal market, there are two shows a year, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but mine--and again in those days is, this is a while back ago.  We talking about what twenty, twenty, at least twenty, (unclear) twenty-three years ago, maybe something like that is when--or twenty-four years ago is what--when we started having wholesale.  But it was small, so when we did the fashion show, it's not like today's.  It was very informal but formal.  Like one model at a time when the salesperson talking in each presentation.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't this way at that time so--
Speaker 1: So it wasn't a production like (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It wasn't a production.  It still was a production but in a different way--
Speaker 1: In that--
Speaker 2: --because I have to turn that apartment to a show (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you were doing the shows in your apartment?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you would, you would--so who were your avera- like so you would invite the--who would, who were you inviting?
Speaker 2: The editors in those days, there were only like two editors, Bride magazine [Brides], Modern Bride or like three or four and then buyers that you invite by appointment three or four at one time and all day long that you do that.  I used to--
Speaker 1: All day long you're doing the show?
Speaker 2: The show, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you do it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: Over, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So your models, whoever you would have for models--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes, it's informal.
Speaker 1: --work the whole--
Speaker 2: The whole day, yes.  It's not like a runway--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with light and camera, not, no, it's not, it's not that.  And what I used to do and people's favorite, is still people talk about it because I'm doing it from home, we used to have a greenhouse and I filled the greenhouse with flowers like, it looks like Macy's flower kind of thing [Macy's Flower Show].
Speaker 1: You had a greenhouse in your loft?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And now, yeah.  Well, it came down because they did--they have to do the facade?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Well, anyway so that I do that and then two works, you know, in the morning I'll do like coffee and the afternoon we serve wine.  And people literally take their shoes off and they sit down and relax--
Speaker 1: Whoa.
Speaker 2: --and that's what they loved about my--
Speaker 1: Whoa.
Speaker 2: --my showroom.  It wasn't, and it was a small group of people.  It wasn't that big.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's, so that's how you got started?  So how many would you have to have in a line though, Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], to begin with.  I mean what--
Speaker 2: How many dresses?
Speaker 1: How many dresses?
Speaker 2: Really not much, fifteen dresses.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And to this day, it's still the, it's still not--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --big, yeah.
Story_ID: 650733
Speaker 1: So you're (background noise) saying Lillian [Lillian Caldwell (ph.)], when she got Peter [Peter Schiffman (ph.)], you know, that was a whole separate thing.  So you're deciding at this point--so he--what does he do then? What does he do for you?  So he comes on.  But that's taking a leap of faith, is it?  Is it--
Speaker 2: From both of us, yeah, really, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right.  Now is this something you feel you can afford and sustain when you make the deal with him. Do you feel that you can afford him?
Speaker 2: I felt good about it because he was so amazing.  And for that reason, if you wanted to grow, we need somebody like him.  So I feel pretty good about it and another thing what Peter say and I used to do, still do, custom.  And upstairs, and by then we rented space on same floor.  The building was half commercial, half residential.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So by then, I rented the space. So one of the thing that Peter say that, "My goal is for you not to do custom."  He saw me running up and down.  I mean just even early on people like Lillian and him are like best friends.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So that is all the connection.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And then he also immediately wanted to also do something about it, you know.  Believe in my talent and he just, you know, he just doesn't think that I should spend all the time.  Now I know 'cause I can do custom.  If you do custom, I get involved it's a whole different setup and just not--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --(unclear).
Speaker 1: (Cough) What you're saying about custom, I mean it takes a lot more time.
Speaker 2: Definitely, yes.  Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And Reese [HistoryMaker Tracy Reese]--so if you're doing custom then you can't really sort of grow.  And then, you know, what is interesting, you know, and I read [HistoryMaker] Teri Agins' book ['The End of Fashion: How Marketing Changed the Clothing Business Forever'] before when I interviewed her but, you know, she was talking about the time it takes to do things that are custom.  You know, that I mean you have to be paid for it, let me put it that way, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely.  I mean when we do like, for example, right now and not because that I, we came up with just a price, like if I, if anyone at my store [Amsale Salon, New York, New York] if we do custom, one, we do it very properly, you know, from the sketch to the muslin and the same process and we--the starting is twenty thousand dollar.  We--otherwise, I will be there all day making and there is no--there will be no time.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And it does, you know, few--the people, people who have the money, that's obviously worth it (laughter).
Story_ID: 650734
Speaker 1: This is their plan for you.  They even sort of say, "Okay, we can see--." Now are there estimations about what you could make at that point?  You know, when you bring him [Peter Schiffman (ph.)] on, are you saying or is he saying to you, "This is what I think, you know, I can do for you?"  Are there projections, I mean projections?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No projection.
Speaker 1: So what does his affiliation with you do then?
Speaker 2: Say that again?
Speaker 1: What does his affil- him being affiliated, what happens once he comes on?
Speaker 2: When he comes on, one, the most respected person in the industry.  People, buyers trust him.  So if he just suggested, buy this dress, get this dress, and they take their word and they really, you know, he gives them a call, he sell, and he was, you know, he does, he's good what, what he does and he's not going to let them buy things that he feels that is not going to move or that's really what makes him, you know, from his previous job, make him--
Speaker 1: So is--
Speaker 2: --liked, yeah.
Speaker 1: So is he the one responsible for you getting into Saks Fifth Avenue and Neiman Marcus and, or is that--
Speaker 2: No, that was--I don't think so.  No, maybe--it's, you know, the early, early one the, opening the door, I think he was but I don't know when Neiman's start purchasing.  And by then, really got quickly became popular.  You know, I again continue to stick to what I beliefs.  The--my line was distinct.  You know, I did not--I stay focused to what I was talking about: clean, classic, simple.  So telling that story through my design or even myself and it become much more easier.  And people really knew the look and the brand.
Story_ID: 650735
Speaker 1: When you're working on a line, you know, or a collection for both the fall and, I mean the spring and fall, has anything changed about that right now, your process like where you would get your inspirations, you know, what updates, what things--because you became known for certain things.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It's, you know, now I actually because I carry three collection--
Speaker 1: Right (mumbles) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I design three, yeah which is--so I really have to, I have to make sure and I really have to put like the bride in my head at all time when I design.  You know, when, you know, when I'm sell it, it always has to be that that girl who like simplicity.  And when I design Kenneth Pool, I need to feel like she is on like, over the top.  Even the wedding, I literally have to imagine it more like four hundred people or add a task.  Either you need to really that size in order for you to really think about elaborate.  Christos, it has to be soft and romantic and you think it countryside.  So it's really the bride are important for me for inspiration.
Speaker 1: Now Christos [Christos Yiannakou] though, didn't she [sic.]--she started in 1984, is it the different--see that's what--Christos, the bridal gowns--was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so Christos was this guy who was really been in the industry, will design for other people before and then he'll open, you know, his own line.
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: And when, and then a little bit before me (unclear) and then when he's ready to close and to retire, he called me and he really have not told anybody just like, "Do you wanna buy the line?"  Our company (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Whoa, whoa.
Speaker 2: --and then that's how, that's how we, you know, we purchase it.
Story_ID: 650736
Speaker 1: When you're starting out in these early years, I wanna say the first five or six years, who is your compet- who are your, who do you see as your competitor or how many competitors can you say?
Speaker 2: When I start out?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Christos was one of them.  Richard Glasgow, Priscilla of Boston and Jim Hjelm, and those are the really, are--and then others too.  Dana Walden [Dana Walden Bridal].  I never really think of them my competitor.  Because at that time, my goal was to be doing design different.  So, but those are the known.  And they're bigger, lot more bigger than I was.  But, and then later on as, aesthetically, they're a star, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --when they are enter than the whole world, the whole fashion and just become the more people start making things that I do.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you then in the--and I'm talking about like 1980--wait a minute because Richard [Richard Glasgow] comes on--no, 1991 it says that you start, your gowns start selling in boutiques and upscale department stores in 1991.  And fashion is changing a little bit around that time too, right overall?  Because, you know, the '80s [1980s] like you say were very--
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) when you look back it's very--
Speaker 2: And it had been really start changing.  I think it really, I think Vera Wang really had a lot, you know, she brought again fashion and then, and then other follow, yes.  And, and since then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what do you think were the critical things with your, you know, the next stage in your growth, Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], because at what--I mean you're talking about from the very, very beginning, you know, to have Katharine Hepburn's--is it--grand- ?
Speaker 2: Niece.
Speaker 1: Niece, you know, coming so your clientele becomes a certain clientele from the beginning.  Is that the way it continues all the way and is there a lot of sort of word of mouth, you know, that happens because you end up ha- I mean you have had a lot of celebrities as clients.  You know, a lot of the Hollywood set too, you know, as clients.  So at what point does that start to happen?
Speaker 2: I think in the '90s [1990s].  That's when really mostly that it happens is in the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so--
Speaker 2: And then continued to be now and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you would say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Late '90s [1990s] I would say it started for--
Speaker 1: Okay.  Mid to late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: So, but you open up your--so what--why the decision to open up your boutique salon [Amsale Salon, New York, New York] on Madison Avenue?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I always felt that--
Speaker 1: Now was that the mid-'90s [1990s], because I had--
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) two dates.  I had 2001 and then 1996.
Speaker 2: Well, the 2001 was when we expanded.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the first one when--I think it was really important to really for us to have a flagship and then that's really when people would know what your brand stands for, it's just eas- it's, you know, definitely is important, and I also felt like it's almost like a laboratory to me because our store can tell a lot what brides want, what they don't want.  That's just, you know, a way to, both to see new things, to experiment and really does help, and that's really the reason that we had it, you know, having the flagship.
Speaker 1: Now Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] had quit his job at this time, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: 'Cause he was, he was with HBO [Home Box Office]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 650737
Speaker 1: So when was the discussion that allowed Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] to quit his job?  Because it's one thing to--I'm sure, you know, all this time he's someone advi- well, I wanna ask you when does he get involved with really being more actively involved in deciding, you know, when--that this was something--or that the two of you deciding that this is something that you want him to do?
Speaker 2: I think, I mean Neil, you know, always been involved too, while he was working at HBO [Home Box Office] too.  You know, definitely to, not to that extent.  When his decision to quit his job not--has nothing to do with my--to join me, but he also had another idea to create a movie, which Neil will probably will explain it better.  But just too many thing happening that did not happen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did--okay.  So he was going to do something a little more--
Speaker 2: And that, yeah, yeah, something else, yes.
Speaker 1: --more entrepreneurial, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Yes, exactly and then, and then this worked out and then and I think, you know, definitely--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: --worked out better so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when, so when it's decided, when that doesn't work and it's decided that he's--so what are your thoughts about what he'll do because it's two salaries at that point, right?
Speaker 2: It's so--I think to me it did make a huge difference the fact that he just not, you know, he joined the company [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York] in terms of the company growth anyway.  So I was not, I wasn't worried at all in terms of security.  It just, I was, you know, I'm disappointed that what, at what he wants to do for him that it didn't work out.  But certainly for this company it wasn't, it wasn't bad at all (laughter).  It did, it definitely--I have to give, you know, Neil a lot of credit of the growth of this company.
Speaker 1: Now what--because he had been on the sidelines.  I mean the last time we hear his name sort of is that he's you know delivering, helping you (laughter) deliver clothes, you know, when you're pregnant, you know, and the baby's [Rachel Brown] going to come, you know, is coming earlier.  But I mean promised custom work--but you're not talking about, you know, his--and you talk about, you know, what he may advise here and there.  But that's a different thing to sort of take him on, you know, in what has been your--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you know, your province since.  So how did you talk about that?  I mean sometimes even couples living and working together, you know, that--
Speaker 2: I think, you know, early on it actually because I was also very, very involved, it was, it was just constantly would just discussing in different way.  I am--Neil is very thoughtful.  I'm very spontaneous, impatient, gut feeling.  The way I come to conclusion to something and Neil, the way he comes to conclusion is so different.  But it may be the same thing because he is very analytical and I to me just like it doesn't feel right and I'm not doing it, that kind of (laughter).  So, and he trust my instinct.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So that helps, you know, does that I, but what I think what happen is as a company grows, naturally there's a role that I need to play and Neil is playing the role.  So the fact that we're talking about things are less and less because I personally don't like to talk about work after work or on vacation, as much as possible so--
Speaker 1: So that's been your position the whole time?
Speaker 2: Oh, especially vacation.  You have absolutely no phone call.  I don't want any, it just, I think my attitude is just like however it is they need to work it out, it's only five days (laughter).  It's--either it need to wait there or they need to make a decision.  You know, it's normally works out but I, but I'm always like that.  But, now I think what really just help is really just give me much more creative freedom so I work mostly in design versus getting involved in other aspect of it, you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: A year, a year ago, I decided I don't want to go to management meeting any more.  And it really is so 'cause it just doesn't work for a designer.  I need to be just listening to too many things and then going out to design.  It's kind of harder.  So it's just the best thing just like really I am, he does certain part of the business and I take care of the other.
Speaker 1: So that allows you to really work on the creativity--
Speaker 2: Yeah, for sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) which is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it doesn't weigh you down with the other--
Speaker 2: Yeah, definitely, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But--
Story_ID: 650738
Speaker 1: Back to this period of time, what is it decided that he's--I mean, what is his title when he first comes in the organization [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York]?  And what is his--what are you kind of--what are you determine his role, was it a project first or was it that he was, it was announced and he was coming on?
Speaker 2: It was all--I really was not that kind of a plan.  Because Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] always worked a little bit, always know about, you know, because it's always been you know he owns the company day one, half of it at least (laughter).  So he knew, I mean he's always been involved.  But to this extent it really just, it was almost without even having a discussion just naturally it happen and--
Speaker 1: But what are the things he's involved with?  Is he involved with the--
Speaker 2: He's involved in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) like the lease, the, I mean the business--
Speaker 2: In everything finance, lien, lawsuit, you know--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --by David's Bridal [David's Bridal, Inc.], whatever all of this things there're just so many, many different thing that he get involved.  Yeah, it just--it's--we still a small company so--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Talking to the PR [public relations].  He definitely keep himself very busy (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you mention this lawsuit, when did that happen with David Bridal?  Can--do you wanna talk about that?
Speaker 2: (Mouths) No.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay.  None of that, okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway I mean, you know, ask Neil, if he asks and wants to know about it but I'm not so sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay, okay, okay, okay.
Story_ID: 650739
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So I want to talk about the decision to--so wait let's go back to the store [Amsale Salon, New York, New York].  So the store is twelve hundred square feet on Madison Avenue?  Do you remember even the search for the lo--
Speaker 2: That was the first one.
Speaker 1: That's the first store?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The second one is close to five thousand.
Speaker 1: Okay, right, right, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But I'm talking about the first one.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there--I mean the look of this store, the--I mean how are all those decisions really sort of made?  Is it an extension of the loft phase or is it, you know, is this a chance--'cause remember you said this was gonna be our laboratory.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the store definitely the visual part of it, I worked with a designer, designer that I really, you know, love and similar aesthetic that we have.  The--both of her store and the second store, the same designer that, you know, work with me.  And when we say, when I say laboratory, it's just in a way just the feedback that I'm getting and new things that we sending, and it's just only the merchandise and the response from brides is what I consider laboratory.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 650740
Speaker 1: Now what made you decide to start the evening couture collection?
Speaker 2: It is when people ask us for celebrities or someone to dress not having an evening wear, it's really just was, you know, was important for us to have it.  We have--you need to do it in a bigger scale and having all this different division right now with the, with the bridal and then even more, more coming, it was just too complicated to grow it.  You just have to be one or the other kind of and, but the decision just really just because of people need, mother's need dresses.  But this makes it a little bit more complicated--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --to focus on it.  'Cause still--for a, for a couture evening wear, it's just such a small business--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --in general.
Speaker 1: That's right.  So, but you're conti- are you continuing that busi- you still continue the business?
Speaker 2: As needed, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) As needed.
Speaker 2: As needed, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's almost, it's almost--
Speaker 2: Back again (laughter), yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's back to that custom design.
Speaker 2: Yes, right.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  But that--you should talk though about why you wanted to do it.  You were talking about seeing people in evening attire and maybe they--it wasn't quite fitted right and, you know, the--you know, what was things worked?  You mentioned something about, you know, in an interview I had read about the, you know, having an (makes sound) evening attire that at least allowed you to wear a bra.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--okay, so--
Speaker 2: It's--I think my design philosophy whether it is dress or even the way I live, it just beauty and function has to work together.  I don't like anything if you become a prisoner of it.  You know, just always constantly worrying about it and fixing it.  So when I think of evening wear, I think just the way I dress for evening.  It need to be--the purpose of dress to be beautiful and to feel comfortable.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: If you feel comfortable, you will look beautiful.  If you don't just con- I mean just like, it just don't, I don't, I don't really get it.  Con- when constantly saw that you need an approval from people which means you're not comfortable that dress.  So I made sure that especially for certain age you need to wear a bra.  You know, just like it has to be bra friendly or is it something that you put it on that you don't have to fix it all the time.  So I put design in mind when I, when, you know, this is my dress.  I made this dress, but it's--it just has to be easy.
Speaker 1: Well I wanted--it's amazing you're referring to that dress because when you walk down the, you know, when you came out of the room and you walked down, it was like everything was pretty and flowing, you know (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, and it was--
Speaker 1: And it looked so comfortable, but it looked so pretty and delicate, and I mean it was just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Awe, thank you.
Speaker 1: So I just wanted to tell you that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you.
Speaker 1: So that was amazing that you were saying that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, at the time that--
Story_ID: 650741
Speaker 1: I wanna move on to talk about the films that, you know, how those projects came about.  Now this is 1999 and it's 'Runaway Bride,' which I love, and 'Analyze This.'  So how do these projects come into being?
Speaker 2: Usually stylists will call you, call us and especially dresses that they have seen and they will come and either we give them the dress just the way it is or we just collaborate with them and design, design, you know, together.  That's really like when we did for example, the 'Grey's Anatomy,' the lesbian brides [Arizona Robbins and Callie Torres], there was a collaboration with the studio what kind of dresses they wanted and then we were--from the, from the existing collection we just tweak it for them and you do that.  You really work with the stylist.
Speaker 1: And was--is there a stylist that you particular have enjoyed working with over the years that you know played the role?  Not--you didn't have anyone like Lillian [Lillian Caldwell (ph.)] in that, in that area--
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: --that department?
Speaker 2: The stylists are like they work for--with the, with the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --movie stars, with the studio and they change all the time so--
Speaker 1: Okay, all the time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) you don't have, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So when you--the designer also that you were talking about for your--the architects were Steve Blatz.  Was it Steve Blatz and--
Speaker 2: No, interior designer.
Speaker 1: Interior designer, was Chuck?
Speaker 2: Chuck Pruitt [Charles Pruitt (ph.)].
Speaker 1: Pruitt.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 650742
Speaker 1: What about Kenneth Pool?  How does that come, you know, come about?  Because that's sort of--how does that come about?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, first we were, you know, when I, you know, the Amsale collection is simple and clean, I know I'm saying it a thousand time, but anyway.  To when people want something elaborate at that time back again to beading, I needed it, some other division so it doesn't dilute.
Speaker 1: Your brand?
Speaker 2: The brand, exactly.  So we created a Kenneth Pool collection and that is so completely different from Amsale.  It's just--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Let's--so can we go back though to the Amsal- Amsale collection and the things that you became noted for like the sashes, the, you know, a touch of color, lace--I mean, can you talk about those inspirations, you know, what--where those inspirations came from and which, you know, where things, certain things started.  Will you, can you do that for me?
Speaker 2: When we did the blue sash, I, you know, I like--you know, wedding dress always white and ivory and I wanted to really--it's always a good thing just like, what do we do?  I still want to keep with traditional.  I still wanted the bride to look like the bride.  Instead of her all being blue, just a touch of that blue sash, it gives it color, still classic, still look like a wedding dress and people really brides just immediately, just, just--I actually have no idea why--it's one of those things that I did not expect to get that kind of reaction.  A wedding of, a wedding dress of the century.  I mean all kind of title that blue sash dress got but I don't think I was planning it was going to be like that.  It just, it just I thought that it was just a touch of blue is beautiful.
Speaker 1: You know--
Speaker 2: And it works out (laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, so a touch of blue and not--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a touch of pink--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or a touch of, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --so the--
Speaker 2: I like blue (laughter).
Speaker 1: I know you like blue (laughter). So you have to be true to who you are, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what year was that though, that you came, you know, that you developed the blue sash (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I am so bad, you know, I don't remember now.  I don't remember.
Speaker 1: But it was, it was before the Kenneth Pool though?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, definitely.
Speaker 1: Way before this.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes before that, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what--how long, how long has the blue--was--did it stay?  How many--
Speaker 2: I don't remember but for a long time, to the point like I wanted just to stop because we have to--other dresses--
Speaker 1: Remove?
Speaker 2: Remove, yeah, exactly, yeah.  But it really, it just for a long, for a long time (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 650743
Speaker 1: What was the ins- instigation for Kenneth Pool?  Was it that you wanted to expand, you know, you didn't wanna be limited and you--you've gotta say it, not me.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.  And it's, it again just in order for me--a beaded and a very elaborate dresses is back again on style.
Speaker 1: Style.
Speaker 2: In order for me not to dilute the Amsale brand [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York], I knew that it was important to expand it into that category and it really that's what made me wanted to do it.  And, so it really even now what's great about what I do it give me a freedom to really those brand to stand on their own rather than a little bit of this and that.
Speaker 1: But they still have your touch.
Speaker 2: Definitely.
Speaker 1: You know, the touch, the still, the--well, the simplicity or the line, you know, but, and there's a soft--I would call it a soft elegance.  I don't know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --if that's a term that people use but that's the, you know, it's--everything--
Speaker 2: It's the elegance, it's the sophistication.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You can be beaded and elaborate but do it tastefully.  That is the sophistication.  The fit which we care so much about the way the construction, how the dress, you know, built.  All the three collection they share that.  They share quality and everything is made here in New York [New York], around New York for quality control.  Nothing is done, is overseas.  For the bridesmaids, yes, we can't afford to get it done here.  So there is a lot of attention that we give it to detail so even if it is an elaborate dress and it is just tastefully done.  Even when Christos, when it's lace, we don't wanted to make it too sweet or too girly and again it become more sophisticated but softer.
Speaker 1: So when you, when you went with the Kenneth Pool,  was that a challenge for you the first year that you--I mean because this, you know, you were saying earlier when I'm designing, you know, for Kenneth Pool, you know, I put myself in a certain mindset when I'm doing Christos, I put myself in a certain mindset.  So I mean it's one thing to talk about it now that you've been doing sort of all three, but I'm saying like in the beginning stages, was it--were you--how did you come up with your inspiration about what you wanted that to be?
Speaker 2: When we started the collection, the Kenneth Pool is actually was a person.  So he designed the collection and--the first three years.  And then after that, I took over.  So, and the Christo--
Speaker 1: Was a person [Christos Yiannakou].
Speaker 2: --was a person when he bought it and I took over.  You really, it's, you know, once you know what, once you know that you know who you design it for and it get lot more easier.  It just really just think about it who is that bride.  And really makes huge difference--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in terms of designing.
Story_ID: 650744
Speaker 1: So how was the industry (cough), the bridal industry changing (cough) in these, you know, I wanna say, you know, fifteen, you know, sort of--how was that changing though too?  Because there was a trend more--well, you have classic designs and they're beautiful and they're extremely, you know, I mean they speak well made--
Speaker 2: Thank you, thank you (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) (laughter) from afar.
Speaker 2: Thank you, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I mean it's just--anyway.  They look--anyway.  But when you, when you--how was the, how was the industry, you know, the bridal industry changing in this time period though?
Speaker 2: Lot more people are entered in bridal, in the industry.  Very specific and bigger like Da- like David's Bridal [David's Bridal, Inc.], you know, really just change the last--
Speaker 1: The whole nature.
Speaker 2: --the whole nature of it, of--so that, that's really this--the change is a little bit more, more mainstream in a way and yeah, that's I mean, that's--
Speaker 1: So what you're, what you're saying is that when you've--I want--so when you first got involved, there were smaller bridal shops?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: As outlets.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The service was different, smaller, which is yeah, too definitely it has changed, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so there was more, this is more mass marketed in a way but you--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you still have a special clientele?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that clientele, I cannot talk.  You have to do the talking.
Speaker 2: No, you doing--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], this is your interview.  This is not good.
Speaker 2: But you're excited and you're helping me (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, but, Amsale, you have to--see, you have to tell.  You know this industry inside out (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  I--it's--I mean (sighs), you know, just comparing then and now just been meaning like fifteen before and, or ten years before and now, it's the industry were smaller.  The shops were much more stronger.  The small boutiques are more for high end, for--but, now it's just a little bit of, because of the economy and all that it just--it's the shift is, is more into, into a price conscious like a, a budget or a lower, lower price which we are about--in September we are coming out, the Amsale was coming out, with the lower price point.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And which is important.  You know, we just can't really service only the--
Speaker 1: Wealthy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly so--
Speaker 1: No, but you have to say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we only, you know, we only cannot service high end, but there are people with an amazing taste and we really need to really figure that out.  How to, how to do this, a whole different set up.  But we are ready and in October which we really very excited about it that we gonna show the collection.  And the bridesmaid like for example, we make this like our bridesmaids should be worn in evening.  It's--I wear it in the evening.  And we have a secondary line [Nouvelle Amsale] which is stunning now.  It's almost too--so we really it just, and just the secondary line it was a lower price point and I think, I think it's really important for us to--in order for us to grow is to hit it in a different, you know, price too.
Speaker 1: So when you're talking about those price points that will be coming up, what price points will those be at the--
Speaker 2: The bridal?  We should be about, about twenty-two hundred [dollars] in average.  I mean I still embarrassed to say that, that's--yeah.  But it's a lot better than, you know, four thousand, five thousand dollar.
Speaker 1: Right, that's right.  Because you're really at the higher levels--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --of society--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which in some respects are growing.
Story_ID: 650745
Speaker 1: I want you to talk about what--how many--what's the structure of Amsale [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York]?  I mean and I'm talking about really at the time that maybe Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] joined, you know, how many employees?  What the, you know, what is your, you know, if someone, if you were to describe your production line, you know, and whose key?  Who's been key--a part of your organization?  So can you talk a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: We are I believe, I think we're either fifty or under, slightly under fifty.  That's still the number of people.  Again Neil, you know, as embarrassing it was probably Neil give you a better (laughter) accurate number.  In terms of organization and really are divided in one is design and sample which is the beginning of production.  Both overseas for bridesmaid and bridal, which is done around, around the country.  And sales, both bridesmaid and bridal sales team, finance, retail, the store.  What else did I forget?  I think that's pretty much it and shipping, you know, people who deliver and then fabric.
Speaker 1: And how have you kept the, you know, new talent coming in, new sort of talent coming in and then your core talent.  What have you--you've talked about the environment that you, you know, what you had originally learned from?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think like I am surrounded like young designers.  I have two great young designers who are incredibly--like what we work right now, I have a studio director, which is her job is to be a liaison between production and which is the sample room and all, you know, people creating, design, me and the team and the sales team.  So she's the one who's connecting all, all of us.  One of the things she find and which is really happy is our design team are allowed to speak, to criticize, to comment.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: And I always, my talk about favorite work internally is critical eye.  You have to have a critical eye, and it's okay.  I can miss thing and--
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: So they have, the young people have a prudent, respectfully though, not in any way.  No attitude.  Everybody has to leave it whatever attitude that, you know, just designers sometimes they can be even young designers can be diffi- difficult.  So this is an open, excited comment that we make and nobody feel--what is it, they're feeling hurt because it really come from a very good place. It just an amazing relationship that we have in terms of the--me and the designers together.  I--they--I would rather they speak though not speak.  They just have to learn how to speak respectfully.
Speaker 1: So you really are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they comment on my stuff, not--when they don't like it.  Because I ask them to do it.
Story_ID: 650746
Speaker 1: One, two, it doesn't matter.  It- actually the less, the better.
Speaker 2: That's true.
Speaker 1: You know, and it really come through it.
Speaker 2: Right.  But when you say that you have fifty that's a large--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that's a large operation in the world (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and it's a lot and it also when you look at our--the sample room, the production side of it, it's serene.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At any time just calmness, the--it's like no one is allowed to, everyone is allowed to speak but not allowed to speak loud or just no tantrum, no one.  I mean just our production manager Sylvia is--she never lose her temper to anybody.  And everybody follow what she does and it just is a very calm, you know, calm environment.
Speaker 2: Which is not always typical of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's what--yeah, and it's actually if somebody speak a little bit even (unclear) you actually just notice in a, in a (unclear), yeah, and, you know, it's a very supportive team to each other.
Speaker 2: How did you cultivate that team over, over time--I mean, you know, you--how did you cultivate it?  And how do you know--
Speaker 1: It's--
Speaker 2: How do you know someone is right to work here [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: I think through interview we talk about just our culture.  And either you fit in or you don't.  And some people find it excited and some people they don't find it exciting.  And some people do not want to work in a very family oriented--they may feel uncomfortable.  Then goes the job, you know, they may not go through it so it's I think it's really important to really, what I, what we stand for so we attract people like that, who really--and loyalty is important to each other, to keep the company loyal to the people work and vice versa.  Yeah, I think it's really like we have in many ways, we really have something in common, value and work ethic.  And we're--yeah.  'Cause I'm trying to find the word sometimes my (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: --my English doesn't work.  It's we're in together kind of thing, you know, I--that's really important.
Speaker 2: And Sylvia, how long has she worked for you?  And what's her last name, Sylvia?
Speaker 1: Sylvia Chen.  And she work, gosh, how long has she work with us?  I don't know, close to ten.  Our controller, seventeen years that he'd work with us and a lot of the people who work, you know, they been working like the seamstress, the hand sewers.  They've been, you know, been around for a long time.  And then, and then we hire young people.
Speaker 2: So you're keeping the fresh faces coming in (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, definitely yes, absolutely, yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yeah.
Story_ID: 650747
Speaker 1: So I wanna go to the question of Christos and how that came to, you know, how he [Christos Yiannakou] came, you know, you said he was selling, he wanted to sell his--
Speaker 2: Company.
Speaker 1: --his company.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: And now why did he--now what I read was that he invited you to take over as creative director. Is that, does that sound right?  What does that--you know, no, no, no.  So this is--
Speaker 2: We really just, you know--
Speaker 1: He wanted, he wanted to get out of the business (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and he felt that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what did he say? Do you remember when he called you or contacting him?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--you know what? Now I think about it, I forget whether it was Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] or me together, I--but he just said, "I'm selling and I'm--you're the first one that I call if you guys want it," and that's how it started.
Story_ID: 650748
Speaker 1: This may be right or it may be wrong, I mean I don't know that's why sometimes when you're, you know, thinking (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right.
Speaker 1: So if I--but you--I read that annual sales reached about thirty million [dollars], is that?
Speaker 2: I likes again, you know, those question should be saved to [HistoryMaker] Neil Brown.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) To Neil.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: As I told you I don't even want to go to management meeting (laughter).  I just kind of, you know--
Speaker 1: But Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], not many people have had this or could have this story.  I mean it's almost like an improbable journey in some respects except, you know, you were meant to do what you--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, you did, but this is--okay--so, Amsale, this--during the time that, from the time that you began and bridal is part of the whole fashion industry--its own little niche.  The fashion industry has gone through, both the fashion industry has gone through almost an apocalypse--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --as well as retail.  So what have you, what would you contribute your success at, you know, at?  Why--what has made you still stay in the game and not really even be aware of, you know, what you are making on an annual basis?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: I (laughter)--well, I think first of all even our growth is always been slow and steady.  It just never really is never been just jumping something up and down and that crazy--in a, in a, in a crazy way.  What really I--the--that's what I really just thinking of is just our growth is not, is not jumping that much.  You know, we been here for, you know, close to what?  I don't know.  Twenty-four?  I said something--
Speaker 1: Twenty-four, yeah.
Speaker 2: Twenty-four something that year.  We always at, we don't grow beyond our means kind of thing.  We add when we are ready for it.  Example would be the lower price point, you know, we did not jump into to go to the lower price point because we wanted to make sure that the three collection are solid and it's important to--for that because otherwise you will be, you won't be important to anyone.  So I don't think our success is not overnight.  It's a, it's a very long time.  The fact that I don't know whether it's thirty year or not, it's actually never worse than that good or accurate about what we're making so I think I know that sound--
Speaker 1: You mean the reports of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The reports yeah, exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: The reports of what you were making weren't always accurate.
Speaker 2: And it--yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Story_ID: 650749
Speaker 1: Along the line, I want to ask you about other things that you consider important, you know, to you.  I want to, I want to ask about--what I don't know, is Austin Scarlett important, you know, that was, you know, you hired, right, right you hired?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was, I was a judge for 'Project Runway' and I met Austin then.  And actually was the, it was about a wedding dress and my comment was not even that good.  I now just end up me hiring him.  So Austin took over the--after Kenneth Pool.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about that epis- I mean the--
Speaker 2: The Kenneth Pool is a--yeah, Kenneth Pool is a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right.  But I want you to talk about how you got even involved with 'Project Runway' because, you know, you weren't--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Project,' you know, 'Project' was good, got a call and they want me to be a judge and the challenge that week was on wedding dresses.  And people were, the designer were doing custom to the, to their models.  So they're supposed to listen to their, to the model and then create design for them.  So that was--that's when that--I was invited to judge that, that project, and it was fun actually (laughter).  And that was the first year.  So I had no idea.  I really, I just did not hear that that was the first, the first episode and then I start watching 'Project Runway' and then I, then I--Austin really--I became familiar with him.  So when we, when the designer left so we hire Austin and work for a couple of years and then after that just, I just, just took over.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You took over (cough)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, the design, yeah.
Speaker 1: --the design?
Speaker 2: The creative, the--yeah.
Story_ID: 650750
Speaker 1: What other things would you consider important?  You know, there was the other thing that--what about 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' that exposure?  But you didn't have a lot of exposure, exposure to that so that may not be as significant.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it was important one.  You know, it's--like the Oprah, you know, Oprah (unclear) a big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is 2007.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it was a big one for me.  And actually because it's just a national television.  Everybody knows Oprah [Oprah Winfrey].  I mean it just--
Speaker 1: She was really at the height.
Speaker 2: At just the height and I actually I remember we went for rehearsal and I was just amazed and then for me just to, to just to be on 'Oprah' was I felt is one that--a huge accomplishment.  And speaking to her, and she was just an amazing--she makes people so comfortable, almost instantly.  And you know that why she was successful and just making, you know--and I think that was such a privilege.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you had gotten a call from her producer is that how--?  And they flew you to, you know, Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Chicago.  I think we did the producer's sister--somebody we did something and they--yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They flew us to Chicago, yes.
Speaker 1: But the episode was on moms who made millions?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know right.  And Rachel [Aberra's daughter, Rachel Brown] had to come out and do the fashion show (laughter).
Story_ID: 650751
Speaker 1: So Rachel [Rachel Brown], that's the other thing, can we talk about her a little bit (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my, yes, don't get me started.  Yeah (laughter), of course.  Yeah, I love talking about her.  What a great kid we have.  Really, really truly just Rachel is special.  I don't know.  What else can I talk about Rachel?  Okay.  I think she is very, very artistic.  She is a musician and sing, songwriter.  And really doing everything to this career that she's very, very passionate about it.  It is not an easy one.  It's a struggle, but she's determined and--
Speaker 1: So talk--
Speaker 2: --we're be- behind it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So I mean this is the child that you carried in your belly and you were on the floor and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, and who came early and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, starting out--I mean we actually have one picture of her, best picture of Rachel and this was for, 'Oprah Winfrey Show' ['The Oprah Winfrey Show'] when they ask us send pictures.  There is a picture of Rachel in her pajama and a bottle with big heart like sunglasses watching a bride in a fitting and that was, you know, that picture sums it up, you know.  The way that, the way I worked early, early on.  And she, you know, she was just, you know, she was just, you know, part of it.  I--at one time she had, she was little and in order for me to allow her, she's like allow her to play with everything.  So she was just playing with this Vaseline and I have to finish up this dress and playing with the Vaseline and that little five fingers right in the center of this dress (laughter).  Oh, my goodness and I--luckily it came off.  And it was, it was a silk shantung, you know, had it been satin, it would have been just lost case.  So just immediately I washed it out and it was just gone so (laughter), so--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: I know, I know.
Speaker 1: So she really grew up around the studio (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Around, around, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what--why music? Do you think it--you know, came her art form, music and song writing and not, you know, being here in the business.
Speaker 2: In the busi- it's, you know, Rachel is actually, before she became like a sing, songwriter, tried different things.  She's really a great artist.  She's a, she's--silkscreen, knitting, photographer, you name it.  Just like it last every six months and very, very involved in it she will run to something else--with, except with music.  But this lasted since, you know, gap year and through all college and a little bit and then as soon as she graduated 2010 and that was just as a full time that she was really working and pretty good at it, you know.  She won the ASCAP Award [ASCAP Foundation Robert Allen Award] a couple of times.  She opened for like John, John Le- Legend [John Legend] and sang at--god, I'm so bad in names--Will Smith's mother [Caroline Bright], DiCaprio [Leonardo DiCaprio] birthday party.  So Rachel have done a lot within the short period of time and continue to do well.
Speaker 1: Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], that's, I mean that's magical too in and of itself (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Was she, where did she go to school?
Speaker 2: She--Rachel went to el- elementary and high school.  She went to Hunter [Hunter College High School, New York, New York] and got her great education there and went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and major in film.  And 2010, and since then, she's just been writing and singing.
Speaker 1: That's wonderful.
Story_ID: 650752
Speaker 1: So what other things were significant about that--so after 'The Oprah Winfrey Show,' does that raise your profile even more or not, really?  Or is that just really meaningful because you already were really quite--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Interestingly in terms of sales, it really didn't help because it's not, you know, the Oprah--like if I were like something that whether it's book or something else and people run out and get it.  But a wedding dress (laughter) is not, is not like people who watching it and run out and buy wedding dress.  So it didn't really have that much of effect on it.  But it was from a personal thing.  I think it was just such so important, you know, to be interviewed by--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) one of the most incredible, you know--
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: --of our time, most successful black woman in television.
Speaker 1: Right.  I don't know if there'll be another such situation.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Unh-uh.  It's--
Speaker 2: Ever, I think (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Right, she came on the scene and then she left (laughter).  But she came on and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --now that we're back to, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --a little bit of this, a little bit of that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 650753
Speaker 1: The other thing I wanted to ask you about was Lincoln [Lincoln Motor Company] hiring you to produce a television commercial.  So how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Through friend and then they look at my tape, and they thought it was a great idea, and that was it.  It was quick anyway.  It was quick in a way in terms of making decision.
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  But do you think--have you done any more of those types of things?  Okay but then 'Grey's Anatomy' came the same year, you know, for the wedding dress for their final--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we been doing it, a few times we have done for 'Grey's Anatomy.'
Speaker 1: Oh, you have?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, we have, yeah, yeah, yeah.  We have.  We have done three or four, you know, we--yeah.  We did like for example Katherine Heigl, something we did for her.  And then another wedding.  Yeah, a few times that we have done a wedding for them.
Story_ID: 650754
Speaker 1: So talk about some of your celebrity clients that you've worked with.  Can you give names first?
Speaker 2: Okay.  People that I have worked with and people that I loved.  I--Alicia Keys.  I mean I really go again by personality in terms of niceness and it just amazing, amazing--love her.  She--we did her wedding, her not the, the reception, you know, afterward that the party dress that they did.  We did that for her which is an amazing, amazing person that she is and another one, Halle Berry.  Another great person that I had worked with.  Most of them that I don't work directly with them, this is the people that I, that I have met.  I think the one it give us a really big coverage and they talk about it even now is, my god, now I am stuck with the name.
Speaker 1: Not Jul- not Jul- not Julia--
Speaker 2: No, way, way, way back then.
Speaker 1: Like--
Speaker 2: She won the Golden Glove [sic.].
Speaker 1: Was it Julia Roberts?  No, no, no.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Golden Globe.
Speaker 2: Well, it'll come to me, sorry about that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wow, I can't--
Speaker 1: Okay 'cause I have Julia Roberts and Selma Blair and Lucy Liu.
Speaker 2: Lucy Liu, yes.
Speaker 1: Liu.
Speaker 2: Yes, this is--she's--just again she was amazing.
Speaker 1: Vivica Fox, oh, god, Lisa Kudrow, Kim Basinger.
Speaker 2: Kim Basinger.
Speaker 1: Oh, Kim?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: Kim Basinger, that was, you know, for when her to win the Golden Glove, that was my first one.  And it was huge, People magazine wrote about us.  I mean the entire family was just, it was, it was big.  You know, really.  And I think what--and last year they picked--that dress is one of the same--in one of those things like from Harper Bazaar [Harper's Bazaar] me- mentioned the top memorable like--good comment.
Speaker 1: So how did that come about, though?  How did she find out or was it her staff?
Speaker 2: Her stylist.  You know, the stylist.  We send dresses to the stylist.  She tried about eighty something dress and then she picked.  That's how, that's how it goes. You know, it's hit or miss.  You never know what works.  So, and we don't know, we do not know until the day of the show whether she's going to wear it or not.  Like you would never, they never tell you and then here I am like watching.  And then she won and when she get up it was just so exciting just to really see your dress on stage.
Speaker 1: So that's how it works?  You're saying that you don't always know if they're going to wear your dress?
Speaker 2: No.  At all.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That, I think that is news to me.  You know, because I, you know, a lot of times they'll say well, this is design- they'll say, you know, who--
Speaker 2: But that day though.
Speaker 1: That day--
Speaker 2: Well, once they're out, of course, they'll tell who it is, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's right.
Speaker 2: But basically they can change their mind to the last minute.  Nobody talks about it, what they're wearing and you're hoping that they going to wear it.  Even if they say that they're wearing it, they may change their mind.
Speaker 1: Now a lot of times what I've heard is that the designer offers to dress someone.  Is that, has that ha--
Speaker 2: For sure.  And you do not--yeah, that's--they're so--nowadays is such in demand you fly, they fly their assistants, everybody just to really get, just get them a free dress.  It's just, it's very expensive to really I think more and more that's why we don't even want to do it as much because it's just too expensive.  It was just not worth it.  But there--
Speaker 1: You're saying the competition because--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, no, no, you're gonna say something.  Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], you can say, you can say that (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no.  No, no what I'm saying is, it's a lot of thing--it's just like everybody wants to dress celebrities nowadays and very--like for everybody's business.  And then stuff happen and people call you and then you do it.  And it works.  Ea- sometimes easily, sometimes too complicated.
Speaker 1: And once again you like the personalities.  You know, you want to design (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --for certain personalities.
Story_ID: 650755
Speaker 1: When did FIT [Fashion Institute of Technology, New York, New York] approach you about serving on the board?  I have 2009 you went on.
Speaker 2: I think that's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, 2009, yes.
Speaker 1: So what did that mean to you?
Speaker 2: It was--I think what it mean to me like the first time when I walked in--and I haven't been to FIT ever since I graduated.  And just to walk in as a board member, one, I felt ancient seriously.  You just, you feel old just seeing this young people and re- and the memory just you go back and it just, it really feels good.  It really just to, you know, to serve and to contribute to a school that you really love and believed.  So it is, it's a nice, it's really nice feeling.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it's really a one of a kind kind of place--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in many ways 'cause it's either FIT and then you hear about RISD [Rhode Island School of Design, Providence, Rhode Island] but really for fashion it's more FI--
Speaker 2: I think, no FIT and also Parson [Parsons School of Design, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Parsons, I forget (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Parsons, yeah Parsons is big too, yeah, yeah.  Pratt [Pratt Institute, New York, New York] is good but FIT is--it's a great school.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, um-hm.  And Joyce Brown [HistoryMaker Joyce F. Brown] is still, is she--
Speaker 2: Yes, and she's amazing, yeah, she's really, yeah, she's (unclear)--
Speaker 1: 'Cause she's been there a, quite a while now.
Speaker 2: For a while--she had been there for a while, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, yeah, 'cause I'm to be--
Story_ID: 650756
Speaker 1: In 2010 your mother [Tsadale Assamnew] passed away--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?  And that--can you talk about that?  Like did--
Speaker 2: It was, you know, one of the, you know, I went home to bring my mom because of my daughter's graduation.  And that's when, you know, on the day that we were supposed to fly back and that's when--the day that she passed away.  But, you know, it still hurts, it still, I still don't know when I will want to go home because of her--I--just hard for me to go back home because of just the memory.  But the more you think about it, you know, it's--I was blessed.  I had her as my (unclear) for a long time and she was--it's, you know--
Speaker 1: 'Cause she had seen your growth?
Speaker 2: She had seen it grow.  She was proud and (crying) loved Rachel [Rachel Brown], Rachel to this day.  She can't talk about my mother without--she just, we just can't talk about it.  And they were so, you know, language is--means nothing, you know.  Very little.  My mother speak very little English and Rachel speak some tiny Amharic.
Speaker 1: Amharic.
Speaker 2: And the two of them just hugging and kissing. She was here [New York, New York] for a, for a year and a half.  And that gives them such a connection and really, really loved each other.  And that was the hard thing.  I think Rachel did not have a closure and that's what's the hardest thing for her not to talk about.
Speaker 1: But you're saying she saw the graduation.
Speaker 2: No, she--I didn't bring her here.
Speaker 1: Oh, you did--
Speaker 2: The day that it was supposed to happen she passed away (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh!
Speaker 2: So that's (unclear) her, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see, okay.  That's sad.
Speaker 2: Anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's hard they say to lose a mother, too.  I have still my mother with me but--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they say it doesn't even matter when (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They hold onto them, yeah.
Story_ID: 650757
Speaker 1: So your mother [Tsadale Assamnew] had continued to live in Ethiopia then?  So that was home for her?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, my mother--
Speaker 1: And your father [Aberra's stepfather, Aberra Moltot]?
Speaker 2: And my father too, yes, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm.  Okay.  So, now the other thing that I read about, wanted to ask you about, was Denise Seegal.  She had been brought on as CEO but that didn't work maybe.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Well, it--
Speaker 1: So can you talk about--I'm not sure if it worked or not, but it was, she was here--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no I mean there is definitely just a contribution that Denise brought.  But I think what was, you know, she is from ready to wear.  It's a whole different situation to what, to what we do.  But, you know, to what she's--I think that she's been here, you know, certainly she just really brought different idea.  But still, you know, she just moved on.  Everybody moves on.
Speaker 1: So what was, what was your thinking when you brought her on?  You know, what was the thinking that, that would bring to the, you know, the Amsale Group [Amsale Design Group, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: I think having Denise is always for when we do ready to wear and that is important you know for us to do that (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, I see.
Speaker 2: But in order for us to do that, we also have to run the di- bridal division and that's really--that--it was just such a whole two different business in a way.  And that's something that we have not thought about it carefully and for her to run it and also the ready to wear simultaneously it just seems to be a bit not the right time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what is your plans in the ready to wear then?  Is this the line that we're talking about coming out?  What line is--
Speaker 2: I think this is still gonna be the Amsale midrange bridal and also the midrange bridesmaid, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it's more in a ready to wear way that we're dealing with.  It can be done and at one time rather than one dress at a time, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but you're committed to that as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Completely committed to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, we're excited about it as a matter of fact yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now the other, the other person that is here also is Joy Kinder.  Is that, is she--Joy Kinder, the whole--oh no, she's with Christos, never mind, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 650758
Speaker 1: So let's go to the 'Amsale Girls.' How did that idea come about?
Speaker 2: Oh, my god, you know, what's the--it's actually came through Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown].  So Neil is a better person to ask that question because I know that he negotiated with every step that, that to make sure that it's going to be real.  So although it looks boring because but at least it was real, you know, and I think it is through Neil.  I think Neil, Neil's probably have a better reference about 'Amsale'--
Speaker 1: Because really that, that's taking him back to his TV days, too (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.  Yes, yes.  That's what he's--
Speaker 1: When he did--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's very familiar for him (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  You know what, it's--it is lovely, I mean you are so lucky to have someone you trust more than life itself, you know.
Speaker 2: Completely, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Who you know has your back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah. And--yes.
Story_ID: 650759
Speaker 1: So talk about designing the gown for Alec Baldwin's daughter--(unclear), no?
Speaker 2: Wife [Hilaria Thomas Baldwin].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, never mind.
Speaker 2: The new one.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay, okay.  (Unclear), okay.  That's--okay.
Speaker 2: She's twenty-eight.  Right, she can--yeah.  She's twenty-eight, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: She was, no, she wanted to have little, you know, we have little white dress.  She wanted just a short dress.  So she came to us and I met her and she did not, you know, she didn't want a long gown.  And then she had this gown, fell in love and she changed the whole wedding based on the wedding dress.  So instead of just being a small and it become a more, a more bigger one.  And then we dress her a couple of times and for a, for an event and they really don't go to events any more as much.  I think they're very, she's very private.  But amazing.  Again I hate to talk about how amazing people are but she is.  She's just like so, so down to earth and grateful about, about things that we have done to her.  Just remembering us the day of her wedding.  Texting and tweeting about her dress and then just like really just a great, a great person.
Story_ID: 650760
Speaker 1: What haven't you done that you would still like to do?
Speaker 2: I, you know, I don't know.  I mean I don't know.  I really don't have any regret.  I really don't (unclear)--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, not regret but--
Speaker 2: But--
Speaker 1: --what haven't you done in the area of design, you know, that you would like to--
Speaker 2: Oh, design specifically, I don't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In design.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, design.
Speaker 2: I think design probably what I really would, wanted to do would really just to do the same thing that I did for wedding.  They got to be people who are like me kind of.  People who really want simple thing but still functional, you know.  To do ready to wear.  It makes people feel good and comfortable and stylish and all that.  And you don't have and for people to worry about it that they have to be size two in order to be great.  Those are the stuff that I would wish that I would have done and, but it does, it's a whole different setup.  You know, it's not willing or, but that would be just a nice thing to really make women feel that you don't have to follow trend.  It's not the trend.  You need to--the dress has to work for you kind of attitude.  And many times it works because something is as simple and basic, what makes people look beautiful.  So those--is more like a philosophy to me really it just--I--it just--especially woman knowing that they're doctors, they save live, they're lawyers, they're so amazing to what they do and I want them also to feel good about what they wear, you know. I want them to go to this black tie.  They don't have to be just oh, my god I have to go this.  I want them to feel like oh, I wanted to go there.  And in order for us to do it, we have to make it simple enough for them so that they feel confident.  So those are the stuff that I wish I could do.  Even today like if someone get together and they say, "Okay, let's design this."  I'll be, probably be very happy.
Speaker 1: So why do you think you were born to design?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Now you say that because I'm in this emotion because I was born to be honest about design.  I was born to make wedding dress to be not really about trend, about being pretty.  About fulfilling of a bride's dream.  And if I design something else, it would be just like that too.  It just to really service people.  And, but my type of people.  Like people who have similar aesthetic about me, you know.  It's not--those are the stuff that I think I, you know, making dresses are not, is not a big thing, but it's very special for someone who is their most important day.  And for me, it's such a privilege to think about it that I am dressing someone that dress is the most important dress in her life.  And that to me is such amazing thing.  Even now, just every time I see bride, a bride wearing my dress, (makes sound) it just get me excited.
Story_ID: 650761
Speaker 1: You know, I was thinking of what you meant for Ethiopia too and those of Ethiopian descent, because--I mean do people tell you that or how do you, can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: I think the Ethiopian community and the African American community equally by the way in terms of the support that I got.  It is so overwhelming and is so amazing and how generous people are.  It's like to my success.  How kind they are, how nice they are.  Things that they write.  How proud they are.  And it's, you know, that always amazes me.  Why, you know, why would anybody have to write me and just simply just because they are proud and I am, I am incredibly grateful for Ethiopian community and the African American community, very much so.  I was given an award at one time and I had to prepare a speech and it was the most amazing evening.  It's all black women too.  And I just say, you know, I had prepare a speech but it just simply doesn't feel right to write from that--I felt like I have to speak from heart, my heart.  Just seem all like knowing every one of them caring they--I've been liked.  It's such an amazing feeling, you know, you're not, you're just like everyone is rooting for you.  If I make a mistake speaking nobody cares because they not--so that's the thing about being, you know, being loved and being care, you know.  So people caring for you so this--it's really amazing.
Story_ID: 650762
Speaker 1: Amsale [HistoryMaker Amsale Aberra], I mean I think about, you know, Iman and model- and then you went to the top, you know, in fashion with just--I mean that's what people want to share in your success because you did it, you did it on your own.  You did it with, you know, internal commitments.  So I wanna ask about you as a role model because there are lots of people now, young people, looking up to you who wanna be you.  And what are you telling them and what do you see?  How do you feel, what do you feel your responsibil- one, what are you telling them and what do you feel your responsibility as a role model is?
Speaker 2: You know, it always, you know, especially when speaking to you young people, it always, I have to really just balance it.  Have that walk that you wanted to encourage them, you also want them how hard it is.  And those are always a difficult thing.  And I always talk about how badly do you want it.  How passionate about what you wanted to do.  And it's not easy but you also don't, you know, that's--but if you love it enough, eventually would come and that's what I want them to make sure that they stick to their plan, to their idea, to my baby story, you know, with the baby cutting on the, on the ground.  And really what get me going was to really think that I love it.  If you love it enough, you don't quit it.  And I think it's really important.  You don't go to fashion just because you love clothes.  You go to fashion because you wanted to create it and not, you know.  So just really making sure that they love because it's not easy, but they will succeed if they stay--stick to it.  That's really, it really requires commitment.
Speaker 1: Amsale, was there any time during your career that you wanted to throw in the towel?
Speaker 2: Never.  No, no throw towel, just frustrated.  It was just how hard you know sometimes it get just so hard for it, but I never really thought about quitting and interestingly when you're, when you're not quitting, if you're happy with little success, you don't quit.  I get so excited over little thing.  And then that keep me going.  One little pickup and I'm happy again.  And, so and if stuff happens.  Stuff always happen.  There was--somebody was going to like what you do and somebody else, you know, there's always something that kept you going, but I never really wanted to quit.  I think, I think it's hard for it for me to quit.  It's just like earlier when I got really good reaction, how do I quit, you know, although it's hard to do.  And then there're people who really, who joined the organization [Amsale Aberra, Inc., New York, New York], they--you don't wanted to quit on them too.  So no I never thought about quitting.
Speaker 1: And then in the, in the bridal industry, was there someone before you?  And is there anyone coming and I'm talking about, you know, African American, I mean or black or whatever, of African descent--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --is there anyone you know that preceded you or is there anyone who is--that you see coming behind you?
Speaker 2: Not yet.  Not in the past and not yet.  But it is, again it's a small industry. It's not a big industry.  You know, hopefully someone will be in yeah, but, not, not yet.  And maybe in a smaller scale that we don't know, you know.  I'm sure.  But not like in a, in a national, you know, I'm not, I'm not so sure.
Story_ID: 650763
Speaker 1: I wanna go back to the--I wanna talk about do you, is there pressure or the design process, can you describe your design process and whether--that's one question.  And whether you feel pressure to--in the, in the design process.  I mean, you know, some people sequester themselves away.  You know, they--but where are you getting your inspiration from and--
Speaker 2: I always two things that really made me (unclear).  When you design, you really design throughout the year.  You know, you see things and it's always in the back of your mind, you know.  And then you put it on the board; there's this what we call it a mood board.  Like right now, for example, we are finishing the bridesmaid and then we're doing the Amsale collection.  There's going to be just lot of ideas, you know.  I talk about okay, let's do satin this time and let's mix it with tulle, color.  Don't laugh, this time blue again (laughter).  And very, very light, light blue so like crystal and blue pearl.  We put all of those inspiration and then we edit it down until they--they have to jell.  They have to really connect to each other and then now the collection start developing.  When it really works is deadline.  To me I work the best when is under pressure.  Because the creativity it just like you--it is I think most artist they work better under pressure because it just the adrenaline and the energy.  Like the last two weeks if we design--like Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] would just say like, "How do you guys come up with a lot of stuff in two weeks?"  You know, he thinks like, you know, you do it, you, it's like you don't.  You know, you think about it 'cause you talk about it is more but the deadline make you want to do it.  And deadline is good for us.
Story_ID: 650764
Speaker 1: Do you ever think that--it's striking about your, you know, just your designs or the cuts and the, and like when the model would turn around it's like this beautiful surprise.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I mean, so you see the dress from the front, you know, but then it was always such a beautiful surprise in the back and sometimes the trains, you know, and the fabric.  So what would you describe as your signature in that way?  You know the--I don't--
Speaker 2: I think my design in general, the way I do is just one focal point.  I don't want it to give too many things everywhere because you don't want people to look everywhere.  Like when you said back detail, like a bride will be more modest in the front.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: She's standing in front of the altar and then her back can be very bare and very low and that's one focal point.  So that's--that our concentration. It always is what is that focal point?  What is the statement you're giving?  Even if you wear--even, even in everyday dressing, if someone just simple black dress and have one earring, one broach, that's the focal point.  That's the statement.  And that's the same thing that I would do when I, when I design this back detail is people are just watching them, you know, most of the time.  That's where she standing and I think the back detail is important.
Story_ID: 650765
Speaker 1: As you said you've been in the business for twenty-four years, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I think my legacy I want it to really be--
Speaker 1: Start again.
Speaker 2: Oh, sorry about that.  (Laughter) Now I'm too comfortable and then I forgot about--I really would want my legacy will be here's someone who basically not so sure of what they wanted to do, having, having a hard work and trusting in being given a chance and where it takes, you know, how--oh never mind, this is not even making any sense.  Let me just think of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: I need to think about my--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my, 'cause when I think about legacy, I'm really trying to figure out what that mean--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --what that mean to me.
Speaker 1: It, you know, what--right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What I wanted to really the legacy to me I wanted to connect to people. You don't have to plan this grand plan about life.  Life will take care of itself.  You need to want it, you wanted to work hard, and you want people when they blend, take it.  Just there are people who really care enough when they see you wanting something so those are the stuff that I would, I would want people just to really take from my life, from my story.  You know, I came here without knowing what this country is and would I have came here, you know, first I got here.  I hated the food.  I hated the weather.  I hated everything.  I loved everything now.  I love the food.  I love the holiday.  I--even the weather.  I know the difference between what winter brings and what summer brings.  And it's not--I could have easily complain about it, but just I allow people like Neil [Aberra's husband, HistoryMaker Neil Brown] and Neil's friends or others to really just be part of me--my life.  And that help.  But nothing be handed to you unless you really work hard at it.  You need to, you know, just--that's really, that's really my advice.  I don't want people to think that it's hard or we're--I am special or I'm better.  No, it's not really that much of it as anybody else, it's just the true thing is important.  It's just to find what you love not because other people are doing it.  Just if you love something.  My god, I believe in this country so much, it's just like somebody really help you.  That's, but you just have to show it.  You have to earn it.
Speaker 1: So you're the, you're the American dream story?
Speaker 2: It's--and I still believe in that.  There is no like link, there is no question.  I think people--not everybody will give you, but somebody just being in right place and keep knocking the door whenever you can.  But you have to have a story to tell.  Something that you're excited about.  You can't just want it to be successful.  You just want, you just don't want it to be a designer, you just have to love it and just show it.  And it doesn't have to be, it could be anything.  And that's really would just what I would, I would--and don't do it just to be famous.  I to this day, I am so, I would do it for business and I really, I don't like spotlight.  It's not, I'm not doing it just to be--it just really not.  If that's really what people want, that's okay too.  That's the passion, just do--that's--I'm not trying to criticize but certain things it requires hard work.  So making sure that you love it, that's my point I was trying to come across after ten minutes (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, no you did well there.
Story_ID: 650766
Speaker 1: You know, we're an African American project or those who identify as African American, oh wait--on--a lot--a fair number of people who were born in the country, in the continent, on the continent of Africa.  I wanna ask you what hopes and concerns you have in general for our community?  And then I wanna--well, I wanna ask that question first.
Speaker 2: You know, so interesting, I probably except to say that I am incredibly grateful of people of being supportive of me.  I feel not, I'm not so sure how good would I be to know it, to give advice and what to say.  Do you know, do you know what I'm trying to say?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It's like, it's the gift I get from the community is huge, but what I wanted to say I don't think I will be the right person--
Speaker 1: To say it.
Speaker 2: --to say it.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But what do you, what would you say that you represent for the country of Ethiopia?  There are a lot of Ethiopian, Ethiopian Americans here in this country, a lot, um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think it represent again hope, you know.  There are people who came here, not everybody is the chance that I have.  I just want people to know that there is always hope, there is always chance and whatever you do I think just keep, you know, work at it.  And that's the hope that I would want to give; and when they see me and I want them--that, that is a possibility.
