Story_ID: 48259
Speaker 1: Well, sir, I'm--we're gonna start out--we're just gonna have a conversation--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --throughout this.  And I want to start out by slating it.  And my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer.  And the videographer is Scott Stearns, and your--the observer, Samuel Adams.  And I'd like you to start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including your middle name.
Speaker 2: Sure, I'm John Daniel Allen, J-O-H-N, of course, Daniel, D-A-N-I-E-L, Allen, A-L-L-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay and can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: One, seventeen, forty-three. January 17th, 1943.
Speaker 1: Okay and can we have today's date and our location?
Speaker 2: This is March the 11th, 2002.  We're in the Columbus Consolidated Government Center in my cramped judge's quarters (laughter).
Speaker 1: And the address?
Speaker 2: 110th Street, Columbus, Georgia 31901.
Speaker 1: And your profession?
Speaker 2: Present, Superior Court Judge.
Story_ID: 48260
Speaker 1: And I ask five questions of everyone.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: They're sort of "People" magazine-ish, but just bear with me.  I want--
Speaker 2: That's quite all right.
Speaker 1: --short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Oh wow (laughter), I like cooking, so I like seafood, just about any sort; love lobster since my days in Southeast Asia.  But I can't do without cooking soul food periodically (laughter), back to the roots sort of thing.  And I cook all types of soul food.  And I love vegetables.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Hmmm, in suits, navy blue (laughter), otherwise--well, I'll say navy blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: That has changed somewhat.  I love late spring and summer.  It's a time for getting out and doing things outdoors.  I like athletics; I like tennis; I like golf.  I get to mingle more with people outside of the profession. End of spring, beginning of summer, I like that time of year.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh well, that's, that's faith has it's--has its benefit, but doubt get you an education.
Story_ID: 48261
Speaker 1: [Interviewer asks Allen to talk about his parents and his growing up].
Speaker 2: An outstanding mother--came from a broken home, typical poor background in Columbus, Georgia, a family of seven children.  I had six sisters and no brothers, and mother and father were separated when I was probably eight years old--seven or eight years old--a very strong woman.  She worked three jobs I think at one period in her life, which was just about consumed the entire day, but in spite of it, held the family together.  She was a strong person, strong symbol, strong parent, hands-on type, only had about a fifth grade education, but managed a nightclub at one point, owned her own business, owned an alteration shop in Atlanta, Georgia.  I'll tell you about that.  That was quite unique.  A domestic a lot of her life and during the latter fifteen years of her life she had ran her own alteration shop in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: What was her name, sir?
Speaker 2: Beatrice Allen, Beatrice Taylor Allen.  A special was done on her in Atlanta, one of the TV stations, about--for whatever reason, a lot of the Atlanta dignitaries used to come by our shop and sit down for advice, Mayor Jackson [Maynard Jackson], Marvin Arrington, Joyner--Gordon Joyner.  For whatever reason, they'd come and bring their clothes and just sit down and chat with her.  She was just a magnetic type person, very down to earth, like I say, uneducated in the sense of having much formal education, but in spite of it, inspired all of us to go on to college.
Speaker 1: Do you know where--where was she born, sir?  Was she born in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Born in Columbus.
Speaker 1: Columbus?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: Were you born in Columbus--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Born in Columbus, Georgia as well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And did she share any stories growing up, any of her stories at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, after a while--after a point.  When we're all struggling going to school, we didn't talk much about her background.  It was more about inspiring us to just--to do more, to be better than what we--better in terms of a ec--economics and a better station in life than where we were.  It was only after she became ill that we talked a lot about her background because at, at that time you get anxious to know things, you know.  She--I vaguely remember her mother, my grandmother.  I have a few fleeting thoughts about her--lived in a little shotgun house in a rather economically deprived area of town.  Her mother died when I--I must have been very, very young.  As in--she--in fact, my oldest daughter--my oldest sister was born when my mother was about twelve years old, so she didn't have much of a childhood--maybe thirteen years old, but she grew well.
Speaker 1: Now your father, did you know him at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you tell me his name and--
Speaker 2: Daniel Allen.  Although my mother [Beatrice] and father separated when I was quite young, he lived here in Columbus [Georgia] and so we had contact with him.  And I lived with him maybe one--two years.  When my mother moved to Atlanta [Georgia] we wanted to finish high school here.  He was a, a porter, janitor, truck driver all of his life, strong work ethic.  He went as far in school in, in public school as you could at that time, which was the ninth grade I think, but, as I've indicated, just did man--manual labor.
Story_ID: 48262
Speaker 1: Do you--go--tell me your siblings' names in the order.  Are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: No, I'm--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --right in the middle.  My oldest sister is Gloria Nabrid (ph.).  Gloria started out as a--as a registered nurse out of Grady [Grady Memorial Hospital] in Atlanta [Georgia], migrated to Los Angeles, California, got her master's in public administration and became a hospital administrator, Kedren Mental Health Center out there. Second oldest was a registered nurse that finished Grady also in Atlanta, went in the military for a couple of years as an officer, came back to Columbus, worked at Martin Army [Martin Army Community Hospital] at Fort Benning [Georgia].  She retired in the last three years maybe from nursing.  They all went back and got advance degrees above their certificate as a registered nurse.  The third from the top is Elizabeth, just above me.  She is a registered nurse also.  She finished a medical center nursing program here, went to Atlanta and worked at Grady as a charge nurse of the ophthalmology clinic.  The next sister just below me was also a registered nurse--once the trend starts--and that was the cheapest way to go at that time--finished Grady.  She became head nurse of the walk-in clinic at Grady.  She retired from nursing, and now she's working at public school system as a teacher.  The one below her is Melinda Thompson.  She retired from Internal Revenue Service as a supervisor the last two years.  And my youngest sister is Rose E. Allen.  She's a flight attendant with Delta [Delta Airlines], has been for several years.  She finished college also.
Story_ID: 48263
Speaker 1: Now what are your--some of your earliest memories of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up in a public housing project.  In fact, it's very near here, probably five blocks away.  I tell people quite a--it's quite an irony that I've gone from public housing projects to superior courts, and I moved only five blocks (laughter), has to be some more in that story.  The--it's labeled now as one of the toughest, roughest areas in the city.  I don't remember it as such.  It was a neighborhood to me.  I remember the elderly persons in the neighborhood getting due respect from all the kids.  Remem--periods of--I had a, what I could--would consider, a very warm childhood.  The school I went to is very near there.  I'm sure we had fights, but I don't remember them as being so bad that it left a scar anywhere, either mentally or physically.  After leaving there, we moved up--what we call Uptown, an area that's near Mr. Smarey (ph.); I lived near him at that time.  Those house are all gone, a neighborhood--neighborhood improvement undertakings, projects--shotgun houses.
Speaker 1: Can you describe Columbus, Georgia at that time?  You know--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what, what kind of community it was, 'cause we're going back.  It's, you know, 1943.  It's a different South.
Speaker 2: Forty-three [1943] of course I was born.  I was in elementary school '48[1948]--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --forty-nine [1949]--very segregated.  I distinctly remember, and so it was probably high school years--black and white water fountains.  I went to the only black high school here, and we couldn't play football even against the white high schools.  All of our football games had to be out of town against other black schools.  The--even the buses, you know, blacks sitting in the back of the bus.  The--of course neighborhoods absolutely segregated; menial jobs, except for, at that time, teachers, and doctors, and morticians, and ministers were the only independent professions, if you will.  And of course school teachers were not independent.  The--I'll tell you how limited we were in our vision and in my environment.  I wanted to finish high school and get a job making $125 a week so that I could buy a car.  I mean that's how limited my exposure was.  Teachers inspired me.  My mother inspired me and my family.  Teachers inspired me, made me believe that I could do better.  So because of the segregation, we had very limited visions.  And if we thought about anything, never considered being a judge of course; didn't know a judge--didn't know a black judge existed.  If we--in our growth to better ourselves, it was just that it came about as a result of just being pushed and encouraged.  We didn't know where we were going.  We just knew we had to do these things, fill these squares, go to school, get an education.  Somewhere out there there's something better.
Story_ID: 48264
Speaker 1: You know Columbus [Georgia]--can you just give some history on this community.  I mean it's--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --it's a small town.  It's not an adjunct.  It--it's (unclear) I was told the largest city outside Atlanta [Georgia].  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Geographically.
Speaker 1: Geo--okay.
Speaker 2: Not by population.  Columbus was for many years, in fact until I got back here to practicing law, basically a textile town.  Wages were extremely low and were kept that way.  There was no need to have any higher wage standards.  If other industries came in and, and, and gave higher wage standards, it would breed discontent of course among the persons that are working here.  So Columbus for a long time was, was, was kept in the mode of being a textile town.  I came back to practice law in 1977, and the banking institutions were growing and had a need to have a, a wealthier capital base, economic base.  So the town began to open more, and other industry came in, a very slow process, the greatest growth in Columbus, Georgia.  I'll say until ten years ago Columbus grew very little economically.  About ten years ago, it began a very fairly rapid expansion and growth and became more inclusive.  Columbus was "integrated" back in the '70's [1970s].  I was gone off to college and Vietnam--integrated to the extent that no buses--segregated buses, no segregated restaurants, etc.--not fully integrated as a society, though.  In fact, even when I came back in '77' [1977], it was not, no back doors as I've indicated.  But at that time we had black and white policemen, whereas earlier in Columbus when I was growing up, they had black policemen.  They couldn't arrest whites.  Of course all that changed when I came back and I was practicing law.
Speaker 1: Now when you said it was textile ta--town, does that mean one family owned the town?
Speaker 2: A few families, very few.  We had a--Columbus was the largest manufacturer of denim, you know jeans, when I came here in '77' [1977], and, and remained so for several years.  So, a couple of very large textile mills-- probably most of the land in the city was owned by three families who developed a lot of the subdivisions that exist here.  It's a very wealthy town.  We have quite a few millionaires per capita here than in a lot of other places--old money.
Speaker 1: Now those families, do you know who they were or you, you--but you--
Speaker 2: Sure, Jordans, Ja--Jordan, they call him (unclear) Jordans (laughter); Woodruffs; Bilges; Swifts; Averett; Dimons--some of them.  I missed a few, I'm certain.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.  Can, can you spell those names--Diamond, we're okay.
Speaker 2: D-I-M-O-N.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Different.  J-O-R-D-A-N.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Woodruff, W-O-O-D-R-U-F-F.  Jordan or what do we have?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Averett, A-V-E-R-E-T-T.  Some of them will probably be a little upset that I've forgotten their names (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's okay (laughter) (unclear).  Now that's not the main subject that you--
Speaker 2: No.
Story_ID: 48265
Speaker 1: But I wanna go back and--so you grew up in a--you know in a com--what you--was a community.  It felt like a community.
Speaker 2: Act--actually wherever blacks lived it was a community.  In the housing projects or every other area that we went to was like most ghettos.  We called them ghet--(unclear) talk about these ghettos--economically deprived areas--the people were actually close.  Everybody sat on their front porch.  The kids--they knew all the kids.  They talked to each other and disciplined kids in those days.  So it was kind of an extended family and I think it was beneficial in that regard, that you had a sense of security when you were back in your community.  Of course you didn't feel it when you drifted out into the white world.  Even when you went to work you're not accepted or welcome.  When you came back into your community you were.  So it was--we don't look on it as being a hard time--those of us who've managed to escape and do well--but a very protected time.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first became aware of the larger community?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Of course in high school we saw we were not able to play white schools.  And we went down--and going out and expanding out, going downtown into other areas to work, you know you're very cognizant of, of the black and white water fountains, black and white restrooms. You had to try to plan places that you could get to a restroom--and most cognizant of it in walking with my mother [Beatrice Allen] and she's moving off the sidewalk, you know, for whites, probably the most disturbing memory.
Speaker 1: Do you remember asking your mother about why there were white and black fountains and what that--and what--and what was the difference--
Speaker 2: No, you kind of--you, you kind of--it was a part of the street education.  You knew what it was all about.  Somehow you just learned it.  You hear talk in the community from grownups of what that was all about.
Speaker 1: Did you ever think that the water might taste differently at the white water fountain?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, we used sneak and drink out of the water all the time.  Funny thing was, you know, blacks were taking care of white kids.  I remember my mother being a maid, and I'd go to her house and she's cooking dinner for them.  And I'm there working in the yard, and the other little kids my age in the house.  And she's cooking for them, and they look to, to her more as a mother than they did their own.  It was kind of in that environment you saw--the difference was to me they were all appeared rich of course.  But there was no difference otherwise in listening to the kids talk.  I was always curious and watching.  They treated those people--it's kind of a paternalistic environment.  They looked out for their black person, you know, the whites did.  So I didn't see any bad treatment of my mother, nor did I get any in that sense, just running into segregated situations otherwise.
Speaker 1: So your mother was accepted sort of as their black person.
Speaker 2: In the little limited environment that I was in.
Story_ID: 48266
Speaker 1: Now you had mentioned--what kind of child were you?  I mean what--were you introspective?  Were you gregarious?  Were you--
Speaker 2: Pretty good, gregre--gregarious really.  'Cause we've always grew up in a neighborhood where there were a lot of kids, and so--you know, always out playing sports, mingling with the other kids, getting into trouble without mom knowing, at school, active.  Because my sisters that went ahead of me were, were just naturally smart, the same was expected of me in school when I came along.  You know, here comes another one of those Allens, and boy we expect you to do well, so teachers stayed on me.  Consequently, I was forced into organizations and activities when it got to the point that I could do so.  Well, I remember even elementary school.  They'd just grab me and I was in the play, you know the little plays.  I was editor of the paper down in elementary school, things of that nature, simply because they pushed me because of the family's reputation and being able to perform academically.  The--otherwise, I, I had--I had experiences I didn't want my family to know about and I never told 'em and--but I had ran around with little groups or gangs--not gangs in the sense of gangs today.  We fought, but we didn't kill anybody.  We chased the little girls late at night, the ones who were out there.  Quite frankly, I did some things that were illegal.  I remember stealing from stores and shoplifting.  If it's almost a game, I'm beating this white system, you know--nothing serious, didn't hurt--I mean hurt anybody physically.  But I do recall going into stores and shoplifting, and the guys, it would be a big joke in doing so.  And another thing, it was kind of a way--we couldn't find jobs--you know it was a way of kind of getting over, so to speak, or getting by--not proud of it of course.  And it was not a way of life that stuck with me obviously.
Story_ID: 48267
Speaker 1: Now what, what--if you take yourself back to your childhood--hood and you know, sort of memories, are there any sights, smells, or sounds that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Fondest memories and sights are kids get up in the morning and play.  And late afternoon you get the, the fragrance of dinner cooking.  You could walk down the street past the little shotgun houses or past the different apartments and you'd smell what a person had for dinner.  And--I mean every day, you know.  It was like everybody was on the same clock.  And the kids would just kind of filter out and disappear and all going home.  And, and that was a very pleasant, warm time.  Of course we weren't having filet mignon, but the fragrances of--the odors--not odors--the fragrance of the foods that were being cook were so powerful, just made your mouth water that even now I guess it would stimulate by the memories that I had then; that and kids would eat, and they'd come back out in the afternoon later on and, and gather and, and play calmer and--just like we're winding down, you know, for the night; those memories of walking around in neighborhoods, of speaking to older people, older people speaking to us, of kids getting together in little groups, being communal.  It even extended into high school.  As we got old, I don't remember quite the fragrance in your neighborhood, but the kids had begun or had grown up being communal so we continued to be so.
Story_ID: 48268
Speaker 1: Now what elementary school did you go to, sir?
Speaker 2: A place called Fifth Avenue Elementary [Decatur, Georgia].  I'm dating myself, but we used to have to go out back and get coal and bring it in to put into the stove.  I might not be dating myself so much.  It's just that we did that in the black school and at central, or steam heater in the white schools--tall--I remember the floors of the school being--feeling not quite so stable, but super devoted teachers, you know.  It went to the sixth grade.  In fact my family moved from Booker T. Washington Apartments.  And since I moved, I was gonna have to go to another high school.  But the teachers liked the family so much, until they gave me bus fare to come back to ride the public bus everyday to come back to that school.  Otherwise, I could not have gone.  I didn't have money to come back to ride the buses.  We didn't have busing as such, public school buses at that point; we had to ride the public bus.
Speaker 1: In the public bus you were as kids sitting on the back of the bus at the time?
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, just put your token and went to the back of the bus.  In fact, sometimes you put your token in and went around to the back door and you got on the bus.
Story_ID: 48269
Speaker 1: What--in here, in, in your ta--in the town in Columbus [Georgia], does--is there a junior high school or does it go from elementary to high school?
Speaker 2: Junior high school.  We had a junior high school when I came along in fact, 'cause one for blacks, Spencer Junior High, seventh and harver grade, and then to Spencer Senior High for--again, the only black high school.  We had a Carver [George Washington Carver].  For whatever reason, it had an intermediate high school that went to the tenth grade, and then all the kids had to leave there and come to Spencer.  You know, in a black community you just live with whatever was given or provided.
Speaker 1: Did you--when you went to school--I had heard this in some communities--were your books the, the throwaways of--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: They were, of--of white schools?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, used books.  And when we got 'em, we still had to wrap them for the teachers to preserve the--'cause we had to pass them on to the kids next year.  Our chemistry lab didn't have equipment, didn't have the chemicals to--very, very, very few chemicals to do anything with any experiments.  They built a new senior high school, which is the Spencer that I went to, but it still was not equipped, and we still had old books.  It's just a fact of life.  We just accepted it.  I don't ever recall having a new book.
Story_ID: 48270
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what teachers influenced you and how--did that start really in elementary school?
Speaker 2: Yes, actually it did.  My mother [Beatrice Allen] didn't have time to stand over us to study.  I was blessed, I suppose, with the ability to pick things up very quickly.  So teachers would push me to do as well as I could and would always single me and my family--oth--oth--other fairly bright kid--you know, bright kids out to, to push them always.  You can--you can do better boy; you gotta do better.  And with--I'd try to go to sleep or be lazy and they wouldn't let me.  And so one of the teachers I told you paid my bus fare back.  I'll never forget Ms. Vontress, V-O-N-T-R-E-S-S.  When I left elementary school and we moved to another section of town I didn't leave the school.  I would have had to transfer, but she paid my bus fare every day to come back.  I remember Ms. Brown further in elementary school, down in fourth grade.  Each time there was a play, they'd want me to participate, but I wouldn't ask my family--my mother for money to buy costumes 'cause she didn't have it.  I mean I even realized that at that early age.  So they would buy my costumes.  The--so there were several, those in elementary school.  Coming to junior high and elementary, I remember Ms. Washington--Mr. Washington-(unclear)--who pushed me, always--not that I constantly required pushing, but who would always see to it that I fulfill my potential.  And in high school several of my teachers are still living and here now, and we acknowledge--I acknowledge them often.  Ms. Ingersoll (ph.), who is now Ms. Viola Hines, was a teacher--my math teacher.  He was actually only about three years older than I was.  She finished college at nineteen, so she was back teaching us.  But I used to dodge all the math classes.  She'd just grab me by my ear and pull me in class, said come in here boy.  You gon--you signed up for physics.  No, here, you're gonna take it, and they'd put me in class.  Ms.--Mrs. Washington did the same thing with other areas of math.  Ms. Childs in English.  I remember I wouldn't even--I had the grades to be a member of the Honor Society.  And I would'nt 'cause I didn't--I wanted to be like my boys, my other boys, not the--I ran with both groups.  And so she forced me to come in and sign up for the National Honor Society and made me take a picture.  I ran away from that of recognition, but they wouldn't let me.  A.J. McClung (ph.) was not a teacher.  But when it came time to go to college, I just assumed that I was going to college--I didn't know how I was going to college--'cause everybody said I needed to go to college.  You know, you're smart; you can be better; you can--you need to go to college.  I figure well, I'll go to college, whatever that is.  And A.J. took me to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] and got me a scholarship; meet the--to meet the dean; and sign me up for a loan for the monies for which I didn't have scholarship.  So that's how I got in college.  So all the--there have been people--and my mother didn't know how to do these things, you know.  She wasn't an educated person.  She just knew I was--should go to college.  She didn't know anything about even applying.  But counselors, Charles W. Duvall, who was the principal at Spencer [William Henry Spencer High School in Columbus, Georgia], they would nurture us in that regard.  So we were fortunate in--for segregation in that sense, that we had these people who could give us the individual attention and push us.  It may not have be--it may not have been--may not be where I am, you know, had the situation been otherwise.
Story_ID: 48271
Speaker 1: What did you show an interest in sort of math or science?
Speaker 2: Math just came easy then.  To tell you the truth, English came easy.  I--most things came easy then.  Maybe I had good teachers, I'm certain.  And whatever course in math I had, I just was able to, to deal with it.  And that was a time of first space flights.  So teachers told me you should be an engineer, you know, because I was good in math.  I said okay, I--well, I'll be an engineer.  I so went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] and signed up for engineering.  That's how I got my engineering degree.  You know, I didn't--coming from an environment that, maybe it's a lack of vision on my part, you didn't have role models in engineering.  I didn't have real visions of black engineers, you know, or what engineering was really all about, except I know it had to do with people going into space, you know.  But, teachers told me I could be--I could do that, so that's what I did.
Story_ID: 48272
Speaker 1: Did you--I mean when you were young--you know, I'm talking about like maybe ten or nine or whatever--did you dream of becoming anything, you know?
Speaker 2: The only thing I ever thought about, dreamed about, and my friends remind me of this, and some of 'em told me I told 'em--I said I'm gonna fly an aircraft.  I used--we used to sit around and (unclear) watch the aircraft go back and said man, I'm gonna fly an aircraft one day, no real plan for how to do it.  It happened an opportunity came available of course when I went to college, Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama], which was fairly renowned for its military program for Tuskegee Airmen.  I supposed we'll get to that in a minute.  Otherwise, it's just I was kind of taking it a day at the time--day at a time.  And the only thing I ever talked about doing was just flying.  And the irony of it is, after I accomplished it and did it for a few years, I don't do it anymore.
Story_ID: 48273
Speaker 1: I--I'm wondering if there was anything else in those, you know, sort of pre-college years that were--proved instrumental in, in shaping you.
Speaker 2: I think the most influential--I had, you know, these--not, not an incident that I can recall.  Well, there are a couple.  One, in working in environment where we were going in at the mercy whites in whether or not we had a job, and just a couple of discriminatory acts, you know, that--the way they talk down and, and dealt with us.  I said look, I'm, I'm not gonna subject myself to this for the rest of my life, you know.  I've got to be independent.  And to me independence at that time was being highly educated and qualified for something.  A couple of the incidents that happened.  The other was just my mother [Beatrice Allen] pushing, saying, you know, I know you're gonna go to school; I know you're gonna do well, so--
Speaker 1: She wa--she--
Speaker 2: --that inspiration.
Speaker 1: She was proud of you it seems like all along.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were--you were a good, good boy relatively.  I mean you were (unclear)--you had no--
Speaker 2: Yeah, she didn't know about my bad things, so (laughter).
Speaker 1: She didn't (laughter).  You were--(laughter).  You had enough right.
Speaker 2: Well, you know it, it was--it was her opinion of me was important.  You know, when I went to pilot training it was tough.  I mean blacks were not making it and--but she said you gonna make it, so I had to make it, you know.
Story_ID: 48274
Speaker 1: Now that--I thought that was very interesting about you--you know you saying I was gonna go to college; you know, I didn't know how or what, but I was gonna go.  At--
Speaker 2: Just had to go to college; that was it.
Speaker 1: When, when Mr. A.J.--
Speaker 2: McClung.
Speaker 1: --McClung--when he took you up to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama], did he describe what it was like?  Had he gone there?  I mean what was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had gone to college, and Tuskegee was a famous--I mean, you know, our world was--knowledge of colleges was limited to, you know, Tuskegee, Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], Morris Brown [Morris Brown College in Atlanta, Georgia], black colleges, Florida A and M [FAMU, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University in Tallahasee, Florida], Alabama A and M [Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University in Huntsville, Alabama], just schools around, Paine College [Augusta, Georgia], Savannah State [Savannah State University in Savannah, Georgia].  I didn't have a vision outside of those.  Irony of the situation is this the state of Georgia paid me to go study engineering out-of-state so that I would not integrate Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, Georgia].  I had some friends in Atlanta [Georgia] who did, but they still paid other bla--there were very few blacks studying engineering, but they paid the rest of us a yearly stipend to not go to Georgia Tech.  I was happy for that.  And we used to have a party once a year on the out-of-state aid that we got to go study engineering.
Speaker 1: So was that--did that cover your expenses at Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't--
Speaker 1: But it was--
Speaker 2: It was good supplement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good party money (laughter).
Story_ID: 48275
Speaker 1: So now you get--you get to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] and this is your first time really away from home.
Speaker 2: It really is.  I had been out of town maybe once.  I mean I had been to Atlanta [Georgia] a lot 'cause I worked there some summers.  I'd been to Florida once I think, but not--very few other places.  Got to Tuskegee and--'cause I'd been told that I should be an engineer, so I just signed up for engineering and finished, and in the process signed up for all--all males were required to join ROTC at that time, something about Tusk--Tuskegee being a land grant college.  I can't remember--a requirement for it.  Maybe they got the payments from the government.  And getting in the military and ROTC af--your last two years, they would also pay you or give you a stipend if you went into advanced ROTC  So I did that just to get the little check (laughter).  That was when I first learned to fly.
Story_ID: 48276
Speaker 1: What about the--what else about Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] would you say sort of stands out?  And how did you end up--
Speaker 2: Quite a--
Speaker 1: Oh--deciding on your major in mechanical engineering?
Speaker 2: I decided on the major simply from being prompted from high school.  The--and fairly good at math.  Tuskegee not only stands out as indelibly imprinted of course as its imprimatur on me throughout.  I'm grateful for the opportunity of being in that--again, in a nurturing environment--at first somewhat isolated from a lot of other happenings, the Civil Rights Movement, until a couple of buddies and I--and we didn't even get any credit, nor did we seek credit for this.  We decided that Tuskegee was being too conservative, so we did two things.  We--several things--but we founded an organization called Tuskegee Institute Advancement League--get students to go out into the community and help educate the persons who were--farmers who were uneducated; do whatever was necessary to assist them in going back to school, babysit, tutor--form--founded Tuskegee Advancement League.  A friend called Theodore Boles--I remember his--there were several of us and Eddie Phillips, all engineering students.  And Tuskegee was not actively participating in marches at that point, as were North Carolina (unclear) and other schools.  I went to the dean of students, said we need to be a part of the movement.  Again, Theodore--Theodore Boles, Eddie Phillips, and I and some others, we weren't officers in the--in any of the classes.  We were just activist engineers.  That's not even written anywhere, by the way.  I don't think it's even in the archives of Tuskegee.  But we went to the dean of students and said we need a taste of what's happening outside of Tuskegee.  And we really fought hard.  And we got Malcolm X to come to Tuskegee to speak.  And it was the beginning of inspiring Tuskegee students to get involved, and we did, quite a bit after that incident.  And I think Malcolm X was killed within six months of coming to Tuskegee.  So Tuskegee gave us--gave me an environment--a nurturing environment of sharing a common experience with other black kids from a lot of different areas, prepared us academically a lot better than I even thought at that time because I had no standard of comparison.  And eventually getting involved in the Civil Rights Movement expanded our horizon.  In fact, after Malcolm came, went to--I went to Tuskegee on the Selma and Montgomery march [1965 Selma to Montgomery Marches], not all the way.  I cheated; I met it outside of Montgomery and jumped in line and marched up.  And we also went on a couple of other marches into Montgomery [Alabama] and--around Tuskegee.  So it was a life-expanding environment.
Story_ID: 48277
Speaker 1: When you saw Malcolm X, what did you think of him?
Speaker 2: You know, you would think that someone coming from our environment of, of being exposed to segregation so much would be excited about the message that Malcolm was bring, but I don't think I was.  I was just kind of curious, you know, wondering, you know, why is it he chooses this militant approach to dealing with the problem that face--I don't really understand the depth of where Malcolm was coming from, even though I had written a paper at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] on, on black Muslims.  Give a--I had given a report.  The--however, I was not opposed to what he was saying.  It's just that I was not openly receptive to following the ideas.  I was kind of neutral on it, if you understand.  And having although come from a segregated environment, it was still a sheltered segregated environment, if you can follow that.  And Tuskegee itself was somewhat a sheltered environment until we started stirring things up.  So I really appreciated Malcolm a lot more in my older age, you know, after leaving Tuskegee, although I'd never lost the impressions that I had of him, his coming there, and introspect was happy for us getting Tuskegee started in that direction, so--influential person.
Story_ID: 48278
Speaker 1: Now the other impression I have about Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama], just to sort of set this, this is a different environment than what you've been used to.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: I mean not even just the city, but the whole environment itself.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, academic--
Speaker 1: Academic, social--
Speaker 2: --social.
Speaker 1: --everything--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you know.  And I'm--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And I'm just wonder what was that process of you sort of finding your places, you know?
Speaker 2: It's quite strange.  I, I took a, a strange turn, if you will.  When I went to--left high school I was a leader in everything, and I got to Tuskegee I didn't wanna be a leader, and then I was tired.  In fact, once again, I--for whatever reason, some classmates were gonna nominate me for president of the freshman class, and I wouldn't go to the meeting.  I didn't wanna be president.  I just wanted to have fun; didn't want the responsibility for doing anything except being a student and was that way for several--for the--couple of--three years; was fairly popular, I mean, was known in engineering, you know, had my fun with the ladies and (laughter), and wasn't playing football, but my buddies were.  So I mingle well.  I got along very well socially.  The--and academically was doing okay; wasn't (unclear) straight A student or anything--A, B, C here, you know.  And I think with all of the civil rights activities going on I began, again, to see--I, I would--I'd never take a go out front leadership role, but would from the behind the scene nudge the group into going in the direction that you go, which is why Theodore Boles, Ed [Eddie Phillips] and I, we started this organization [Tuskegee Institute Advancement League] in--without any hoopla about it.  We went to the dean.  Probably only five of us who knows that we pushed the dean to have Malcolm [Malcolm X] to come and then let the president of the student body take the credit 'cause we didn't care.  But I had other persons thinking and feeling the way I do so we exchanged ideas and talked about--it was this nurturing environment that we were able to help each other grow.
Story_ID: 48279
Speaker 1: And when I decided, of course, I got some exposure in engineering.  We had job offers up at IBM--interesting anecdotal experience.  I was going into my last year in engineering.  And black companies began to recruit us because we were one of the few engineering schools in the country where there are--for black engineers--Tennessee State [Tennessee State University in Nashville, Tennesse], Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama], a couple of others--Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  So IBM offered us a summer job.  We went up to--never forget, I caught the bus, if you believe this, a Greyhound bus, from Atlanta, Georgia to Poughkeepsie, New York.  There were three of us from Tuskegee who got there.  And IBM had this big meeting where they had kids from all over the country, Fiske University [Nashville, Tennesee], Tuskegee, and then some white kids.  And they had met with us and told us we would start to, to work on a Monday--this was a Friday or so--and to report back to this plant on Monday.  And the Tuskegee kids kept sittin' there and a couple of other blacks from other areas, and they asked us well, you know, what is it?  What's the problem?  We said we don't have anywhere to live, and we didn't.  We didn't have any money.  Here we are in Poughkeepsie, New York, no money, and nowhere to live; kind of a testament to our solicitude in just stepping out and, and experiencing new things.  So to their credit, IBM went and rented a private school.  It was a school where several movie stars sent their kids up there.  IBM rented the entire school for us to stay for a couple of weeks until we got paychecks.  And then we all went and rented a house together.  There were four of us, two whites and three blacks that rented a house together.  So it was something about the comfort level of Tuskegee that allowed us to step out like that.  A lot of the kids in--from Tuskegee got job pick-(unclear) believe picking tobacco in the summer, waitin' tables up in the Catskills [Catskill Mountains, New York].  So we were very fortunate to get these engineering jobs at Poughkeep--at IBM in Poughkeepsie.  That was a--we were kind of a novelty to the community.  This was--there were one or two black engineers working at IBM.  We were such a novelty that the white IBM community would invite us to dinner every other weekend to talk about our black experience down here.  I'll never forget that.  We'd get invited to different homes and we'd sit and eat, and the family was very cordial and invariably would lead to them asking us about--what is it--although, you know, the confrontation and the clashes in integration--in attempts at integration were in the papers, and this was (unclear) post-Selma and some other marches we had--they--is it really like that?  They wanted to know.  People see it in the paper.  Is it really like that?  Yeah, it's really like that.  But the experience of mingling and being comfortable with whites in that environment was a growth experience also.  So Tuskegee was good in that regard.
Story_ID: 48280
Speaker 1: Now when you--so it was 1966 when you graduated?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So that's like--that's a very significant civil rights period.
Speaker 2: It is.  It just so happen--'cause we had done what we did at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama], but it was also the Vietnam era.  And being in the military, we were called off--I was commissioned and called off to go to pilot training.  So any efforts in the line of--in, you know, the area of, of attempts at integration had to be fought over on the military side--somewhat beneficial.  We benefited from the timing of it all because they needed black pilots.  I call that they needed cannon fodder, I call it.  They needed bodies for that Vietnam War [1955-1975].  They didn't make it easy for us though as pilots.  It was--it was extremely difficult, 'cause we had the history of going through Tuskegee, not the same kind of training as the older Tuskegee Airmen, 'cause they--but we had some flight training and, and were fairly self-confident, those of us who went.  I didn't have a Tuskegee individual as my roommate, but I had this general--Newton was my roommate, Lloyd Newton.  He was from Tennessee State [Tennessee State University in Nashville, Tennessee], same background as I had.  When we first got to our air force base, the--there was--it was one of the, the bases to which they sent most black pilots.  For some reason they wouldn't send us all over.  They--these areas that tolerated blacks better we were sent there in larger numbers.  Williams Air Force Base [Mesa, Arizona] was such a base.  The--several blacks were flunking out or washing out.  In fact they were having a washout party when we got there.  And I met Lloyd and we agreed to room together; and we agreed that we wouldn't let each other fail; and we didn't, you know.  I believe at that time we were the only ones to get through what they called on-time.  You had certain classes to graduate with, and some of the guys would wash back a class if you didn't do well in some area.  But Lloyd and I never washed back 'cause we just pushed each other.
Story_ID: 48281
Speaker 1: Now you--your going into the Air Force [U.S. Air Force] was because of ROTC? It was.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So there wasn't--it wasn't like you had an option, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew that we probably would be drafted.  And if I were gonna go, I was gonna choose how I was gonna go.  So I joined r--Air Force ROTC, and I decided well, I'm going to the Air Force; I'm gonna fly--another one of those life-altering decisions I make.  I said I'm gonna fly, so I just flew.  The--first started out there the instructor pilots were all white of course.  They said well, you black guys will probably have--it wasn't but two of us in my class--gonna have some difficult, because blacks don't have a propensity for flying.  I mean Tuskegee Airmen had gone through, you know, back in the '40s [1940s].  And here they are in 1967 tell us that, you know.  And then of course like a self-fulfilling prophecy, they try to make it as tough as possible for you.  But we got through, not to say all instructors were that way.  We had one or two who were fair and a few that were not.
Speaker 1: Now so what--'cause you were in the service almost-
Speaker 2: Seven years.
Speaker 1: Almost--okay, so it was a (unclear).  You did say that.  Now are you--at this point, do--did you cheer--choose the Air Force?  I mean did you--so and--
Speaker 2: Yes, I chose--
Speaker 1: And it was based on your sort of being fascinated with flying, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And where were you based at--based out of?
Speaker 2: I went to Williams Air Force Base [Mesa, Arizona].  First of all, I got a--what's called a--I was a Distinguished Military Gradate, which was pretty rare.  There are these levels of gradation in the military.  The Air Force Academy guys would have certain dates of rank.  We might be the same age.  They'd be coming out the Air Force Academy.  I'll be coming out of ROTC.  They might give them a date of rank one week ahead of us so that when it came time for promotions they get promoted first.  But because I was a distinguished military graduate, I got the same date of rank as they did.  So I was able to be promoted ahead of my reserve officer peers.  The--but going into the military it was just I, I wanna fly, and once I started flying it was a love of flying that I had.  Of course I didn't get to be pleasurable flying because from the time I finished pilot training until I got out, I was training to go to Vietnam for about a year and a half--when I say Vietnam, Southeast Asia--in Southeast Asia for a couple of years.  And I came back training people to go to Southeast Asia.  So I got burned out quite frankly, you know, with the war effort.
Story_ID: 48282
Speaker 1: You were getting ready to tell me how the whole thing was pe--
Speaker 2: Well, going into--it was during the, the Vietnam [Vietnam War] era.  So I anticipated that I would probably be going, and that's what I was training for.  But once you finish pilot training, depending on your rank in the class, you get to choose the aircraft that you want.  And I chose fighter aircraft, and I got fighter aircraft.  So I knew once I did that--in fact, once I got the fighter aircraft, they stamped on my orders what they call pipeline Southeast Asia means all the training subsequent to that was in preparation to send me to Southeast Asia.  And I never stopped to, to be afraid of what might happen going there.  Actually it was a lot of curiosity about it.  Wasn't necessarily a wave of patriotism that I wanted to go, but I was fighter pilot and this was my job, and, and we went.  I don't--I think--and I tried reflecting on this in, in, in earnest--I don't think I ever felt any animosity toward the people I was killing.  I--being a fighter pilot is kind of impersonal.  And when they shot at me it was--and which was about daily--you know, to me it was well, I would be shooting at me too if I were on the ground (laughter), and they were dropping bombs on me, you know.  It's kind of the attitude I had about it.  And of course reality would set in when a friend was killed, that it was not a game of course.  I knew it was not a game, but I didn't have any false notions that I was saving the world from Communism, that--I mean shortly after I got there, if I had any such notions, they were dispelled.  But I was a professional soldier and this was my job, and so I just did it as best I could and just thought about living past this, hopefully get back home and do something else.
Story_ID: 48283
Speaker 1: Now the other thing I'm just curious about--this was a time, not with everyone, but people--there was protest, you know, starting to be--and what--were you--you were not caught up in that, or that wasn't occurring at Tuskegee, or--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I was--I was in--at Tuskegee we started--I told you I went to Selma and Montgomery [1965 Selma to Montgomery Marches].
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And we had--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had several other marches--
Speaker 1: But did you--
Speaker 2: --back--
Speaker 1: But did you ever--okay, sorry.
Speaker 2: And we were pulled out of that environment when I went to Southeast Asia.  However, King [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed [in 1968] I believe while I was there.  And I--and I, I became quite militant in the military, as a result of what was going home and listening to the discussions of some of my fellow--my white cohorts.  They, they took the attitude that somehow demonstrators were breaking the law, you know, and it irritated me--no end.  So I got to be very short with my white counterparts except for one or two that we stuck together.  We were really friends beyond color.  So everything that I could do to, to further our cause in the military, I tried to do.  I went to bases; I would raise sand with the commander about something that I thought was wrong.  And they would correct it, to their credit.  In fact I got out of the military,  I was searching for what it was I wanted to do.  And I ran into one colonel who--I would have excellent ratings and I was being promoted--recommended by most--be promoted well ahead of my contemporaries.  This one colonel didn't give me a perfect rating.  I thought I was perfect, so that was my excuse to get out, so I put in my papers to get out.  And the colonel, a higher ranking office called me in and said why is you gettin' out--said you're gonna be a general, you know.  I said well, I ran into a racist, and I've decided that I'm not gonna let somebody else determine my future for me.  And that's what happened in the military, so I'm gettin' out.  He asked me who was the guy.  And they shipped him off to some little place, Timbuktu somewhere, to the military's credit, but it didn't change my mind.  I was still subject to somebody else doing something to destroy--possibly hamper my career.  I got calls from everywhere.  I had generals calling me saying son, you know you need to stay in.  You're gonna be a general.  You know I had been to Vietnam; I had a chest full of ribbons and I was just in my early twenties; fighter pilot.  I mean how many black fighter pilots were there?  You could count 'em on your fingers.  But, this militancy had been building up in me, said I'm not gonna be subject to some racist white person determining how far I'm going to go in my life even though the Air Force [U.S. Air Force] tried to compensate for it.  And my buddy didn't get out, and he got to be a four-star general.  In fact all of my friends who stayed in got to be four-colonel, or because we were all on the same track, we all had to--college graduates all with the same combat record, all highly-decorated pilots.  We were cream of the crop, you know.  And I was just waiting to be pushed one way or the other.  This guy just caught me on a bad day, so out I went.
Story_ID: 48284
Speaker 1: Now I wanna also just take you back to your first trip to Vietnam--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --because I mean at this point you think you're really have sort of--I mean you--you're not from the little Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you know you've been a--you've seen, you know, a few other places.  And so I'm just--but this is a whole different environment that--and I just want you to sort of take us back to what your initial impressions are.
Speaker 2: You know, this has gotta be--and I'm sure all of my buddies who, black pilots, felt that same way.  You imagine, first we come from an environment where you're not really certain--as confident as you are, that you're not really certain that you're as good the white counterpart in these areas, because they come in extremely comfortable.  I'm sure if at any time I felt uncomfortable I didn't show it.  But then the first time you--they turn you a loose in this sophisticated multimillion dollar jet by yourself, and you're out of Tuskegee [Alabama], in this sheltered environment, and you see, man, I do this as well as everybody else, it is a real ego booster, you know.  So, going to Southeast Asia, having gone through the fighter pilot training, it--and having done well, it was a real confidence booster.  So I went knowing that I was as good at what I was doing as they were.  And just like I had always been told all my life, I probably was better 'cause I had to be better.  And in retrospect, I was, because I had to function under--and all of my cohorts--under a kind of pressure that my white cohorts didn't have, the pressure to not fail because you're doing it for everybody black, you know.  So with that comfort level I went to Vietnam, and it was just--I was just open to the experience, no preconceived notions except that it was war, in fact, no preconceived notions that I was there to win freedom (laughter), you know, for democracy, but just to do a job as a soldier.
Story_ID: 48285
Speaker 1: But when I got there, there was still--there was still a great deal of demonstrations going on in America.  And I think it might have been Graham Greene in one of his books I first saw the, the, the connotation of ugly American.  White America was ugly in those dark countries.  They didn't look on--a lot of my cohorts didn't look on those people as being human.  I heard the expression it takes, takes 10 slopes to make a human, slope being a slant-eyed--or they call 'em slope heads.  They treated them with disrespect, disrespected the women, not all, but in large numbers.  So I began to see white America as not having a whole lot of respect for darker races everywhere, you know.  So I was not proud of being a part of that, and I wasn't.  I mean because I made friends with the local natives.  I--my black friends and I got invited to very personal things in Thailand, to weddings, to marriages.  And for the--for the indigenous persons to invite you to, those things means they accepted you, you know.  So it was a growth experience, a very--one of the greatest growth experiences in my life.
Speaker 2: And as well I saw a lot of other things that I thought were acts of hypocrisy having to do with business and the war.  But that wasn't my area to deal with.
Speaker 1: You're talking about people making money.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Large amounts of money being (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, we'd bomb a rubber plantation and go pay Goodyear [Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company], you know.  Everywhere I went I saw (unclear)--service station, you know, just, just wasting, profiting off the war.
Story_ID: 48286
Speaker 1: Now you have all these, you know, five Distinguished Flying Crosses, twenty-three Air Medals, and you know, two Air Force commendations, a (unclear)--but you did two round--two tours of--
Speaker 2: Two tours.
Speaker 1: --duties.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when did the first tour of duty end, and when did the second, and how did--I thought--'cause you said I--
Speaker 2: This is--
Speaker 1: --sort of gave up.  I was like--you know.
Speaker 2: This is really comical.  I don't know if you read the book "Catch-22."  And if you didn't, this is the catch-22.  When pilots went overseas they had a certain number of missions to fly, and you could rotate back home.  Well, in the movie, "Catch-22," every time the pilot got close to meeting that quota of missions, the commander would call him in and say if you agree to fly 10 more missions, I'll let you get your quota to go back home.  And that was the catch-22.  You could never--well, when I went on the first tour it was if you flew a hundred missions over North Vietnam, you could rotate back home.  When I volunteered after I got there, I was flying missions left and right, and I almost had a hundred missions over North Vietnam at about six months.  And the commander says--I had like 96 missions--said well--and all of my buddies had been doing the same thing.  And he (unclear) said well--not necessarily black 'cause there was only one other black--you guys--if y'all agree to fly more than 100 missions in the North, we'll let you get your 100 missions (laughter), you know.  I said man, are you crazy?  You know, this is right out of "Catch-22."  So we said no way, so they wouldn't let me fly up North anymore.  Instead, I had--I flew about 60 or 70 missions in other areas of Southeast Asia, Laos and South Vietnam, Cambodia, a lot of other (unclear).  And finally, after about ten and a half months, they let me get my last four missions over the North, and I came home.
Story_ID: 48287
Speaker 1: Well, I was just a pilot at that time.  I was flying an F--F-4 and a what we call a guy in the back; it's a two-seater.  And then I came back and upgraded to aircraft commander.  In four and a half months they sent me right back to the same squadron, I mean the same outfit.  It's like I hadn't left.  Some of the same guys were there that I'd left, you know, in my first tour.  I was like oh, man, my life is on hold for two years, you know.  So this time I went back as an aircraft commander.  But now, at the tender age of about 25, I was a seasoned combat pilot and so I became an aircraft flight commander.  And I was leading the flights and going up North and other places.  And this time it was just a matter of putting in my time, you know.  From day one I was just counting the days, you know, to come home--brought me the same targets, same madness over and over and over again every day--futile to me, even at that age and not being as knowledgeable about world issues as I perhaps am now.  And demonstrations were still going on.  I was angry about the slow rate of acceptance.  And anger (unclear) my white cohorts, you know, bad mouth demonstrations that were taking place.  In particular, I had one guy talking about the Black Panthers and them being armed.  And I was asking him about all these white farmers who rode around with rifles--three and four rifles stuck in the back window of their truck.  And they were trying to convince me--well, that's, that's nothing, you know, racist about that.  I said you know, you're from the South.  To me that was a symbol.  But that's just the Southern heritage of them being hunters, I mean you know.  So I had great fallings out with some of my white cohorts at that time.
Story_ID: 48288
Speaker 1: Tell me how--and I'm also curious about how it felt to be, you know, in a fighter plane, and actually when you flew your first successful mission, and what that mission was.
Speaker 2: It was a bombing mission up in Northern Laos.  Once again, a mind is a powerful and strange creation.  I never once thought that I was gonna die.  And when we were flying and people were shooting, I never thought it was gonna hit me.  I didn't do anything.  I mean I would take whatever maneuvers necessary to dodge.  But it was almost like a game and my mind just shut it out.  I mean it was--it was literally no conscious fear.  I have been on the ground near the end of my second tour, coming into my last month, I began to think about gettin' home.  And I could feel myself being nervous in the briefing, and the briefing's about where we were going and the type of resistance we're gonna meet.  But the minute I stepped into the aircraft, it was a total calm, absolute perfect calm.  And it was almost mechanical, going up to fly the missions.  I remember I had--almost had three mid-airs in my last month.  And I just kept thinking man, I'm gonna die my second tour over here.  I survived all these missions, and now they're trying to kill me.  My own people trying to kill me, keep me from gettin' home.  It was the only time I was ever nervous about coming home.  And one other thing that happened is almost right out of a storybook.  We had a going away party for one of the majors.  He was a white guy, a friend.  He had flown all of his missions up North, got on a transport plane to come home and crashed and died, you know.  See you know, you think wow, this thing is real; you know, you can die.  So--and the other thing was coming home from there, I just knew the, the civilian airplane was gonna crash.  Happiest moment of my life was when it touched down in California, 'cause I wasn't flying the aircraft.  Somebody else was flying. I thought oh, man, I'm gonna let some civilian jockey kill me after going through this war for two years, you know.  I sat there worried about that.  Again, I came back home a lot older, you know, than when I went.  Strange--the strangest thing, all I wanted to do when I got home was sit on the back porch and listen to birds, and take a ride in a car and go anywhere I wanted to go, just simple things.  I wasn't aware how much the war [Vietnam War] and the shooting affected me until my family told me loud noises--the alarm would go off and I would almost destroy the clock.  I remember in downtown Atlanta [Georgia] once a--riding in traffic and somebody just kept blowing the horn at me.  And I jumped out the car to go fight him for blowing the horn at me, and I was not that kind of person.  So there was something bothering me after that war, you know.  After a while, I kind of calmed down and got out of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I remember, you know, there were a lot of people in college with me who had been in the Vietnam War.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah?
Speaker 1: And, and I remember being at a Fourth of July (unclear) they went.  This guy just went diving.  It was like, you know--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --just the firecrackers falling off.  He was--
Speaker 2: I went to Australia on what we call R and R.  They give you a week off to go to a safe area.  And I somehow hooked up with this young white guy from what we call in-country from South Vietnam.  We're walking down the street and a truck backfired, and both of us dived behind, behind a building.  And in a jet, see I couldn't hear the bombs--I mean the shells exploding around me, but apparently they registered in my mind.  You know, apparently I was hearing it in my subconscious.  And so these loud noises would bother me for a long time after I got back.
Story_ID: 48289
Speaker 1: And seeing death didn't bother you--or because you were sort of--
Speaker 2: If I'd--
Speaker 1: You were remote up in there in the plane.  You can't really see.  It's all--
Speaker 2: When I--
Speaker 1: It's all--
Speaker 2: When I--
Speaker 1: --concept, right?
Speaker 2: When I dropped a bomb I could see trucks and tanks.  And then when I pulled off, they weren't there anymore.  You know what I mean?  So I didn't see, you know, bullets ripping people--persons' bodies apart.  I just--when I bombed things, I left.  I saw fires; I saw buildings gone; I saw trucks gone, things of that nature, and it wasn't as personal.  I had them to tell me once that we pulled off a target and they were through body counts.  And they said well--said we can't find the--all we can find are body pieces.  And we think y'all killed about 200, you know.  But I couldn't see them, so it was kind impersonal, you know.
Speaker 1: It's more conceptual being a, a fighter, fighter pilot.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --(unclear)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: I've seen planes go down, get shot down, guys crash, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when you flew a formation, how many--how many people were in that?
Speaker 2: Generally we go with four aircraft.  And a lot of times going up North Vietnam we just go--well, on body missions we go two at a time, but most of the time it'd be four.
Speaker 1: And how good was your accuracy?  Was that why you were so celebrated?
Speaker 2: That's pretty good, yeah.  I was pretty good.  In fact, one of those Distinguished Flying Crosses, they had us testing a special weapon.  And because I was such an accurate bomber, one other guy and I were chosen--a white guy from the academy and I were chosen to test this weapon.  It required us going to North Vietnam every day on 10 days in the (unclear).  One of us would go down and make people shoot at us, and the other one would roll in and kill 'em, and test this weapon.  And then another guy would come by and take pictures of the accuracy.  And it was such a--it was such an accurate--accurately performed project, they named it Son of Rock Eye.  I won't forget that.  And (unclear) we got a Distinguished Fly Cross, at least I did, for that.  The--and that was because I could--and every time we went on a special mission up North and they used that weapon in my squadron, I was the one that carried that weapon.  It required a certain amount of accuracy to use it.  So I--but that came from--and I think all of my black cohorts were good like that.  We just worked harder; you know, we tried harder to be the best at what we were doing.  We felt we had to be, you know.  If we flunked out it was more of a "scandal," not just to us, but to the, the black community.  So--
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: --represented more than just ourselves.
Story_ID: 48290
Speaker 1: And I have one other question that relates to that, and that is what makes a good fighter pilot?  I mean what--and how, ha--
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, it doesn't require being lean, mean, and athletic, because I have seen some guys who couldn't walk down the street without stumbling over themselves.  And they would get in that fighter aircraft, and they would just be like they're part of it, I mean just great pilots.  And I have seen these great big athletic jocks who just could not fly that airplane.  They couldn't stay in formation; they were just rough.  So, to some extent, our white instructors were right.  You had to have something of a propensity.  I mean everybody could learn to fly, but to really good at it, I think you almost had to have a knack for it.  There are some people who got sick every time they went to fly.  They would still fly.  So somehow I--in addition to my desire to be good at it, I must have had a propensity for flying; of course I didn't know it.  The first time I ever flew an aircraft-the first time I had ever been in an aircraft in my life I was getting in it in Tuskegee to learn to fly.  I'd never been in an aircraft at any other time in my life, the first time ever.  I wanna fly aircraft, I go to get in an aircraft and then they're teaching me to fly.  So I didn't know I had a knack for it.  And of course, I--like I could say maybe good instruction, you know, learning in a--in a nurturing environment at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] probably helped.  And all the other black guys who were in service had the same environment at their schools.
Story_ID: 48291
Speaker 1: Now when you--okay, you've done your second tour of duty.  When you--well, let me ask you was anything else about the Vietnam experience that was significant to you in your development or just--
Speaker 2: I ran into--Earl Brown was one of the three-star generals I talked about is older than I was, was a colonel at the time, and he was becoming embittered, he says.  I told him--I said Earl--well, I, I--that I thought I was gonna get out and go to law school, or med school, or an independent profession.  He says I regret that I didn't pursue something.  This is what Earl said.  He was a lieutenant--a colonel at the time.  But he stayed in and he became--got three stars after that, so he made the right decision.  In fact, the next time I saw him, he was a lieutenant general, so his decision to stay was good.  He was extremely sharp.  But I ran into people like him who encouraged me also to follow my heart and use the military experience for what it was.  It was a good growth experience for me.  It's like seven years wasted in my life in the sense that, that it was not preparation for my present profession, you understand.  I was not doing engineering, certainly didn't help for law, but it was a great growth experience in the sense that personally I had developed and settled down and believed that I could do anything now.  I knew I could do anything I wanted to do.  So going to law school was just another thing, you know.  Well, it's just a matter of puttin' in the time 'cause I'm gonna accomplish it.  So it helped me in that regard, being put in an environment, a predominantly white environment that were not--very few black fighter pilots, where--and competing and doing well.  So it was not wasted in that sense, but it was a waste in a sense it took me that seven years out of my life.  Guess (unclear) I'm changing direction.  So I started law school I was seven years behind my contemporaries.  Other guys coming right out of undergraduate school, and I'm coming after seven years of military.
Speaker 1: But that decision to start--'cause it took you an additional two years, right?
Speaker 2: To--
Speaker 1: To start, right?
Speaker 2: To start?
Speaker 1: Law school.  Didn't you start-
Speaker 2: I started law school right after--
Speaker 1: Right after (unclear)--I (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I finished law school in two--
Speaker 1: That's why--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: --years.
Speaker 1: You fini--that's what was--I'm sorry, 'cause usually it's three years.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You went--you went summers and everything.
Speaker 2: I went year round.  I got out of law school in two years.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, that's why--
Speaker 2: And out of a very tough school.  University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida] was tough.
Story_ID: 48292
Speaker 1: So how did you end up after University of Florida [Gainesville, Florida]?  And I'm just--
Speaker 2: This is a--that's something else.  I was the beneficiary of affirmative action.  I was in the military--I was going to, to school at night, working on a master's of science and management.  I mean it was really tough.  I was flying 12 hours a day and going to graduate school at night.  And I took the law school acceptance test.  I got a decent score.  I went up to the University of Florida to talk about going to law school.  And the admission's officer was--asked me what I was doing.  I told him I was a fighter pilot.  And I learned that he was an--he was an elderly white gentlemen, had been a fighter pilot.  He says look, don't worry about applying.  Just come on up here.  He said if you can fly jets, he said you can handle this law school stuff.  So I was a victim--I mean a beneficiary of affirmative action--affirmative--you know, they chose me because I was a fighter pilot and, and they needed blacks at that time.  University of Florida was trying to increase its enrollment for African Americans.  So, that's how I went to law school.
Story_ID: 48293
Speaker 1: Did you--are there things about Thai culture that you appreciate and grew to like--
Speaker 2: Quite a bit--quite a bit.
Speaker 1: --besides lobster.  I remember you said that's (unclear)--
Speaker 2: My first exposure to it; never had lobster before.  Yes, there were--I was a single individual, but I was impressed with their family--with, with the value of family to them.  I noticed that when they were feeding their children they would sit down and feed the child.  And the child could walk around and play, and they'd just sit there and wait.  The kid would come back for some more.  They'd feed the child some more, no real pressure to force the kid to adhere to any rigid regimen.  And consequently, the kids grew up very happy.  I don't think I ever heard a child--baby--cry all the time I was there.  And in spite of their very dire economic circumstances, they were very close family-wise.  They cared for each other.  They walked down the street even two men hugging each other.  And ladies would walk down the street, they all hold hands.  So it was a close culture.  I liked that about them.  I guess it--I wanted to see that same thing exist in American culture, you know, although I was close to my friends.  But, but it was not--it was not that something that was displayed commonly otherwise in our society.
Story_ID: 48294
Speaker 1: Now so you--but you've, you've made the decision to--but wait a minute.  You ended up in
Speaker 2: (Unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) were you--I'm not sure how you got to Florida (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, from South--
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I know that, you know, you were working toward your masters, but Florida wasn't even anywhere on the--
Speaker 2: From Southeast Asia you get to "choose" an assignment coming back.  Well, the military wrote me a letter, and they wanted me to go to the Air Force Institute of Technology [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base, Ohio] and get my masters in engineering, and go teach at the Air Force Academy [U.S. Air Force Academy, Colorado] 'cause I was in engineering.  But I'd been away from engineering for five years, and I really didn't like it at that point.  I decided I wanted to do something else.  And bethid--besides--had, had they sent me to school, I, I would have incurred another commitment to stay in the military.  So I refused it, and I came to Tampa [Florida].  I chose Tampa as a site, and I was an instructor pilot there.  And while I was there teaching others to fly the Phantom [F-4 Phantom], we were "losing the war in Vietnam in the air."  Because now all these guys were going over there.  All the fighter pilots had gone.  I had been twice.  And when I came back the second time, only 40 percent of all pilots had even been.  And so we were training people who flew multi-engine craft to go, and they were not that good in fighters, so they would get shot down, crashing.  So they asked me--came in and asked me to volunteer to go back a third time.  You know, John, we need this crack core fighter pilots to go back and, and stop this trend of all this losing all our fighters.  Mentally I just couldn't do it.  I just was not up for a third tour.  And I was sure I had used up all the luck I had, you know, having flown some 300 missions or so.  So I just didn't wanna go back.  I said no, I'm gettin' out--that, in addition to these other incidents that I talked about.  And so I looked around for an independent profession--and law.  I decided--ran into a few lawyers who were doing interesting things.  So I would go to law school.
Story_ID: 48295
Speaker 1: You thought about becoming--was, was being a pilot of--for like an airline, was that ever a factor?
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  When I got in law school [University of Florida in Gainesville, Florida], right--the war [Vietnam War] had wound--had wound down.  So all the airlines now have got on this affirmative action kick and were looking for black pilots.  I got a call from Delta [Delta Airlines], Pan Am [Pan American World Airways], Eastern [Eastern Airlines].  And some of my buddies--the first pilots there were guys who had gone through the military.  So they had these black guys to call us all, and called my buddy and me.  I had another buddy down at University of Florida who was a pilot in law school.  And they asked us to come work for them.  And I said well, since I'm in law school, why don't you hire me as a lawyer?  I said I know all about flying, and I'm gonna be a lawyer.  I should be an ideal lawyer, you know, for one of these airlines with my flight experience.  They said no, said we just want you to be pilots.  And I was infuriated.  I said what you want are some black bus drivers.  I said you can take your job and ram it, you know.  And I did; I asked each one of 'em would you hire me to be a, a lawyer.  I'm gonna finish school in another year or so.  I told 'em to take that pilot job and stuff it.  I was incensed that they didn't want to hire us to sit behind a desk, but they wanted us to be what I called a glorified bus driver.  And I'm not putting down the guys who took the job.  You know being a pilot is skillful position.  I just looked at another level of affiliation and, and to use that experience in another way--again, an act of discrimination to me, you know.  Commonsense says that I would have been an ideal lawyer, you know, but, so that's how I did not go into flying.  Some of my buddies did.
Story_ID: 48296
Speaker 1: Now when--with, with law school, was it what you expected it--
Speaker 2: Wasn't--
Speaker 1: --and how--
Speaker 2: --was not.  Another--as experienced as I had been in the military [U.S. Air Force] and being older, it still was another aspect of society to which I was not really prepared for or exposed to.  That was the second greatest growth--third greatest growth period of my life.  But you get to law school and Florida [University of Florida in Gainesville, Florida] was a pretty liberal school in a white Southern environment.  And the kids come there--the white kids came with long hair and cutoff jeans.  And everybody had very liberal ideas, until it came close to graduation.  They all cleaned up their acts, cut their hair.  They went to dad's law firm and got all these nice, big positions.  And black kids, we were all left there with nothing, you know.  And they started talk about the greater good of society as opposed to all of these liberal ideas they had early on.  But I watched and I listened.  And I watched that transition and I listened, and it dawned on me.  I've gotta deal with those ideas when I gotta get out, so I've gotta watch how these people are thinking and how best I can prepare to deal with and the counter to their arguments.  So it was a tremendous growth period to be in that environment.  I thank Florida for that, for providing that environment and being exposed to that spectrum of ideas.  I even had a law professor who was a Marxist, an avowed Marxist.  And another told me that he didn't think black students would do well in law school because we don't write very well, you now.  And this is 1973, you know, or 4 [1974], whenever it was.  However, the school was dedicated to the proposition that it would have a mixed--and it would produce black lawyers because society needed black lawyers, in spite of some of these professors.  So they helped us, or provided an environment which we could survive, and I did, and it was a good learning environment; I think prepared me very well, you know, in, in areas to come back here and survive--tremendous growth, growth period.
Speaker 1: Were there any subjects you gravitated to?  I mean obviously aviation law seemed to be off the, the plate.
Speaker 2: Wasn't even offered.  (Unclear)--you know I had these delu--delusions of learning tax and business law and come out and get a nice fat job.  So I took quite a few courses in consumer law, and corporate law, and tax.  And the real world hit me when I got out of here.  There was no demand in Columbus, Georgia for a black guy with no experience gonna do any tax work for anybody, you know.  So then I began to do those things that a black attorney could do here, practice criminal law, I sue car companies for turning out lemons.  In other words, I began to fight, to use what I learned to fight corporations.  And it helped obviously.  I got where I am.
Story_ID: 48297
Speaker 1: You (unclear)--I'm curious about--was it always assumed you were gonna come back to Columbus [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: No, in fact, I left and I swore I would never come back to Columbus, although fond memories of a childhood and a neighborhood, I had no delusions about a black being able to make any real progress in being successful economically in Columbus.  So I had no dreams of coming back here, and very circuitous route, you know, going to college, going to the military, going all over the world, finishing school.  And I said well, there're not many blacks in Columbus, and there were not.  Congressman Bishop, Sanford Bishop, was here; practicing law Judge Thompson [Albert W. Thompson], who was not a judge, he was practicing law at the time and maybe three other blacks.  I said well, it's wide open, and I'm from there.  Perhaps I could be easy for me to start.  It was rude awakening because when you came here the blacks had not quite gotten out of that mode of thinking that they could get better justice in a court legal system if they had a white lawyer.  So I had to push really hard to make that inroad, and it was a real struggle.
Speaker 1: Talk about that because people don't really realize that.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) there's a psychology too.  Okay--
Speaker 2: Especially in the area that was kept so--when I called as isolated textile town, you see there weren't--the only contact with professional blacks otherwise was teaching and a doctor here and there, not black lawyers.  You know, we had the few who had come here and made some inroads, one or two.  But on a larger scale, blacks still believed that they couldn't get--not that we were not qualified, but they couldn't get good justice in a white legal system by having a black lawyer.  And it was a long time to break that mode.  Slowly you get a case that you went in and you fought hard, and you'd win and get some publicity out of it.  And other blacks would begin to see.  And they would come to you with the most difficult cases after white lawyers had turned them down that you'd have to be innovative in your fights, you know.  And, and with some successes--or after awhile blacks began to see that you just fight even if you lost, and they began to gravitate or be attracted to that.  And that's the start of practicing law here.  The courts were--the judges and the establishment were a little receptive to me because I was older.  There's a lot of capital to be gained by being a decorated veteran in this military town.  So when I came back I was--like I said, I was a little bit older going to law--I didn't start law school until I was thirty years old.  But I had been a veteran, a highly decorated veteran, and word gets out.  So judges accepted me, gave a little more deference than they would have had I been a young black right out of law school; and got a little bit more respect from other lawyers even without having to first establish my competency, so a little bit easier.  So the military paid off in that regard.
Story_ID: 48298
Speaker 1: Plus, weren't you a celebrated hero--local hero?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't call it that.  It was--a lot of people didn't know about the background.  Of course the word got out after a while, and be asked to speak places.  And the newspaper picked up on it, you know.  Gosh, John Allen, he's done some amazing--I never talked about it, I mean--and once they picked up on it, it was published a few times.  And, and so I got a lot of white clients as a result of it.  In fact I had about a 35, 40 percent white clientele and I didn't know why, so I, I didn't ask any questions.  I just represented them.  I started the first integrated firm here.  Bobby Peters and I were--became partners.  He became mayor.  I became Superior Court judge, so there was obviously some benefit to be gained by being an integrated firm.  He's a very good friend.
Speaker 1: You know, that--so in many ways that speaks volume about how Columbus, Georgia had changed in that period of time.
Speaker 2: You know, this is a strange place now.  We have a black mayor pro tem, who had been so for 20 odd years, from the time of all the rioting here in '70's [1970's] until his retirement.  And he was elected at-large in a city that quite frankly discriminated for the most part.  But it's a strange phenomenon that they'd elected A.J. [A.J. McClung] as the at-large candidate; kind of a strange phenomenon when blacks have trouble getting elected.  I am consistently elected in a--an all-white area--I mean predominantly white electorate.  Some of it is in deference of course.  I (unclear) the military record--I like to think the fact that I'm just competent in what I'm doing.  But it's--but still whites would vote for me, you know, even when they didn't want to have their sister date a black or something of that nature, you know.  I kind of tapped into that late in my practice that there's a certain ethic, Southern ethic.  I call it the Southern work ethic.  And I would play that theme in, in spite of all the segregation and discrimination, believe it or not.  And I think if they ever realized that Southern whites, poor whites, have so much in common with blacks, you know.  So when I argue the cases to the jury, I would try to tap into that sense of fairness.  This is a person not asking you for a welfare or a handout.  This is a person who has worked and has earned what I'm asking you to give them.  And I'd argue that to those Southern white jurors and I'd get their vote every time, I mean--you know, on juries--strange ethic--not strange, not strange to me.  But it is an ethic that--that's there even in spite of racism, you know.  I guess I learned how to deal with it.
Story_ID: 48299
Speaker 1: So how long did it take you to build your law practice, 'cause you--and what made you--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: You did--you just ha--did you just hang your shingle?
Speaker 2: Well, I came here and I went in practice with a black female for about a year.  And she left town [Columbus, Georgia] and so I just hung my shingle and just started on my own, taking appointments, taking whatever came in the door.  I paid my secretary more than I earned at that time--and just working hard, studying hard, practicing hard, taking appointments, building a reputation.  I practiced for ten and a half years before the judgeship--state court judgeship came available 'cause there were no blacks in the judiciary here.  Well, Albert Thompson had been appointed Superior Court judge and then lost.  So I was the first ever elected judge in this area.  The--got appointed, kind of showed people that I, I was gonna be fair and could be fair.  And then I've been unopposed in every election so far.  I actually garnered--I have some of the most--the largest corporations in the town, their officers sit on, on my election committee so (laughter) you know--you know, very high-placed Republican on one side and high-placed Democrat on the other, you know.  They've been--the corporate world has been very supportive of me here.  Of course I've been involved in a lot of things in the city during this time period and not all of them conciliatory.  I was--I was a chairman of the board of PUSH [Operation PUSH].  I don't think I put it on there for a while.  When we--in the election office with the portrait of--marched down and had them to install a portrait of the individual that broke the black--I mean the white-only primary.  I sued the police department for discrimination.  I sued the fire department for sex discrimination.  I took the city on without pay to make them accommodate the handicapped, 'cause my client was a white female in a wheelchair.  I mean those kind of things help--and forced the city to, to provide for access for the handicapped, they never had it before.  So I--I'm not so sure I planned to do it that way.  It's just that my sentiments leaned toward helping the underdog.  And these cases gave a lot of publicity and a chance for me to get my name out and be involved.  And after some of those fights, I was asked to be on committees, various boards. The first black on the airport commission, for instance, and then several things, chamber of commerce and on and on.  So I guess I've been the beneficiary of good timing also.
Speaker 1: Well, they say sometimes good timing is being--having worked hard enough to be at the right place at the right time.
Speaker 2: Requires some of that.
Story_ID: 48300
Speaker 1: Do you know the other--so is there anyone mentoring you at this point?  Is there any--'cause you--there's not a lot of role models here.  This--
Speaker 2: Not really.  I had--now Judge Thompson [Albert Thompson] is a mentor in the sense that he was a black lawyer who had endured a lot of indignities here before.  But he was also in the state legislature, so he had garnered a great deal of respect.  But he was not practicing the kind of law that I--activist law that I was practicing.  So mine was a struggling on your own learning process.  In some areas I was fortunate enough to have a couple of older white lawyers around that I could go to and say: what can I do about this matter?  Not having to do with the race or discrimination or those matters, and they would help.  But as far as filing civil rights suits, I was on my own.  I was just out learning as I go.  We didn't have a very receptive court here, you know.  United States District Court here, they would kick me out summarily each time I filed a civil rights lawsuit, and so just got your knuckles bruised and just went back in to fight some more.  So it was a character building experience.  And to have to take those bruises and stand up in court and be strong for your client, you know, was quite an experience.
Story_ID: 48301
Speaker 1: Well, there--two other questions I have about that.  One is that: did you ever think around this time period as you were trying to build your practice, that you had made the wrong decision, you know, that this was, you know, a lot of work for little reward that--
Speaker 2: I was, for a while, pretty discouraged because economically I wasn't growing as fast as I was seeing some of my white contemporaries grow.  And, and then every now and then I was--but I was making a living for my family.  We were being fairly comfortable, as comfort goes around here.  And about the, the time I was beginning to get discouraged, I'd get a better case, and I'd get more self-satisfaction out of what I was doing and helping.  And I hooked up with Bobby Peters, a white lawyer, and, and we really began to roll.  In fact, when I came on the bench, this judgeship came open.  I give credit to Bobby.  He said we need a black--John, you need to go.  But I was--a big cut in pay to me.  And I was just beginning to make a lot of money, you know.  So I, I didn't come to the judiciary out of a desire to be a judge.  I came in order to--sounds kind of narcis--narcissistic--but to serve the community, to fill a void in the community.  Like I say, I wasn't making much money.  I, I, I was going through a divorce at the time, and I had--I was raising my sons.  I had to draw down on my savings to maintain my standard of living.  I almost went broke, and then gradually got raises in pay.  And--but it was purely to serve the community that I took this role.  Well, it was not the role.  I mean it was the lower court.  And it--and it did begin to, to diffuse some situations that I felt were, were not fair in the court system.  Being there, being a part of it, setting a different tone helped, and then getting elected to public office who was ready to accept it, 'cause then I got elected, and again, and again and nobody would run against me.  Quite frankly, I don't think the--I don't think anybody felt they could win after a while, because the corporate community had gotten on board; I was out speaking to groups, very conservative groups.  I'd go right to them and talk to them.  It's my job to convince them of what was needed here, and what was fair and what was not.  I almost hesitate mentioning this, but I took the rebel flag out of my courtroom back when that move first started in Georgia.  And it went out all over the United States.  In fact, I read about the Wall Street Journal.  And that was a--as you well know--in Georgia--a way to get unelected.  But when would you believe that I got more votes than anybody else on the ballot in my district including the president, including every senator, including every white judge; got more votes than anybody in this district in those six counties--a strange phenomenon.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: And I got calls after doing it.  You know, whites call me up and had a lot of dirty remarks.  And some veterans called up and I said look, I'm a veteran.  I said I don't disrespect veterans by taking this flag out, but it does not stand for what I fought for and what I stood for.  They understood that, my biggest supporters.  And they know I mean that, and I mean that from my heart, you know--strange phenomenon down here.
Speaker 1: But do you think--now it was historic when you and Peters got together too--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right?  That hadn't--that, that--had that happened before--
Speaker 2: It had never--
Speaker 1: --a white--
Speaker 2: --happened in Columbus.
Speaker 1: In Colum--okay.
Speaker 2: Never.  It hasn't happened since.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A couple of larger firms of--one larger firm has hired a black female.  And an insurance firm has hired a black lawyer, but not practicing.  Still doesn't happen.
Story_ID: 48302
Speaker 1: And when you--what were--well, I'll go--when you first got appointed, right?  You were fir--was appointed to the--okay.  Were there--what did you enjoy or not enjoy or miss about practicing?  You know, 'cause at this point in time you've established yourself to some extent.  You've gotten--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --over the early, you know--
Speaker 2: Struggle, yeah.
Speaker 1: --it's a real struggle.
Speaker 2: I, I enjoyed the opportunity to set a tone of fairness in the courts.  Even white lawyers felt that they would get a fair hearing in front of me because, to some extent, they felt, they perceived, that there was some favoritism from the judiciary for larger firms, for certain more established lawyers, and depending on the class of your client, the type of fairness you get, even from juries.  But that coming in front of me, that tone changed, and they felt like they got what's called a, a level playing field.  I enjoyed that.  I enjoyed, you know, that tone being set, that atmosphere, and the opportunity to be called to speak and to start other thing--involvement in other matters like Knight Ridder, you know, tell you about it--economically it was no joyride at first, but that began to improve.  And after a while, of course, the, the inroads that had allowed me out into the community to, to make an impression, to make a, a recommendation to have blacks push blacks off in other areas, or the poor whites, or to be involved in certain black causes.  I, I had to operate on the fringe of what judges should normally do, you know.  We can't be advocate for causes that might come before the court, so I had to push that to its limit, the envelope in terms of speaking out on issues and getting involved.  But I felt I had to do it because of my position in the community, you know.
Story_ID: 48303
Speaker 1: Now you were starting to talk about the judge's activist.
Speaker 2: Yeah act--
Speaker 1: Okay, I mean and that is--you know there are lots of--but people don't talk--you know, 'cause I was gonna ask, you know, a lot of judges talk about being lonely.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That it's, it's a very isolated thing 'cause you have conflicts; you have this; you can't socialize with this; you--you know.
Speaker 2: It really is, but I--I don't think I have the luxury of sitting back just being what the ideal judge can be because of my position.  I felt I had to exploit my position to do and make certain connections in the community between different groups in the community.  And one being that one of the assistant editor [Jack Fuller] and I got together and decided that blacks and white got along in Columbus [Georgia], but they weren't really getting along and getting to know each other.  Our favorite expression was we got together at buffets and banquets, wasted drinks on each other, and then went our separate ways, so we wanted to do something about that.  We started something called United Beyond 2000, a group planned the future of Columbus beyond the year 2000.  And as a part of that, what could we do to improve race relations, and further education, and better education for everyone.  Jack and I handpicked a group of persons in the city.  We didn't want top CEOs.  We didn't want lower level.  We wanted upper management and got together and just start coming to each other's house, didn't have an agenda, except to sit down and talk--got so close.  So that group started several other projects in the city.  This was a black and white group, started several other projects in the city of trying to pull the city together.  One of them being to start magnet schools.  The city started talking about magnet schools, but there was a lot of resistance to it.  And quite frankly, the real resistance to it was they didn't want to bus white kids to black areas for magnet schools.  So this--the United Beyond 2000 group--in fact I picked up the phone and called--the foremost authority on magnet schools at that time was a super--superintendant up in Mecklenburg, Virginia--to come down.  And we had a town hall meeting at the college--university here--overflowing--advertised that we kind of--we monitored and facilitated the group.  And we had a new--fairly new superintendant.  And we opened all the sores about magnets and gave all the answers.  And shortly after that meeting, the school board voted in the concept of magnet schools.  Not something we got out front and took credit for.  It's just something that we did.  This group--same group that had worked to get the together, what can we do?  We began citywide teen forums on issues that confronted teens.  And all of the persons in that group ended up being leaders in the community.  And because we were close to each other, we supported each other.  You know, one of 'em is a co-chairman of my election committee for instance, a female Jewish individual, so that kind of activism, in addition to things like sitting on the board of directors of chamber of commerce, House of Mercy, Urban League [National Urban League], things of that nature, which are okay for judges, except I have to recuse myself of-there's a suit against any of these organizations that comes before me.  But I just didn't have the luxury of sitting back and not be--I had to exploit my position in addressing some of these issues.  And so I was--it gave me the inroad to do it, so I did.
Story_ID: 48304
Speaker 1: Now I--I wanna ask about any case that you've worked on that you thought was very difficult for you, or that put you in a difficult position, or you particularly pondered over, or--
Speaker 2: A lot of cases, but a lot of cases are difficult.  I mean the different types, like dealing with child abuse cases, things of that nature.  But I was in a very difficult situation.  There were several young black kids who were charged with armed robbery, and they were guilty, all A students in high school, come from middle class families, just a stupid lark; they were not bad kids, but they committed a serious crime.  And the prosecutor--Georgia had passed these mandatory minimal sentencing laws.  If you are convicted of this crime, you must do 10 years.  Well, the prosecution wouldn't change it from armed robbery to rob--robbery.  If it were robbery, they wouldn't have to serve 10 years and I wouldn't have to sentence them.  And the sentiment in the community, of course, was punish kids for--and punish them very harshly for committing crimes.  But these punishments were falling disproportionately on black kids.  I found a loophole in the law, and I knew it would not be popular.  So following this loophole, I didn't convict them and didn't sentence them then--sentenced all of them to that mandatory minimum 10 years.  It went out all over the state.  And the governor went ballistic.  I mean he gave several public--just castigating me.  And one other liberar--liberal white judge did the same thing.  And you know, how can these judge--robe judges they call 'em, you know, gone off the deep end.  It was in Atlanta Constitution in the Columbus [Georgia] paper--it was all over the state.  Court of appeals upheld me in my--in my robe.  It was absolutely sound in the law.  And so it passed a rule--a law.  The legislature the very next year closed that loophole.  It is an instance of--and you know, being a law and order state, you know, you really risk your political career in making those kinds of decisions.  Once again, I got the unbridled support of the local newspaper.  And there was editorial even in Atlanta [Georgia] paper saying the judges should be allowed to make those kinds of decisions.  And it was based on what the kids that I had before me.  It was the right decision, but it was not a popular decision politically and to law and order persons.  So--but I survived it.
Speaker 1: Do you know what happened to those kids?  Did they go on to do okay?
Speaker 2: Well, no, they're in confinement--or one should--some should be coming out of confinement, but they didn't have to serve that min--mandatory 10 years.  One of them did that had the gun and that did some things.  Another couple who were less culpable might be out.  I didn't check on them yet.  And I'd--some of the things not so notorious in sense of its notoriety.  I've--a couple of kids charged with selling drugs out there.  I, I sentenced them to go to college.  I mean, you know, and they did.  One guy did.  I told him if he dropped out of college, I was gonna put him in jail for 10 years.  He finished college--gave him probation, which was unheard of, giving somebody selling marijuana probation around here.  But it was a smart kid, you know, an extremely bright kid.  And it was just to me I'm watching him.  It's like it was--it could be done so he did it--was not the hardened criminal.  He selling drugs to his little college mates.  Take a chance with those kinds of--but it's my streets experiences and my instincts that told me they were the right thing--it was the right thing to do and not just for black kids.  I've done it for white kids as well.
Story_ID: 48305
Speaker 1: Now what do you want to end up still doing that you haven't done?  I mean what are your aspirations?
Speaker 2: I have kind of given up.  One time I thought I wanted to be a federal judge, but it's the wrong political party, wrong time.  I like--believe it or not, I, I gave up the opportunity to go to a higher court 'cause I like the work I'm doing.  It allows me more contact with the public.  On an appellate level you just read briefs, important function, but I think I can have more of an impact in what I'm doing now.  And this is a long way from public housing projects, you know.  You know, people--you know, there are persons that--this job is to die for.  People wanna die with the name--you know the, the title of Superior Court Judge behind their name.  I never quite thought about it like that except thinking in retrospect.  That's, that's a fairly long journey, you know.  I've kind of resolved myself--resigned myself that I--this is where I want to be.  I'm, I'm not that far from retirement now, and that's all right.  I--because I enjoy what I'm doing, and I still could use the position to influence things in the community.  Once I retire I'll be even more of an activist in asserting positions without question, no doubt in my mind about that, even more involved in the community.  You know we help start up a 100 Black Men in Columbus, a lot of things like that.  I don't think I even mentioned it.  So we're--I haven't gotten away from being an activist, but I will be even more so in retirement.
Story_ID: 48306
Speaker 1: Now the other thing I didn't--I, I had failed to ask, and you had mentioned it earlier, and that was your mother [Beatrice Allen] about moving to Atlanta [Georgia].  And I think that occurred when you were in high--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And I wonder--I mean I--sorry I stopped over that chronology, but that--you said that--and that's when your father [Daniel Allen] took over raising you.
Speaker 2: Well, he didn't really take over raising.  I hate to--I don't wanna say anything bad about my father, but there's not that much good to say quite frankly.  But she couldn't get a decent job here, a job that paid anything, so she moved to Atlanta.  And then I had--that was--I was in high school and my two sisters beneath me, and she took my youngest with her.  And so I decided that we could stay with my dad until we got out of high school because I was a senior; one was a junior and a sophomore or a freshman.  And so we wanted to stay where we were for the time being, because when I finished they went to Atlanta and finished up with my mother, except the one behind me finished at Spencer.  And, and--but as long as I was here I could look after them.  And so they moved to Atlanta with my mom.
Speaker 1: Now how did she become some popular there?  You said she had a demeanor about her, but you said it--
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: --was sort of a--
Speaker 2: You know it's the strangest thing.  I mean she was not a community activist or anything.  All she did was--all she was, was a hard-working woman and excellent seamstress though.  And this one politician in Atlanta, he was just starting out practicing, having a hard time.  And she was near--not very far from Morehouse [Morehouse College in Atlanta, Georgia] and that AU [Atlanta University, now Clark Atlanta University in Atlanta, Georgia] complex.  So there was great need for those persons who didn't have a lot of money to have their clothes tailored. And she told one--this one particular politician--said you gotta buy a new suit.  If I sew the pants together anymore, your pockets are gonna be meeting, you know (laughter).  So she used to talk to people like that, you know.  And they'd come in and they sometimes sit around and wait while she was sewing.  And, and she was just a down-to-earth, most common sense of anybody I've ever met in my life.  And she'd tell 'em how to run the government, said y'all need to go down there and straighten out such and such a thing.  And she'd tell 'em there's no sense in you doing ABCD, and that's the way she'd talk to them.  Not that she was a matronly little mother figure; she was feisty, you know.  And, and so she'd sit there.  They'd come in and then she'd give them her advice about what they all do.  And they just keep coming back for more.  And I didn't even know this was happening when it was happening until after the fact.  And they did this special in Atlanta.  I have a tape of it somewhere.  And at her funeral when several of them--in fact, Marvin Arrington, who was so powerful in Atlanta, said man, I didn't know your mother--said I used to go by there and sit down there and just listen to her talk, you know.  And this guy, Gordon Joyner, who is county commissioner, said he used to go by there.  And, and she used to tell him about all these other people from Morehouse used to come by.  And so they'd just go out of their way to bring their clothes to and just listen to her tell 'em what to do, you know.  She was just a unique person.
Story_ID: 48307
Speaker 1: When did she [Beatrice Allen] pass away, sir?
Speaker 2: Oh, it's been about twelve years now.
Speaker 1: Oh, it has, okay.  But she saw it.  She saw your success.
Speaker 2: She saw me get--make state court judge.  She told me when it came open.  She said you're gonna get it--said I know it.  I just know it in my heart.  And sure enough, so she came to the swearing in.  And I have a picture of her and the entire family at the swearing in.  So she lived to see that.
Speaker 1: You know what--you know what strikes me is that you're a very principled person.  It seems like--no, well, it seems like you move a lot on principle or what is right, what feels right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I try to.  I think so.
Speaker 1: And you've--and you've seem to also have a conviction to act.  That's--those are two things.  Sometimes people are principled, but they don't have the conviction.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, it's--in addition, I credit--of course my mother didn't get out and do those kinds of things, but, but just the strength of belief in yourself that was instilled, and the summation of all my life experiences, quite frankly, that have just led me to here, you know, having to survive discrimination, deal with it, stand up and assert myself in positions where it was necessary.  After a while, you just begin to believe that it's the right thing to do, you know.  So I attribute a lot of that to a nurturing support system I suppose, you know along the way.  You have to be prepared to be where you are, so I give the credit, you know, to that support system.
Speaker 1: Now do you have hopes and concerns for the black community as you move forward?  This is a--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a community here you've seen.
Speaker 2: I didn't mention my sister's a fair supporter.  We are a close knit group.  We--all six of my sisters are living and we always get together.  We just clown and carry on and support each other.  We are each other's greatest fans, so they've always been supportive.  When I was in--they were in nursing school, I remember working and sending them money to buy uniforms, you know.  And whatever money they had, they would send me if they had, you know, so we're very supportive.  So that had to be a, a principal part of it all as well.
Story_ID: 48308
Speaker 1: Now back to your question, hopes for the black community.  Yes, we are--I kind of--for this environment anyway, Columbus, Georgia, I kind have some concerns about whether or not that generation--that two generations from me--well, a couple of decades, I guess, behind me have had the life experiences that I've had that would motivate them to take the positions that I and my peers have taken in, for instance, giving up a practice to be a judge for the community, of pushing the envelope because it needs to be pushed.  Because I don't think they've quite had the struggles.  It's like--I guess (unclear) borrow a phrase from engineering: it's tempering steel.  You have to subject it to heat, you know, for it to become the kind of steel--that quality of steel that you want.  I guess being from the old school, I think that we're missing the tempering, and the experience that racism--that the--instilled, that the lessons that it taught--that discrimination taught, you know, I have concerns in that regard.  I have no concerns about the abilities of these young people.  We have some brilliant young minds.  I also participated in something called a page one, where we grade--sponsored by Knight Ridder--that every school in the Chattahoochee district sends representatives and outstanding representatives in certain areas like citizenship, scholarship, athletics.  So I'm one the judges to see who's the best.  These kids are doing great things, and I mean--and our minority kids are right up there at the time, winning in lots of categories.  I am--I am much encouraged about the brilliance of these kids and their comfort level in existing in society.  And they're gonna do good things.  I just don't--and they do a lot of charitable things.  I'm not so sure they feel the need to fight as hard for black causes.  I don't think they see the causes as much as my generation does--still see the concern, if you will, for the cause, you know.  I'm hoping that they're right, but my experiences don't allow me that comfort level of believing that they are.  They're gonna make an impact.  They're gonna make an impact in medicine, and academics, and a lot of other areas, you know, highly qualified.  I just hope that we can hold the door open (laughter) for them to be able to move in large numbers out into community to truly make an impact.  So do I--I'm concerned about them, yes.
Story_ID: 48309
Speaker 1: Do you believe in the new South (unclear)-it seems like you're a believer in the new South?
Speaker 2: This is almost political, and I hate to say this on the (laughter)--I do.  We're running out of time here?
Speaker 1: Mm-mm.
Speaker 2: It's all right.
Speaker 1: But I just have one more question.
Speaker 2: I do, in the sense that--well, I do and I don't, okay.  I see how easily the South is misled and pandered to when they're bombarded with certain code words like family values, patriotism, and Christianity.  And I call it by pandering to the South--I mean in South and, and some of the people who believe basically in those values.  But true politicians are misusing their beliefs in those values to divert them away from being as communal that I think the South was in years past, even across races, even though there was discrimination, still a kind of communal.  That was the underlying work ethic that I talked about, this sense of fairness to sup--of supporting each other--to now they use family values to separate people into groups, you know.  They use Christian--notions of Christianity to separate people into groups.  And we seem to be more susceptible to it in the South than they are in other places of the country, South and Midwest.  So, while on an individual basis we get along really well, I worry about the South still being victims of true political maneuvering, manipulation.  You follow that?  Yeah.
Story_ID: 48310
Speaker 1: And sir, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Wow.  First in my profession, that I was competent--I am competent; that highest level of integrity in it; that I was fair to people; that as an individual that, that I did something to advance the cause of humanity period and in general.  And that goes what I was saying about the other things about being a family man.  I love my kids.  I love my family.  I just kind of take it for granted that people will see that, you know--but that I was a person who cared and did something about it.  That sounds--you know it's very dull to say that a judge is fair, but you know, it takes a whole lot of preparation to be able to make the right decision that everybody feels comfortable with.  You know what I mean, lots of preparation.  But that is kind of the reputation that I think I've got.
Speaker 1: And what do you want to leave the future generations then for your--for your family what do you want--
Speaker 2: Eve--even my kids that--I guess with the involvement, I certainly want to leave this community a little better than what I found it, and, and hope that I had  part in making it better, and my kids with a desire to be a part of making their world a little better; I really do.  And that doesn't call for a whole lot of self-sacrifice, just a little bit of effort.  You notice I don't talk much about Christian values and things of that nature, although I am very much involved in church.  And I just--I kind of assumed that persons who-they'll use those values to help do these other things that I'm talking about.  It's quite general to say make the world a better place.  Make your community a better place, some, some by example and some by doing, you know.  I happen to push it in that direction.  I hope my children are good people--first to good people.  I didn't worry so much about 'em being good students in school.  I wanted 'em to be good persons, and I think they are.  The rest will follow--if you have average intelligence.  That's as general as I can make it, you know, and, and I was trying to in response to your question, specific things, of course, that go into that.
Story_ID: 48311
Speaker 1: This is a photograph from my law school class in 1973.  I'm the third from the left in the white turtleneck on the back row, third in--individual from the left.  I was--the other gentleman on the front row with the striped shirt running the width of his body--striped sweater--was also a former military.  That's James Thompson.  We were older than our other classmates.  We were about seven or eight years older because we had done our tour in the military.  University of Florida was quite liberal then, having this many.  I think it was the only school to have this many blacks in an entering class in the South at that time, other than a black school.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And what year would this have been?
Speaker 1: This would have been 1973.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  What was the occasion for this group shot--just to--
Speaker 1: Probably black law students on the entering class to get together just for posterity.
Speaker 2: But that wasn't black student law--black Law Students Association.  That was pre--
Speaker 1: No, that was just part of black students' Law Students Association.  Those are just the freshman class.
Speaker 2: Of course I was a--prior to going to law school, this was after graduation from combat crew training.  I was in Southeast Asia at the time.  This had to be 1968, '69' [1969] in Udorn, Thailand, probably two years out of college at most.  I think I was one of two black pilots on my base at that time.
Speaker 1: I guess I talked so much about being poor, I don't look very poor in that photograph, but we were--this is my senior high school.  I was senior class president and also student government president.  So this was in my role I think as president of the student government presenting a gift to the PTA--was pretty much active in high school at that time.  Wouldn't believe this, but I had on my dad's borrowed coat 'cause I didn't own one.
Speaker 2: You look very dapper though.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I really did.  That was a wool coat.  I guess it was--might not have been summer.  It might have been--(simultaneous)-
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  The year of this event?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961] maybe.
Speaker 2: That was at Spencer High School.
Speaker 1: Spencer High School, yes.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of the--of the aircraft that I flew in combat, the F-4 Phantom.  I can't swear by it, but I believe this was a photograph--the reason I have it, it was a photograph taken of me flying the aircraft by one of the other individuals in my flight.  And that would have been over Southeast Asia.
Speaker 1: [Off-camera aside]
Speaker 2: Okay, that was the taking of oath for Superior Court here in Muscogee County [Georgia].  I was sworn in.  This was a pretty unique occasion because the governor came down to Columbus [Georgia] to swear me in.  I think it was a political move on his part, because I had such a big following here.  And I think--believe it was the first time it had been done, that the governor came to the local area to swear in a Superior Court judge.  That was in 19--October, 1973, and we had about five or six hundred people at my investiture.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  And which governor was this?
Speaker 2: Governor Miller
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA MALE VOICE):  Zell Miller?
Speaker 2: Zell Miller.
Story_ID: 48312
Speaker 1: Okay, this is just a picture of a--an air-to-air refueling.  Somebody circled the aircraft on the lower right, as if to indicate that it were--as if that were me in this flight.  It may be and it may not be, but this is typical of a flight that we would take.  And this is an actual air-to-air refueling that we--that was very common when I was flying in Southeast Asia.  We'd do it on almost every mission.
Speaker 2: Again, in this one I, I think this is my second tour in Southeast Asia.  I'm a captain at this time.  And I was probably suiting up to go on a mission.  You can see the bombs under the aircraft.  And this would have been in 1970.  I was a lean, mean fighting machine.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is after law school back in Columbus, Georgia.  As you can see from the military, I was pretty clean cut, but now I've gone back to my afro.  My militancy is exhibiting itself somewhat.  So I came back to practice law as--I guess it's about as neat an afro as you can get in practicing law in a conservative area.  This would have been 1978, maybe '79' [1979].
Speaker 2: Again, this was--this is the same time period as, as the previous--about 1960--no, 1970.  I was a captain at that time, close to winding down my second tour in Southeast Asia.
Speaker 1: And believe it or not, this was way back in pilot training.  This was when I first started, left Tuskegee [Tuskegee University in Tuskegee, Alabama] and went to Williams Air Force Base, Arizona.  No, no that was not pilot training.  I'm sorry that was not pilot training.  I was at Tampa [Florida] at Tampa Air Force Base.  I was an instructor pilot at that time.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of when I was in the military.  I was on R and R, rest and recuperation, and in Australia, in Sydney, Australia, 1969 or early '70 [1970].
Speaker 1: This is my--a graduation picture from when I was awarded my wings in Williams Air Force Base, Arizona in 1967--no, '67 [1967] H--yeah, '67 [1967].  That's my sister.  Of course my mother couldn't afford to fly my family out, so everybody got together and chipped in for my sister to come out to represent the family--a sister, one of six.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Which sister--name?
Speaker 1: That's Melinda (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: L-I-N-D-A?
Speaker 1: A--yes, Melinda, now Thompson.  Melinda Thompson.
Speaker 2: Okay, back at Tuskegee Institute.  This would have been 1965--about 1966, maybe '65 [1965] at Tuskegee--'64 [1964]?  Oh, 1964 at Tuskegee, all right.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you identify the people in the photo?
Speaker 2: Yes, the one gentleman standing--I'm the one in the shades in the back, third from the left.  The one in front of me is David Carnes and--architect major.  To my left is--I've forgotten the names.  Dementia set in.  Wade--Wade Jackson, an engineer--a fellow engineer.  And I've forgotten the other two.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So from left to right we have unidentified Mr. Carnes--
Speaker 2: And me. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And then Mr.--
Speaker 1: Allen--John Allen then Wade Jackson, and I've forgotten the far right. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  How do--how do we spell Carnes?
Speaker 2: C-A-R-N-E-S, architect from Tennessee.
Story_ID: 48313
Speaker 1: This is after back in Columbus, Georgia practicing law.  The young kid to my immediate right is my oldest son, John, Jr.  And just in front of me is my youngest son, Jeffrey.  And quite frankly, I don't even know the name of the young kid on my left.  He just came in and jumped in the photograph (laughter).  We were at church one Sunday.  This had to be about sa--no, let's see.  John, Jr. looks--'77 [1977] plus eight--about '82 [1982] or so.
Speaker 2: The gentleman--the old-- (OFF-CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: The gentleman sitting immediately to my right--I, I was emceeing a roast and a toast for Mayor Pro Tem A.J. McClung.  A.J. McClung is a Columbus [Georgia] legend, the first black mayor of Columbus, and became mayor pro tem for some 20 odd years.  He is the gentleman that I mentioned earlier who took me to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute in Tuskegee, Alabama] to get me a scholarship.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And is that this gentleman here?
Speaker 1: That's the one you want to interview, A.J. McClung, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So from left to right unidentified, unidentified A.J. McClung--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, left to right, I want to say that's Michael Bellamy.  It's difficult to tell.  I want to say that's Michael Bellamy.  He's a Tuskegee graduate, a young--the lady I can't make out.  A.J. McClung, and then that's myself as emcee.
Speaker 2: Can you spell Mr. McClung?
Speaker 1: M-C-C-L-U-N-G.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, and Mr. Bellamy, B-E--
Speaker 1: Michael Bellamy, B-E-L-L-A-M-Y.  He's an Alabama judge.
Speaker 2: Okay, a better picture of--from left to right--we're at a party at the home of a Columbus AFLAC executive.  I'm on the left.  That's Judge Albert Thompson, the gentleman to my left.  And the third from the left is Mr. Warren Steele, who at that time was personnel director for the city of Columbus.  And the far right is A.J. McClung, Mayor Pro Tem of Columbus, Georgia.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And do you remember when this was taken and what the occasion might have been?
Speaker 2: Let's see.  This photograph was about 1992.  Yeah, I was still on state court.  A.J. was quite vigorous at that time.  And it was just one social gathering in the city.
Speaker 1: And this is a photograph of my present wife, who at the time we were engaged, 1994--early '95 [1995], late '94 [1994] in Atlanta, Georgia.  Victoria Broussard, B-R-O-U-S-S-A-R-D, Allen.
Speaker 2: Of course that's the oath of--oath of office.  We had that one earlier from Governor Miller [Zell Miller] swearing me in, October 1993.  That was a huge gathering at a foreign investiture.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  For those of us from Chicago who might not be able to remember, his first name Zell is Z--
Speaker 2: Z-E-L-L.  He's now a United States Senator from the State of Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is my first judgeship.  I was sworn in as judge of state court that is county court in Muscogee County.  And these are my sisters, and niece, and a nephew.  Left to right, my oldest sister, Gloria, in the polka dot dress.  To her left is my youngest sister, Rose.  On the back row, my sister, Elizabeth.  And back down to--next to Rose in the glasses that are shining is Imogene (ph.).  And behind Imogene is my sister, Virginia.  And of course, the young man standing in the front row is my youngest son, Jeffrey.  In the center of the picture in the peach/beige looking dress is my mother, Beatrice.  Over my mother's left shoulder is my niece, Kyra (ph.).  And then of course, that's me in the center with the, the glasses tinted.  And next to my mother's left is my oldest son, John, Jr.  And over my son's left shoulder is the then governor, Joe Frank Harris, who made the appointment to state court.  And then and my nephew, Tyrone, on the front, then my--another sister on the far right here is Melinda.
Story_ID: 48314
Speaker 1: That's a part of the crowd at my swearing in for Superior Court.  It was quite a gathering.  All of those are Superior Court judges on the row with me.  Of course the governor is sitting immediately to my left.  And then to the governor's left is our chief judge in this circuit, Ken Followill, F-O-L-L-O-W-I-L-L.  To his left is Judge William Smith.  And the bald gentleman on the far left is Judge Whisnant, W-H-I-S-N-A-N-T.  And there were a throng of about five or six hundred people.
Speaker 2: It's my sheepskin from Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama].  I've not even had it framed yet.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA ADJUSTMENT)
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's my sheepskin from Tuskegee, Degree of Bachelor of Science and Engineering, 1966.
Speaker 1: Okay, that was--I was sworn in my graduation from Tuskegee Institute.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA ADJUSTMENT)
Speaker 1: That was when I was sworn in at Tuskegee Institute.  I was commissioned to second lieutenant at Tuskegee Institute in 1966.  And my mother on my left, and a lady friend on my right.
Speaker 2: That's, that's my mother of course at a very young age back--and those are the public housing projects that I grew up in, in the background, Booker T. Washington Apartments.  That's Booker T. Washington Apartments, and that would have been about 1940--no, let's see--(unclear) at '43 [1943] after Linda--maybe '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: That's just a baby photograph of me, probably eight months.
