Story_ID: 4056
Speaker 1: Then I'm just gonna to ask, you know, quick short things and then we'll start.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Abena Joan P. Brown.  That's A-B-E-N-A, Joan, J-O-A-N, P, initial, and Brown, B-R-O-W-N.  That's the easy part.
Story_ID: 4057
Speaker 1: Now just real quickly.  What's your favorite word or phrase?
Speaker 2: Success.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: Macaroni and cheese.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Africa, any part.
Speaker 1: And favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Anytime.  As long as I'm on the planet.
Story_ID: 4058
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna--what I'd like to start--because you're a native Chicagoan, I want you to talk about growing up, and your family, and what that was like.  You know, where you fit in the family.
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in Chicago [Illinois].  On the South Side of Chicago, where most of us were born at the time that I was born and lived.  I'm an only child.  But I had lots of cousins.  But I was sort of a singular child in that I was younger than all of my cousins.  And so the whole family to a great extent doted on me.  Because I've been different all of my life.  Recognizably so, admittedly so.  And I think that made a significant difference in my world view and how I came along.  I grew up in--now as we would say the African American community where neighbors, friends, extended family were all the caretakers of the children.  I also came from a family that had a lot of respect of excellence--demanded excellence.  I also came from a family where they believed--as most families did in my age group--that all children should take a lesson, a class of some kind.  So every Saturday, we went out to take either music or dance or drama.  And one of the things I always remember now as I grew up across the street from one Ann Henry, who was a consummate and serious dance student.  And we used to say, "Oh, Ann is going for her dance lesson."  And later, of course, she became a member of 'The Co-ops' with Julian Swain and Peter Green and danced with Duke Ellington in a group called 'The Co-ops.'  And I remember feeling so proud the first time I saw her on stage, and knowing that she grew up right across the street from me.  I went to Catholic school because when I was in the second grade, I played hooky for two whole weeks.  And I was exploring the neighborhood.  I was exploring the universe if you will.  And I'll never forget.  My great aunt, with whom we lived with at that time, said, to my mother [Luola Reed], "Luola, I think you better go to school to see about Joan.  Because she comes home from school, all different times of day."  And it was around 3:00 [P.M.].  You know, I'd come home five to three, five after three, ten after three, 'cause I didn't have a watch.  And even the first watch I got was a Mickey Mouse watch.  I'll never forget that, and I had torn it up, torn it apart to find out what made it tick.  That's interesting.  It's a metaphor--what made it tick.  So anyway, my mother took me to school to find out what was going on, and why I was coming in such laggard times and different times.  And the teacher looked down and said, "Joan, where have you been?"  And my mother looked down and said, "What do you mean?"  She looked at me and she looked at--"What do you mean where's--?"  And the teacher told that I had not been in school.  And that was the end of that conversation.  My mother grabbed me up and literally dragged me back home, you know, in a very swift pace that my feet were hardly touching the ground.  And then of course, she reported me to the whole family.  And it was shortly after that, that I was sent to Catholic school, boarding school if you will.
Story_ID: 4059
Speaker 1: And then when we--when I was older, my mother [Luola Reed] used to say that, "I sent you there to reform you."  And I was a teenager by that time.  And she said, "I'm not sure I was successful."  But when I look back on it.  I was really very glad that she did it, although I hated it at the time.  I thought that I had been dispelled.  I thought that I had been sent to jail, literally.  And you know Catholic school sometimes can be that way.  And I would write and say, "I was so unhappy, blah-blah-blah-blah."  But I stayed in that Catholic school from the third grade.  And when I came back to Chicago [Illinois] on a permanent basis, I was in the sixth grade.  But I'm very happy that I had that experience.  Because I've always been willful.  I've always been determined.  I've always been able to--say if somebody asked me to do something in the family--I didn't want to do it, I would just say "No."  And I remember being asked, "What do you mean, 'No'?"  Because you know--maybe up until recent times, children were not permitted to say, "No."  But at any rate, I certainly got a very good academic foundation.  The good nuns taught me a lot of discipline, insisted upon it.  I learned how to manipulate certain aspects of the environment.  And I was glad to get back home.  And had a real deep appreciation--a deeper appreciation, I think for family and extended family, and friends.  And I also learned organization at that stage of life.  Because we got up at 6:00 [A.M.]--you know, life was highly organized.  You had a time for school--serious study.  You had a time for play.  All of that.  So those were the--some of the things that I remember growing up.  And then, of course, when I became a teenager, it was a time when we were all in clubs.  And we named the clubs to distinguish ourselves in some way.  And the club that I remember most and best was when we called ourselves the 'Unique Voguettes.'  Which had within it, the notion of how we wanted to be, what we wanted to be.  And certainly in--in the most obvious sense, we wanted to be fashionable.  But it deals with issues--now as I look back on it and I can, you know, analyze it, issues of self-esteem.  It  had--it deals with issues of attaining--first setting aspirations for oneself, and then developing the wherewithal, the consciousness and the determination to achieve one's goals.  So those are some of the things that I remember.
Story_ID: 4060
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, what--what would you--How would you describe your mother [Luola Reed]?  You know, what type of person was she?  And--.
Speaker 2: She was a Pisces and I'm a Taurus.  And so I think in a real sense, I was always very difficult for her.  But she was also very wise (with emphasis).  And I can be anecdotal about that as well. And she understood process.  You know, because when she decided that I needed to be in an environment where I would be protected and my willfulness be curbed--because she worked.  You know, my mother always worked.  Had a step-father who worked.  My family all worked.  And I had a lot of responsibilities growing up.  When I was seven for instance I was going down, paying my mother's bills, you know.  And you hear a lot about latch-key children now.  But I had a key to the house.  I was expected to go to--come inside and stay until my mother came home from work.  I was expected to clean the house.  I was expected to go to the store.  You know, I had duties of that kind.  But when she decided I needed to go to this Catholic boarding school, she very wisely took me to visit some family friends whose children went to that school.  So they could talk to me and tell me what they thought about it.  So she had a sense of child rearing and opening up the discussion with a child--no matter how young, no matter how old.  We had a very good relationship.  We could talk about any and everything.  And when I was about sixteen--we sat down.  She said, "I want to talk to you."  'Cause she was concerned about me as what we now call the teenager.  Course, we didn't talk like that then.  And she used to say, "Uh, are you okay?" She'd say, "You do such strange things," she said.  "Are you losing your mind or what?"  And that's how the conversation started.  And those of us who know anything about boys and girls--but particularly I think girls in those teen years, when you're feeling so much of yourself that it's a very logical question to ask.  "Will--will this child get through life," and look, of course, "Will she get through life without getting pregnant before marriage?"  Which was a very important issue in our families.  So she had the ability to really to cut to the quick of an issue, be open to discussion.  Help one to understand where you were coming from, as we would say, in today's language.  And she was very strong.  And she gave me everything I wanted which was within her power to give.  Which certainly led me to understand or to gain a sense of entitlement, which is very, very critical I think to growing up and maturing into a responsible, adventuresome, but yet thoughtful and smart person.  And my mother went to college after I graduated from college.  She finished high school as a matter of fact, and then went on and got an associate arts degree from one of the community colleges.  And that was a very, very proud and wonderful day for our family.  So that's who my (with emphasis) mother was.  And all my friends still refer to her as "Miss Reed."  She's been dead now twenty years.
Story_ID: 4061
Speaker 1: Now the--the other thing.  What was--what was--can you--I know you--it says that you started dancing at age three.
Speaker 2: Yes, tap.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you say that was the start of your interest in the arts?  Or can you--you know, can you talk about what artistic influences you encountered, maybe during childhood.
Speaker 2: Well, I've already talked about one.  I talked about Ann Henry and Julian Swain and Peter Green.  And then--when we had the 'Unique Voguettes,' [social club] we were smart enough to get the manager of the Regal Theatre to be our sponsor.  And in so doing, that meant we could see all the stage shows. Free.  And we wouldn't have to sit through the movie.  We could go back--in and out, in and out.  I think, um, Miss Edgerton who was one of the early teachers in dance that I had, certainly influenced me.  Because when we went to her class, we danced.  We did not play.  And I will always remember her giving us grades.  And then we'd get a grade on 'Smile.'  'Cause we had to--you know, tap and smile go together.  I remember the music that was played in our house.  I come from what used to be called a race family.  There was great pride in the accomplishments of black people.  So I grew up listening to Dinah Washington, and Billie Holiday.  And even a little later in life as I was, maybe a preteen--no, earlier than that as I recall--I was running around.  My Aunt Sarita, whose was one of the cofounders of the South Side Community Arts Center [Chicago, Illinois], along with Margaret Burroughs and people of that ilk.  They had soirees--they called them, on Sunday afternoons.  So that's where I first saw [Joshua] Josh White.  Some time after that, I met Paul Robeson in person (with emphasis).  And I was a little girl--in going through the reception line at the Parkway Ballroom [Chicago, Illinois] where Lena Horne also appeared that day.  In the reception line, when he got to me he said, "And what is your name?"  And I told him.  He said, "I'm so pleased to meet you Joan."  And I can't really describe the sense of recognition and power that came.  Because I was the little girl in the line and everybody else was an adult.  And he treated me just as he had done the others.  When I decided to go to--well I never really decided to go to college, it was an expectation.  I entered as a Dance major.  And then they put me in the Physical Education School, in which I had very little interest actually.  And that's where I finally changed my major.  But I--I love dance.  I still do.  In fact I was dancing the other night in my house.  We danced to all the doo-wop music and choreographed.  But it was during that--that time, that dance seemed so glamorous, you know.  It seemed like it would be such fun.  But then after I had to take hockey--field hockey, and soccer, and swimming, and blah-blah-blah-blah--and I'm glad I did.  I decided along with my family saying, "Are you going to be able to make a living doing this?",  "Are you going to be able to take care of yourself?"  Plus the very extreme fundamental racism that I experienced in that school.  And so I came home from there.  And I first said, "I don't think I'm ever going to school again."  It was just that devastating.  And I remember my mother [Luola Reed] stirring in a pot saying, "Well two years of college is enough for any little colored girl."  I had never thought of myself as a "little colored girl."  I mean just the opposite.  You know what I'm saying?
Story_ID: 4062
Speaker 1: So I went to my room, thought about that and that Monday I went and enrolled at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois].  Changed my major--Sociology, Psychology--but because I'd been already two years in--at the University--I had so many hours, you know, extra hours of one type or another.  So when I came out of Roosevelt [University], I had a major in Sociology, minor in Psychology, a minor in Political Science, and a minor in Economics.  That's fascinating isn't it?  And then all the time that I was going to school, I was also continuing to dance.  Because that's the way I got money to pay some of my school fees and my this and my that.  Extra money to buy these sweaters and skirts of which we were all so fond.  And so the dancing and the other career went hand-in-hand.  And I got into theater quite by accident--or opportunity.  Which is the way most of my life has been--responding to opportunity.  And so a young man where I was working asked if I would be interested in taking a part in a play.  Now for the three years I had worked at the Cook County Department of Public Aid [Chicago, Illinois].  We always had a Christmas party and I always put on a show for them, you know.  Maybe wrote something or do some--choreograph some dances.  So it--I guess I--I never really left it.  And so he said, "Well, you might want to take a part in a play.  I'm in a dram- drama group--," in fact, it was called 'Drama Incorporated,' "--and, we need somebody to take a part."  And I said, "Sure."  So I went to that rehearsal and I've been in this business ever since.  And came under the influence of one Lillian Tompkins who had organized this company [eta Creative Arts Foundation, Chicago, Illinois].  She--her's--her statement was, "The professional touch in little theater."  And she insisted that we take lessons and workshops.  And we had professional directors and all of those things.  And that's where I ended up.  And in that process, I learned not only the acting business, so to speak, but I became a company manager.  I became stage manager.  And in that company, we did everything that had to be done.  We built the sets.  She did the costumes 'cause she'd been a wardrobe mistress at the Shubert [Theatre].  We sold the tickets.  Everything that had to be done--we'd done--we did the public relations, whatever.  We did it.  And she would say all the time, "We need a place."  And indeed we found places.  We would rent them, fix them up--paint them, turn it into a nice, wonderful theater space.  And then, of course, the landlord would come and say, "Didn't know this place had such possibilities," and put us out, okay.  So that kind--her thinking, and her pushing us constantly in that direction, led to the day that I was riding down to the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association], maybe ten years after her death, and saying, "We need a place.  We need a place."  And it dawned on me that I had been hearing that so many years and we had not yet accomplished it.  And that's what set me on this path.  Just like that.
Story_ID: 4063
Speaker 1: I want to go back a little bit, and then I'll come--come forward again.  But, can you describe what it was like growing up in Chicago [Illinois] at the time that you grew up?
Speaker 2: Growing up in Chicago was wonderful.  See I'm not sure that I know what you mean, but it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Well I'm just--I'm trying to put things in a--I mean what was actually happening at that time?  I'm trying to have you put--put your life in a context.
Speaker 2: Nothing was happening.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We got up, we went to school.  We came home.  We did our chores.  We went to parties.  We had our clubs.  We had a wonderful, wonderful time.  We dealt with those things that all young people growing up deal with--,
Speaker 1: Can you talk--?
Speaker 2: --but we never felt, quote, 'the pressure,' we never felt that we were, quote 'poor,' you know.  Dempsey Travis has done a wonderful thing when he pointed that out.  In fact, most people in America were poor, until World War II.  And as long as you're growing up and you had what you need and want, you don't experience anything except what it is you're going through.  I mean what are the fundamental gripes.  I don't--the only gripes I remember having was too much homework, not being able at a certain age to stay out as late as I wanted to stay, not be able to go visit in people houses, 'cause I was a girl child.  And we weren't permitted to go sit around in--in people's houses.  Unless, you know, the family really knew each other, and knew each other very well.  Because you--family would always say, "Well we don't know how they run their house," you know.  People could always come to my (with emphasis) house, you know, which has added to my gregariousness, to be sure.  The neighbors intervened in your life without being asked.  And sometimes you would resent that.  And it'd make you rather flip.  But when you were, that news got to your--your parents before you even got back from where you were going, you know.  So I always felt a sense of being protected, certainly loved and given advantage.  I wanted a--a motorcycle.  Of course I never got one.  But I remember my mother coming home and I was taking a bath, she opened the bathroom door and she said, "I bought you something."  And I said, "What!  What!"  She said, "A bike."  I said, "A bike!"  And she said, "Yes.  You're not getting anything faster than a bike."  But of course, that was very exciting, you know, to me.  So I remember having a wonderful time growing up.  I remember when we moved out of our extended family house and got our own apartment.  I remember working.  'Cause I started work when I was very young.  'Because I always would like to have money--always liked my own money.  So it was singularly uneventful (with emphasis) except for being surrounded by the cultural metaphors and paradigms.  And hearing stories about, Jack Johnson [boxer] and what the United States had done to him, and what the United States had done to Paul Robeson.  And of course, hearing stories about the workplace, and things that had happened to black people in the work place.  But I also felt that it was being handled.  I didn't grow up in a family where people felt victimized.  We just were expected to achieve, expected to excel and told outright, as a matter of fact, that you have to be better than anybody else.  You must achieve more.  You must work harder.  But if you run up in some--to something and in something, where you feel you are in jeopardy, quit.  You don't have to take it.  That's what I remember.
Story_ID: 4064
Speaker 1: Just one other question about the clubs.  Is that something--I mean, the--what were the clubs that--you know, the clubs like the 'Unique Voguettes' were--did everyone form their own club, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, there were a lot of clubs.  In fact we had a little publication where we had teen reporters, and--I forgot now who even published it for us--but we had teen reporters.  It was a--you had a life, you know, which was separate and apart from the adult world.  But it was also a way to practice becoming an adult.  So yes, there were lots of clubs.  And they were friendship clubs, you know.  And we had ways to determine who could be in our club and could not.  And I think the most--other than President and all of those things, the most important person was the Sergeant at Arms.  And to keep order in the group.  And we planned parties and we went on trips, you know.  We had--it was to have a good time.  And also I think with the peer group, we established patterns of behavior.  And I think each group did that.  Their own--they set their own--I know we did.  And I know that they--that others did too, because we had connections with these clubs.  Set up our own standards--what we, the Unique Voguettes did, and what the Unique Voguettes did not do.  That kind of thing.  That was the purpose of them.  And there've always been clubs in the society, as sort of a testing and experimental ground for growing up and maturing--very important stage.  It's unfortunate that many of our young people don't have them today.  'Cause you get a chance to practice being grown up.  But yet, you have the caution and the security of the group not to step out too far.
Story_ID: 4065
Speaker 1: Oh I want to ask--you had--you had mentioned about experiencing racism the first time--I don't know if it was the first time.  But it was in college--,
Speaker 2: I think it was the first time.
Speaker 1: --And--.
Speaker 2: It was--well let me put it this way.  It was the first time I recognized it and understood it.  And of course, I didn't call it racism.  What I said--because of--what I said was, "These people are trying to kill me."  That's what I said.  Because I did recognize what was going on as being an assault on my person, on my being.  And of course, now with all this training, I can just say it was an assault on my ego, you see.  Any time you grow up as a central figure in the family--a princess if you will--and then you go to a big university--and I had always been very smart, always at the top of my class, in a relatively small school environment.  And then you go to a big university where your name is not even known.  But worse than that, in the classes when you're attempting to give the answer, and the instructor does not call you, does not even look at you, it reminds you of Ellison--Ralph Ellison, [author of] 'The Invisible Man.'  And so when I came home at the end of that year, I said, "I'm never going--I'm never going to school again.  These people are trying to kill me."  And that's what prompted my mother's response, "Two years of college is enough for any little colored girl."  She was really saying, "There's a real world out here.  You're not the first one this has happened to."  And negroes and black people don't respond in that way.  "You just keep on steppin'."  That's what she was saying to me.  Hmm.  But that was my first recognition that people actually could be trying to kill you, by denying your being.  And obviously if you look at me now, you just know it just made me more determined.  But suppose she had permitted me to stop.  I think it would have be--my life would have been very, very different.  Very different.  And then I had other experiences, you know, where I started to work with people, you know--not on the correct tip, you know, so I would just quit.  'Cause I had given permission--"You don't have to take that."  If I could--when I speak up for myself--if I didn't get through that, you know, then I would just quit.  But I never really resigned or quit.  I would always have something come up (laughs), that would prompt my leaving.  Because I was also taught, "Never close the door, you may have to go back."  So I learned a lot of little lessons.
Story_ID: 4066
Speaker 1: You know--so when you--in Roosevelt [University, Chicago, Illinois] you majored in what?
Speaker 2: Sociology, Psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: I went to the University of Chicago after I had worked for the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] for some four years.
Speaker 1: Okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And what made you decide to go to, you know, University of Chicago then?
Speaker 2: Because it was here.  It was in town.  Had a wonderful reputation as a university.  And it had a School of Community Organization.  It was the first one and I was in that first class, I think--yes, I was in the first class.  Because in working as a caseworker and then as a group worker, it became very clear to me that that was not the only way, and probably not the best way to make change.  Not only in people's lives as individuals or groups but in the society itself.  I began to realize--and this was when the movement--it was just coming up--that in America we're generally socialized or acculturated to believe that if we do not succeed that there's something wrong with us as individuals.  And I think I began to understand in a very clear way that there were other things in the community itself.  And I'll say that in the society itself--in its definitions, in--in its structure and its system, if you will, that really insist that there be people who don't do well, in order for those who do well to continue to do so.  And the displacement on the individual was not valid.  And that if we wanted to really effect change, we needed to begin to work on systems.  And that's what led me to the University of Chicago.  'Cause it was here and had this curriculum.
Story_ID: 4067
Speaker 1: Were there things that you--you know, while you were working at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association]--in terms of trying to help from a--you know, a social work standpoint from that point, that wanted you to go into this program at the U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois]?  You felt that you could learn something to help build an inst- institutions.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--I didn't.  You see, I maintain with any school, that if you don't go there knowing something, you won't learn anything.  What I was interested in is how does the community impact on the lives of the individuals and the groups within the context of the total society--how to effect change?  And I saw myself as a change agent.  Not to help people, but to enable (with emphasis) people to come to a sense of their own possibilities.  And how really to manipulate the environment.  How to keep on steppin', despite what, and to achieve goals and objectives.  That's what was interesting to me.  And to understand the system itself and to effect change.  Through what we call in the field "Conscious intervention strategies."  And it's a people business.  And that's what I'm in now--I'm still in the people business, using the arts as a conscious intervention strategy.
Story_ID: 4068
Speaker 1: Now you said that you got into theater really sort of by, you know, happen- I mean happenstance--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --You know, you have these inclinations, but you got it by happenstance.  But this has really been your life.  And, I would like you to talk about the early, you know, years of ETA [Creative Arts Foundation, Inc.].  You did a lit--I think you did a little bit of it--,
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --the early years ETA and what that whole experience was?  If you could just share, you know, some--some of your memories, of things.  And, you know--what was happening in the arts--you know, in the arts community, period--in the black arts?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  Well, we know that there've been theater companies since 1895, and in Chicago [Illinois] since 1905.  The company that I was in called 'Drama Incorporated' at the same time and its predecessor was 'Skyloft Players,' out of which a number of significant artists came.  One Lynn Hamilton is still doing films and television for instance.  There are the Richard Bees (ph.} and they continue to this very day, operating out of St. Thaddeus Church, I think it is.  There was the [St. Thaddeus] Center Aisle Players, out of which Micki Grant--'Don't Bother Me, I Can't Cope'--emerged.  Then, during the time I entered, these companies used to have a Sunday soirée once a year where the different groups came and did primarily one act plays.  So there's always been a theater community.  What has not happened, or had not happened until we came along--and some of the companies today which are truly institutionalized, was the impetus, particularly for the individuals in this group.  These groups were to go to Hollywood [California] or to integrate Broadway [theater district in New York].  In fact, when you read the history of black theater not just in Chicago but across the nation, that has been a recurring pattern.  Although the people in these companies have always said, "We need to have a place."  But you can't establish a place if the individuals in there are trying to go somewhere else to establish a place.  So that's been the history.  I think when I mentioned Miss [Lillian] Tompkins saying, "We gotta have a place," I've never really seriously wanted to be anywhere, but Chicago.  It goes back to an earlier statement I made.  How is Chicago?  I love Chicago.  There's no city like it in the world.  And I've been to a great number of them.  But I've never wanted to go any place else.  Then, when I started traveling to Africa and saw myself in terms of that cultural--that identity question, you see.  When I became very active in the Civil Rights Movement, building on that continuum of consciousness which had already--always had already been in my family.  Then as we worked within a group we called the 'Catalysts'--which was exactly that--a group of us who were university trained.  And we said, "We cannot be a buffer."  That we need to use our skills and our talents for the liberation of our people in our community, i.e--e.g. 'Spook That Sat By the Door.'  [Samuel] Sam Greenlee, right?  You know, all these things coming along.  W. E. B. [William Edward Burghardt] DuBois was one of the, you know, the cultural icons, Alain Locke, Hoyt W. Fuller, Addison Gayle [Jr.], [Lawrence] Larry Neal, Maulana [Karenga], Amiri Baraka.  So this consciousness in terms of, quote, the black protest movement was rising.  And the artists--those who defined themselves as artists--and they weren't all performing artists, or visual artists, began to understand that this cultural paradigm is what must be lifted.  Because certainly if one does not have a sense of one's own identity--one's own worldview, as having value, as one--one's right (with emphasis) to advance one's own self interest.  Then certainly we will never succeed economically, politically, socially, or any other kind of way.
Story_ID: 4069
Speaker 1: So it was a conscious decision within this group called the 'Catalysts,' that we had to involve ourselves--create institutions for cultural outcomes.  We had to create educational institutions, Haki Madhubuti certainly being a prime example, with Safisha [Madhubuti] and [D.] Soyini [Madison] and that bunch.  That we had to align ourselves professionally.  Out of that came the National Association of Black Social Workers, the National Association of Black Psychologists, the National Association of Black Lawyers, all of these things that we now identify as core groups for mutual support, et cetera, came out of those days.  And it's been very, very important and very significant.  It's made a major impact not only on lives of African American people.  But it's made irreversible changes in this nation.  Our honorable Mayor certainly was a part of that movement.  The Harold Washington, Mayor [of Chicago, Illinois] I'm talking about.  So, within that context, you see, it's perfectly logical--plus people like myself, Useni Eugene Perkins, you know, took on this cultural work.  And he was then with me from the very beginning in this work.  [Okoro] Harold Johnson, [Archibald] Archie B. Westin, Attorney at Law, now retired, and Al Johnson, who was then with Sears [Roebuck and Company], and later established the [Chicago] Shoreland News--and the paper still exists, although he is now deceased, we were the original incorporators.  And come--those four coming out to create what was then called Ebony Talent [Agency].  Also were meeting simultaneously around these same issues with Val Gray Ward, Vince Cullers.  And during that same time, he established Vince Cullers Advertising [Agency], among the first.  You know, so the dialogue and then the formation of these entities has always been going on, and is built on the continuum of our past.  There's nothing new about it, except the form.  When you think, ETA [Creative Arts Foundation, Inc.] is in it's twenty-ninth year.  [Jacqueline] Jackie Taylor, The Black Ensemble, I think it's in its twenty-six or twenty-seventh year.  Muntu Dance Theater, is twenty-seven.  So all of these--Jazz Unites [Inc.] is in that same age group.  So here we are.  Institutionalizing one essential fundamental thing.  That our lineage, our worldview, our history is based on tradition from an ancient, ancient time.  Just parenthetically as we talk about this so-called millennium.  I think it's important for us to know we're in the year 6240, okay?  And that--what--the work that we do really has to fortify our people to realize more fully all of their capacities and possibilities.  While at the same time elevating what we do for the world.  Because we are the innovators of culture.  That's where the Jesus come from.  The African American innovative arts have come from Africa, and African American people.  And so it's time that we benefit from that which we do.
Story_ID: 4070
Speaker 1: Did it differ at all with, you know, New York or [Washington] D.C., or--I mean or was there a sharing at that time?  Or, you know, was there--.
Speaker 2: There--I think the Black Arts Movement, the world of it has always been connected.  But Chicago [Illinois] is very, very atypical.  See we had to think about New York as the Great White Way--Broadway [theater district].  Most people in New York who are in this business, they're trying to get on that stage, okay.  People in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], similar--that's the film industry.  That's they're trying to get on that stage.  In Chicago because--going back to my earlier description of how I grew up, I grew up in the black community (with emphasis), okay.  Even though during what--the '60s [1960s]--the papers used to say that Chicago was the most segregated town in the--city in the North.  Let's just say that may have been true, but it has its positives.  And more positives in my judgment than negative.  Because what it meant--and within the context of understanding, that Chicago is a city of neighborhoods.  It's a city of cultural groupings.  No other city that I know of is developed--has developed in that particular kind of way.  It's also a city where people believe in political power.  They believe in organizing.  They believe in getting what is due their particular group.  This does not exist in any other city.  So Chicago is not only extremely atypical.  But it also has been very innovative in practically every sphere of life.  And there's honesty here that you don't find in other cities.  Early on we had a group called the Union of Black Artists.  And then we had the African American Arts Alliance, which still exists to this day.  When FESTAC [World Black and African Festival of Arts and Culture, 1977, Lagos, Nigeria] was done--this big brouhaha, wonderful, you know, 17,000 artists from around the world--we in the Midwest, because we had a Midwest African American Theater Alliance--were most prepared to bring the artists together to make a selection of artists for our delegation, and we led the way in terms of the other parts of the United States in the selection process, and all of that.  So we've always been those kinds of people.  Here's the other things that's very important is there's money in Chicago and business in Chicago and there's--Differing from most other cities the artists in Chicago, irrespective of race and all those other things that we like to mention, do sit around the table and discuss the issues.  The League of Chicago Theaters.  Before that it was CAPA [Chicago Association for the Performing Arts].  You know, so it's always been those ways to talk to each other.  And these long standing institutions among us has kept the dialogue open.  It kept us--provided a way for us to be cooperative, rather than competitive.  And some of us when we first went into the [City of Chicago's] Department of Cultural Affairs as sitting on panels, we took the others with us and opened those doors.  Did workshops so that people could develop a way and learn how to do those proposals, that kind of thing.  That's a very, very different environment than you find in most places.
Story_ID: 4071
Speaker 1: So if we look at our current day then--it's like in Boston [Massachusetts] you have--what was her name--you have--and then you have Barbara--,
Speaker 2: Elma, you're talking about Elma Lewis.
Speaker 1: --Elma Lewis from Boston, and there's Woodie--,
Speaker 2: Woodie King [Jr.].
Speaker 1: --King in New York.  But there was also Barbara--,
Speaker 2: Barbara Ann Teer.  She's still there.  She's [the National Black Theatre, New York] thirty years old.  Just saw her last week.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you say there--the theater move--well, I mean the theater movements in the other parts of the country, if you look at them today.  Have they still--do they have as strong an institution as, let's say, ETA [Creative Arts Foundation, Inc.] does now?
Speaker 2: Barbara has this land right at 125th Street.  And she's struggling right now because Chase Manhattan Bank is trying to get her off that corner, very frankly.  Because [Walt] Disney [Company] is there, Time Warner [Inc.], okay and Harlem [New York] as we know is going to be changed--that's prime land, okay.  So she's having a real struggle but her institution continues.  Woodie has never had a place.  He's--most of his work--he does productions, you know, for--at different venues and he also has the National Black Touring Circuit.  And as a director, he goes around directing in various other venues around the country.  And as a producer--I mean most people now know that, [Ntozake] Shange's piece came out of Woodie King,  'for colored girls who have considered suicide, et cetera [/when the rainbow is enuf].'  We are now cooperating on a--on a co-production of 'The Trial of One Short-Sighted Black Woman vs. Mammie Louise and Safreeta Mae,' which premiered through our PDI [Playwrights Discovery/Development Initiative] process here at ETA.  And we've done two runs already in New York.  And we're looking for investors.  That's the kind of collaborations that are going on.  I think the--the [National Black Theater] summit which was convened [at Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire] by August Wilson [playwright] in 1998, has created some other collaborations and possibilities among groups throughout the country.  So it's coming.  And the issue now is not so much how to get where others are, but how to make our institutions financially viable.  So that they can be sustained over time.  And this is a very, very critical issue.  Because most of the [theater] companies are not as old as we are.  Not--most of them are not as old as any of them--us in Chicago [Illinois], with the exception of New Freedom [Theatre] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And they're in an expansion mode--in a building mode.  But at the same time, they're having severe financial difficulties.  Crossroads [Theater] in New Brunswick [New Jersey], the one at--the company that won the Tony [theatrical award].  The first, you know, black regional company to win a Tony [Antoinette Perry Awards] is now having severe financial crises.  So these are--this is the serious issue which faces us.  It's hard to create a model which is as I say embedded in the community.  And most of these cities don't have communities like we have here, which is another difference.  So that they can be financially sustained past grantsmanship--in other words, in short, how can we increase our earned income, become more entrepreneurial and maximize our individual giving?  Which means you've got to have a strong constituency.  Which means you got to have a product which resonates in terms of--you know when you talk about it in this way, I'm talking about marketing.  And as a product that people value and will pay for and will help to sustain the institution over time.  And these of course, are artistic and management issues.  See we're the only company that is not managed by its artistic staff.  This institution is management driven.  And it's fortunate by choice--you know, I mean nobody put me here, I put myself here.  By a person who is also an artist, and a very good one.  And so that's a combination that you don't find in many places.  And I think this combination plus respect, you know, between these entities, you know, for the business part of it, for the development part of it, for the artistic part of it.  And how you get people's butts in these seats is from a team perspective--which is the way we manage this place, has made a tremendous difference.
Story_ID: 4072
Speaker 1: Now let's--going back to, sort of, the whole issues of black theater.  What do you think besides the whole issue of, you know, the economics of things.  Something has happened in, I would say maybe the last fifteen maybe eighteen years where white theaters who used to not necessarily have things that--you know, in their rotation, do have that.  And what impact does that have on the black theater?
Speaker 2: I don't talk about that.  Because it's not about the art.  I mean, I don't--I'm not gonna have a big discussion about that.  It's not had any impact on this operation.  And very little impact on--on the ones that I know about.  And that's practically all of them.  It has really nothing to do with theater.  It has nothing to do with black people.  It has nothing to do with Latinos.  It has nothing to do with Asians.  It has nothing to do with the Na- so-called Native Americans.  What it has to do with is the survival of the eurocentric paradigm.  The demographics tell us that those audiences are flattening.  Those old subscriber audiences are flattening.  There have been--have--there's been difficulty, let me put it that way, in making inroads into the younger population, okay.  So this quest for new audiences has to do with those realities, rather than anything else.  And people artistically in terms of management have a right to do whatever it is they want to do.  I do not go around telling people what they should do in terms of their institution.  Principally because I don't want anybody coming over here telling me and this staff, and this board of directors what we ought to be doing.  We are in the market, okay.  And people make choices within that.  We had just under 100,000 people last year, okay.  That tells us a whole lot doesn't it?  And most importantly, we don't define ourselves in the narrow sense of theater doing plays.  We do the training starting at age six.  We have daytime performances for school-aged children.  Anybody is concerned about the audience of the future.  We know these are the ones who will be supporting this or other institutions as they grow and mature.  It will become part of their lives.  The visual arts gallery, which not only enhances the aesthetics of our facility, but it also makes the art accessible to people who come here for one thing and then can buy work of the visual artists.  So it's all interlaced, if you will.  To create a total experience of resonance.  Or as Haki [Madhubuti] would say, "An experi--an experience which evokes our memory of who we are, who we have been, who we are and who we can be."
Story_ID: 4073
Speaker 1: Now with ETA [Creative Arts Foundation, Inc.], you know since it's past twenty plus years history--,
Speaker 2: Twenty what?
Speaker 1: Twenty plus.
Speaker 2: It's twenty-nine.
Speaker 1: Twenty-nine.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: What--could you share with us some stories, you know, maybe there of, you know, an experience here or someone--you know, some of the people you've touched, or--or a little moment?  I don't care, you know, it doesn't matter--I'd just like--.
Speaker 2: Hmm.
Speaker 1: What--what, if you sort of look over your twenty-nine years, you know let me, let me just say.  What is--what is something that was maybe a funny experience?  Or something that you may have been close to--well, I don't know.  If you could share some memory.
Speaker 2: The very fact that we're in this place, is the most important memory we can have.  When we first acquired this property--and I always like to give Dempsey Travis credit, who has now written some seventeen books.  And who took a workshop with us when [Samuel] Sam Greenlee was teaching.  Because he thought he wanted to be a writer.  And then went right on out and became one.  And published his own books and all such a stuff as that.  And then when we found this property, I kept saying, "We gotta find a place.  We gotta find a place."  So I called Dempsey.  I said, "Dempsey, we're looking for a place and people are bringing you places.  Why don't you find me a place."  And I had sort of schematic--a concept drawing which an architect friend had done.  So I took it to him.  Within two weeks Dempsey said, "I think I found you a place!"  Now when we came in here it was, Oh God!  It was horrendous.  It was--I can't even describe it.  I mean it was dirt on the floor.  It was terrible (with emphasis).  It was past dilapidated, as Vernon likes to describe it--Vernon Jarrett that is.  But at any rate, I went to the bank and I got these people to come and see it.  And began to talk about, "This is going to be here.  That's gonna be there.  And this is going to be so-and-so."  And they would look at me and they said, "Yeah, sure.  Sure. Uh-huh."  And a Mary Houghton at South Shore Bank [Chicago, Illinois] was one of the ones who came.  And she said, "Are you sure?"  And I said, "Oh I am absolutely certain."
Story_ID: 4074
Speaker 1: But I also say it's very good The Creator only lets you know one thing at a time.  Doesn't--he didn't let it come to you all at once.  Because I think if The Creator opened that door and you saw everything, you'd say, "Oh my God!  This will never be achieved."  But it has been achieved.  And people have now told me that they thought I was absolutely crazy.  And I own up to it.  I said, "I probably was and am.  But I'm not certifiable."  And if you see it and you can help others to see it.  And the surprise was that people saw it.  And as we moved through and began the painting.  And then finally got enough money to start the renovation, we now had people who said, "I remember when we sat in that front on those hard wooden chairs and came to know that we can do whatever it is, we want."  That is the most important thing that has come out of this experience.  The second thing that Nancy McKeever, Vice Chair of the Board says--and it's a wonderful Board of Directors.  I'd never do any interview or have anything appear anywhere, without talking about these people.  But Nancy said, "What we have done is integrate the black community."  That's a very profound statement.  Because when you come to ETA [Creative Arts Foundation], all kinds of people are here.  You don't know who's got what, hmm?  People that have been given an opportunity to contribute at whatever level they define for themselves.  We have children who come here and in these twenty-nine years and Runako [Jahi] works with these children.  He was a child himself, a teenager when he came, and has gone through this place as a career ladder.  But now works with these young people [as Artistic Director].  We've never known of any child or teenager who came to ETA who has ever went to jail, who ever dropped out of school, and they still come back with children--with their own children, some of these early ones.  The auxiliary which started because they were the then parents of those children back in 1971, '72 [1972], still exists as a fundraising entity.  It's quite remarkable.  Or in more recent days when Kel Mitchell from  'Who's That?' [sic, 'All That'], or Nickelodeon [cable television] channel and 'Mystery Man,' [ sic, 'Mystery Men'] who's doing extremely well said, "ETA saved my life.  And my mother sent me to ETA 'cause she was afraid that I would get in trouble."  He never did.  And the kid's become a very outstanding performer.  As has Avery Waddell who just did a segment of 'Law' ['Law & Order,' television program].'  Rhona Bennett, I mean we can just name them.  We got so many who have gone to college and universities and graduated, started their own families.  That's the real meaning of this work.  And we raised a whole lot of money because the people had given it to us.  Because they believed in this vision.
Story_ID: 4075
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let me--what--what are your plans--I mean you're in the midst of a capital campaign.  What are--what are your, your dreams and aspirations?  You've brought this organization or, you and the board have brought this organization here for twenty-nine years.  That's a major statement in and of itself.  But what are your hopes and thoughts about the future?
Speaker 2: Well because we, and that means the board of directors and the staff--really concerned in our long range planning and strategic planning, in looking at this as an institution its longevity.  Stability and longevity and ability to financially sustain itself.  I think the artistic product is here.  We've got so many fine artists.  I mean we could never really run out of them.  And we're training new ones all the time.  So looking at the question from the point of view of longevity and the next generation, I mean that's part of our mission.  It's part of our concern.  It's part of our commitment.  Then we establish an endowment, we're the first to do that.  With an initial goal of $1.5 million.  And we're--we announced it in '94 [1994] when we had the Miriam Makeba/Hugh Masekela Concert.  And so we are only $121,000 away from that initial goal.  So money--we have money now that is working for us.  And we're not going to ever touch the principal and we're not gonna take the interest, probably for about ten years.  And we're, what, six years--four or five years into that, if we talk about from the time we made up to where we are now.  So that's all invested.  Then hand in hand with that went the notion of expansion, and we initially began to buy the additional properties around here.  Because we wanted first to preserve our options for expansion--to preserve the integrity of the neighborhood, and at some point be able to add further to the economic benefits that arts and culture bring to our communities.  So that led us to acquisition.  And now that we have it, we obviously began--developed a master plan, which is board-driven for the most part, to say, "What would we do?  What do we want to do?"  So we've had focus groups throughout the constituency.  We've done surveys to find out what interests the constituency has and are moving forward.  We've talked about in our long-range plan and strategic planning retreat for the last four or five years.  And [William E.] Bill Brazley has done the design.  It took us eighteen months to agree on the designing.  We're very, very excited about it.  Because it is afrocentric.  It's never been seen before, not even on the continent, okay.  And that will accelerate our goal to create a cultural district for the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  And when we say that, we're talking about tourism.  Which is an economic engine for these years.  And we know and bel- we believe, and do know that people will come from all over the world to see the architectural design.  Because they're already coming from all over the world to look at the work that we do, particularly with children.  That's been especially intriguing to people from these various countries.  'Cause not many companies do the kind of work and the depth of the work that we do.  So as a result of this exploration what the people have said to us, is they want--They like what we do very much.  They want us to do more of it.
Story_ID: 4076
Speaker 1: So we're talking about, in broad areas, the career paths to the future in the technological area.  So we want a sound stage so we begin to teach our young people as they reach teens particularly, all the technology related to film, radio, video, digital--you know, all this digital stuff that my technical director talks about in a very sophisticated way.  We want to expand dance, like we're doing the Katherine Dunham technique.  We've--from time to time we've done ballet.  We've done tap.  So we can expand in that arena.  We can expand in other technical aspects like we do stage management now.  We can do set design in a more definitive way.  We have some marvelous set designers who are now, you know, young men and women who are coming up.  So we want to do that.  We want to expand on that aspect of this work.  We have talked about it in that way.  And then there are certain amenities that we don't have, like a coatroom--people are very clear, they'd like to have a coatroom.  They'd like to have a utilitarian kitchen so they can use it for their receptions.  And we have maybe 350 groups in any one year who have receptions here following theater parties.  We are going to have a cabaret.  Right now there's no place for the individual artist to hone their skills, and their professional competence--the singers, the comedians, the small bands, the hip-hop artists if you will, the poets.  So that--our enlarged facility--expanded facility will have that opportunity.  And then an amphitheater so in the summer we can have concerts outside.  We'll have another auditorium which we're thinking of using as a transfer house, principally.  Because we have a lot of shows here that can run--here that we're doing now and have done over these twenty-something years, that could run a long time.  But because we have a commitment to new plays and up and coming playwrights, we have put ourselves in a season.  So that the writer, the griot if you will, can be developed.  But we could take some of these shows and let them run until--open end.  They could run.  And we can also do concerts.  Jerry Butler [singer] has been in this theater.  Wouldn't it be wonderful to have X more seats for a Jerry Butler whenever he feels like it and wants to and we decide that he can to come and entertain over several weeks.  Terry Callier who's just come back on the scene, one of my favorites, absolutely.  And some of the bigger acts, you know.  So we can do so many things.  God bless the child who's got his own.  So we're in the process now of talking about our program options, 'cause we've got a laundry list--I mean a long list of what we can do, when, how, how can we phase it in, and equally as important, how are we going to pay for it.  Because expansion sometimes can take you under (with emphasis).  So that's the preparatory stage that we're in now.  We're looking at expanding our arts and education program.  Not only going into the schools, but perhaps doing after school programs.  Because there's a great need for that.  Expanding our cultural arts day camp which we now do during the summer.  So there's no end to what we can do.  And there's no end to the population that needs it to be done.
Story_ID: 4077
Speaker 1: I have--I'm gonna ask you four more questions--.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--and you--I hope you won't say you've already answered this question.  But, after you leave this earth and you--and if you have a chance to look back.  What would you want to see?  Of ETA [Creative Arts Foundation, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Once I leave and I look back?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: What would I like to see?
Speaker 1: See existing?  I mean, or--you know of ETA?  What would you like to see?
Speaker 2: I would like to see it be.  I want it to be (pause) and keep turning out this wonderful, wonderful product.  Do you realize we--we're in the 1999-2000 season.  We've had two productions up--the current one has only been up two weeks.  We have been nominated for a Jeff Citation [Chicago theatrical award] for each of these productions in this season--there have only been three.  We're told that this is unprecedented.  And there's only one other company in this season, I think it's the Circle Theater [Forest Park, Illinois], that is joying--enjoying--and we do enjoy it, this kind of recognition.  In the [newspaper] article that Howard Reich [arts critic for the 'Chicago Tribune'] did on this business about the loop and we obviously don't agree.  But that's not the point.  He referenced us as the "Venerable ETA--ETA Creative Arts Foundation."  I like that.  I want us to take our place as an international model, which we are fast becoming.  As we recognize and have done this work to tell our story, meaning the African--particularly the African American story in the first voice.  We know that this kind of metamorphosis is equally as important and needed in the total diaspora and on the continent.  I just met with two young men from Nigeria just last week and they're struggling with the same question.  "How do we tell our story?", "How do we preserve the history and the lineage and the worldview of a people?"  See, we did not begin with slavery.  We did not begin with colonialism.  And if we don't tell our stories--contemporary stories based on tradition and that continuum--that lineage, then it will be lost.  That is our work to do.  So I want to see people coming from all over to find out what we're doing?  How we're doing it?  And to help us to do it.  A sort of shared international collaboration.  So that we are truly elevated--re-elevated to the world class people we are.  That's what I want.  And people within the context of community financially supporting it as they are now doing.  I want to see the leadership that we have begun to cultivate in what we call the 'up-and-coming'--you know the late-thirties, early-forties take over the succession.  In terms of leadership of this marvelous board of directors and this wonderful staff.  Our staff is really--I'm the oldest thing here.  They're basically early-forties to mid-forties, that's quite young.  And the youngest person on staff is twenty-nine.  And we will be adding to our staff, looking at training them to be leaders.  And for the volunteer, providing an opportunity for them to make decisions, to be corporative-ly responsible.  To make decisions and to see those decisions come to life.  Because there's still--are not enough places where we can exercise our own authority and own our own stuff, and make our own decisions on our own behalf, and in our own best interest.  So we have a pool of young people coming, both volunteer and staff who are going to make that vision manifest.  I know it will happen, because we're working on it right now.
Story_ID: 4078
Speaker 1: Now the next question I have is about Africa.  You've been there--it said in the article, "forty-five times." [WVON-AM radio's newsletter from October, 1998]
Speaker 2: Yeah, a whole bunch.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--I'd like you to talk about--your first visit there and what--what impact it had on you?
Speaker 2: It's not a long answer.  But again it happened--my going to Africa in 1970 was again as a result of an opportunity.  When I left Chicago [Illinois] going to New York for some reason, which I now don't remember, I was told I should get in touch with the Reverend [William] Willie Smith.  And I did.  And we were having lunch.  And he said, "I'm going to Africa in July--" I think it was April then "--would you like to go?"  And I said, "Yeah.  Sure.  Love to go."  So he jumped up and went to the phone and called the American Forum for International Study--whoever he was working with there.  And he came back and he said, "They're holding a spot for you--I'm going."  And he said, "Pearlie Evans from St. Louis [Missouri] is going."  I didn't know Pearlie.  He said, "But you'll like her, you're the same kind of people."  And I said, "Fine."  I said, "How much does it cost?"  He said, "Fifteen hundred dollars."  I said, "Sure."  So I came home, I told my family, "I'm going to Africa in July.  It costs fifteen hundred dollars."  I didn't have fifteen hundred dollars in 1970 to go to no Africa, girl. (laughs) So, everybody looked at me and they said, "Okay.  Okay."  And it just--you know, with that look (rolls her eyes).  So at any rate, I told all of my friends I was going to Africa in July.  But I needed fifteen hundred dollars.  And so two sets--one set of my friends--friends' friends gave a big party at the Sutherland Hotel and people brought money and stuff I might need to take to Africa.  And then a group I was working with in the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] called Women Mobilized for Change, a group of 1,000 women I had organized in support of the Martin Luther King [Jr.] Movement in Chicago.  They had a big party out in--in Wilmette [Illinois]--in Winnetka [Illinois] at Henny's (ph.) house.  So when I left here, I had three thousand dollars.  Ghana--Accra was our first stop.  I couldn't believe it--I couldn't believe it.  When you get out of that plane and everywhere you look you just see black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black, black.  And it was so beautiful.  So lush.  People moving around, doing whatever they do--it's like 47th Street [in Chicago]. (laughs)  So I was on that continent.  And I went all over.  We went to Ghana--went all through Ghana.  We went to Nigeria.  We went to Ivory Coast, I think Sierra Leone.  When I came back here, the question of identity was forever and irrevocably answered.  I have never wondered who am I since I went to Africa.  Never.  I know exactly (with emphasis) who I am.  "Free at last.  Free at last.  Thank God almighty."  Because that's really what it's about.  To know who one is, and then to have a sense of mission which my mother's death gave to me in a most profound way.  I'd always been on a path, (unclear) you know about--but when your mother dies and you realize that you are the head of the family.  And you don't have that--that backing, you know.  It's nothing like a mother.  It puts a pers- gives you a perspective that you better get on doing--to doing that which you think you are here to do.  To clarify what that is.  And I mentioned earlier as I was driving to the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] saying to myself, "We gotta find a place.  We gotta have a place."  And I realized that Lillian Tompkins had said that so many years before.  And here I was an organizer with consummate skill.  And I'd just said to my--and then my mother having--yeah, I think recently died.  'Cause it was all in my head together.  I said, "Well, I guess that's what I'm supposed to be doing."  Just like that.  And that's what I've been doing ever since.  Organizing people, (laughs) and institutionalizing this cultural paradigm, going all over talking about that.  That's basically all I really talk about--it's all related in my, in my head.  It's association.  And I'm knowing that until we can get that straight, then we will not make decisions in our own self-interest.  And that's what all people do.  Just in closing--whether you're closing or not, we know that culture is that vehicle which drives all people.  It is the summation of a people's inclinations, the traditions, their norms, their values, lifestyle.  It is the culture which defines us and tells us what we are--are to do.  What we ought to do, what we ought not to do.  How to educate our children.  How to sanction behavior positively or negatively.  And it tells us that product which we have, which the rest of the world needs.  And we know one thing.  It is art as an expression of culture, particularly our music.  But in every art form, the innovations on the form have come from the African people, and particularly the African American.  It is an irony of history that those of us who were taken away and brought to this place are the richest slaves in the world.  We can travel.  We can go to school, if we will.  We can achieve, if we will.  And we have the key to liberate our people across the globe. That's what I think.
