Story_ID: 653864
Speaker 1: I'm [HistoryMaker] Belva Davis, and Mr. Brown would you state your name and--
Speaker 2: Willie Lewis Brown, Jr. [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], born in Mineola, Texas, March 20th, 1934.  I'm being interviewed on the fourteenth day of December, 2015 [December 14, 2015] in San Francisco, California on Mission Street.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a lawyer by education and trade and I do a little bit of outside work as a semi-journalist, writing for the San Francisco Chronicle and broadcasting for Channel 5 in San Francisco [KPIX-TV], as well as KCBS Radio; and I do a little bit of work with MSNBC nationally, basically the Chris Matthews show, 'Hardball' ['Hardball with Chris Matthews'].
Story_ID: 653865
Speaker 1: Well, even with your busy schedule, I know there's another side to your life, and that is that you have a great interest in how you dress your body, so therefore what are your favorite colors?
Speaker 2: I really don't have any favorite colors.  I wander through the world of fashion through the world of color, based upon the season, my own attitude and what I've observed other people wearing and how it reflects itself on people with my skin tones.
Speaker 1: Is there a favorite phrase or saying that resonates with you that is a favorite with you?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I have been in the business of public policy making for so many years that required a considerable amount of personal expressions, oral expressions and comments.  If there was any phrase that I probably have repeated more often than any other, it would be: awesome.
Story_ID: 653866
Speaker 1: How far back can you remember your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Only back to my grandmother.  My grandmother was named Anna Lee Collins [Anna Lee Nolan Collins] and she was part Indian [Native American].  I think that the family originated somewhere in Oklahoma, but I never frankly went beyond Anna Lee Collins.  I knew absolutely nothing, and to this day, on, on the family side of Brown.  That name was just a name given because of the father and I know nothing about him or his family.
Speaker 1: Well I was gonna, the next question was to ask you about your parents, about your mother [Minnie Collins Boyd] and your father [Willie L. Brown, Sr.].  I know that your mother was extremely dear to you.
Speaker 2: My mother was a female in a family that Anna Lee Collins produced that had four males, and one female, and my mother was the youngest of the five children that my grandmother gave birth to.  And my mother had the same number of children.  I had three sisters and one brother.  I am number four in the chain.  My brother James [James Walton] is number five.  We were from a family where there were three different parents, three different fathers, not three different parents, but three different fathers.  My oldest sister, Baby Dalle [Baby Dalle Tuck Hancock] was a Tuck, Gwendolyn [Gwendolyn Brown Hill] and Lovia C. [Lovia Brown Boyd] were both Browns and my youngest brother James, Walton.
Speaker 1: What can you tell us about your father?  When did you get to meet him, get to know him?
Speaker 2: My father was a Pullman porter.  He worked on the T and P line [Texas and Pacific Railway] in the category of a Pullman porter waiter on the train and that's all frankly, he ever really did, was either be a waiter in a, a facility that white people occupied, or he was working on the train.  I cannot recall ever sleeping overnight in the same building with my father.  That's how distant he was from participating in raising the family.  The family was--my sisters and brothers were all raised by the grandmother because the mother went off to another city to work.  She'd come home only on weekends.  And the family was fairly close, under the directions and the guidance of Anna Lee Collins and with the great assistance of three of her four sons.  One of her sons died early on, the other three lasted a long time, and two of them worked in the whirl of Second World War [World War II, WWII] industry and the third one was basically a gambler.  And Anna Lee Collins, my grandmother, ran a honky tonk, or a nightclub in Mineola [Texas].  It was called a honky tonk in those days and she also handled the bootlegging obligations for that little city, and she had a relationship with the hired sheriff that allowed her also to stash and sell the things that were rationed during the Second World War, like washing powder products or sugar or things of that nature.  And so my grandmother was quite an entrepreneur.  I don't ever remember her having a job.  I remember my mother having a job all of her life.
Story_ID: 653867
Speaker 1: What did your mother do?
Speaker 2: My mother was a domestic.  She lived in what's called service in Dallas, Texas, and that was that she lived up over the garage in a small apartment where servants lived and where she worked for people who were well to do, very well to do, in Dallas, and she was at some point a cook, a housekeeper and semi-nanny, but not really a nanny.
Speaker 1: I remember that you really made quite a fuss over your mother as you grew into the Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] you are today.  So when you talk about the family and the family ties, how did you become so close to your mother?
Speaker 2: My relationship with my mother stems from my grandmother's absence of a relationship.  My grandmother was pretty hard on me, and in retrospect obviously she had a profound influence on all of my personal habits.  My mother on the other hand was really upbeat at all times was pretty direct and wanted to be treated not as an adult so to speak, i.e. a distant adult, but she insisted that we not call her mother, that we really called her by her name Minnie [Minnie Collins Boyd], and she called us by our name, and we called Anna Lee Collins [Anna Lee Nolan Collins], Madear [ph.], or as it's properly done, mother dear, but Madear, but Minnie was my mother and my mother was ultimately more like a friend at the outset, an older friend, nevertheless, but a friend.  In that regard I really aspired to always seek her blessings 'cause my grandmother provided zero blessings, period.  My grandmother was pretty stern and pretty strict, and pretty forceful and pretty direct, and as I said, in retrospect, it was contributed to the survivability skills that all of my brothers and sisters and I acquired during the time that we were raised with the grandmother.  But the mother was the entertaining component and I edged toward my mother and her number two brother, Itsie [Itsie Collins].  I was--wanted to be more like the two of them.
Speaker 1: How did you become so comfortable with your own background?  There are many people who would find a PR [public relations] company as they would grow in political life, to shape and mold that heritage in a different way.  You just threw it in people's face.
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know whether or not you'd call it throwing it in people's face, but it's what it is.  There's no reason to disguise it and the fact that I at ten years of age was already working and already trying to buy my own bicycle, trying to buy my own clothing, that was all part of what the grandmother insisted you needed to do.  You needed to earn your keep, period.  And there was nothing wrong with that.  In the little town that we lived in, everybody had to do something similar, every black person, 'cause it was a town in which black people lived on one side of the tracks and white people lived on the other side of the tracks and black people went to schools and churches and activities that were all for colored people, and white people did the same thing for white people and the downtown was the meeting and the neutral zone where you could not and did not impose upon white people.  It was just a normal conduct that kept you for survival. Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], between Mineola [Texas] and Dallas for an example, where my mother went to work, there was a town called Grand Saline [Texas] where on the train you had to pull the shades down because Grand Saline didn't want to see any black people in their town and so in living in Texas and in living in that part of the world, you, you, didn't spend any time worrying about what other people thought of you.  All of what you were about were similar to what all your neighbors and friends were about; whether it was Mineola or whether it was Dallas, it was all literally the same.  So when you ask me how did, how is it that I put it out there and lay it out there, I just eliminated any need for any mystery.
Story_ID: 653868
Speaker 1: We almost had to curtsy for your mother [Minnie Collins Boyd] when she came here.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My mother (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You presented her that way.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you, my mother was an incredible woman.  My mother, in spite of the fact that she was black, in spite of the fact that she only had about a tenth grade education, because in Mineola [Texas], the high school [Mineola Colored High School] didn't come into existence for twelve grades until after like 1947 or '48 [1948].  Before that, it was the tenth grade and you were gone, and that was it.  You had to go to another town to go to eleven and twelve.  And my mother wanted all of us to be sure to graduate from high school and so my oldest sister [Baby Dalle Tuck Hancock] had to go away.  My second sister [Gwendolyn Brown Hill] had to go away from Mineola in order to be able to get out of high school.  My mother, however, was extremely well read, well informed, highly opinionated, but never in an accusatory manner, never in any way depreciating anybody else.  She was so incredibly gifted at communicating that you just had to know that this was somebody so special that everybody ought to see her in the same light that I saw her in, and that's what I tried to do, period.  I got to tell you it, as part of, as I moved along in the world, I knew my mother had never traveled, but I knew she read about every place, and so my goal was almost every year to find a way to get her to be able to go someplace where she had never been, whether it was New York [New York] or whether it was Europe, and sometimes I would book an arrangement to meet her there because she was so reluctant to spend money, even money that was my money, she wouldn't take it unless I was part of it, so I literally had to misrepresent to her that I'd meet her in Paris [France] or that I'd meet her in Spain or I'd meet her in Italy, I'd meet her someplace, but I always have another one of those little old ladies that would go with them and Miss Mitchell [ph.] who was a school teacher, risen up to be school teacher and her son was my buddy.  They didn't live in Mineola, they lived in Dallas [Texas] and Miss Mitchell loved to travel, and Miss Mitchell loved the directness of my mother with other people and the directness of my mother with other people caused people to react incredibly positively to my mother, and my mother scared white people, because of her skillset.  My grandmother [Anna Lee Nolan Collins] scared white people because they thought she was crazy and that she might do anything to them, period.  And she talked to them badly, she insulted them, she never got out of her mode of being a, a dangerous, crazy black person.  And developed a lot of respect out of that.  My grandmother was just that way.  Her daughter on the other hand, was the opposite of her, but with an equal amount of effect, and my mother evidenced that, and so when you ask the question how did I so appropriately wanted to have other people see my mother in the right light, that's why I insisted because I knew my mother could handle things.  My mother was a funny woman though.  She was really funny.  She could put you down without being, evidencing any vindictiveness.  For an example, she was incredibly sensitive to weight, to people who consumed too much and she was always advocating for people who were a little overweight, "You need a pushback diet."  What the hell is a pushback diet?  You need to push away from that table (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 653869
Speaker 1: We're finding out so much about Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] by hearing about your mother [Minnie Collins Boyd].  Your mother in- indeed deserved all the credit that you gave (laughter).  Tell me about your dad though.  Did you ever have an opportunity to get to know him before you left Texas?
Speaker 2: No.  I didn't know my father at all.  My father was obviously dismissed by my mother at some point, I think.  She never discussed it with me other than, and with the children, other than the fact that she wanted us to know that he was our father and that we owed him a great degree of respect.  And we extended that to him appropriately, but there was no interaction.  He didn't go to the church that we went to, he didn't show up for birthdays or holidays.  He had no relationship, and his family lived on another street quite a distance from where we lived and there was no interaction with that family, except with my sister, Lovia C. [Lovia Brown Boyd].  My sister Lovia C. had a relationship with my father and she had a relationship with my father's family 'til her death, and that rela- and 'til many of their deaths, and that relationship was shared with us.  She'd insist upon things that that other family, the Brown clan, were doing and she was very much a part of what they were doing without leaving the nest egg of my mother.  But my father otherwise, I did not know him.  When I got to California and after becoming somewhat involved in statewide activities, if I had an occasion to be in Los Angeles [California], or he found out I was going to be in Los Angeles, my father was equally as aggressive as my mother.  He would call up the people, in this case [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters would have me down there for something, he'd call up Maxine Waters' office and inform them that he's Willie Brown's father, he's Willie Brown, Sr. [Willie L. Brown, Sr.] and that he anticipate being invited and coming, so he could see his son.  And he would be there before I would arrive and he would be already seated at the head table.  Sometimes on the podium, when the head tables in those days were on the podium.  And he was kind of a character as well.  He was fairly friendly with my uncles.  They knew him reasonably well because I think they kind of ran around together in Mineola [Texas] and they were all friends in Mineola.  But he moved to California ahead of me.  He moved to Los Angeles and I moved to San Francisco [California]--
Speaker 1: How old were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) with my Uncle Itsie [Itsie Collins].
Story_ID: 653870
Speaker 1: How old were you when you, when you discovered the opportunity to move west, to leave Mineola [Texas]?  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't discover the opportunity.  I went to, I graduated from high school [Addie E. McFarland High School, Mineola, Texas] in 1951, May of 1951, third week in May.  And in those days if you were a good student you invariably got recruited with a scholarship to one of the historical black colleges [HBCUs].  I got recruited for Prairie View A and M, Agricultural and Mechanical [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University] in Hempstead, Texas [sic. Prairie View, Texas].  All of my sisters [Baby Dalle Tuck Hancock, Gwendolyn Brown Hill and Lovia Brown Boyd] had gone to Texas College, the Methodist school in Tyler, Texas, and they'd gone to become teachers.  My, my mother [Minnie Collins Boyd] did not want me to go to Tyler because too many of the family members had already been there.  Texas College, it might not be the proper place for what she saw as my skillset.  I can't understand to this day why she thought Prairie View A and M would be a better choice.  But I ended up at Prairie View A and M about a week or ten days after I graduated from high school.  Your scholarship in those days were, was one where you had to produce, you had to work.  You had to farm and help raise the food that was put on the table for the students and you, some relationship, it wasn't just academic, but you really did have to work and produce and so I went for the summer harvest and I'm at Prairie View A and M and the first few days there it was clear that those who had football scholarships and basketball scholarships were in the same category as those of us who had academic scholarships, and we were all seated at the same tables where they'd serve the food, and the food was served family style, and, and in the bowl, the bowls in which the food was in was passed around.  Well, I looked around the cafeteria and it appears as if there was a nerd at every table where there were five or six football players or basketball players or athletes, and invariably the nerds were getting no food, because the, the other guys were passing it among themselves, and the nerds couldn't do very much about it.  Well, I started trying to organize the nerds and, of course, in black schools you don't do that, you know, in those days, you don't.  You do not defy authority, or you do not defy the plans, and I didn't know that you couldn't speak up 'cause my mother's whole direction had been, if you see something you say something about it.  You speak up and you do it with respect and dignity.  So it was not like a protest.  This was just to tell them that it didn't make any sense, put all the nerds at the same table.  Of course, they told me, "You don't be giving us any idea on how we run our school."  And then in the evening when you would be walking back to your dorm, you could not walk on the same sidewalk as the girls.  Aw, that was just prohibited.  You could not, and I thought that was the craziest thing in the world that I had ever heard of.  What do you mean I can't walk on the same sidewalk with the girls?  Well, the school put my clothing in a trunk in a suitcase and put them on a bus and sent me and the clothing home.  I lasted probably under a month at that school with that scholarship, and my mother was devastated, I mean really devastated.  I didn't go back to Mineola 'cause that would have been embarrassing to her.  I came to Dallas [Texas].  I had another uncle in Dallas named Richard [Richard Collins] and he was married to a school teacher named Gladys [Gladys Collins (ph.)], and they lived in South Dallas right across from the high school that was there, and my, my mother had, the family she worked for had a relationship with SMU, Southern Methodist University [Dallas, Texas], and Southern Methodist University wanted to know whether or not I could really read, and, of course I could; and they said, "We got a job at the library that this family can arrange for you to get."
Story_ID: 653871
Speaker 1: Well my mother [Minnie Collins Boyd] was convinced she was not going to have her son just working in some college library, she was gonna have a son go to college.  And so she literally over her normal judgment, yielded and had me worry about saving the money that I worked, that I got at SMU [Southern Methodist University, Dallas, Texas] for that one month at Founders Library [sic. Fondren Library] or so, and I could use that money for train fare to San Francisco [California], because she had finally decided my uncle who had been trying to get me into San Francisco for four or five years, he wanted me to go to high school in, in California, or in here, but my mother would have nothing of it because my uncle had no job, my uncle was a gambler, that was what he did for a living, and she didn't like that family structure in this place so far away from her.  But once I got bounced out of Prairie View [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas] and she figured that it would be better if I went with Itsie [Itsie Collins] and I convinced her I think, that my math skills would best be honed at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California], and that I'd come back a professor of mathematics when I graduated from Stanford, and so agreed and we could go to Ca- we could go to California.  Got on a train, she picks everything up, I got wonderful box of fried chicken, so I'd be able to eat all the way here if I chose to do so, and I got to San Francisco on, on the train and my uncle picked me up in Oakland [California].  The train came in Oakland.  It didn't come in to San Francisco and he brought me across the bridge [San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge].  Well I have no clue about the bridge, and, and as I saw the lights on the bridge, and looked into what was San Francisco, all the streets looked like they were bridges because they were uphill, downhill, and their lights were similar to what was on the, on the bay bridge.  I got to San Francisco though, 1028 Oak Street is where my uncle lived.  That's near Divisadero [Street] and he had a room for me and he had a wife named Ruby [Ruby Collins (ph.)], and, and, and I moved in with him and the first thing he said to me was there was nothing else he could do for me, except get me here and get me a room and put money on the counter every day and that I was to go for myself in a different direction from 1028 Oak Street, but try to figure out how to get back for dinner.  Just learn the city, and that's what I did for literally the first several days of being here.  I went in a different direction every day and I ended up figuring out how to go down to Stanford and apply for school, and I did.  And, of course, I didn't get into Stanford, I didn't have the grades, didn't have the background.  But I got really lucky because the guy that was the admissions officer for late admissions was a guy named Duncan Gillies, Dr. Duncan Gillies.  He was a full time professor at San Francisco State College [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] on Buchanan [Street] and Haight [Street], not too far from 1028 Oak Street, and when he looked at my previous history and my grades from the school in Mineola [Addie E. McFarland High School, Mineola, Texas], and my inability to navigate the admission process at Stanford, he concluded that the best thing he could do for me was to get me into San Francisco State College.  He said they needed students and he would sponsor me.  And that's how I got in San Francisco State College.  And I almost flunked out the first several weeks because I didn't, I didn't speak the same language, I didn't have the same history, the same background, but by the, I don't know, eighth or ninth week, I was doing work that would allow me to stay in that school.  And by the time the year ended I was doing really good work.  And all of that was because of the transition from Prairie View A and M on scholarship to Founders Library at SMU to the train ride to San Francisco, into my uncle giving me the responsibility to figure out how I was to navigate for the college opportunity and the work opportunity in California.
Story_ID: 653872
Speaker 1: So how did you go about connecting yourself to your new home, to California, to San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Well, I made a deal with my mother [Minnie Collins Boyd] that the first thing I would do is go to church.  I would literally take out membership in a church.  My mother was over religious.  She did everything.  She sang in the choir and she did all the things.  And she requ- my grandmother [Anna Lee Nolan Collins] required us to do something similar.  Although my grandmother never went to church, we had to go to Sunday school and church in Mineola [Texas] and I didn't like church.  My mother obviously had been raised by her mother, a church woman, and my mother was a big time church lady, and she said, "The one thing you absolutely have to do, in spite of Itsie [Itsie Collins], I know he doesn't go to church," et cetera.  "You go to find a church."  And then she gave me some names of some relatives of ours that I didn't know, the Pipers [ph.], that I didn't know.  And it turned out the Pipers lived on the corner of Sutter [Street] and Steiner [Street], lived on Steiner right at the corner of Sutter.  And right around, right around from there, Post Street, Post and Steiner, was Jones Methodist Church [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California], not knowing that Jones Methodist was not Jones Colored Methodist, which is C.M.E. church [Christian Methodist Episcopal] that I was in.  I got here, I went to visit the Pipers and they were in First Friendship Baptist Church [First Friendship Institutional Baptist Church, San Francisco, California] or some other place, just a block up, but I went around to the Methodist church.  My mother was a Baptist, but my grandmother had raised me a Methodist.  So I went around the corner to the Methodist church.  First, literally, the first week here and I took out membership, and I joined the Methodist church and let my mother know right away that I had joined the Methodist church so I'd have her tacit approval of my conduct and my uncle didn't care.  Well, in the process, the Pipers, friends of my mothers, and ultimately distant cousins in some way, and Jones Methodist turned out to be the first two anchor places for me to meet people.  And the streets were friendly.  The streets were extremely friendly.  Nobody asked you any questions about how long you been here, who you were or anything.  You could talk to people and instantly San Francisco engulfed me.  At that church, it was a pastor named Boswell [Hamilton T. Boswell] who was the pastor of that church and there was a person there named Joe Kennedy [Joseph Kennedy] who was a lawyer in that church.  And there was a woman named Willie Hewitt [ph.], who ultimately became Willie Kennedy, great looking black woman with an incredible voice and they had a, a acting group.  They had a theatrical group.  They had other kinds of things that you could hook up with the first day you arrive in church.  I joined church and immediately hooked up with a series of things that were connected, including, inci- inci- interestingly enough, the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Overnight, literally I transitioned from being a Mineola boy into a San Francisco lad.  And it was fun.
Story_ID: 653873
Speaker 1: So Fillmore Street was the Broadway for black people coming from the South; and you're just, your church [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California] is just a block away from the main drag so to speak, so talk a bit more about what San Francisco [California] was like, the people, the neighborhood, and life style.
Speaker 2: I thought San Francisco was heaven.  It was just nothing that a kid from Mineola, Texas, had it to compare to.  It clearly was superior to anything that I'd been exposed to for the time period I spent in Dallas [Texas].  And I spent some time in Dallas on and off because my mother [Minnie Collins Boyd] and my uncle [Richard Collins] and his wife [Gladys Collins (ph.)] were there and I could come to Dallas and my sister was in high school, one of my sisters was in high school in Dallas, so I got a little bit of flavor of Dallas.  But nothing compared to Mineola.  Dallas was not friendly as Mineola is, as San Francisco had proven to be, and Dallas was clearly, again, a separate facility for black people and white people.  There was a clear demarcation line and Dallas was so big that you had different kind of black people in all parts of Dallas.  They too had their separatist kind of operation.  He got to San Francisco and there was something called Fillmore Street.  And Fillmore Street in those days, only for black people, went from Bush Street over all the way to Haight [Street].  And it was Fillmore Street, but the core of Fillmore Street was from Bush Street to Fulton [Street].  There was a, a Manor Plaza Hotel [San Francisco, California] on, on Fulton, on Fillmore near Fulton and there was a Booker T. Washington Hotel [San Francisco, California] and, so you, all black businesses and black places.  And there was one store after another that served black people, that was run by black people.  Even the banks and their operations that were on Fillmore Street were, had black managers and black people out front.  And then there was a component of Fillmore Street that had white people coming to Fillmore Street.  Onerados Fish Market [ph.] was on Fillmore Street, and that was where everybody, white people and black people and everybody else bought their fish.  There was no other place really to get the great fresh fish and things of that nature.  And there was some white businesses.  There was a shoe store, Florsheim's shoe store [Florsheim Shoe Company; Florsheim Shoes, Inc.], Kaufmans owned it, Jack Kaufman [ph.] owned it, and then, of course, the black businesses were the bars, and the restaurants and the nightclubs.  There was even movies on Fillmore Street, movie houses on Fillmore Street.  There was the Temple [Temple Theatre, San Francisco, California] that showed the second run of the movie operations.  They had been downtown and other parts of the city, Temple would get them as second run and you pay almost nothing to go see the movies, and then the Temple operator--and then there was there was an Ellis Theatre [San Francisco, California] and then there was the Uptown Theatre [San Francisco, California].  I'm telling you Fillmore Street was like where you, you didn't need to go downtown for anything, period.  And you didn't go downtown.  You really lived in your world, you lived in every aspect of the black world and it was a center of black life in, in San Francisco.  People from Hunters Point came and that was the other black community in San Francisco was Bayview and Hunters Point.  They came to Uptown [San Francisco, California] which was the black part of the city, and in those days Geary Street ran without an underpass.  Somewhere these white people in this town decided they didn't want white people being, stopping off in black towns so to speak, Fillmore Street, so they cut a hole under Fillmore Street and you could leave, I don't know, you leave about Van Ness Avenue and you didn't come up for air 'til you got pass Divisadero [Street], and that's how, and slowly but surely, when the redevelopment process started and all that business, that changed dramatically because the people who owned homes, black people who owned homes in the Fillmore [Fillmore District, San Francisco, California] got bought out by the redevelopment agency, Justin Herman, and Justin Herman was determined to literally wipe out the so called black ghetto, and the black ghetto had, I think, prospered as black people transitioned into what had been J-Town [Japantown, San Francisco, California].  It had been where Japanese had lived, but Japanese had been taken away to the intern camps, and in the process, in the process, the houses had been ultimately bought by black people and the public housing in the, in the Fillmore was a part of where I lived the second tenure of my being in San Francisco.
Story_ID: 653874
Speaker 1: My uncle Itsie [Brown's maternal uncle, Itsie Collins] provided me with the first year of my living; and the second year of my living, my uncle Son [Son Collins], who lived in the public housing projects, and he actually had a job.  He worked, he retired from the Hunters Point Naval Shipyard [San Francisco Naval Shipyard, San Francisco, California], and I lived in 2547 Sutter [Street], Apartment 326, Westside Courts [San Francisco, California], and that's where I lived for a period of time until I was able to really start earning enough money to move into the college dormitory.  You understand though that at this stage of my life today I have never ever received a nickel from home.  The only assistance I ever got from any family of mine for my college purposes was my uncle Itsie and my uncle Son, giving me the wherewithal to get into California to get started.  But I immediately went to work.  I was a farm worker here.  I used to go first because that was my skill set, and I used to go down in the Mission [Mission District, San Francisco, California] where the trucks would come, four or five o'clock in the morning and pick you up and take you down to the Central Valley [California] to harvest onions and things of that nature.  And I went on those trucks and you got paid in cash at the end of every day and you paid to get back, and that was my first work experience.  Well, I knew instantly that I was not going to be a farm worker in California like I was a farm worker in Texas.  I was not going be a farm worker in California, and I start looking around.  My Uncle Itsie got me to be a counter person at one of his gambling joints on Post [Street] near Webster [Street].  Unemployed Janitors' Association [ph.] was the name of the building and then the business, and in the back they played cards and gambled, and I was simply to alert them whenever there was either a stranger or policemen.  And I would do that and I got paid to do that.  I also shined shoes as part of another arrangement that I had to make enough money so that I would not need any great assistance, my whole role in life though since I was ten.  You had to work and be self-sustaining and self-sufficient and that carried over into my pursuit of my college career and my law school career by the way.  School was good in that you had all these veterans who were on G.I. Bill [Servicemen's Readjustment Act of 1944] going to school.  They'd come and they'd go to school and they had a package of benefits that included if they enrolled in a class, they got the books and whatever support things they needed as part of their package.  Well many of them were only there to get the monthly stipend that came with enrolling in school, and they were eager not to be burdened with the packages and so I became a place you could buy used books that had never been used.  And I got a fee for that.  And so it was fun frankly, managing all these things and doing these things, not unlike what my [maternal] grandmother [Anna Lee Nolan Collins] used to do back home, but all of it went back to my first experience at Fillmore Street through Jones Church [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California] and through Ham Boswell [Hamilton T. Boswell] and through Joe Kennedy [Joseph Kennedy] and through all those people that were almost like they adopted me.
Story_ID: 653875
Speaker 1: College for me, first, literally first day I enrolled, Air ROTC [U.S. Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps].  That was to make sure I could get a deferment if I needed one.  We were alphabetical and John Burton was right after Brown.  That's how I met the Burtons.  I met the Burtons because we were in Air ROTC together on the drill team together at San Francisco State, and I literally, because there were only maybe a hundred black kids at San Francisco State College [San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California].  We all knew each other, we all sat basically at the same tables in the cafeteria.  We all hung out together.  We either were in one, two or three fraternities, was just automatic.  You got in a fraternity, you got to know everybody and here I am four or five months into being from Mineola, Texas, here and I had more names and acquaintances than I had had in all my life in Mineola of kids of my age level, kids of my collegiate level.  Most of the kids were much older than I am, two, three, four years older than I was at the time, but it was incredible that I was immediately engulfed in the life of San Francisco [California], the life of San Francisco State, the life of the church, Jones Methodist [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California], all the characters that were of some substance here in this city.  At the same time, interestingly enough, San Francisco State was the place where the black kids who were at USF [University of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] would come for social purposes 'cause it was, you all in the social, same social world there were so few of you.  And at USF there was Burl Toler [HistoryMaker Burl Toler, Sr.], Ollie Matson, Bill Russell, K.C. Jones, all those incredible ultimate superstars, 'cause that's the only people U- USF, would take.  Now we really didn't know the kids at Cal [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California] but there are black kids at Cal who thought they were superior to the whole world, and so we didn't interact very much with them.  But because so many of the black kids who are now enrolling in San Francisco State College came over from Oakland [California] every day, we did get a little bit of a flavor of what it was like to be a part of the Cal scene.  There may have been half a dozen black kids at Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] at the most.  They too were like the superior gods and they didn't have a whole lot to do with us, but they couldn't belong to white fraternities down there, so they had to belong to black fraternities, so Stanford, Cal and San Francisco State had Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity], Kappas [Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity], Sigmas [Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity].  They had all kinds of people, Omegas [Omega Psi Phi Fraternity], and they had on the women's side, they had AKAs [Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority], they had Deltas [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority], they had Zetas [Zeta Phi Beta Sorority].  It was incredible, but all of those black kids who went to these several colleges and universities ended up kind of knowing each other, interacting with each other, socializing with each other; and doing so, in many cases, with Fillmore Street as the anchor tenant for all of it.
Story_ID: 653876
Speaker 1: You talked about coming to Jones [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California] and you mentioned some names.  You mentioned Reverend Boswell [Hamilton T. Boswell].  At the time you were elected and active in the state legislature, he became the chaplain.
Speaker 2: I appointed Boswell as the chaplain of the California legislature [California State Legislature] and he served in that capacity during the time that I served as speaker.  I think he finally retired like in '91 [1991] or '92 [1992], but I appointed him back like in '83 [1983] or '84 [1984], and I knew that our church didn't pay a whole lot of money to the pastor.  We gave him a place to live I think out on 9th Avenue or something, and he had two wonderful daughters [Eleanor Boswell Raine and Jeri Boswell Lawrence] and a great wife [Eleanor Gragg Boswell].  His wife taught school.  His wife was a teacher on the school [Golden Gate Elementary School, San Francisco, California] on Golden Gate Avenue because I, you know, you know all of the black teachers in those days too who were in the schools, there were so few of them.  And I knew that we didn't pay him a whole lot of money, but he was, had been so important in my life, so important in developing my opportunity for political purposes.  When I discovered that we paid the chaplain a good fee, and he came and did the prayer every session of the legislature for as long as I could keep him doing it.  Even when he became a bishop in the, in the Methodist church, he still carried the title of the chaplain of the California State Assembly.
Story_ID: 653877
Speaker 1: From that same period, you met a guy named Joe Kennedy, who went on not only to become a great lawyer, but become a great judge.
Speaker 2: Joseph Kennedy was one of the first blacks, maybe even the first black, ever to become a public defender.  He was a public defender in the City and County of San Francisco [California], and he was a member of Jones Church [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California], and a very distinguished lawyer, big time in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  There was a second lawyer in the church named Leroy Cannon [H. LeRoy Cannon].  Through Boswell's [Hamilton T. Boswell] outreach efforts and what have you, he had gotten a job with the city attorney's office with another black man named Ray Reynolds, who was in another church, Bethel A.M.E. [Bethel A.M.E. Church, San Francisco, California], is where Ray Reynolds.  Ray Reynolds became a judge, Joe Kennedy became a judge.  Each of them became really distinguished as judges and they were appointed by the governor, all because the black churches were powerful in those days.  The black churches in San Francisco had managed to team up with the International Longshoreman and Warehouses Union [sic. International Longshore and Warehouse Union] and they had a church labor coalition and they were the key to the votes in San Francisco among African Americans.  And in those days, the vote of African Americans were somewhere between 13 and 15 percent of the population and in terms of on election day, they could have as much as a 20 percent influence on the outcome of every election without really having black candidates.  These were white candidates and so the white candidates who were successful acknowledged that by the nature of how they would reach back and extend the opportunity for advancement to black folk.  Jones Methodist was the number one black political church in this city, although you had had a pastor run for the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors], Frederick Haynes [Frederick Haynes, Sr.] ran for the Board of Supervisors when he was in Third Baptist Church [Third Baptist Church of San Francisco, San Francisco, California] which was one of the biggest black churches in the city.  He did not register the way Ham Boswell registered and he did not have in his church the kind of black talent that Ham Boswell had in his church, and, as a result, that Boswell's political star, not on running for office, but influencing appointments and things of that nature, really excelled.  There was a group of black Catholics in San Francisco in that same time period.  There was, and they were kind of the business blacks in San Francisco and that was made up of people like Terry Francois with whom I practiced law, and they were, they were important to, you know, to that world of, of, of Catholics, and they too had a degree of power because the Catholic church had a major role and played a major role in how this city operated.  And the Catholic church didn't hesitate to utilize the Terry Francoises and the Zuguzbis [ph.] and people like that among, in the Welton Flynns [H. Welton Flynn] and the people like that among the group.  And so when I reflect on the years of all of the things that I got exposed to in the early development period, it's just kind of amazing that with the population, Asians not being participants in the political process until sometime in the late '70s [1970s], African Americans dominated in the field on that regard as minorities from maybe the '50s [1950s] through the '70s [1970s] and with the Latinos never really rising to the level that we now have.  Asians have risen and Asians have done so, not only by skillsets and talent, but by just the sheer numbers, whereas, African American numbers have gone down dramatically.  Now we're far, probably we only have about a third of the people on the African American side who still are here since I was first elected back in '64 [1964], whereas we've gone off the roof when it comes to people of color holding office with the Asians.
Story_ID: 653878
Speaker 1: So your power base then would then be around church politics (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My power base all started with church politics.  As a matter of fact, there had been a desire by the black church and the black labor movement to have, to elect a black to the legislature [California State Legislature], and they had tried a couple of times and they didn't go anyplace.  The first money ever raised for me was collections taken up in the black churches.  They would, whether it was, the Baptist, Methodist church, it didn't matter.  If it was a black church on one given Sunday, they, the second or third collection.  Black churches have a lot of collections on Sundays and the second or third collection would be the one for political purposes; and I think the campaign that cost me, my first successful campaign, cost like seventy-five hundred dollars.  I think the black churches paid for half of that.
Story_ID: 653879
Speaker 1: So were you sure of your professional direction at that time when you were thinking politics.  I mean law, did law lead to politics or in addition to having the support in this political field.  When did it all start coming together for you?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can we go back to San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] and then to law school, just a little bit.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, sure.
Speaker 1: Let me, let me, let me tell you how my involvement in the world of politics became possible.  When I mentioned earlier that enrolling in the ROTC [U.S. Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps] and becoming acquainted with John Burton, it instantly caused me to become sensitized to politics.  Burton and the Burton family and the Burton brothers were liberal Democrats, trying their best to break in to what was a conservative Democratic establishment in San Francisco [California] dominated by the people who were in the trade union movement, not the service workers' operations, nor the hospital types, and, more importantly, dominated by the Catholic establishment and the ethnicities, the ethnic groups, like, you know, the Italians and the Irish, and there was frankly no room for creative politicians like the Burtons.  The Burtons were great recruiters.  I got recruited instantly to become a member of the Young Democrats, and so in 1951 or '52 [1952], I became a Young Democrat.  And that meant going to meetings once or twice a month, that meant going to your speeches by roaming politicians from all around the country and that coupled with my membership and activities in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], I became instantly exposed.  On graduating from San Francisco State in 1955, I was still living in a dormitory at 2255 Mariposa [Street], which is where they had rented a building and turned it into a dormitory.  And there was a fellow named Ben Travis [Benjamin Travis, Sr.] who was older, from New York [New York], who retired.  He had, he was a veteran of, from the [U.S.] Air Force, and he always wanted to be a lawyer.  And as we were graduating from SF State, he said, "Why don't you come take me down to Hastings [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California], I'm gonna try to enroll in school down there."  In those days you didn't have to do the LSAT, you didn't have to do all that other preliminary stuff 'cause there was still plenty of seats available.  And we went down and I sat in a room listening to the interview.  The dean with, with, with my friend, Mr. Travis, and Mr. Travis missed about, I don't know, three or four of the twenty questions.  I didn't miss any of them, and when the dean said, "Okay, Mr. Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], you can be admitted," I wasn't even an applicant, and then Billy Travis [sic.] got admitted at the same time.  So we entered Hastings College of Law together.  I was more concerned about could I get a deferment.  I was determined not to go to--and become a militaries, because I declined the offer for a commission.  When you finish ROTC in college and you're about to graduate, you get an offer for a commission.  I declined the commission.  Several of my brothers and sis-, black brothers and sisters who were also in ROTC, accepted the commission.  I enrolled in Hastings and I simultaneously became a member of the National Guard [California Army National Guard] at 126 medical battalion [126th Medical Company].  I became trained as a dental assistant and that would keep me out of being drafted.  I entered Hastings, and in Hastings I continued my politics.
Story_ID: 653880
Speaker 1: I had been heavily in politics at San Francisco State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California], both fraternal politics, NAACP politics, and regular politics as a student.  We elected the first black president who was Bert Phillips, and then we elected the second one, LeVell Holmes, a kid from Richmond [California].  We really were like activists like you would not believe.  We were also activists on the outside of, of the school or, and so politics was just flowing through my blood veins.  I ended up graduating from Hastings [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California] as the president of the class and still in the capacity of the world of politics, still very much a part of the Burton world by then, it had really expanded, and the NAACP's [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] world, and really expanded.  We had come to become real activists in every way because by then, then the incident involving Rosa Parks had occurred, and activations throughout the country.  The Martin King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] world was beginning to evidence itself in the late '50s [1950s] and people running for public office had begun to talk about the right to vote and things of that nature, and so it was just all totally and completely natural.  It was a way in which to advertise as a lawyer, 'cause in those days you didn't have the privilege that you do now of literally advertising.  That was considered a violation of the canon of ethics.  Same time period, going--I met George Moscone.  We were classmates at Hastings and so suddenly my world had become expanded in San Francisco [California] through my Italian buddy who was a nephew of the people who ran the garbage companies in San Francisco, the scavenger countries--companies in San Francisco.  So suddenly, I'm, my world is just expanding by light years and politics was kind of the center piece of that world, and as young lawyers, both George Moscone and Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], both availed themselves of the opportunity, first to run for the county committee in 1960 and then George ran for the state legislature [California State Legislature] and I ran for the state legislature two years later.  Didn't win.  I ran four years later and I did win.  At all times always keeping our relationship with our operations at SF State because after all that was home base for us.  That was a foundation, that's where many of our friends still were, that's where many of the people we recruited to be a part of the operation really were, and, simultaneously, we had graduated to interact with more than just the Young Democrats, we had begun to talk to labor.  We had begun to talk to the International Longshoremen and Warehouses Union [sic. International Longshore and Warehouse Union] because one of the things that we did is in 1952, long before any of us fully understood, independent Progressive Party ran the candidate for office--prison, named Vin Hallinan [Vincent Hallinan], and we were part of that effort and we got accused of being communist and all the other things, and then the McCarthy [Joseph McCarthy] hearings, and--it was just natural by the time I got my law license, opened my office to practice.  Francois [Terry Francois] and Goodlett [sic. Carlton Benjamin Goodlett] and all of that crowd, Joe Williams [Joseph B. Williams], and all that crowd kept us really focused on changing the world through organizing and through the political process and through the racial activities, period.  And it was just a wonderful time period for any young cat to be around doing the things that they were doing.  You had black organizations at every level.  You had black medical organizations.  You had black lawyer organizations, the Charles Houstons [Charles Hamilton Houston].  It was incredible to have all those things and you were a part of all those things and there was a incredible black social movement.  There was virtually no integration in, in, in terms of social integration.  There was work integration, there was political integration, but in terms of social world, it was still as it had been in Dallas [Texas], as it still, as it had been in Mineola [Texas] and, and it was just a wonderful time to be so exposed and the definitions, people didn't even question whether or not you were black enough if you were any form of a leader because you didn't have a choice.  Everybody expected you to do it on behalf of black people.
Story_ID: 653881
Speaker 1: --Law career. Were you taken in by friends, guys who had already got into the business before you; did you prac- where did you practice, who is your group?
Speaker 2: Well, my law career started up in a different way.  When I graduated from Hastings [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California], I had become a teacher so to speak because the school where I attended, all of the professors were retired deans and older people in what was called the sixty-five club.  You had to be sixty-five years or older to teach at Hastings and in most cases you had written the books that we were using as law students.  I worked at the school, along with Moscone [George Moscone].  We were janitors.  I ended up being the head janitor at the school, but in the process I also managed to get the school to start thinking about how to help these old guys and they selected individual students to be the teacher's assistant in case illness prevailed him halfway through the year or what have you.  And so I ended up with the tort, Larry Vogue [ph.] was a tort professor and he didn't do well.  Leon Green was a tort professor, older man, didn't do well in those days.  We didn't have the kind of health assistance you now have as you age, and so I ended up participating in every aspect of student operation, so much so that I ended up being a law school teacher at night in, in, in, in Lincoln Law School [Lincoln Law School of San Jose, San Jose, California] and simultaneously, you look for a job.  My white brothers who graduated all had multiple interviews for law jobs.  Black folk who graduated had none.  There were only two of us that graduated in my class.  One was a four year student named Gabriel Solomon from down in Bakersfield [California] whom since has died and I was the other student.  The four or five black students that started with me didn't finish on time.  Like Benny Travis [Benjamin Travis, Sr.] became a judge eventually.  The first year Benny Travis didn't make it.  He had to come back and start all over, repeat and start all over.  Brilliant guy, better grades than almost anybody but just kind of a washout on the discipline side.  And he finally got it together, other students ultimately didn't even become lawyers, and so the disaster rate was high among, I graduated, got a, literally got an interview with a federal judge, Ollie Carter [Oliver J. Carter], and Ollie Carter hired me as his clerk and that was a (gesture) prestigious spot, to become a clerk for a federal judge, except Ollie Carter died before I got the job.  And so all the other jobs that I might have tried for, and been interviewed for, were gone, 'cause this is July.  Well, I ended up being a lawyer without a gig.  And there was a guy named Francois [Terry Francois] that had a space in his office over on Sutter Street, and, Sutter and Steiner [Street], and I took that office with nothing.  I took that office with absolutely nothing except the money I saved with my janitorial position.  My first desk, Hibernia Bank [Hibernia Savings and Loan Society, San Francisco, California] lent me the money to get my first desk, and that Hibernia Bank by the way, is right there on the corner of Jones [Street] and McAllister [Street], and it just so happens that one of the students' family had high influence in Hibernia Bank, and so some of us who needed a loan could get it through out contacts; and that's how I ended up getting the first money I ever had for a law office.
Story_ID: 653882
Speaker 1: Went out there with Francois [Terry Francois] on, on, on Sutter Street.  Right next door to us was a doctor named Herbert Henderson.  Herbert Henderson was a very famous doctor in this town because his good friend was Miles Davis.  He was into all of the musicians.  He had been regularly handling the musicians who had come to this town, including Billie Holiday and others, and he also had a huge volume of black clients, of black patients, and many of whom would get in an automobile accident and suddenly I had a supply line of auto accident persons.  I also had a supply line of people who had criminal problems 'cause my uncle [Brown's maternal uncle, Itsie Collins] still had things ongoing and he would have people use his nephew as their lawyer, so suddenly my law practice blossomed with those two things as the anchor tenants for it, plus the church operations.  The churches had not yet gotten on to a private practicing lawyer.  They had lawyers who were working for government in their operation, but the few lawyers that were private practicing, most of them didn't have the church connection, so I had the church connection.  So suddenly, I had there sources of potential business that probably new coming, new come lawyers would not have had.  And I started my practice under those circumstances along with my politics and things just got better and better and better, because as I would win a case in criminal court, other folk would see that and they would call up and ask if I would represent them in their cases.  So I became, particularly for the prostitution trade, I became maybe the most dominant defense lawyer in the prostitution trade, and that happened because on one occasion, again, my civil rights activities prompted this, and that was a black woman was arrested for engaging in prostitution, not solicitation, engaging in prostitution.  And I said, "Who did she engage with?"   And, "Well," they said, "you know, a guy."  I said, "Well you're not prosecuting him, why would you prosecute her?"  And the judge agreed with me.  The judge agreed with me.  From that moment on, every prostitute or every hooker as they say, I became the hookers' lawyer. I ended up with about 75 percent of the prostitution, the, the prostitution accused persons, as a result of just that one constitutional challenge at selective prosecution of only the woman.  In those days it wasn't just the woman, they were my client, and I hadn't yet gotten to the point where the gender discrimination was being discussed.  It was strictly how I got started and how I ended up having the reputation and I became a real criminal trial lawyer.  I tried murder cases, I tried assault cases, I tried drunk driving cases regularly, I tried cases involving hookers, I had cases involving pimps.  And then I graduated to represent drug dealers in, in, in the world of law.
Story_ID: 653883
Speaker 1: We, we better fast move to where you went next (laughter).
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: No, I was just thinking, your life is so full of things that don't particularly match (laughter) with your latter life image.  That, no, but so, we better figure out how, how this, this business of engaging in this wide spectrum of the practice of the law became beneficial by the time you got into politics for one.  I'm sure those skills that allowed you to make things that normally that, where people had a tough time.  That must have prepared you for having tough times in trying to get the world to change around you.  So you, you had this law practice that was as varied as anybody could get, and yet on the other hand, you were thought of as a, what do they call it, the Burton machine.  You also became part of the Burton machine.  Now tell me why was it a machine and who was in it and what happened to them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, I'm not sure it was ever really a machine, but there was a fellow named Phil Burton [Phillip Burton] who was a patron saint, so to speak, of the new political movement for San Francisco [California], for those who had been kept out of the delivery system, been keep out of the choice system, and his young brother, John Burton, and his other brother, Robert Burton, were both really heavy duty involved in organizing on the political side and recruited on the political side.  And the, Robert Burton had married a Cohelan [Shirley Cohelan Burton].  The Cohelan was a family over in the East Bay [San Francisco Bay Area, California] that were equally as outcast in the world of Democratic politics, and so being a part of all of that caused one to literally have a great foundation for the world of politics and for, ultimately for the world of success because Phil Burton, the patron saint, understood all the rules, understood the dynamics of population addressing and directing in how to increase the size of your voter pool.  He understood all of that, most of us didn't understand any of it.  He taught us all of that, and in the process, he came up with the formula that there ought to be an African American, there ought to be an Asian, there ought to be a Latino, there ought to be a woman, there ought to be and there ought to be white folk involved, there ought to be senior citizens involved, there ought to be labor people involved, there ought to be people who cared about parks, and this was before there was an environmental movement.  He understood all of that.  In the process he put all those components together and the success was just overwhelming, and the news organizations dubbed it a machine and they dubbed the principals in the machine as being Phil Burton, his brother John Burton, Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], George Moscone.  We were allegedly the, because we were the stars so to speak, we were the ones who managed to get elected, we were the ones who were always out front and quoted.  We were the ones who were a part of going to Mississippi to do the voter registrations, we were the ones who first introduced the world to people like [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and others when they, we were, Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture].  We were the ones who did all of those kinds of things and so the Burton machine began to erode the Democratic control generated by a combination of the trade movement, the Italians and the Irish, and the Catholics, and we began to penetrate in every way, and Burton insisted upon repre- almost quota representation and that's how the term the machine became so much of an identifiable means by which to describe what basically was a people's political movement.
Story_ID: 653884
Speaker 1: Phil Burton [Phillip Burton] went on himself to become a legend.  Talk a bit about Phil and your friendship with him.
Speaker 2: Phil Burton lost his first election.  A dead man beat him.  He was running against a guy that died in mid-September and it was too late under the law to remove the man's name from the ballot and put somebody else's on.  But the dead man beat Phil Burton for the state legislature [California State Legislature].  Didn't bother Phil.  Phil came back the next year and won the seat and as soon as Phil won the seat, he began to help program those newcomers like his brother, me and others and the Young Democrats and we started doing statewide stuff.  There was a political movement that Alan Cranston started called California Democratic Council and Burton was a part of that, Phil Burton.  Phil Burton was in the legislature and he was so brilliant and so awesome and so motivated politically that he had begun to cut a path and open the way for lots of his followers and so by the early '60s [1960s] when the reapportionment lines started drawing, and in those days, the legislature did reapportionment, Burton cleverly never allowed a count to take place until the final day before the bill was to be introduced in the legislature.  And when they counted they only had seventy-nine seats.  It's an eighty seat state.  Burton had the sheet separate and distinct where he divided San Francisco [California] into five districts rather than four.  If you divide it into five districts, you get the eightieth seat, and in those days you didn't have one man, one vote.  You had line drawing for other reasons and other things and the [U.S.] Supreme Court had not ruled that you have to have equal number of voters or equal population in each district and Phil cleverly added an additional seat in San Francisco which pleased the powers to be because suddenly you know that's going to be a Democratic seat and the Democrats wanted to dominate in the legislature.  That's the seat that I eventually won.  Someone else had it ahead of me, but I won that particular seat all because of Phil Burton's incredible skill.  Phil went on from there when he carved out that seat.  Simultaneously when he drew the lines so that his brother John [John Burton] could run for the state assembly [California State Assembly] at the same time that I ran in '64 [1964], and the two of us won.  Phil won a congressional seat [U.S. House of Representatives] by then.  He took the Shelley [John Shelley] seat in the [U.S.] Congress and Shelley became the major of San Francisco.  And Phil went on for the next twenty years in Congress to dominate that body while still dominating what happens in the State of California on who could get elected to public office, so Phil Burton was in every way a legendary figure.  He would have to be personally credited with having elected the first African American in any category in San Francisco.  In that case it was me.  He'd have to get credit for electing his brother, he'd have to get credit for electing George Moscone, influencing that election.  He had to get credit for electing the first people who ran and got directly elected to the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors].  Before that you were appointed to the Board of Supervisors and then got reelected, or you were part of the team that the newspaper and the downtown organizations put on the ballot and nobody challenged that.  Phil challenged all of those things and that's where, again, the Burton machine became identified because he simultaneously participated in electing the first Latino, he elected the first Asian to the Board of Supervisors.  He elected one of the, directly elected, one of the first women.  Dianne [Dianne Feinstein] was the first woman directly elected to the Board of Supervisors and I was the only elected official to endorse her candidacy, but that was with Burton's direction and Burton's blessings.  And so Burton was frankly in the second half of the century, the last century.  Burton was probably the most dominant political influence in the City and County of San Francisco and everybody hold an office, including Nancy Pelosi, would have to trace their history back to a relationship in some fashion with what Phil Burton did for them or for what Phil Burton created.
Story_ID: 653885
Speaker 1: Let's move to your own career.  So now you're in Sacramento [California], you're elected.  Almost as soon as you got there almost, you were a well known name.  What did you do when you got to Sacramento (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well first and foremost, I lost against a guy named Ed Gaffney [Edward M. Gaffney] in '62 [1962] by a thousand votes.  In '64 [1964] I beat Gaffney by four thousand votes.  I had literally walked the streets of San Francisco [California] in that district [California State Assembly District 18] every day meeting everybody who lived in that district and who could vote in that district for the next two years, while still practicing law, while representing the hookers and the dealers and all the other people, the gambling people.  I rang doorbells and I won.  And as soon as I won it meant I beat an incumbent Democrat.  A twenty-two year incumbent Democrat got defeated by a black person who only had going for him Phil Burton [Phillip Burton], ILWU [International Longshore and Warehouse Union], Revels Cayton was the campaign manager of--under certain (unclear), and the black church, church-labor coalition.  People like Bill Chester [William H. Chester], LeRoy King, all of those people were a part of, and Ham Boswell [Hamilton T. Boswell], all those people were part of, Bedford, all those people were a part--Reverend Bedford [George L. Bedford]--they were all part of that coalition that produced me to success in '64 [1964].  And it was just wonderful to have that reputation going up to Sacramento.  Unruh, who was then the speaker of the California State Assembly, had spent the money that speakers are supposed to spend and provided the resources for his incumbent, Ed Gaffney, we had beaten them, and they outspent us five, six, seven to one, but we did the job that needed to be done to win that seat with the coalition that I have just described.  So when I got to Sacramento, the first vote to be cast was the speaker vote.  And Unruh was the candidate, and I cast the first no vote ever against Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], and that instantly caused everybody in the press to pay attention to who this person is, he's got to be out of his mind.  Well, I voted first, three or four names later, Burton [John Burton] voted with me, 'cause we never separated.  Several additional names later, maybe ten, twenty names later, a fellow from down in San, in San Jose [California] named Stanton [William F. Stanton], who had been on the outs with Unruh for other reasons, voted with us.  So it looked like we were instantly starting a movement to challenge the unchallenged person called Jess Unruh, the most powerful Democrat in the State of California at that time.  I mean he was awesome because Governor Brown [Pat Brown] was on the skids; and Governor Brown ultimately lost in '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: The first Brown.
Story_ID: 653886
Speaker 1: Yeah, first Brown, ultimately lost in '66 [1966], Edmund G. Brown [Pat Brown] as we called him.  He lost in '66 [1966] and Unruh remained the most formidable political Democrat and most powerful Democrat in the state.  In those days we didn't hold all these offices that we have now and have had over the last few years, and so that's how I became known throughout the whole state as casting the first vote against Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], and then as things unfolded from '64 [1964] to '66 [1966] to '68 [1968], Unruh adjusted his, himself, to see that I could be a reliable supporter and a trust--guy to be trusted.  And I saw him as having skills that I would like to emulate, and we became fast friends and he began to tap me for the things that he needed to have done in the world of politics.  For an example in '68 [1968], when the Democratic convention was held in Chicago [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] and the issue was whether or not Maddox, the governor who carried that axe handle, the governor of Georgia and his delegation would be seated versus the delegation of [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond, this up and coming new Democrat, black, in the State of Georgia, I made a motion in the credentials committee.  We had two members from California.  Every state had two members, a woman and a man.  Jess Unruh named me and Trudy, and, and Trudy Owens and Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] were the two from Cali- from California on that committee.  As soon as I got on the committee, the governor of New Jersey [Richard Hughes] tapped me as being the go to guy for quality motions and appropriate debate and I made the motion to throw Lester Maddox out of the convention and seat the Bond delegation and we did exactly that.  And so as things unfolded, my prominence as a person in politics in California was enhanced tremendously, and it was enhanced by first voting against Jess Unruh, and then becoming a part of the Unruh team.
Speaker 2: Is that where the famous line, give me back my delegation, or is that another time?
Speaker 1: No, that's '72 [1972] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's in, okay.
Story_ID: 653887
Speaker 1: You began as a rebel; and so now we move forward to, what are you by the time that you are asking for a delegation (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, by the time 1972 came around, we had helped orchestrate from '64 [1964], from the time we helped Fannie Lou Hamer in the Mississippi delegation, get a representation in Atlantic City [New Jersey] for that Democratic convention [1964 Democratic National Convention], we began to really have an influence on how delegates were to be selected.  We knew that the old system would never allow for people without resources, et cetera, and all we had were votes, so we began to say you got to select a delegations based upon how many votes you produce.  And that's how we ended up by the time we go to Florida, got to Miami [Florida] for that convention in '72 [1972 Democratic National Convention], we got there with the delegation from California being dominated by Latinos, outside Democrats like Burton, and African Americans.  And the three co-chairs of that delegation on that occasion was Dolores Huerta, John Burton and Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], and we were, we won because we had pushed the candidacy of George McGovern in California against the Democratic establishment running Humphrey.  Some of the establishments supposed Storm Jackson [sic. Henry M. Jackson] from Washington and one or two supporting Shirley Chisholm.  Well we had fashioned together an operation that got us about 90 percent of all the votes on the delegation side and it was the most diverse delegation that anybody had ever had seen when we got to Florida.  Of course, we were instantly challenged because winner take all was not, no longer wanted to be sanctioned.  We were winner take all.  We won in California and we were entitled, we thought, to all of those delegates and at the convention, which was still dominated by people from the old school, they wanted to see people like Joe Alioto [Joseph Alioto] on behalf of Hubert Humphrey.  They wanted people like [HistoryMaker] Barbara Lee on behalf of Shirley Chisholm.  So we had a, we had a collection of people that were trying to take our seats.  And our delegation was there, we had put together the money to finance their trip to Florida.  We had put together their staying at the hotel.  We were at a hotel in Florida that was a golf course, and in that process obviously that site had been chosen because they thought it was going to be rich Californians, not, not people who were on welfare, farm workers, people who were on marginal incomes and in that process, we were in frankly bad shape financially, but we were the governor--we were the delegation with George McGovern, and the only way George is going to get the nomination and beat Hubert Humphrey was to hold on to all those numbers in California.  That's where the give me back my delegation speech came.  And the reference to give me back my delegation was because California and with me being a part of it, had done so much in Atlantic City in '64 [1964].  Clearly we had done the job that we needed to do in Chicago [Illinois] in '68 [1968], and I said that it's time you pay back what we did for you in all those places; and that's when that speech occurred.
Story_ID: 653888
Speaker 1: So we're far, wait, we're, we're at '72 [1972].  What, we're at '84 [1984] was here right?  Was that '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-four [1984]--
Speaker 1: Was here.
Speaker 2: --California.
Speaker 1: So that's a diff- (unclear)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I wouldn't start with '84 [1984], I'd just finish up with '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Yeah, '72 [1972], '76 [1976], '80 [1980].  Eighty [1980] was New York [New York], '84 [1984] was California [San Francisco, California], '88 [1988] is Jackson [sic. Atlanta, Georgia] and--
Speaker 2: How do you do this Willie [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown]?  You always so annoyed me.  I was in those places, I wouldn't be able to tell you which one.  I was in New York, but all I know Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy] was there.  Outside of that I don't know nothing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA INDIVIDUAL):  Okay, let's go back.  Let's finish up '72 [1972].
Speaker 2: I know, I know, I know, but he just always knocks me over with his memory and recall of everything.  Okay, so '72 [1972] was a year when you, you now, you really realize your power, what you can do (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Well, as a matter of fact, it was the most prominent visibility opportunity in the world of politics although in Chicago [Illinois], because of the overriding dispute with the Chicago Seven--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what we did on behalf of [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond and the Georgia delegation, didn't get the prominence it should have gotten.  That was a significant movement.  Georgia has never been the same.  That was really the foundation for Jimmy Carter's [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] ultimate candidacy, successfully, because we had made it literally possible for, now we've got all these black mayors.  We've got Stokes [Carl Stokes] in, in, in Cleveland [Ohio].  We've got Hatcher [HistoryMaker Richard Hatcher] in Gary, Indiana.  We got Jackson [Maynard Jackson] coming out of, out of Georgia [Atlanta, Georgia].  So suddenly we got a collection of African Americans, prominent African Americans and we go in and we do the thing with McGovern [George McGovern] and I got to tell you, McGovern had said, "We win the presidency, you're my attorney general."  Can you believe that?  I would have been a great--it would have changed, obviously my trajectory, but nevertheless he didn't win and he was beaten badly by Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon], and what followed that was obviously everything having to do with Watergate; and that's where our friend who died much too early, Barbara Jordan, became so significant in those Watergate hearings.
Story_ID: 653889
Speaker 1: While we were simultaneously in the halls of legislature, kind of under the radar screen.  I was trying to become speaker, '74 [1974], Bob Moretti who was then the speaker, and I was chair of the ways and means committee [California State Assembly Ways and Means Committee].  I had been the author of Ronald Reagan's [Ronald Wilson Reagan] budget as the chair of ways and means and the chair of the Senate Finance [California State Senate Governance and Finance Committee] would be the author of the governor's budget.  Well here I am this flaming crazy Democrat doing all the things that I'm doing politically on the Democratic side of the aisle.  That's the same time I had started to introduce the bill to decriminalize sexual acts between consenting adults in private.  I had carried for normal the organization to reform the marijuana laws.  I was carrying that piece of legislation, simultaneously, operating within the framework of Reagan's governorship doing the things that the ways and means guy does on that governorship, and then Moretti decides he's going to run for governor in '74 [1974], which means my speaker is distracted.  He's running for governor in '74 [1974], that also means he may leave the speakership and it was envisioned that I would become the speaker which was the second most powerful position in the State of California, behind the governor.  Jerry Brown beat Moretti and I lost the speakership vote by one to Leo McCarthy [Leo T. McCarthy] because my good friend and roommate at that time, Leon Ralph [Leon D. Ralph], got offered, black man, got offered the chairmanship of rules [California State Assembly Committee on Rules] and he sold me out for that title and it was frankly devastating, but nevertheless, and I got literally ostracized and put out to pasture, exiled by Leo McCarthy, who became the speaker.  He wanted nothing whatsoever to do with me.  My friends, we had planned a trip to Russia and Israel, with Moscone [George Moscone] kind of leading the delegation, and we, before Moscone was mayor [of San Francisco, California], we, I didn't go on the trip.  I was scheduled to go on the trip, had the visa and everything.  What I didn't realize was that the Republicans and some of the more liberal Democrats were planning a coup.  They were planning to put a Republican and a Democrat delegation together for both purposes, and elect me speaker in the fall.  That failed because one I was not at the King David Hotel [Jerusalem] in Israel when the plans were unfolded in 1974 or '75 [1975], thereabouts.  My good friend Ken Meade [Kenneth A. Meade] in Berkeley [California], again lost his nerve and couldn't go with a coalition of Republicans and Democrats to make me speaker.  Well as things unfolded, things got a little more complicated for everybody when Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] won the nomination in '76 [1976] 'cause Jerry Brown got in that race now that he had won the governorship and he got in late, but he won like four or five primaries in the last month and a half or two months, and he really thought that he was gonna go someplace.  And he was so young and so new and so Hollywoodish in every way.  Jimmy Carter slowly but surely got the nomination and won the presidency thanks to Richard Nixon's poor, and the Republicans, poorly handling the McGovern [George McGovern] campaign and then all of the things having to do with the Watergate, all that stuff and Nixon [President Richard Milhous Nixon] having to resign, Gerald Ford [President Gerald Rudolph Ford, Jr.] having been appointed; so things were in a turmoil (gesture) everywhere.
Story_ID: 653890
Speaker 1: And, but it didn't have any great benefit on us until after Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] had been elected and we started piecing together a different relationship with all the civil rights people who had managed to get themselves elected, post the, both the Voting Rights Act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] and the Civil Rights Act [Civil Rights Act of 1964] which had benefited so handsomely.  The Democratic constituency with African Americans being an increased number of the voting pool and with black mayors now really emerging and in that process, Andy Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young] who was by then a congressman, was very much a part of all of that we were about and so we arrived at the time period when superstar for Democrats in America was one Ted Kennedy [Edward M. Kennedy], and Ted Kennedy came to California to appear at a fundraising event in Los Angeles [California], invited by the speaker, (gestures) Leo McCarthy [Leo T. McCarthy].  Leo McCarthy at that event failed to introduce the membership that supported him for speaker and let it be known that all this money being raised with Ted Kennedy was going to be ultimately used for a [U.S.] Senate seat for Leo McCarthy.  That literally pissed every member of the legislature on the Democratic side of the aisle off.  They start planning Leo McCarthy's demise and within a period of a week, a fellow named Howard Berman, majority leader, appointed by Leo McCarthy, and he had double crossed me as well when I was, should have been speaker back in '74 [1974].  He called me and he came up here to see me and he wanted to tell me that he wanted to recruit my assistance with my group of supporters because he was going to oust Leo McCarthy as speaker, because Leo McCarthy had done just what I told you about the money.  I turned him down because by then Leo McCarthy had wised up, a year or so earlier, and there was all kinds of investigations going on in the capitol [California State Capitol, Sacramento, California], and the one person not being investigated for anything because I wasn't there, was me.  I was back here practicing law full time, and I had had the reputation of being an honest person in the legislature all the previous years, particularly in the power position of ways and means [California State Assembly Ways and Means Committee].  Leo McCarthy needed to bring somebody back for press image purposes with--representing reform in what was assumed to be a corrupt world.  He brought me back and put me in as chair of, of all things, rev and tax [California State Assembly Committee on Revenue and Taxation].  Rev and tax obviously ultimately was the committee that handled Prop 13 [Proposition 13].  We did all the interpretations for Prop 13.  We did all of the tax exemptions.  But he also assigned all of the sin items to the way- to the rev and tax committee.  Sin items being horse racing, gambling, card clubs, because that's where the scandal allegedly was pushed, and all that came under my jurisdiction.  In that capacity, it gave me an opportunity to suddenly go back and renew my relationship with the Republicans who conspired at the King David Hotel [Jerusalem], three or four years earlier, to do something about making me speaker, and so suddenly I was back en vogue and when the tackle McCarthy came, being the lawless that I am, I informed Burton--I informed Berman [Howard Berman] that under no circumstances would I join him and that I was going to inform McCarthy of what was coming.  He thanked me very much and went on his way.  I informed McCarthy and typical, McCarthy didn't want to do anything about it.  I called his attention that he was already the speaker and that unless somebody had forty-one votes to fire him, he would remain the speaker.  I knew Berman only had the Democratic, major number in the Democratic caucus, maybe a majority, but he didn't have forty-one.  And I knew after talking to my Republican friends, that they were simply gonna watch Democrats try to kill each other, and so when I told McCarthy what I told him about the votes needed, he thanked me very much and he did have the courage not to yield and resign, based on the rejection by majority of the Democratic caucus.  That started the process that ultimately led to my successful effort to put Republicans and Democrats together and make me speaker of the California State Assembly, a slot which I held for some fifteen years, twice as long as any other person in the history of this state.  No person has dominated and survived more than seven and a half years.  I did it fifteen years.
Speaker 2: Proves working across the aisle has its benefits.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Story_ID: 653891
Speaker 1: Today is December the 19th [December 19, 2015].  We are speaking with his honor, The Honorable Willie Lewis Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown].  We're at the Museum of the African Diaspora in San Francisco [California].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, we are ready to start.  We agree, I'm sure, that your life has been a rich one, and that you've accomplished almost everything that you have publicly said you want to do, but we're gonna go back to the years when you couldn't be so sure because you were creating the phenomenal success that you enjoy today.  And that was in the California legislature [California State Legislature] where you seem to have realized your gifts and using them.  There's a position called the speaker in the California assembly [California State Assembly].  Explain what it is.
Speaker 2: The speaker is the person who presides over an eighty member house of fellow legislators elected from districts that are equal in population since 1966 [sic. 1963] when the court [U.S. Supreme Court] said it had to be equal, and it was 1980 when I assumed that role.  And that role carries with it, the power, by reputation and by conduct, to be second to the governorship of the State of California in terms of power.  You exercise literally the authority over everything that the governor doesn't have authority over and in some cases including some things the governor does have authority over.  You are in league with the governor in terms of negotiating whatever the public policy options are in the state and if you are part of a political team like a Democrat or Republican on an activist side, you become frankly equal to any U.S. senator in the State of California, if not even higher, from the standpoint of party activities and party politics.
Speaker 1: Why do you decide that this was a job that you could manage and that you could do it well?
Speaker 2: I had an opportunity to observe two speakers before me.  I had the opportunity to observe a fellow named Jesse Marvin Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh] who was the personification for this nation of what a speaker could do.  And then I had the opportunity to observe a person who actually defeated me in my first effort, and that was Leo McCarthy [Leo T. McCarthy].  In between was a third man, a fellow named Bob Moretti, who had replaced Jess Unruh, and he was very close to me, and while he served as speaker I got an opportunity to experience and exercise lots of the speakership powers, and the combination of all of that training, on what to do, what not to do, and how to do it.  By the time I got the job, it was a home run.
Story_ID: 653892
Speaker 1: Your pathway to actually defeating McCarthy [Leo T. McCarthy] in a sense, was not clear to everyone; and I think people try to align you on the other side of that issue.  Tell me why did you reject it and what happened.
Speaker 2: Well, when McCarthy was challenged by Howard Berman, and Howard Berman's clan of folk, they were basically the more liberal Democrats in the state.  They were the labor Democrats in the state so to speak.  They were in some cases a farm worker Democrats.  They were environmentalist Democrats.  They were all of the things that make up the Democratic party, and when McCarthy could not manage that process, it became clear that had they won, we would be somewhat akin to what Washington [D.C.] became, and that's a partisan operation incapable of doing anything really for the benefit of all of Californians, and I observed that fairly closely, so when I got the opportunity to replace McCarthy and become the speaker, it was going to be absolutely necessary to change the perspective that everybody had for the speakership and take it back to the Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh] days, and sure enough, we did that by first making sure the Republicans who had, for a period of time, been considered stepchildren.  They had been considered people you only go to after you've finished, everything else was done.  They only got a chance to eat with the help, so to speak.  They were really in the doghouse without anybody telling them they were in the doghouse, or acknowledging it.  And so when serving both as a chair of a committee, in this case ways and means [California State Assembly Ways and Means Committee], or rev and tax [California State Assembly Committee on Revenue and Taxation], I was always careful to make sure every member had the same status because that was the way Unruh played it, and that was the way Moretti [Bob Moretti] played it.  And in that capacity you get better cooperation from the membership, and it becomes very clear that you're managing the speakership as one of doing something for the membership of the house [California State Assembly] and ultimately for public policy in California you can develop a great sense of cooperation in activities of the special interest organizations, as well as individual members, where they were Republicans or Democrats and that's essentially how the speakership under Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] became what it became and lasted twice as long as anybody else's speakership in the history of California, and last while we had only two years of Democratic governors during that fifteen year, almost fifteen year span versus mostly Republican governors.  So it was a good run.
Story_ID: 653893
Speaker 1: It was a good run.  But you became speaker largely some people think because of Republicans, that, that you rounded up people that no one could understand why they were supporting you.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I must tell you that, and when it was clear that I was going for the membership of the house [California State Assembly], the Republicans who had observed when serving on committees with me, how truly fair I could be, got a chance to, in fact, vote for somebody they thought would really treat this speakership as an instrument for all the membership and as an instrument of government for the State of California, and that what's they saw in me because they clearly did not see any ambition to be anything other than the speaker.  I was not interested in [U.S.] Congress, I was not interested in the U.S. Senate, I was not interested in any statewide office.  It was clear that I would be the speaker and all of my conduct, by the way, was geared to representing the house rather than representing me and enhancing my own image.  It was always the house from the time when I literally recognized that people would be criticized for using what was then a telephone system that had numbers and had records.  I made, I made it so that all of the telephones were in my name so you couldn't ever say which member did or did not.  I extracted the opportunity out of the membership to do things like provide them with healthcare bill or healthcare coverage.  I provided them with death benefits.  All these things they never had before I provide, I created a travel service within the context of the legislature [California State Legislature], we put in a travel office and so they no longer had to use their campaign accounts in order to do the traveling they needed to do back and forth between their districts.  I set it up so that each member had a direct budget equal to every other member, enhanced based on leadership status, chairmanships and things of that nature, but I really did put it together and I ran it as if it was a nation unto itself for the benefit of the members.  And believe me that was not prospectively lost on the Republicans.  And so when it came time to decide would they support one or another of the respective candidates of speaker, they chose Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown], 'cause they also had the prospect for the first time of having Republican chairpersons in a caucus, in a concept where it wasn't from caucus, but it was from the house, and they loved that completely.  And so when the vote was cast, of the number of Republicans who were there, I got them all but four.  So I got twenty-eight Republicans and other Democrats who were there, I got about half of the Democrats, but I got twenty-eight out of thirty-two Republicans, and I got twenty-three Democrats, and I won the speakership with a greater number than anyone else had won a contest for speaker before and since.  The history of California, that was the only time there was a real recorded contest, and without all of the hype of mutual respect and what have you.  It was a real contest.  We won it and we won it with Republicans doing twenty-eight and Democrats doing twenty-three, and then the distribution of chairmanships, there were over twenty chairmanships, (unclear) Republicans ended up with five, we ended up with the concept of if there was a chair Democrat, there was a vice chair Republican.  If there was a chair Republican, there was a vice chair Democrat.  We ended up with proportionate representation, whatever percentage of your political party was a percentage of the membership of the house and every member, as I said, had an equal budget.  We also set it up so that there could be no exploitation of the budgetary process involving the house membership; and the members just loved it, loved it beyond belief.
Story_ID: 653894
Speaker 1: You're talking about politics as it is dreamed of in Washington [D.C.] and other places in other states.  What, I guess what people couldn't understand about you is how could you, a black man from the South, from a conservative state, come up with such a democratic outlook on life, democratic outlook on what the process the democracy ought to be?
Speaker 2: Well, in all of my life, in all of the training and all of the schooling that I ever had, and whether it was my mother [Minnie Collins Boyd], my grandmother [Anna Lee Nolan Collins], my uncles [Itsie Collins, Son Collins and Richard Collins], the church that I was a part of [Jones Memorial United Methodist Church, San Francisco, California], there was always one overriding factor, fairness.  That was always the guiding line for everything that I've ever, ever been a part of.  If you were in any manner unfair, it was considered an absolute no-no.  Applying that rule to every aspect of politics, it becomes frankly really easy, particularly to develop the respect of your membership because so few people make fairness the overriding factor in their decision making.
Speaker 1: I guess one of the biggest impressions that I retained is when your mother passed away and you had services in Texas.  The number of Republicans that traveled to Texas to pay respect was an astonishment to most people.  Did it even surprise you?
Speaker 2: No, it didn't surprise me at all.  Once I became the speaker, the business of the house [California State Assembly] became the business of all of the membership, and whether you were a Republican or a Democrat, there were times and occasions for when you paused just out of mutual and human respect.  That's what I tried to establish through my own conduct as speaker, and that infected the house, and, as a matter of fact, to this day there are still reactions based upon the experience that that incredible collection of people had during the almost fifteen years of my speakership.
Story_ID: 653895
Speaker 1: Well it's a wonderful story.  It's the ideal American story.  There were still things on the edge, I mean there were investigations.  There were people that were looking for something to get Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown].  They didn't succeed, but they did something else, they introduced term limits.
Speaker 2: Well, you're, you're correct.  There was a quest by a collection of people to try to figure out how to bring Willie Brown down, how to take the speakership away from Willie Brown.  That effort was made full time by lots of people, and they all had one thing in common, two things in common, they intended to take me down and they failed.  That's the two things they had in common.  And it was some of the newer Republicans.  Every time there're be a Republican elected, there was always if you're gone run for office, run against Willie Brown if you're in Bakersfield [California].  Don't talk about the Democrat who's running in Bakersfield, talk about Willie Brown and talk about his relationship to the gay community in San Francisco [California], talk about his relationship to the people who smoke pot in San Francisco, talk about his relationship with the entertainment world in California, talk about his constant demand on behalf of people of color, Latinos, women, and, and the African Americans.  And you talk about all of those things that are symbolic of Willie Brown.  The only thing you couldn't do, you could never say that he used the power of the house to implement his personal philosophy in his personal views because I never did.  And so when you went after Willie Brown you failed because you were going after him for things that he did not do, period, whether you were the law enforcement people, whether you were the press, or whether you were the Republican Party, or even the Democratic Party, you could never come up with any facts that would match your assumption and your representation as to why Willie Brown should be replaced.  A Republican who left the house and became a supervisor in Los Angeles County [California] named Peter Schabarum [Peter F. Schabarum] got on to the idea that you ought to place a limit on how long anybody can serve, forget aiming at Willie Brown, let's just go at the whole system and let's say that once you have served for a limited period of time, similar to the presidency, you should be re- out, period.  You should be replaced, not because you are not doing the job, not because the voters don't want you, but we just gonna place this artificial limit on how long you could serve.  And so in 1990, that measure was put on the ballot.  Both houses of the legislature [California State Legislature] on the Democratic side decided to oppose it, and we, frankly, would have won it if the participants had kept their word.  My house, the assembly [California State Assembly], Democrats in the assembly, assumed the responsibility to do all of the advertisement, we assumed the responsibility to do like the door to door campaign because we had a greater number of members, only forty senators and there are eighty assembly members, and you divide that between Republicans and Democrats and you see instantly that our, our force, our warriors were greater than the senate warriors.  Which means we had better access to the people on a ongoing full time basis.
Story_ID: 653896
Speaker 1: The senate [California State Senate] agreed that they would do the mail, that is whatever is mailed out to people, and lo and behold we had our closet Republican friends, so to speak, going after the president, Mr. Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan].  And Mr. Reagan had said, in private conversations on more than one occasion, had there been no presidential term limits, he would continue in the presidency, and that is clearly true because even today people still talk about how favorable it is to compare one's candidacy to what Reagan brought on behalf of the Republican Party.  With that in mind, one of our smart folk start talking the president about whether or not he could send a letter and he finally agreed yes he could send a letter.  Ordinary presidents don't interfere with statewide initiatives, but President Reagan said that he would send a letter, and he did.  He sent a letter to a Republican member and we reprinted that letter to be mailed out to a designated collection of Republicans throughout the state and we knew that it was 5 to 6 percent of the total vote, and that Reagan could control that vote and all we need to do was communicate with him.  It was about a four hundred thousand dollar obligation.  David Roberti, the president pro temp of the senate and my counterpart from my house, had the leadership job over there on the campaign side, for sending out the mailers.  At some point, three or four days before the election when the mailer was to be dropped, he concluded that he'd be better off holding onto his money to run for treasurer or to run for city council of Los Angeles [Los Angeles City Council] or something else, because he was, in his opinion, and his people were of the opinion, that the measure was going to pass and we would be termed out and that he would, he was better off looking out for himself.  We didn't find out he didn't drop Mr. Reagan's letter in the mail until the Monday before the election, and lo and behold when the election dust cleared, we lost the fight by two points.  All the polls and all the measurements said Reagan's letter was worth five or more.  There would not have been term limits, Peter Schabarum, the late Peter Schabarum [Peter F. Schabarum], would not have succeeded if David Roberti, president pro temp of the senate [California State Senate], had kept his end of the deal.
Story_ID: 653897
Speaker 1: And it's interesting how fate deals you some degree of revenge when someone has done something they shouldn't have done.  The first person ever affected by term limits was David Roberti.  The way it was worded, he could not--applicable only starting in 1996.  That would have been the first time because of his six year term.  Roberti's nature, his senate seat was such that he couldn't even apply for reelection in '94 [1994] because it would have gone beyond the time period that would allow term limits to apply.  And so we lost term limits and the first victim of that loss was David Roberti, poetic justice for the person who cost us that, that change in the law.  Nowadays you hear everybody, December 19th, 2015, any Republican who is affected by term limits directly, in the '90s [1990s] now say that there is no question, they never should have had term limits and that however, when they were campaigning, they were arguing that it was term limits to get rid of Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] and the partisanship of that, obviously, held sway.  It would have been overcome, however, if the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] letter had been published, and I would not have ever been a candidate for the mayorship of San Francisco [California].  I frankly would be answering and being interviewed at this moment, with the title speaker to the California State Assembly.  Even a group of Democrats who tried to get rid of me as speaker, a group of five young Democrats, buddies of mine, people whom I'd use my tickets to the Academy Awards [Oscars].  In the old days, the speaker of the house, on behalf of his membership, got tickets to the Academy Awards, and good seats at the Academy Awards, and that was one of the nuggets, that was one of the gifts and the benefits you could share with quality members, cooperative members, responsive members and what have you.  I not only would share with my own members on the Democratic side, but I'd always make sure I gave two Republicans tickets to, and I'd take them.  We'd go as a group and we'd take our ladies, our wives, or whomever.  And it was always a very good thing.  These, two of these five Democrats that decided to put together an operation to get rid of me, had, seven or eight years after I'd become speaker, they were funny, they had been the beneficiaries of my generosity.  They had been beneficiaries of my choice for quality assignments and they had actually joined me for one of the most famous birthday celebrations at George Hamilton's house in Los Angeles [California] where Sammy [Sammy Davis, Jr.] sang and Barbra Streisand was there, Clint Eastwood, just a whole host of people.  And I exposed them to all these people, yet they decided that one of them wanted to be speaker and so they came to see me on an occasion and said, "You know, you need to, you've set the record now and that was your goal," which obviously wasn't true, but nevertheless, they assumed that I simply wanted to break the record of Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], who had the record at that longevity on the speakership side.  I wanted to be speaker forever, they had no idea however, because I never expressed it.  I just went along and listened closely to what they said and then suggested to them, it was the middle of the day, maybe we should have dinner or something later and continue the discussions of their quest to be speaker, and, of course, that's when the war started.  And they discovered I was already planning their demise and I succeeded in holding onto the speakership, I succeeded in making sure the Republicans, those who didn't really know me and had not been a part of my operation, that they didn't line up with them, and they did not know that the Republicans wouldn't never line up with them no matter what they wanted to do against Willie Brown and the results were that each of them suffered, like Roberti.  The one that suffered probably the most was a fellow named Condit [Gary Condit], who I just got a Christmas card from by the way, and he, he was kind of the leader of the Gang of Five and he ended up in [U.S.] Congress and had a problem in Congress and end up losing his seat over some relationship with an intern [Chandra Levy], and then there was Rusty Areias who was, still is my buddy 'til this day.  I had lunch with him as a matter of fact on the 20th of December, I'm gonna have a Christmas lunch with him celebrating Christmas; and he was part of the Gang of Five--
Story_ID: 653898
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let me interrupt just to say one thing.  I think the Gang of Five is known more for the way you dismissed them--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --than they are for the deed they planned.  So just skip us ahead.  How did you do it?
Speaker 2: Well, what I did frankly was just interrupted my day, brought them in, per their request, and informed my secretary to call Lou Papan and tell him he is released to handle the matter appropriate for the occasion.  That mean they were evicted from their offices, their titles were taken and their staff was defrocked and terminated from their, under their control, and I kept the conversation going and I gave Lou Papan, the head of the rules committee [California State Assembly Committee on Rules], about an hour and a half in which to get the job done, and then I suggested that we meet later in the day and I sent them out the door and by the time they hit the door, the press was aware, with furniture being set in the hallway and from five different offices, that there was something going on, and they came to find and I made sure that they interacted with the press immediately, so there'd be no question that there was a war and it was a war that they had no possibility of winning because they were, frankly, overmatched.  Part of what I had always had in place was alternative plan in case of potential disaster, and that alternative plan included the potential for a disruption caused by traitors, disruption caused by people trying to set up situations in which corruption would occur in the house [California State Assembly].  I prepared for all those things.  Every day of my life I was prepared for potential disaster because you needed to be prepared for potential disaster.  Most members didn't see it that way, most members don't see it that way, but I did, and I literally, not only dismembered the Gang of Five, but on other occasions when there were challenges involving the authorities, I kept the membership under wraps and on the floor and offered this, my assistance and the house's assistance to the authorities, which really pissed the authorities off because they were firmly of the opinion that I was blocking their investigations.  And all of these occasions and in all these techniques that came from the one component of my personality that I encourage and I fertilize and I reminisce and think about every day of my life, and that is survival.
Story_ID: 653899
Speaker 1: I guess the--we talked a little bit about Francois [Terry Francois], your start in his office, that was in there, that was before he ever ran for office, It's gonna--I don't know, we're sitting here talking about you like you're not here, but do you feel that we missed some dates?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no.  Each of you are missing the fact that I talked about being elected, four thousand votes, and then instantly challenging Jess Unruh [Jesse M. Unruh], instantly having to work through that over a two or three year period, instantly being put in a place in '68 [1968] to put [HistoryMaker] Julian Bond in versus, and then, that's all part of, and then consistently moving on to nominating Moretti [Bob Moretti] to be speaker [of the California State Assembly] and then staying through that process, '72 [1972] McGovern [George McGovern] activities involving that particular presidency and then moving to '74 [1974] in the loss of the speakership in the Saint--Hotel David [King David Hotel, Jerusalem] accord, in Israel, on the fact the Republicans couldn't get themselves together to put it at that time, losing the speakership by being double crossed and then ultimately being resurrected to help McCarthy [Leo T. McCarthy] save his speakership, and then being elected to the process of having McCarthy understand how not to lose it and then going into an election of speaker.  That's the history.
Speaker 1: I thought so, but I thought it was because I was too inside track maybe it'd be--maybe the names don't need a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's, that's it, there's nothing else in it.
Story_ID: 653900
Speaker 1: We just got rid of those guys and we've also done ter- term limits which I thought was of national importance because it really shaped your, your future.  So, we--my, my interpretation when people ask me about you and your career, I said, "Well he lost his speakership [of the California State Assembly], but he gained the leadership of his hometown," but I'll tell you, I'll have to tell you what I say.  Are we ready?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yes.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll start here, okay.  So let's pick up.  You've been through one of the toughest times ever, losing the speakership.  You said you would have done for life if you could have.  But right along thereafter something happened that you later said brought you some of the happiest days of your life, you were elected mayor of your hometown and proceeded to run the city.  Talk about that period leading up to winning the mayoralship and your ideas about how you could transfer those skills from the legislature to running a city.
Speaker 2: Well, Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis] I think it would better if we went back a little bit further than that because the idea of thinking about the mayorship was never on my mind.  Just as I said when elected speaker, one of the things that the membership all knew was that I only had one thing in mind, and that was being speaker forever.  You go backwards in terms of the mayorship, I helped elect Moscone [George Moscone].  The Burton machine was instrumental in electing Moscone to the mayorship.  He was a state senator at that time and he beat a conservative fellow Democrat named Bobby Chalatta [ph.] here in, just barely, here in San Francisco [California].  And it was a magical time for the city.  We began to extend, with the mayorship of Moscone, we began to extend opportunities to women, to racial minorities, to neighborhood people to be a part of the whole operation of the city in a very wonderful way.  We also included some people that turned out not to be so good, Jim Jones.  When the operation involving Jim Jones, his appointment to the housing authority [San Francisco Housing Authority] and all of that started to go bad, and then the Jones operation created a problem in Guyana that resulted in so many people dying, and when now congresswoman Jackie Speier was injured, Congressman Leo Ryan was assassinated on the tarmac, those were all really bad times.  Moscone was still mayor.  Shortly after the Jonestown [Guyana] incident and the killings, Moscone was killed and so was Harvey Milk by a supervisor named Dan White who had resigned but wanted his job back.  I was a practicing lawyer, I was not the speaker, I was a practicing lawyer here in San Francisco.  I was actually upstairs trying a case when Moscone was assassinated downstairs.  Most of us live to this day to regret our association and our exposure to Jim Jones and the horror that he created, almost as much as we just bristle and are always sad that Moscone's life was cut short.  That incident and the combination of those things, turned me completely off on being a part of local government.  I didn't want to be a part of local government.  It didn't feel right.  It didn't have any of the flavor of what I had read about and knew about government really to be in this country.  And so going back to Sacramento [California] after helping elect Dianne Feinstein to replace Moscone in the mayor's race, I absent myself from this city altogether.  Not until term limits in 1990 did I begin to think rationally that there was some other things maybe I could do.  Things that I would do, however, were all in Sacramento.  There appeared to be a senate seat about to open and I thought I'd run for senate [California State Senate], once I finished the tenure as speaker under term limits.  And, again, the Burton machine played a role.  Phil Burton [Phillip Burton] had died.  His widow, Sala Burton [Sala Galante Burton], had also died.  Sala's successor, Nancy Pelosi, who had been our party person back in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s], and had done such a wonderful job of running the Democratic Party statewide, stepped up and became the replacement for what had been a Burton congressional seat, a Phil Burton congressional seat.  John Burton, who was my colleague in the legislature [California State Legislature], had left, went off to [U.S.] Congress for ten years, had some medical issues and some abuse issues, some substance problems, he had quit and gone and taken care of himself personally, but he had come back and considered running for legislature, so there were all kinds of things going on; and so by the time term limits really impacted on the, on the diocese, so to speak, was the two items.
Story_ID: 653901
Speaker 1: There was the mayorship and there was the senate seat.  I zeroed in on the senate seat.  Burton zeroed in on the mayorship.  There was an incumbent mayor and the measuring tools in the focus groups, the focus groups said Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] can win either one.  He can win the mayorship or he can win the state senate seat.  Same focus groups and the same measuring tools said John Burton loses the mayorship, but could win the senate seat.  Under the terms and conditions of the Burton operation, there was no question I would have to run for the one that I could exclusively win, John would run for the one that both of us could win.  That's how I became a candidate for the mayorship.  It was never I wanted to be mayor, period.  Never, I wanted to be mayor.  The Moscone [George Moscone] assassination and the local government type things and the magic of managing the State of California and interacting with the governor and interacting with a member from Porterville [California] or a member from Dinuba [California], or a member from San Bernardino [California], a member from any other place, Carmel [Carmel-by-the-Sea, California], was far more interesting to me than somebody from the Sunset [Sunset District, San Francisco, California] or the Richmond [Richmond District, San Francisco, California], or Pacific Heights [San Francisco, California].  That was not of interest.  But under the Burton rules, and everything we had been taught, selfishness is not one of the factors that you deal with.  So I ran for mayor and Burton ran for the state senate [California State Senate].  He won the state senate and I beat the incumbent mayor [Frank Jordan], and as soon as I beat the incumbent mayor, oh my god, I got to do the job now.  What do I do?  I had spent a lot of time trying to abolish local government so why would I be (laughter) dedicated now.  You ran a facility in which the quake had destroyed the building, you couldn't go to city hall, it was off limits, it was being rehabbed.  You were in the old war memorial, Veterans Building, not even the War Memorial [San Francisco War Memorial and Performing Arts Center, San Francisco, California].  You had all kinds of challenges of unfinished things and, so suddenly, I actually had to go from theory and policy to action, and within a year I have no reservations about saying, that year of being the mayor wiped out all of the alleged superior pleasure that came from being speaker [of the California State Assembly] for fifteen--almost fifteen years.
Story_ID: 653902
Speaker 1: Being the mayorship, holding the mayorship, there was nothing like it; but getting elected was tough because there was an incumbent mayor, and you really did have to be kind of clever in being to get, defeating that person, particularly when I had never run citywide.  I'd run in a district, a district that I owned, literally, electorally speaking, but now I had to run all over, and the Burton influence was good among the Asians and among the people in Hunters Point-Bayview [Bayview-Hunters Point, San Francisco, California], and good among many of the people in organized labor, but that was not the whole city.  So we literally had to revamp the whole political operation, unlike anything we'd ever done before.  I had not been a candidate for anything where I'd shook a voter's hands for a long time, but we did exactly that in pursuit of the mayorship.  We did--there was a cap on how much money any single entity could give you for that job.  We went nationwide to get, to raise the money to get elected to the mayorship because there was a seven hundred and fifty dollar maximum donation level and we needed about $5 million.  That's a lot of people.  So all of my national contacts generated by virtue of the speakership, and my national stature benefited, we benefited from it.  We started our sweep across the nation in Seattle [Washington] and Tacoma [Washington].  My brother [James Walton] was the city manager of Tacoma and part, and he was a principal in that, you know, politics in that western part of the United States, and so we started there, and then we went city after city after city across the nation over a three day period.  And there's some interesting contributors in that cycle.  The word when Donald Trump [Donald John Trump] said at one of his events, one of the debates, "Hey I look around, I've given all these people money."  Donald Trump raised money for me for the mayorship of San Francisco [California] so many years ago that it's kind of funny to reflect upon it.  But that way--we raised money in Atlanta [Georgia], we raised money and in Boston [Massachusetts], we raised money in Connecticut.  We raised money in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  We raised money in New York [New York] or Washington, D.C., in Dallas, Texas, in New Orleans [Louisiana].  We raised money all over the nation, Denver, Colorado.  We raised money all over the nation.  A fellow named Darius Anderson was the coordinator of all of that and it was hard work but we did what I had no done since winning in 1964 in any political campaign.  And we ended up with some good things occurring, because a lot of mistakes were made by the incumbent mayor, including taking a shower with two L.A. [Los Angeles, California] disc jockeys [Mark Thompson and Brian Phelps] for the purpose of a stunt, and that obviously hurt him.  Also, we had one more thing going for us that nobody else had ever been able to access politically, was a fellow called Herb Caen that had more to do with the attitudes of people in San Francisco than any other single human being.  Herb Caen had been a Willie Brown aficionado for forty years and he just delighted at being able to report his buddy's antics and his buddy's activities involving the mayorship.  He fought with his newspaper [The San Francisco Chronicle] virtually full time to have them allow him the privilege of reporting, since they were for the incumbent mayor.  And that got offset and the world so learned a casual mention in a humour- humorous way in a Caen column was better than an editorial endorsement.
Story_ID: 653903
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Didn't that cause you problems in the back--black community though where people didn't quite understand some of the jabs that he would take at you?  You were looking at your name in the column.
Speaker 2: Well, first and foremost, I have never allowed anybody but me to determine whether or not something hurt me (laughter).  That, that, that I live by.  I live by that 'til this day, and so I never paid, frankly, any attention to what other people said, somebody's conducts and somebody's comments were.  You are correct, there were a number of people, not only in the black community, in some of the other communities, and that's still a reality today.  They still think, at all times, everything that's said about me ought to be very favorable, and I have always said whether favorable or not, the brand is Willie Brown [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown] and that's all that counts.
Speaker 1: The Herb Caen mystique still lives because every Friday you still lunch at the same restaurant and sit in the same window where everybody can see you, minus Herb, but with your good friend Wilkes Bashford.
Speaker 2: No, there were six of us.
Speaker 1: Six of you.  Well, the people that mentioned--got mentioned the most were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We've lost two--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: --Herb and Matthew.  Matthew Kelly just died.  Herb died.  I actually performed Herb's fourth marriage I think it was, in 1996, the Gettys gave me their plane to fly to Mineola, Texas and I took Herb and Ann [Ann Moller Caen] and some other folk with me to bring the train into Mineola.  Now that I'm mayor [of San Francisco, California], my friend Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had got the train to stop in Mineola, something the train had never done before, but we had to go for the inaugural ride and in that process Herb convinced me I had to come back and perform the marriage for he and Ann, and I did, and then, of course, we lost her in '97 [1997], February '97 [1997], to lung cancer, but nevertheless, all of the involvement of Herb is as if Herb is still alive today.  On the Christmas lunch no woman is ever invited to participate in the boys, the six men lunch that we been doing since the '70s [1970s] at Le Central [San Francisco, California].  Herb has died, Matthew has now died.  Ann Caen, Herb's widow, is invited every Christmas to the Christmas lunch; and it's the only time any woman is invited to participate.
Story_ID: 653904
Speaker 1: So you have lost some colleagues back in the legislature [California State Legislature], but now you're in the city and you're beginning to discover as you run for election and get to know the community better, even though you lived here all your life, that there're things you want and you interested, you wanna protect, and what you want to push forward.  Some people said you ran like a freight train.
Speaker 2: Let me tell you, you know Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], when I looked at the speakership [of the California State Assembly] and saw what needed to be done to perfect the speakership on behalf of the membership, I looked at the city the same way.  On the first day in which I was a candidate, it was a debate in June of 1995, and your colleague, Rollin Post was the moderator of that debate.  It was at the Italian Athletic Club [San Francisco Italian Athletic Club] up on Stockton Street [San Francisco, California], and it was all the candidates, including the incumbent major, Frank Jordan, was there and I prayed that I didn't get the first question 'cause I didn't know a whole lot about local government and it's interesting, the question was about affordable housing.  The mayor was terrible on that question because he spent time attacking me.  And Roberta Achtenberg, who was a undersecretary of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] at that time, very knowledgeable about housing, had spent full time writing a good answer and when she was next in the line for--to respond, she gave an incredible answer.  She never looked up from the pad and lo and behold I watched the audience and it did not appear that there were too many people listening to her, either.  The third person to speak, and answer the question, was Angela Alioto, the daughter of the late Joseph L. Alioto [Joseph Alioto].  She had been a supervisor a long time.  She may have been president of the board [San Francisco Board of Supervisors] at the time possibly, and she was a knowledgeable San Franciscan, but for whatever reason, she had lost concentration and she leaned over to me 'cause I was next in line to speak, and she said, "What was the question?"  And I, of course, saw the opportunity to substantially reduce her influence so I told her, "Something about health I think."  And she talked about healthcare, not housing.  And then it was my turn, knowing that nobody had heard Roberta, I took what Roberta said and counseled it and moved it around and added some of the flavor of Sacramento [California] and gave the best housing answer anybody had ever heard, and the two other people were just people who run for office, no matter what, so I knew they didn't count, and from that moment on, after that debate, it became clear that you had to assume that the guy from the legislature was going to be the competitor for the mayor and we went around the city doing debates from that point on, and press availabilities and what have you, and it turned out it was a lot of fun to run, but then I got elected.  I got elected December of 1995, and I got to tell you that the first day, a sink hole occurred in Sea Cliff in San Francisco [California] and I got my first, and I'm not sworn in yet, I got my first exposure to what it's like to run out there with the fire department [San Francisco Fire Department] and the police department [San Francisco Police Department] and the Department of Public Works.  All these people, none of whom knew me from Adam, other than by reputation, because again, I had never been a part of city government.  Nothing that the city does operationally reflected itself, similar to what we do at the state level.  Giving orders meant nothing in the city.  You got civil service, you got union contracts--you got all those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 653905
Speaker 1: But it was the opportunity to start and really observe; and so by the time I got to Veterans Building on Venice Avenue [San Francisco, California] I was ready to be challenged by the whole system, and the system included resurrecting the city at a $90 million deficit, and that deficit had been rolled over and over by previous mayors.  It had a public transportation system that had not been properly maintained, properly repaired, or upgraded in better than fifteen years.  It had a collection of employees who were pretty indifferent to doing their job because they were protected by so many means by which you couldn't touch them.  It had a sewer system that was challenged, because Hetch Hetchy [Hetch Hetchy Reservoir] by then likewise didn't have a whole lot of maintenance and what have you.  I was stunned with the volume of things that instantly needed to be done.  Fortunately for me, having been at the state level so long and having all the national relationships, I instantly copied what Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] had done.  He put together an economic summit before he was sworn in when he got elected in '92 [1992].  I put together a summit on the future for San Francisco [California].  Did it at the Fairmont hotel [Fairmont San Francisco, San Francisco, California], within the first two or three months of my mayorship, and I brought in a successful mayor, Daley [Richard M. Daley] out of Chicago [Illinois], who was considered like, the guy who could run cities.  I brought in Milt Friedman [Milton Friedman], who was a genius.  I brought in George Shultz [George P. Shultz].  I had this combination of people helping to shape what ought to be the mission for the city for the next ten or fifteen years.  We put together a short term plan, a medium term plan and a long term plan, and then I set about to get the supervisorial support of each one.  To get--I replaced many commissioners and had appointed people who would immediately glom on to what was a program to rescue this city.  I made sure that there African Americans head of boards and commissions.  Asians, head of boards and commissions.  Latinos, head of boards and commissions.  I made sure that there was a combination of staffing people that were credentialed, and I brought them in from the outside, I brought them in from wherever I could get them because the business of instituting something that would make San Francisco the spectacular city that I thought it could be, became a great challenge, and to utilize all of my national relationships and my operation with the federal government, in particular the Clinton administration and with the [U.S.] Congress and the power that came from Nancy's [Nancy Pelosi] presence there, and others, it became a great set of tools to use to make this city what this city is frankly today.
Story_ID: 653906
Speaker 1: We didn't mention it, but on that list, I'm not sure where the AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome] epidemic was at that point in your career (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's go backwards a little bit, because it was in the middle '80s [1980s] when the business of all these young males in San Francisco [California] becoming potentially fatally sick with something that nobody understood.  And it seemed to evidence itself in the gay community, I got with George Deukmejian, the governor, Republican, got him to give the University of California a huge amount of money to do research.  I got that commitment on a Wednesday, that he would sign it if I delivered it to him on Monday in a package of things.  I didn't have anything other than the vision.  I had Joanne Murphy and people, the University of California here [University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California] and at UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], spend the whole weekend putting together a proposal for the research project that would be funded by, I think it was about $50 million.  It was the first public money ever spent and it wasn't called AIDS then.  It had a different name because no one really knew what it was.  But it was a first effort and following the research that was done in a relatively short period of time, by the university, we in America and we in the world probably, at that stage knew that there was a major health challenge that could wreck the lives of lots of people if we didn't get our, a handle on it.  Over the years from the time of that research 'til the time I reached the mayorship [of San Francisco, California], major steps and achievements had been taken.  We discovered that it was AIDS or HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] as it was initially called.  We understood very clearly that it had international implications.  We understood that the [U.S.] Congress had to be involved.  We understood that the whole business of early intervention and early identification and all the preventative methods had to be employed, so by the time I became mayor, I really was in a position where I actually brought on, for staff purposes, in the mayor's office, someone to deal directly on behalf of, and be the advocate to address that particular issue.
Story_ID: 653907
Speaker 1: One of many challenges that you faced, as you outlined at the beginning, I don't know if you can categorize that because there were so many things that you were trying to do.  What was the most difficult part outside of getting people with titles on your team, in time to resurrect the city so to speak?
Speaker 2: Well, the most difficult part were the crazy rules that exist in this city that adversely affects the exercise of power by the chief executive.  We had to overcome many of those and in some cases, it was in defiance of the interpretation of existing rules.  As a matter of fact, Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], the city attorney is supposed to be the attorney for the mayor.  I only understand the attorneyship if I hire you.  City attorneys are elected.  So I decided he was not my lawyer.  I got my own lawyer because I wanted my lawyer to implement my interpretation.  I didn't want my lawyer to implement his interpretation and we managed to overcome things of that nature.  Then we went to the voters for some things.  Like, for an example, we went to the voters with the blessings of Cecil Williams, Quentin Kopp and Roberta Achtenberg as the co-chair for the ballpark [AT&T Park, San Francisco, California].  We got the ballpark done.  We had to back off, for an example Belva, on things like, "I can fix Muni [San Francisco Municipal Railway] in 100 days."  Well, to my utter embarrassment, that wasn't a piece of rolling stock of Muni that was under fifteen years old, twelve to fifteen years old, which means we had to replace all of the entire fleet ultimately, and you can't do that literally overnight.  And the same goes for a whole series of things that we need to get the approval for because the city had established a means by which, to eliminate the possibility of any significant growth in any lifetime for anybody so to speak.  We obviously needed to jam that much faster, and, by the way, in terms of fixing city hall [San Francisco City Hall, San Francisco, California].  It was 1989 when the quake hit.  This city was still red tagged on many public structures and many public facilities, including city hall and the opera house [War Memorial Opera House, San Francisco, California] and the Bill Graham auditorium [Bill Graham Civic Auditorium, San Francisco, California] and a library.  There were so many things that needed to be done that even with my level of energy, I couldn't get my hands around all of them at the same time.  And there was a clearly an absence of a great assistance.  Fortunately for me, Barbara Kaufman became the chair of the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors], great ally.  I ended up appointing six members of that board.  No other mayor has had six appointments to the board.  It's eleven men on the board.  I appointed a majority of the members of the board.  You only get to appoint if there are vacancies that occur during the time that someone else has already been so elected, but simultaneously, they came up with this crazy idea of electing supervisors by districts.  They came up with this craz id- they implemented process rather than citywide, they, there was a constant ongoing war in the city where those who were here before me and those who hope to be here after I'm gone, and so there was always a war, so unlike Sacramento [California] where I had [HistoryMaker] Maxine Waters, Elihu Harris and Mike Roos and Richard Alatorre, I had an army of subs who really could execute.  They could meet with me for an hour and go execute.  I didn't have that in San Francisco [California] unfortunately.  It was almost like a one man show.  Of course, I had my commissioners.  Of course, I had the people that I appointed to various boards, but they too had lived for years with the business of a dysfunctional city designed not to succeed in most ways and so I had to get some means by which to overcome that.  Fortunately, I had people like Don Fisher [Donald Fisher], Walter Shorenstein, whole host of folk that were so overjoyed.
Speaker 1: That's a list of very wealthy--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  But they were so overjoyed with somebody who really wanted to be a CEO, who really wanted to operate like a CEO and they literally gave me a blank check to be of assistance, and they didn't have the down side of a blank check from the tech industry because there was no tech industry.  We were just beginning to think maybe there might be a boom on the technology side, and so we did some marvelous things to enhance the opportunity to exercise the power that had probably not been exercised since Joe Alioto [Joseph Alioto].
Story_ID: 653908
Speaker 1: You spoke about your ability to, to appoint supervisors, your ability to name department heads so that the machine that you put together worked more closely.  In the background of your development though, there was this guy named Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett.  Very few people know much about him, except he was a guy that ran a black newspaper and he was a Socialist.  You did something that amazed everybody.  You changed the name of the street in front of city hall [San Francisco City Hall, San Francisco, California], the Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett Way [sic. Dr. Carlton B. Goodlett Place].  Tell me about that, why you did it and how you did it.
Speaker 2: One of my appointees, a fellow named Michael Yaki, who had been chief of staff to Nancy Pelosi here in the city I appointed, my first appointment to the Board of Supervisors [San Francisco Board of Supervisors].  He replaced the person who got elected district attorney.  He replaced Hallinan [Terence Hallinan] and one the jobs he had to do was to make sure that the acknowledgement of people who had helped build the city, who had helped get me elected, and who had made incredible, had over their lives impacts on the city.  Carlton Benjamin Goodlett was exactly that kind of person in every way.  He owned the Sun-Reporter newspaper.  He literally organized a financial institution out of his medical bag, an S and L [savings and loan] out of his medical bag.  He ran for governor back in the '60s [1960s] against Brown [Pat Brown].  He was awesome in every way and impossible to get along with.  He was just perfect though to call upon in every way.  He was so bright.  He had been gifted with a set of brains that led him into Ph.D. before he became an M.D.  The Ph.D. was from the University of California [University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California].  So he was just fabulous in every way, so it was a no brainer when Michael Yaki moved the measure that caused the area surrounding city hall and in particular, the address of city hall to be named in honor of Carlton Benjamin Goodlett.  That occurred while I was mayor.  I signed that into law and it's one of the good things; and Goodlett's importance was frankly equal to almost anyone else who came along during my mayorship.
Story_ID: 653909
Speaker 1: The importance of the black community, has it, with the small the numbers, ever been given the power to manage itself, or was there the ability for this community of small folks to have a real impact on--
Speaker 2: Well, being elected mayor and being the first African American and the only African American every elected mayor of this city [San Francisco, California], literally gave us the opportunity to, without reference to numbers, to be as influential on the results of managing the city on behalf of people of color and not of color.  And so, city hall and city government had probably at every level six hundred or more people of color, African Americans in particular, doing the job of helping to run the city.  Every board, every commission, every significant place in city government had representation reflective of the diversity of this city, without reference to their numbers.  In the past, people had made political based upon your percentage of the vote and for the first time that was totally ignored and disregarded.  It was the population of the city that was the agenda item reflective of everything that we were doing and did it with the Chinese community in the same way.  We did it with the Latino community.  We did it with the Filipino community.  We did it with the Vietnamese community.  I mean it was just fabulous to be able to bring all these people in, and we did it at every level.  We did it at the most important level of the civic organizations, the cultural organizations, they all had people of color involved in the management of them, involved in the policymaking and the overseeing and the trusteeship.  All of that happened because of one thing, you have an African American sitting in city hall who had the vision that that is the way it ought to be; and who, by hook or crook, produced what needed to be produced to make it happen.
Story_ID: 653910
Speaker 1: You're sitting in a building that's here only because, at least this portion of it, because of you.
Speaker 2: It's one of the mitigations.  You want to build the St. Regis hotel [The St. Regis San Francisco, San Francisco, California], mitigation says you give us the mitigation that you sit in called MoAD and so the superstructure for MoAD came at the expense of one of the concessions made by the authority to build the hotel, and then, of course, we the public, all of us participated in doing all the things that needed to be done for the interior and for the operation for programmatic purposes.  And interestingly enough, we did that in multiple places.  We did that for the Contemporary Jewish Museum [San Francisco, California].  We did that for the Mexican Museum [San Francisco, California] which is not yet finished but it is part of a construction project directly across the street from here.  We did that in every aspect of the replacement of the de Young Museum [San Francisco, California] for, after the quake, it got knocked out.  We did that for the academy of science [California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, California].  We did that for the garage that didn't exist under the band concourse [Music Concourse, San Francisco, California] to make those two facilities really work.  Well, we just had a ball doing all of those kinds of things from the mayor's standpoint, and we did them in a very short period of time, and we did it over, in many cases, stepping on all the rules that normally bar you from doing anything in one generation.
Speaker 1: This, you call the MoAD, but it's the Museum of the African Diaspora [San Francisco, California]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --a huge idea in a small facility, you had, did you have difficulty convincing people that this was something San Francisco [California] needed or this community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had more trouble, frankly, convincing black people that this is something that San Francisco needed because there were so many people in the black community that kept thinking community center rather than something as significant as the Museum of the African Diaspora.  They really wanted it.  And we had arguments with, we had arguments with [HistoryMaker] Danny Glover, we had arguments with a whole collection of people, but what did we get, we got what we're in.
Speaker 1: A museum focused on the world.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And our closeness to one another because of Africa.
Story_ID: 653911
Speaker 1: We talked about a lot of things but we di- we haven't talked about what has been the pitfall in many political lives, their personal life.  You've managed to get through with whatever comes your way, completely dusted off from whatever dust was sent your way.  Talk about how you managed to also hold your personal life together around all of these issues that you tackled over the years.
Speaker 2: I simply have been, and still am, of the opinion that you really can't do the public job unless you do the private job, unless you take care of your own personal family obligations, period.  And you have to do it with the same level of enthusiasm and the same level of the application of skills, etcetera, and fortunately I've been able to do that with reference to my own family situation.  I am still married to Blanche Brown [Blanche Vitero Brown], almost sixty years now of being married to her and almost forty years of not living with her or she not with me, but nevertheless, as enthusiastic about our mutual relationships and love for each other and the same goes with the four children, three come of that [Susan Brown, Robin Brown Freidel and Michael Brown], and one [Sydney Brown] of another [Carolyn Carpeneti], or all of those, and grandchildren, five grandchildren, and a collection of nieces and nephews, some twenty-three nieces and nephews and with all the bloodline people that come from those relationships, and so all of those are administered to as religiously and as direct as would be any of the so called civic problems or state problems that have ever come my way and in many cases, time spent on a preference basis dealing with those issues exceeds anything that was done in public life and without, in many cases, the assistance of anybody from public life, and frankly, it's been a joy because the celebration that comes from whatever is bestowed upon me and to have the family be an intimate part of every aspect of that knowing that they have licensed me by not imposing up on me exclusivity.  They've allowed me to practice my hobby and do what I ever wanted to do on the outside with their support and with their enthusiastic involvement where they deem it appropriate, and I have been very careful at no point to exploit any of them as a shield, period, and they have returned the same favor.
Speaker 1: A miracle, your family, your three children with Blanche, your other daughter, and yet they're all family, they're together celebrating things.  That doesn't happen regularly.
Speaker 2: Well, my life has not been happening regularly, you got to understand that it takes work to do all these things.  It takes involvement to do all these things and you gotta be sincere in doing.  You cannot fake it, you really do have to go to the kid's performance at the, at whatever theater, or wherever that kid is performing, you gotta go there and you gotta go there paying attention to what's happening with any member of your family, period.  And I do that, I do that regularly.  That's priority for me.  It's priority for them, and without sacrificing any of the public responsibility; and it can be done, it just means you gotta do it.
Story_ID: 653912
Speaker 1: Let's talk a bit about some of the things that you've done that are quite unusual.  You have--you have part of the bay bridge [San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge] named for you and we found that to be a unique honor that an African American individual would have a major transport point like that named for them.
Speaker 2: Well, that came about because a woman named Alice Huffman [Alice A. Huffman] who heads the western region for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], she's been a political activist for years, she worked for CTA, the California Teachers Association, during the time that I served as, as the speaker and CTA could not get to me unless they came in through Alice.  Alice also had an overriding commitment to African Americans and the images of African Americans and the structure involving the African American world and the needs that that community has and she's had for a long time an abiding commitment that there needed to be symbols of African Americans beyond the African American community, and one of the symbols that she came up with was the bridge, and she declined to discuss it with me, nor allow me to know that she was doing it because she has always known that I have discouraged her from doing anything on my behalf.  I've literally said one of the things that have made my life successful in the public arena is that I'm not perceived as looking out for me.  I'm not perceived as trying to get things for me, and going after that bridge would be traumatic for white people, let alone for black people, but it would be, Alice understood that.  Alice put all of that together, got the legislature [California State Legislature] to pass it over the objections of Governor Brown [Jerry Brown] who openly opposed the idea.  And Alice being the formidable technician that she can be on public policy issues, clearly parlayed it in such a way that it became a reality, and frankly it is from a symbolic standpoint, the most important item that's been done in my name, period, and have that celebration take place two years and six months ago, is just incredible, and the fact that it's second in the nation, the Washington Bridge [George Washington Bridge] is first, Bay Bridge is second and lo and behold, the George Washington is first and the Willie Brown [Willie L. Brown Jr. Bridge] is second.  George [President George Washington] was the father of the country.  What does that make me?
Story_ID: 653913
Speaker 1: Okay, there's one altar to which you do worship and it goes with things that go on your body.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So let's talk about you and clothes and color and fun stuff.
Speaker 2: Well, first and foremost, I've been interested in clothing from day one.  I actually thought about, educationally speaking, becoming a designer of clothing.  Even in Mineola [Texas], that's what I wanted to do, and in Mineola, you had to order things from Sears, Roebuck [Sears, Roebuck and Co.].  I don't know anything about all--Vogue and all these people, and I'll tell you one story.  I saw a pair of boots, ankle boots, with a gold chain hanging over the front of them, in the Sears, Roebuck catalog.  There's no way anybody in my family could afford that, but I was a shoeshine boy at that time, and so I start saving my tips from shoe shine to buy those shoes, and I ordered those shoes, but it took me a long time to pay for them.  And when they were finally shipped to me, I'd outgrown them, and, but that didn't bother me, I ruined my feet wearing those shoes.  I did the same thing with reference to many other items of clothing, and so when my uncle [Brown's maternal uncle, Itsie Collins] who had the same interest in clothing as I had, finally got me here in California, the first day he took me to Howard's Clothing on, on Market Street [San Francisco, California], and I got a blue serge, double breasted suit with a yellow tie and a light blue shirt and a pair of black shoes.  A black man named Marion Wilson [ph.] was the salesman down there and he is the one that delivered that suit of clothing.  And I kept that suit of clothing for a long time and I've added to that suit of clothing year in and year out, up to and including the time that I met my friend Wilkes Bashford.  My life long clothier is a fellow named Wilkes Bashford.  I met him in the '60s [1960s] and at that time, I had graduated from law school [University of California, Hastings College of the Law, San Francisco, California], was practicing law and had a family and was not making a whole lot of money, but I was wearing Brooks Brothers three sixty-fives, and they were those, they looked like those suits you get if you go to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], they were three button, they were slim and trim and a bad fabric.  I didn't think it was bad then, but I know it's bad now, and lo and behold I happened to wander into this store in a garage over on Sutter Street and met Wilkes and his crowd and bought a suit from them and got into Brionis, and then into Kitons, and then Brunello Cucinelli, and then into Loro Piana, into to Ralph Lauren, into Versace, just into a whole host of fabulous designers and over the years, over the forty or fifty years, I have literally been almost as if I was the model for the Wilkes Bashford store.  They would get a piece of fabric, have me sign off on it, make an outfit that I would wear and they could highlight and help me build a wardrobe appropriately, and that's where I still am.  I love clothing.  I think every aspect of what one in public life should do is pay as much attention to what he or she looks like on any given occasion representing the public as they do on what they say.
Story_ID: 653914
Speaker 1: You love clothes, you love education.  It's, you've demonstrated it through the schools that have been named for you, the money you just raised for your, for your old college.  Talk about education and why you put it way up there high in your public image.
Speaker 2: It's the number one shield for me.  Everything that I've done, everything that I have, came about because there was a group of, in many cases, unqualified black teachers in Mineola [at Addie E. McFarland High School, Mineola, Texas] who really wanted to see all those students, including me, succeed.  They knew that if you were armed with knowledge, you were armed and that couldn't be taken away from you and my mother [Minnie Collins Boyd], the same way.  My grandmother [Anna Lee Nolan Collins] to a lesser extent, my uncle [Itsie Collins], all brow beat education into all of us.  My friends were the same way, my pastor [Hamilton T. Boswell] was the same way.  They really said you've got to be credentialed in this day and age and you got to be credentialed for as long as you could possibly be and for as high as you can possibly go.  And so, in- invariably, education has been a great force in my life.  Assumptions about who you are and what you're about sometimes based upon what credentials you have on paper, frankly that's why lots of people pony up educational credentials, because in the system there, it's so important, period.  And this morning at breakfast I was sitting here talking to some people and I was just thinking, they were discussing how they graduated from Stanford [Stanford University, Stanford, California] and they did this at Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], and they did this, and here I'm sitting there from SF State [San Francisco State College; San Francisco State University, San Francisco, California] (laughter) , yet you ain't near where I am, but nevertheless, education had been the k- tool.
Speaker 1: So there's that Willie Brown Fellowship [Willie L. Brown, Jr. Fellowship Program] at State that you just raised about a million dollars (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Well that's part of the public policy institute that I operate [Willie L. Brown, Jr. Institute on Politics and Public Service, San Francisco, California] and we have at San Francisco State, we have a whole component of my memorabilia, a whole component of all of my papers, a whole component of all of the video clips, all of the news stories, all of the things that's ever been done, or that I've ever done.  Every speech that I've made that we still have a copy of, it's at SF State, so it can be a teaching tool for all of the students.  Simultaneously, we have raised money and we keep raising money.  We do internships in partnership with San Francisco State because I do believe that there needs to be an emphasis placed on people participating in public life running and staffing and they got to be appropriately trained.  And so we raise enough money to make the Willie Brown internship, scholarship so to speak, for a scholar, equal to almost any other internship or scholarship that you can get and hopefully, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty years from today, when somebody runs and wins the presidency, nothing would please my relatives more than to say, "That was a Willie Brown scholar."
Story_ID: 653915
Speaker 1: Anything left that you want to do that you haven't done?
Speaker 2: Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], yes.  I am desperate to live long enough to see individual members of my family begin to pick up in the world of public life where I am.  So far not one of them has shown any interest, but I want to live long enough to get at least one into it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I have three--three more questions.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What hopes or concerns does he have, well, no, first about him, what does he still want to do that he hasn't done in his life, that's a different thing?
Speaker 2: Didn't I just ask him that?  I did.
Speaker 1: No, there's nothing else I want, I've said--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Anything else?
Speaker 1: Nothing else.
Story_ID: 653916
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  So what hopes and concerns does he have about the black community?
Speaker 2: About what?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  The black community (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Hopes and concerns, is that it?  Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what does he think of the legacy of his generation and his own legacy, so three.
Speaker 2: Legacy, okay.  Well let's talk legacy, that's easy, that's an easy one I guess, maybe an easy one.  I guess it involves, yeah, what are your hopes and concerns about black people and their place in life, their status in life?
Speaker 1: I'm hopeful Belva [HistoryMaker Belva Davis], that talented black people will start elevating public participation in policy making and decision making.  They'll elevate it to the same level that they do the pursuit of money.  We've got too many African Americans graduating from all black schools [HBCUs], interested in becoming investment bankers, interested in becoming all the things that produce a great volume of dollars, but not enough wanting to do what Louie Stokes [sic. Carl Stokes] did in Cleveland [Ohio], or not enough on what [HistoryMaker] Richard Hatcher did in Gary [Indiana], or not enough on what David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins] tried to do in New York [New York], not enough on what other people have done, the Franklin, the Franklin [HistoryMaker John Hope Franklin] types who stepped up on the education side who did what they attempted to do.  I'm always fascinated with the absence of African Americans trying to pull together all of the art that's being produced by African Americans and making it a part of who we are and what we're about, and I am always enhanced when I hear of some African American become, becoming head of let's say like Ohio State University [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] or one of the other places.  I'm hopeful that he will bring in a whole series of young African Americans and I really am blown away frankly by the absence of, from the last administration [of HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] on trying to protect black colleges and universities, historical black colleges and universities where most of us are ultimately educated.  I wanna see all of those kinds of things morph into what got Thurgood Marshall to do what he did when he represented in Brown versus Board of Education [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  I want those kinds of precedents, I want another Adam Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] coming out of New York or some other place, making the same kind of advocacy on behalf of African Americans.  That's really what I wanna see, and I wanna see it from all of these new talented blacks.  I am excited as all hell about Cory Booker out of New Jersey, and Kamala Harris out of, out of California and Devon Patrick [sic. HistoryMaker Deval L. Patrick] out of Massachusetts.  We've got some superstars.  I want to see their replacements stepping up so that the next generation following them will be able to do what they've done and even go beyond.
Story_ID: 653917
Speaker 1: That's what I'd like to see; and that's probably the legacy that I'd, I'd love nothing better than to have a volume of African Americans doing what I've done, but doing it in either smaller locales--in California, we finally are growing a number of African Americans in the legislature [California State Legislature] for an example.  And we're growing them not because of black communities, we just don't have the volume of black voters to elect you, but in Pasadena [California] we elected a black man.  In San Bernardino [California], Riverside [California], we've elected a black woman.  In Sacramento, California, we've elected two black folk, one of them from a place where I think he's the only black that lives in that particular district.  I wanna see that happen, and that's the legacy of being who I am.
Speaker 2: It's like the preacher's sermon, I don't have anything else to say after that.  Who's black that wouldn't want and dream of that day?  Well said, Willie [HistoryMaker Willie L. Brown].
Speaker 1: All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well said.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Thank you very much.
