Story_ID: 34808
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Chief Henry.  Sir, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is William Francis Bundy, B-U-N-D-Y is the spelling of the last name.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 12, 1946.  I was born in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: I'm a professor at the U.S. Naval War College in the Center for Naval Warfare Studies.
Speaker 1: Okay, and just for the record, what was your rank when you were serving in the [U.S.] Navy, full time?
Speaker 2: I retired as a commander.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, and, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 27th of April, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: You're at the U.S. Naval War College [Newport, Rhode Island], and we are in the Ward Room of the Navy Command College.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34809
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we always ask as kind of a warm up, and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like blue shell crabs.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Again, the color is blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I, I tend to like summer.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: My favorite vacation destination these days is Orlando [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay, and the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have to think about that.  We have one for our Gravely Group which is "Knowledge and courage,"-"By knowledge and courage."  I think that will have to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 34810
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but we'll start with your mother's side first--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll put 'em together.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's first name is Paulyne and it has an unusual spelling, P-A-U-L-Y-N-E.  Her middle name is Louise.  Her maiden name is Johnson, and her married name is Bundy, B-U-N-D-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I recorded that for you.  I don't have that memorized.  It's in, it's I think the 15th of March, 1910.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Stonewall, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and what are the stories about their occupations or--
Speaker 2: Well, I would probably start by talking about my grandfather.  My grandfather's name is Charles Johnson, and the thing that I remember about him for our history is that he, he was trumpet player.  And he played with Louis Armstrong's band.  And so, for I guess, most of his young years, he was on the road as a musician.  My grandmother lived--
Speaker 1: Well, let's just stop a minute on that one, just for that, just for the sake of, if he's playing trumpet with Louis Armstrong, you know he gotta be good.
Speaker 2: Well, he was pretty good.  He--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had to be.
Speaker 2: --played for quite some time.  And in his latter years, you know, later on, he gave up music and, you know, he had a, kind of a regular day job.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that's, so, you know, if you played some other instrument, you might slide--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --but you're not gonna slide on the trumpet with Louis Armstrong.
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, he wanted me to play the trumpet, and I was kind of a frail youngster, and that didn't work too well for me.  So I, I learned to play the drums.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And so I didn't pick up his music ability.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's something.  So, I just wanted to chew on that for a minute.  So we can--
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: --go with your grandmother now.
Speaker 2: That's all right.  The grandmother, her name is Pauline Johnson, and P-A-U-L-I-N-E.  And she lived in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] for most of my youth.  And I used to spend summers with her.  There were four brothers from my mother, and they all lived in the Philadelphia area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, and well, are there any stories that are passed down from your grandfather about--
Speaker 2: About Louis Armstrong?
Speaker 1: Yeah, about traveling with Louis?
Speaker 2: No, he never, he never really talked about it that much.  I mean that, we knew that to be the case.  The family spent a lot of time in Long Island [New York], and there were some connections to Cubans in my mother's family.  And that's about all I really have to kind of share.  The Philadelphia connection was pretty important.  I used to spend summers up there when I was in the, in my teen years.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you say your grandmother was connected to some Cubans in the Long Island area?
Speaker 2: Well, it was probably on my grandfather's side actually.  And back in those days, they lived in Long Island, and my--the story goes that, you know, there were some Cubans, part of the blood members of the extended family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, well, I know Cuba would have been a venue for Louis Armstrong to go in to play.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I think that's where all those connections came from.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause Cuba was like Las Vegas [Nevada] then.  People would--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --go there to gamble and party.  So--and vacation.  So, now, are there any stories passed down in your family about the family living anywhere other than in the Northeast?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was all in the Northeast for my mother's side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So, so are there any--did, are there any stories from, that go all the way back to the Civil War or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No, not that I know of.
Speaker 1: Okay, and your grandfather, Charles Johnson, is there--are there any stories about how he, who taught him to play the trumpet?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't spend that much time with my grandfather.  And so he didn't share those kinds of, those kinds of stories with me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and did your grandfather or grandmother go to college?  Or did they get a chance--
Speaker 2: No, they, you know, they went to regular grade school.  There were no, no college graduates for my grandparents.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 34811
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] grow up in Stonewall, New York or did she--
Speaker 2: She grew up in Stonewall, and also in Long Island [New York]for a period of time, and then she moved to Baltimore [Maryland], I think in her early twenties, and that's where she met my father [William Cox Bundy].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she--did she have a chance to go to college herself?
Speaker 2: No, she was a high school graduate.  And she would read a lot, but she was not a college graduate.
Speaker 1: Okay, so did she finish in Long Island or--
Speaker 2: I'm, I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, a very unfortunate thing happened along these lines, and that is, my sister had taken many of the family documents, that, you know, that go back with the birth certificates and a number of those things.  And she lost those in an unfortunate incident.  We just, you just can't recover that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You just can't recover that.  And, of course, and many of the, you know, my mother and father have both passed on now.  And my father's sisters are all passed on.  So it's hard to recover that information.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so did your mother have any stories about growing up that she shared with you about any--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She didn't, except she would tell us, you know, correct us and kind of keep us on the straight and narrow.  But she, you know, it was none of those, "I walked, you know, five miles in five feet of snow to go to school" stories.  She didn't do that to us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  But no, she might have talked about what life was like in those days and what she--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No, didn't--
Speaker 1: --liked to do.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, she, when--early in my life, we lived in, on a street called McMechen Street in Baltimore.  And it was about five blocks from Pennsylvania Avenue.  And Pennsylvania Avenue was really the center of African American entertainment in the city on the West side.  And it turned out that on the floor above us, there was a group of singers.  And they were called the Beltones or the Blue Notes, I forget, forget which.  But they would, they would go to New York on the train on the weekend, appear on radio and sing on radio.  So where we lived was, was next to a park, and we lived kind of at the edge of the African American area that abutted the predominantly white area in Baltimore.  And I guess we, we lived rather well, to be quite honest about it.  We had a nice place to live, and we weren't far from, you know, the center of activity there in Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I'm gonna ask you more about that as we go along.  But I just wanted to know what--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --your mother said about growing up and if she--
Speaker 2: No, she didn't do a lot of sharing about that.
Speaker 1: So she was, I would assume that she would be--if her father's [Charles Johnson] on the road with Louis Armstrong a lot, then she and her mother [Pauline Johnson] were probably home alone a lot.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she spent a lot of time with her mother, and, of course, as I said, she had four brothers.  And they all lived, you know, in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New Jersey when I was growing up.
Story_ID: 34812
Speaker 1: All right, well, let's go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name is William Cox, C-O-X, Bundy.
Speaker 1: And so Cox, C-O-X?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's the 14th of April, and I think it's 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Lancaster County, Virginia in a town called Weems, W-E-E-M-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Weems, all right.  Now, again, what can you tell us about your father's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them and--
Speaker 2: My, my grandfather's name is Carey Bundy, C-A-R-E-Y.  And, and his, and my grandmother's name is Mamie.  And they both lived in Weems.  My father and his family were fishermen, along the Rappahannock River and the Chesapeake Bay.  And that's how they made their living.  There were seven, there were seven other children.  Most of them migrated from Weems up North, primarily to Baltimore [Maryland] and New York.  I had one aunt who did very well in life as a caterer and a domestic worker in New York City.  Her name is Eleanor.  I spent probably more time with her than I did with most other people in my father's family.
Speaker 1: Her last name would be?
Speaker 2: Elliott, her married name was Elliott.
Speaker 1: So she was a domestic worker and caterer?
Speaker 2: Right, well, you know, she had clients out in Long Island.  She lived in Brooklyn [New York], and she would go to Long Island [New York] and do domestic work and, of course, they then asked her to cater their parties.  And there became a time when she spent most of her time catering parties out in Long Island for her clients out there.  And she then, one of the clients was a businessman in the city, and he said, look, you don't need to go out to Long Island every day anymore.  I want you to, I want you to really run the kitchen or the, you know, the food service here in my company.  And so she did that in Manhattan [New York], and then on the weekends or whenever they had parties in Long Island, she would cater those parties.  And so she had a bartender and a couple of other people that would work with her, and that's how she, she, you know, made a living in New York City, and did rather well with it, I might add.  The, the other aunts lived in Baltimore.  So two other aunts lived in Baltimore, and I spent quite a bit of time with them too.  One was a domestic, and the other one was a housewife.  As a matter of fact, I'm trying to remember the movie that we just had about the domestics in--
Speaker 1: Oh, 'The Help'.
Speaker 2: 'The Help'--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I, you know, I reflected back on that with my Aunt Sarah.  She would put on her uniform and get on the bus and go out to the suburbs of Maryland and, or, you know, suburbs of Baltimore, and that's where she worked.  And I had another Aunt Cordelia (ph.), and her name's Cordelia Byrd.  And she did rather well.  She married well, and then I had another aunt that I remember.  Her name is Nannie Widey (ph.), and she was the one aunt that stayed in Weems and managed the family land.  The family owned land on the Rappahannock River that had been handed down to them.  Now, there's a story that my father's family is linked to McGeorge Bundy's [United States National Security Advisor to Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson from 1961 through 1966, and president of the Ford Foundation from 1966 through 1979] family over time.
Story_ID: 34813
Speaker 1: And they were very careful with me as I grew up.  As you remember, there was a situation with Emmett Till.  And he was, he was killed in the South, and my parents [William Cox Bundy and Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] would not allow me to go to Virginia.  They said because I was a bit too cocky, and so I never got to go there.  So the story is, I was stationed in Norfolk [Virginia], and I'd just come back from a submarine deployment, and the wife and I said, let's go for a ride.  And so we got in the car, and we're driving along and I said, you know, I've never been to my father's home.  I've never been to Weems [Virginia].  And she said, well, let's go.  And so we found our way from Norfolk, up to what they call the northern neck of Virginia, along the Rappahannock [river].  And we stopped and saw a few people playing tennis.  And we asked them, you know, where might we find Nannie Widey and other, you know, people that would know the Bundys.  And they said, well, go up to the church.  It was a Sunday morning.  And it was a very interesting thing that happened.  I walked into the back of the church, and, of course, a number of people turned around.  And it was like there was my family.  There were all of these people who resembled, you know, me and my father and it was kind of a moving thing for me.  I'd never gone to Virginia.  You know, I was a grown man now, and I had that experience with them.  And so I spent the day talking to a number of the people there and, you know, towards the afternoon, we got back in the car and went back to Norfolk.  And I think I've been back once since then.  My--it turns out my daughter who is married to a Baptist minister, took a church in Weems, in Kilmarnock County.  And so my daughter has spent more time in, you know, the family homeland, if you would call it that, than I ever did.
Speaker 2: So did she have any idea that her husband was gonna be assigned to church in Weems?
Speaker 1: No, no, I think he, you know, as Baptist ministers go, they, he was trying to find a church, and then he got offered a church in Kilmarnock, Virginia, which is a town there.  And so she told me about that, and I said, well, you know, that's where my father's from.  And so she says, well, I guess we ought to go on down there.  And she did.  And she got to meet a number of people from our family, you know, extended members of our family and those that were close to us.  There're about four or five families there, the Dillivers (ph.), excuse me, the Dillivers, the Blackwells and the Bundys all, you know, all lived in that area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  So that's, it's an interesting area.  I've been there to the--near there.  So, okay, now, so your grandfather, Carey Bundy and your grandmother [Mamie Bundy], they lived on that land in--
Speaker 1: They lived on the land there, and, you know, as I said before, they made their living with a bit of farming and also, you know, with fishing there in the Rappahannock and the Chesapeake Bay area.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 34814
Speaker 1: Now, what did your father [William Cox Bundy] say about growing up [in Weems, Virginia]?  Did he grow up on the farm there on the land?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, his stories really revolved around the fishing, you know.  And he said he really liked that.  And there was a time, I guess I was in the junior high school range of age when he took off and went to, went to North Carolina.  It was Wilmington.  He went to Wilmington, North Carolina and, you know, got back on a fishing boat and did fishing for a living during that period of time.  The only thing he said is he didn't like oysters.  He would not do anything with oysters.  And he said he didn't like that.  I remember that about him quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, you know, my mother [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] and father, after the met, my father went into the [U.S.] Army and went over to Europe, you know, during World War II.  And when he came back, he, you know, took part in the GI Bill, became a construction worker, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I never asked, and they never really got too deep into that.  They--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, they--
Speaker 2: I thought they were a very happy couple, you know.  I remember a number of pictures of them together, and in those days, you know, it was, you had pictures of people in the various night clubs and I thought they really enjoyed themselves when they were courting and early in their marriage.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they met in Baltimore [Maryland], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hum.
Speaker 1: And what was your father doing in Baltimore?
Speaker 2: He had, you know, left Virginia and come to Baltimore to find his fortune.  You know, it was that whole migration that we've all read about of African Americans leaving the South and coming North.  Eleanor [Bundy's paternal aunt] went to New York, and my father and two sisters came to Baltimore to find their fortune.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, but after the met--now, did they get married before he went to the service?
Speaker 2: Yes, they were married when he went overseas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 34815
Speaker 1: So dad [William Cox Bundy] served in the [U.S.] Army, right?
Speaker 2: Army, yes.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: He was in a port company, and he was a Sergeant T/4 when he left the Army.  So, you know, he was part of that Army contingent that offloaded the ships in Lahave [ph.], France and pushed stuff out to [George S.] Patton's Army and that's what he did [World War II].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he have any stories about the war?
Speaker 2: He didn't tell a lot of stories about the war.  He, well, he didn't, you know, and I don't think that's remarkable.  A lot of the soldiers who returned did not talk very much about what they experienced.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, so you didn't really get a sense of what it was like in World War II.  Now, this--he would have been in the segregated Army in World War II.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was in the segregated Army.  That, it was a, we call it a port company.  And what they were is stevedores, you know.  They offloaded the ships and provided manual labor over there.  I, I don't think it was until later that we really understood all of the ramifications of the segregated Armed Forces.  You know, there were black [U.S.] Marines, and you don't hear about them.  They went ashore in Iwo Jima [Japan], you know.  They had high numbers of casualties.  They were there in Iwo Jima.  There were black soldiers that went ashore in Normandy [France], and there were black units that operated in Europe, particularly in the Italian campaign.  And, of course, we all know about the Red Tails or the Tuskegee Airmen.  At the same time, you know, on the [U.S.] Navy side, we had a couple of ships that were, that were staffed on the enlisted side, primarily with African Americans.  It was the U.S.S. Mason, which was operating in the Atlantic.  There was the P.C. 1262 where Admiral [Samuel L.] Gravely initially served, operating out of Miami [Florida].  It was one of the coastal defense ships, and there were sailors in what amounted to stevedore companies and port companies on the West coast.  As you recall, there was a major issue in the San Francisco [California] area at an ammunition handling station--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --where--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Port Chicago.
Speaker 2: Port Chicago that blew up and those were mainly African American sailors doing that work.  At the same time, on submarines, you know, African Americans were serving as stewards, and so there were stewards on submarines.  There were stewards on many of the major combatant ships, and there are a couple of books out today that you can read about African Americans who served, not as stewards, but they were mechanics and other support occupations in the Pacific on the various islands.  And so, when you see the movies, you don't see enough of the African Americans who really, really served.  I mean everybody knows about the [Doris] "Dorie" Miller story at Pearl Harbor, but after that, you know, you don't really hear about the fact that he was on a ship that went down.  You know, he actually did not survive the war.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so I didn't ask my father a lot of questions about his time in the Army.  And I remember when I was a young fellow, we had one of his patches, and we had his Eisenhower jacket and I guess he brought back a few things too.  We had a German sabre, which was kind of a family treasure, and I remember as a young man pulling it out of its case, and I got yelled at pretty, pretty definitively, you know.  You're gonna cut yourself with that thing.  And we had a German helmet.  He brought back a helmet and a sword, you know, which really pointed to the fact that he was over there.
Speaker 1: Right, right, and close enough to get a helmet and sword.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) He bought back--well, you know, I don't know how that worked back then--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --but he, but we had the helmet and we had the sword.  And he brought, he brought 'em back.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34816
Speaker 1: Okay, so after the [World] War [II], your father [William Cox Bundy] came back.  He took advantage of the GI Bill, you said, and went to school, right?
Speaker 2: He went to school, well, you know, for carpentry and for construction and for most of, most of the time, he worked for construction companies.  You know, there was pretty significant building boom back in those days.  I remember going with him on Saturdays to some of the construction sites where they were building these nice, ranch-style homes and we lived in the city.  But he would take me out every once and a while to go see that.  And so that's what he did for his, for a living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34817
Speaker 1: When you think about your father's personality, and his disposition and both your parents [William Cox Bundy and Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy], the way they look, the way they walk, talk, their point of view on things, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: More my mother.  I, you know, I spent probably more time with her than I did my father.  I like to think that I was a lot like her.  I mean she was a very reasonable person.  She would help people.  It was a, it was kind of a joy to, you know, be around her.  I, I left home when I was seventeen [years old] to come into the [U.S.] Navy.  And it was after that, you know, she started not--her health kind of deteriorated over time with that.  But it was my mother that I spent most of my time with.  She was the one who was the disciplinarian in the house.  And the things that I remember most is, you know, her encouragement to stay in school and do well in school.  I recall, you know, what she would say to me and my brother [Leslie Bundy].  I, you know, I have a brother and a sister [Veda Anne Bundy Moore].  And she, she worked very hard to make sure we were taken care of.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 34818
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us the order of your siblings and put yourself in--can you name them--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, I'm--
Speaker 1: --and put yourself in the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --I'm the, I am the oldest.  After me there was one child that did not survive.  As a matter of fact, his name is Andre, but he did not survive.  So he would have been two years younger than me.  And then there's my brother, Leslie, and he was born in 1950, and he grew up in Baltimore [Maryland], attended Carver Vocational Technical High School and was a graduate of Carver, and he was a basketball star in the city.  And he played for the University of Baltimore, and then left University of Baltimore and went out and played at JFK [John F. Kennedy] College in Nebraska.  He now lives in Baltimore, and, you know, that's where he lives and works.  My sister was born in 1954.  Her name is Veda, Veda Anne.  She married.  She lives in the Baltimore area, and she's a graduate of the Baltimore Community College, and she is a, a counselor.  She works for John Hopkins Hospital as a counselor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34819
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Earliest childhood.  I, yes--I have memories of spending time with a number of my mother's [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] relatives.  We used to go to Aunt Alice's house on Sundays.  My mother wanted to, wanted us to go to church with her, and she was a member of Allen AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Church in West Baltimore [Maryland], and so we would, we would go to her house.  We would have gravy and biscuits with her and a nice breakfast, and then we would head down to church.  And it seemed we stayed in church like almost all day.  You know, it was Sunday school, and then we would go to the adult service, but we had to sit up in the balcony.  And so I remember that very well, and then--
Speaker 1: Did you like that?
Speaker 2: Well, I thought it was something I looked forward to.  We didn't go every weekend, you know.  I mean there were weekends we would go.  I, I enjoyed that, and, you know, you heard--you would hear the sermon.  You would have the Sunday school time.  So my, my Aunt Alice, you know, had a pretty significant influence on me, my brother [Leslie Bundy] and sister [Veda Anne Bundy Moore] as we grew up.  My mother's sister, my mother's sister--not, well, not her sister.  My mother's mother's sister.  How do I--she's an aunt, right?  Then, she would be an aunt, Aunt Frances lived in West Baltimore.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she'd be a great aunt, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, great aunt.  And so I spent, I spent quite a bit of time going over to see her as well.  And so in my younger days, we would, you know, go to the various aunts' and uncles' houses to spend time with them, and in the summer, we would go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and spend time with my grandmother [Pauline Johnson].  And I remember whenever you went to stay with her, you'd have cereal in the morning and in the afternoon, she would send out for hoagies, and you'd get hoagies.  You very seldom, you would sit at the table and have a, have a dinner.  It was always take out.  She just didn't wanna cook, and so she had two children by a marriage and, you know, a marriage late in life, and they would be in charge of us.  And they would take us to the movie or we would go down to South Street and go around.  I, I enjoyed Philadelphia.  I don't have all of the memories still with me about that.
Story_ID: 34820
Speaker 1: An important part of that though comes with my, my mother's [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] step-sister.  And her name is Joan Johnson.  Joan joined the [U.S.] Navy, and we were at home one day, and I knew she was in the Navy, and she showed up in a convertible--and I don't remember whether it was a Chevrolet or whatever it was, but it was a red convertible, and she had one of her friends with her.  They were both WAVES [Women Accepted for Volunteer Emergency Service] in the Navy, and they came upstairs and spent time with us.  And that was in the summer, and she told me about being in the Navy, and that was a good thing, and that kind of stuck with me about, you know, joining the Navy.  And then, and then later on, I guess it was around Christmas or holiday season, she showed up with her friend again, except they came in with all these bags.  And it was a train, you know, an electric train and other, other gifts for us.  And she said that, you know, she had gotten these things at the Navy store in Patuxent River, Maryland.  And so that really stuck with me.  I remember that like it was yesterday.  We were all excited as kids and there was, you know, Aunt Joan in the Navy who brought all these things for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, so you had a positive impression of the Navy?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Very positive impression of the Navy.
Story_ID: 34821
Speaker 1: And it wasn't long after that, that we moved to the projects [Baltimore, Maryland].  You know, my mother [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] and father [William Cox Bundy] separated and we moved to the McCullough Projects, 412 Manson Court was where we landed in--there was a guy down the street who had a significant influence on us.  His name was John Carter.  John Carter had served in the Korean War as an [U.S.] Army sergeant.  I don't think he retired.  Maybe he had, but he, he got all of us kids together, you know.  It was like he was the driving force in our court, and he brought all the guys together, and he says, look, I'm gonna, I'm gonna teach you how to be soldiers.  And he put together an organization called "The Cadets", and just before then, I had joined the Cadets of America at the insistence of my Aunt Joan.  She had bought me a rifle and a helmet and she was teaching me how to do the manual arms and all that thing and that sort of thing.  And about the same time, John Carter, who was a member of the American Legion, put together "The Cadets."  And so rather than just be a Cadet of America by myself, I joined John Carter's organization, and we did a lot of marching in parades.  We set up a drum and bugle corps and that's where I learned to play the drums.  And he was a significant influence on us kids in that block.  And there were about four or five of us that lived right there with him, Raymond Casey and Ernest Jefferson and John Warner, we all lived right there and it was this John Carter who kind of kept us on the straight and narrow.  As a matter of fact, whenever we would get in trouble, it was John Carter who came and bailed us out.  And so we would march in parades and over time, I guess he put this organization together.  We had a couple of hundred kids that were involved in "The Cadets."  And about that time, you know, most of us were finishing up junior high school, going into high school.
Speaker 2: Okay, yeah, I wanted to ask you like what--now, you were born in forty--
Speaker 1: '46 [1946].
Speaker 2: --six [1946].  And about how old were you when your parents split and you moved to--
Speaker 1: Oh, I must have been, I must have been about 14 or 15--no, 13, 14 [years old].
Speaker 2: Thirteen, fourteen, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because I went into the junior high school, and the junior high school was a block from where I lived.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is--okay, thirteen or fourteen, this would have been about '57 [1957], I guess or--
Speaker 1: '57 [1957], you know, I entered high school in '61 [1961], is that right, '61 [1961], '62 [1962], '63 [1963], '64 [1964].  So I entered high school in '61 [1961] and so you back up three years from that, and that's when I went to Booker T. Washington Junior High School.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--
Speaker 1: And that was about the time that my parents had split up.
Story_ID: 34822
Speaker 1: Now, you said before that you lived in a, you all had a big corner house near the entertainment district [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 2: Well, it was kind of in the middle of the block on McMechen Street, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And we--well, it wasn't a house.  We lived in the second floor apartment, and there were two apartments above us.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So was the--now, the projects has a different connotation today than it had--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --then.
Speaker 2: Yeah--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So that wasn't like, you weren't moving down, were you or--
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact, it was, it was a bit better arrangement for us, you know.  We moved into a project apartment that had, you know, a living floor, where you had the living room and the kitchen, and then the next floor, we had three bedrooms up there.  And so my brother [Leslie Bundy] and I were in one bedroom, my sister [Veda Anne Bundy Moore] was in a bedroom all her own, and, you know, my mom [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] was in her room.  And so that was a pretty, pretty good living.  And then there were a lot of kids my age.  I had, you know, friends that we spent quite a bit of time together.  You know, Ernest Jefferson, I think of him first.  Ernest went into the [U.S.] Air Force about the time I went into the [U.S.] Navy.  [John] Warner wanted to go--Warner went into the Air Force as well.  So the two of them went into the Air Force and [Raymond] Casey couldn't get in because he had a medical case, and so he didn't go in.  But we all went in the service about 1964.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and, of course, Vietnam [War] was, was the situation then.  We had a few of the guys that we came along with then, that went into the [U.S.] Marine Corps.
Story_ID: 34823
Speaker 1: Now, I didn't wanna get you that far yet, but I just wanted to--in fact, like what was your first school?  What was the first school you attended?
Speaker 2: I went to Henry Highland Garnet School [Baltimore, Maryland].
Speaker 1: Oh, Henry Highland Garnet [African American abolitionist, minister, educator and orator], the great hero--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --of the nineteenth century.
Speaker 2: Yep, Henry Highland Garnet School, and that was PS-103.
Speaker 1: Did you all know who he was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we knew about the history, and, you know, the fact he went overseas.  He went to Africa.  He was, you know, a black patriot, so to speak, and so we knew about that.  You know, in those days we always had--it wasn't called Black History Month then.  It was called African American History or--no, not African American History.
Speaker 1: Negro History Week.
Speaker 2: Negro History Month.
Speaker 1: I think it was Negro History Week then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and we, and so I went from Henry Highland Garnet School was my elementary school.  I went there for kindergarten all the way through the sixth grade.  And then I went to Booker T. Washington Junior High School, and I went there for seventh, eighth and ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, is that in the same neighborhood?
Speaker 2: In the same neighborhood, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the schools were about three, four blocks apart.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that's just before you moved then, right?
Speaker 2: Well, I started at, I started school at 103 because the funny thing about that was, I lived in a, on McMechen Street which abutted or a cross street for that was Utah Place.  And on the other side of Utah Place, a block away was an elementary school.  But I couldn't go to that elementary school because that was for white kids.  I had to go eight blocks the other way to PS-103.  And so while I lived on McMechen Street, I went to PS-103, and we'd walk to school.  I remember it wasn't such a chore, but, you know, we would walk to school and attend school there at 103.  And then when we moved to, when we moved to the projects, that was about the time that I left 103 and started school at Booker T. [Washington Junior High School].  Matter of fact, you know, as we talk about this, I get the timing a bit better in my head, you know, thinking about that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So PS-103 comes first, then Booker. T.?
Speaker 2: Yeah, then Booker. T., yeah.
Speaker 1: Over at the projects.
Speaker 2: Booker. T. was the junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, and that was near the McCullough Projects?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was one block away.
Speaker 1: All right.
Story_ID: 34824
Speaker 1: Now, at this juncture in your life, were there any special teachers who you remember in grade school [Henry Highland Garnet School, Baltimore, Maryland] and junior high school [Booker T. Washington Junior High School] or mentors otherwise?  I know you mentioned the--
Speaker 2: I mentioned John Carter.
Speaker 1: Yeah, John Carter.
Speaker 2: You know, he--I think he was a great influence after I moved into the projects.  I remember a Ms. Sheridan.  I think it was in the fifth and sixth grade.  She was a very good influence there at the, at [PS] 103 [Henry Highland Garnet School].
Speaker 1: Okay, Mrs. Sheridan.  Now, what did she do?  Did she--
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, in those days you stayed in one room all day.  And so she taught everything for us.  And I remember her.  She was a very attractive woman as I recall.  But she did a very good job of teaching us.  I, you know, it was, as I remember.  I don't remember some of the other teachers.  I remember her.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what were you interested in, in elementary school or what--did you have any special talents or anything that you--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) The, I wanted to take music, you know.  I did all the other stuff, you know.  And we did not have organized athletics at that level, but I did it, a bunch of--well, I went to school on a day-to-day basis.  But this music teacher, and I remember his name.  His name was Mr. Nolan.  I signed up to get into music.  And so I told you earlier about my [maternal] grandfather [Charles Johnson] and the trumpet.  And I thought I wanted to play the trumpet.  And my grandfather convinced me that I was a little bit too frail to play the trumpet, and so I said, well, what can I do?  Can I play the drums?  He says, yeah, you can play the drums.  And so I went to--you know, we had our initial meeting with Mr. Nolan, and I said, I wanna play drums.  And he says, I don't want you to play drums.  I want you to play the violin.  And I said, what?  (Laughter) And he said, I want you to play the violin.  And so a lot of bad things in my mind came together around that whole discussion.  Here he was, getting me involved with playing the violin, and I was also diagnosed that I needed glasses because I had an extropia problem and I had to wear these glasses.  So here I am, you know, a pretty rugged kid, they're gonna give me glasses and a violin (laughter).  I remember this part.  I threw the glasses down the gutter, the storm drain, and I gave him back his violin.  I had, I took it home.  I played with it.  I tried, but I took it back to him, and I gave him the violin back.  And that was the end of my music lesson in school.
Speaker 1: Now, could you see?  I mean, you know, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I can see fine.  I thought I could see okay.  I had this extropia problem, but I could see okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I just, I didn't like where they were taking me.  They were giving me a violin and glasses.  And that wasn't gonna cut it.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So--
Story_ID: 34825
Speaker 1: Well, who were your heroes in those days?  Did you, I mean real and fictional, I guess?
Speaker 2: I don't remember any heroes in those days, to be honest with you.  You know, we watched TV, but not that much.  I just don't remember heroes.  I remember spending a lot of time at the YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] though.  And, and we used to, we used to swim.  I used to go there to swim.  And in those days, they didn't make us bring bathing suits.  We were all boys, and so we swam with no bathing suits.  And I had gotten a free membership to the "Y."  And then the free membership was gonna run out, and in order to continue to have a membership in the "Y" and to go to swim, I sold soap.  So when I lived on McMechen Street [Baltimore, Maryland], I was a newspaper boy.  So I sold newspapers and sold the 'Ten Star', which was the white paper, and I sold the African American, 'Afro American' which is the African American paper.  And I would sell papers.  And that's how I made money, particularly on Sundays.  Sunday we would have the Sunday paper and then I'd have to go about ten blocks, and I'd deliver my papers on a route in those days.  And the African American paper came out on Tuesdays and Thursdays.  And that's how I made money.  And so I had money to get myself a, to renew my membership at the "Y", but I didn't have money to go to camp (laughter).  So they said if you wanna go to camp, you have to sell soap.  And the kind of soap they gave us was crates of Cashmere Bouquet (laughter).  I remember that.  And I would go sell my papers and ask people if they wanted soap.  And so I sold soap in order to go to camp one summer.  But I don't remember any, any real heroes.  You know, we had the Orioles for baseball, and we had the Baltimore Colts [football].  But I didn't become really a Colt fan until much later, you know, when I was in high school [at Baltimore City College].
Story_ID: 34826
Speaker 1: About the time that you went to Booker T. Washington [Junior High School, Baltimore, Maryland], that's--what's that, '58 [1958]?
Speaker 2: That's about '58 [1958], '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: '59 [1959], that's when the--is that when the [Baltimore] Colts [football] won the NFL championship?  They beat the Giants in that--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think so.  And we all watched that on TV from Memorial Stadium [Baltimore].
Speaker 1: Right, right.  That's considered like the game that made the country wake up to football or something--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and so there's some connections there.  You know, that was in '58 [1958], '59 [1959], and as I said before, it was about '61 [1961] that I started at the Baltimore City College.  But there's a story that I have to tell before we talk about Baltimore City College because these are the things that really started to align.  You know, I had the education that I got from "The Cadets" [in his neighborhood in Baltimore; organized by John Carter] about what military discipline in life was about.  And so I had a bit more of a positive and confidence about me, about what was gonna happen next in my life.  And so it was in the ninth grade, and you're in, you know, we're all getting set up to go to high school.  And you could pick the high school you wanted to go to.  And Baltimore City College was PS-480, I think I got that number right.  And so I put 480 on my selection list, and I didn't put Frederick Douglass High School.  I didn't put Carver Vocational High School.  And I put City, and the counselor said to me, said, "Why do you wanna go to City?"  I said, well, I've heard about City College, and I don't wanna go to Douglass.  I wanna go to City College.  That's where they prepare people to go to college, and I wanna go there.  And as you may recall, schools were just being desegregated about that time.  And so I think I was in the third class entering City after it was desegregated.  And so I, now, I had this conversation with the counselor, and she was intent on me going to Douglass, and I just told her, I said, I'm not gonna go to Douglas.  I wanna go to City, and if--do I have the scores?  Do I have the academic standing to go there?  She says, yeah, you can go there.  And so I went to City College, and then--
Speaker 1: So you had good grades in--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --throughout.
Speaker 2: --I was okay.  I mean I don't think I was, you know, this A-plus student, but I had good grades, good enough to get into City [College], and so I went there.  And I think that changed my life.  I think that that conversation with the counselor, when I told her I didn't wanna go to Douglass.  I said, all you--if I go to Douglass, all I'm gonna do is wind up being a waiter or a laborer.  I had already figured that out, that I had to find my path to the, to a good education, and not--now, at Douglas, they had graduates that went to Morgan State [University, Baltimore] and Coppin [State University, Baltimore] and that was a good path.  But that wasn't the path I saw for myself.  I saw myself going to City, and I did.  I went, I entered City College and--
Speaker 1: How did your mother [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] feel about it, and--
Speaker 2: Well, she said, you gotta ride the bus.  I said, well, I gotta ride the bus to (laughter) Douglass too, so--.
Story_ID: 34827
Speaker 1: So next door to us [in Baltimore, Maryland], and you mentioned the projects being a pretty good place to live in those days.  But next door to us was the Savage family.  And Ronald Savage had gone to [Baltimore] Polytechnic Institute.  And in those days, there were two all-women schools and two all-men schools in Baltimore.  There was Eastern and Western, and you had to be competitive to go to those schools.  And there was the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute and the Baltimore City College.  Poly [Polytechnic] was the engineer school.  City was more for the, you know, the straight-laced academics and they were rivals.  There was a big City-Poly football game, which exists to this very day.  And so, and it was played on Thanksgiving.  And so Roland was a student at the Baltimore Polytechnic Institute.  And I talked to him, I said, you know, I wanna go to City.  He says, well, you can go to City.  He says, as a matter of fact, you can go to City, and you can play on that football team.  I had played on the Baltimore Police Northwest Police football team, at Police Boys Club, football team.  So I learned to play football.  And I said, I could go to City, and I can play football just like you play at Poly.  And this guy was All State, you know, I mean, he played lacrosse and football.  And he lived right next door to me.  So he said, he said, yeah, you go to City.  You tell that counselor, you go back up there and you tell her that you're gonna go to City.  And I did.  I went back, and I went to City College and that summer, I showed up for the football team, and I showed you the picture.  I made the JV [junior varsity] football team, and I played JV in my sophomore year and in my junior and senior years, I played on the varsity football team.
Story_ID: 34828
Speaker 1: And so I talked my way into going to [Baltimore] City College [Baltimore, Maryland].  When I got there, I went out for the football team, and I got on to the JV [junior varsity] football team and later on to the varsity team.  At the end of my sophomore year on football, the coach came up to me and said, "What are you gonna do in the spring?"  I said, well, I don't run track.  I had done track in high school, I mean in junior high school.  And I said, I don't like running track.  He says, well, I want you to play lacrosse and he arranged for a guy who was an attack man to teach me how to throw and catch and scoop with a lacrosse stick.  And his name was Marty Rosenblatt, and he spent time with me during the winter to teach me how to throw and catch with a lacrosse stick.  And that spring, I got onto the JV lacrosse team.  I was a midfielder, just like, you know, you and I talked about Jim Brown, and that's what I did.  I was a midfielder.  And it really built up my stamina and my running ability and so, so that's what I did in high school.  I played football in the fall and lacrosse in the spring.  And I did pretty good in my grades.  And so I, my mother [Paulyne Louisa Johnson Bundy] had never been able to see me play either lacrosse or football, you know.  She lived in the center of the city, and she had a pretty tough work schedule.  It was just hard for her to, for her to get there.  But in my senior year, we were playing the City [Baltimore City College]-Poly [Baltimore Polytechnic Institute] game in Memorial Stadium, and she came to the game.  And that was the first time she saw me, you know, play football.
Story_ID: 34829
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [William Cox Bundy] ever come out to watch you play?
Speaker 2: No, he never did.
Speaker 1: I get the sense that he was kind of estranged from, well, whatever happened with him--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, after he left us, he, you know, we--I knew where he was.  If I wanted to talk to him or get something from him or if he needed me to do something, I would go and spend time with him and so, you know, really the family separated.  And he had hard times during that period of time.  My mother was the person that kept everything together.  I mean it's the standard story of the mother really holding everything together for the family.  And, and my role in that was to get through school.  And the way I did that was, you know, to play sports and, and it was in my junior year that I got involved in the Sea Cadets.
Story_ID: 34830
Speaker 1: And again, that [U.S.] Navy theme started to roll back in.  By that time, my Aunt Joan [Bundy's mother's step-sister], you know, she was stationed in other places [Navy].  But I talked to her about going into the, to the Sea Cadets, and she said that I ought to do that.  And I went down and joined the Sea Cadets while I was in high school.
Speaker 2: So the Sea Cadets were sponsored by--
Speaker 1: The Navy League.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was sponsored by the Navy League and the Navy, you know.  You got your uniforms from the Navy.  It was a lot different from John Carter's cadets, in that this was sponsored by the Navy, and we went on Navy ships to do our training.  And so that was a terrific experience.  I did very well in the Sea Cadets.  There were only two African Americans in our division of about thirty or forty Sea Cadets.  And I made rapid advancement in that, and it was, I guess between my junior and senior year that I went off to the Great Lakes [Illinois] and went to, went to boot camp at Great Lakes.  We actually went to the Naval Reserve Boot Camp, which is a two-week boot camp.  And that was in July of 1962.  I was, I was the guide on, and there were two African Americans in a company of about sixty or seventy Sea Cadets.  And we did very well.  I, you know, I did very well there.  We took this test.  It was called the R-Facts test, the Recruit Factors Test, and I'd scored one of the highest grades in the group.  So the Sea Cadets really got me pointed into really understanding that I could go into the Navy.
Story_ID: 34831
Speaker 1: Now, were you taking a lot of science when you were, you know--
Speaker 2: No, I was in the general technical program at [Baltimore] City [College], and so we had drafting.  We had shop.  We had technical math.  We had general science.  And so the thing that I know now that I didn't know then, and my parents [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy and William Cox Bundy] didn't know, is that, yeah, I got into the City College, but I got into their general technical program and not their fast track to college program.  But that was okay.  I was gonna recover from this.  And it was gonna all work out in the end.  So I got involved in the Sea Cadets and--while I was in high school.  And in my senior year, after going to boot camp with the Sea Cadets, I went into the Naval Reserve in my senior year.  And so when I went into the Naval Reserve, I got advanced, I got advanced immediately from seaman recruit to seaman apprentice, and I then went onboard the U.S.S. Darby DE-218 reserve crew.  And so here I am, a senior in high school.  I'm on the reserve crew of the U.S.S. Darby, and I'm in the, what we call the Fox Division, and that division was fire control technicians which is science and technology, sonar technicians.  In those days, we were called sonar men, science and technology.  And so they were grooming me to become a technician on the ship because I was advanced because of the Sea Cadet effort.  And then they made me an E-3.  And so when I graduated from high school, I went on the summer cruise on Darby [U.S.S. Darby], and that was my first experience actually going to sea for an extended period of time.
Story_ID: 34832
Speaker 1: We went down to Guantanamo Bay.  We went to liberty in Jamaica, and I was, I was an E-3, and there're a couple of stories about that in that there was a first-class steward.  His name was Pie, and he wound up being my--in those days, we called them sea-daddies.  He was really the person that kind of looked out for me in the crew.  I had a division petty officer and all those things, but it was Mr.--and we called him Mr. Pie--Mr. Pie was the person that looked out for me.  And as a matter of fact, our commanding officer, his name was Jacob L. Zimmerman, told, told Petty Officer Pie, he says, I want you to look out for Seaman Bundy.  You take care of him.
Story_ID: 34833
Speaker 1: Now, does this all mean that you didn't have to go through a boot camp experience in the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: I went when I was a Sea Cadet.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that was really your boot camp?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was my boot camp.
Speaker 1: Going to Great Lakes [Illinois]--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I was I was Great Lakes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --so you had already had it over the summer.  So you were done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to boot camp--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: All right, so I didn't realize that's what exactly that, that was the equivalent of.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the equivalent of Navy Reserve boot camp, and I went in the summer of '62 [1962].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had boot camp, and what is an E, was it E-4, you made or--
Speaker 2: Huh, E-3.
Speaker 1: E-3, yeah.
Speaker 2: That's a seaman.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So that's a, that's equivalent of like a private in the [U.S.] Army or--
Speaker 2: No, that's equivalent to a private first class.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, I've got an Army frame of reference so I've never been in the Army (laughter), but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, so you've got private and then you got, I think you've got Private, E-1 and then you've got PFC, Private First Class, E-2, and then I think you do, in fact, in the Army have what they call a lance corporal.  In the [U.S.] Marine Corps they have a lance corporal.  In the Navy, it's a seaman.  And that's an E-3.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34834
Speaker 1: And so I advanced to E-3 [seaman; U.S. Navy] as soon as I got on the [USS] Darby crew, and that summer after I graduated [from Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], I went to sea on the ship.  We went on the summer cruise, and when I came back from the summer cruise--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So where did you go on the summer cruise.  We don't wanna jump over that too fast (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, we went to Guantanamo Bay--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(unclear) (simultaneous), Guantanamo, okay.
Speaker 1: And while we were at Guantanamo Bay, they decide--the division officer for the Fox Division, who was the weapons group, he said, I want you to operate the gun director.  I said, okay.  And so they put me up on the very top of the ship with a gun director.  It was a World War II gun director.  It had two handles and you looked through the sight and you would point these five-inch, 38 guns at the target, you know, using this gun director.  And there was a radar on it, and the radar fed a room down below where I was.  And so they trained me to do that operation, and I wound up being a gun director operator and then on my normal watch rotation, I was a helmsman, so I steered the ship.  And after I did that awhile, they made me an after-steering watch.  And I was in the stern of the ship with the steering gear in case there, they lost control of the rudder up on the bridge, I was the person that was supposed to steer the ship from the steering gear in the back of the, in the fantail of the ship.  So that cruise went very well for me.
Story_ID: 34835
Speaker 1: You know, we [USS Darby] went to Montego Bay, Jamaica, and the thing I remember about that is I won the anchor pool.  This is where everybody signs up on a sheet that's got sixty blocks on it.  And whenever the anchor drops, and they record the anchor time, that person wins based on the minute that the anchor goes down.  And I won the anchor pool, and, you know, back then it was all of about $25.00.  And, and I was getting ready to go ashore in Montego Bay, and Mr. Pie comes up to me and says, how much money did you win?  I said, I won $25.00.  So he said, you give me $15.00.  And so I gave him my $15.00.  He says, I'll have this for you for tomorrow (laughter).  I said, okay.  And I went ashore, you know, and got a scarf for my mother [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] and we stopped at a couple of the nightlife spots there.  And the second day, I came back to him, I said, see, I got some gifts and what not.  I said, you know, give me the rest of my money.  And he gave me the money, and he says, I just didn't want you to spend it all in one day in one place.  And he took pretty good care of me.  There's another story about that, and I, I was in Fox Division, as I told you before.  And so we had the gunners' mates and the fire control men and the sonar men and, and this petty officer who was a gunners' mate came up to me, you know, and everybody's getting ready to go ashore in Guantanamo, and he says, I want you to go grease the gun mounts.  And I said, okay, I'll go grease the gun mounts, and he gave me the bucket of grease.  And in those days, you didn't wear plastic gloves.  You'd just go grease the gun mounts.  And so he told me what I had to do.  And so I climbed up on Mount 51, and they raised the gun so it was pretty in the up and down direction.  And so here I am strapped to the gun mount, raised--greasing the gun.  The next thing I know, one of the first-class radar men comes out on the bridge, and he yells down.  He says, what are you doing down there?  I said, Bloodgood told me to grease the mount.  He says, okay, and he disappeared (laughter).  About four minutes later, here is the first-class radar man and Mr. Pie.  And he says, who told you to do that?  (Laughter) And I told him, I said, Bloodgood told me to grease the mount.  He says, you're not a gunners' mate.  I said--I wasn't gonna argue with him, and you know, and I'm greasing the mount.  And so I'm taking my time.  I'm figuring something's gonna happen here pretty quick.  And, and on the main deck appears the weapons officers, our department head, Mr. Stout.  He was a lieutenant and Bloodgood and Mr. Pie (laughter).  And they said to me, he says, Bundy, you climb down.  So I unhooked myself (laughter), and I climbed down.  But he says, give me that bucket.  And I gave the bucket to, through Mr. Stout.  He says, you go and you get on your dress canvas.  Here's your liberty card.  You go on liberty.  (Laughter) And so I went down, jumped in the birthing space.  I put my clothes on.  I wasn't even gonna shower.  I was gonna get out of there, and I left the ship.  And as I'm doing down the pier, you know who was up there greasing the gun mount, Bloodgood.  So, you know, throughout my career, there have been people that have stepped in and done the right thing for me.  And I think I've kind of done that for them too.
Story_ID: 34836
Speaker 1: There're a couple of other, you know, stories about [USS] Darby, but I came back from that cruise, and I decided that I was gonna go into the regular [U.S.] Navy.  I went down to see the Navy recruiter, and he said I could be in the electronics field.  My grades were good enough--you know, they give you an entrance exam--my grades were good enough for that.  And in those days, between the time you took the exam and the time they mustered you in, was less than two weeks.  And so I went home, and I said, I said, I need you to sign this for me.  I was only seventeen [years old], by the way.  And I said, I need you to sign (laughter) this for me.  I'm gonna go in the regular Navy.  And she says, and she says, you sure you wanna do this?  I said, yeah.  You know, I'm in the reserves now.  I might as well go in the regular Navy.  The cruise went pretty good.  And then my mom [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] signed, and I went back down, and within a week, I was bagging baggage.  And I went over to the naval station at Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] and mustered into the regular Navy.  And that was in July of 1964.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, well, when you were, I guess--okay, now, you had been--you graduated from high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] in sixty--
Speaker 1: '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: '64 [1964]?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, as you said, as you enter the Navy, the Vietnam War was going on, and there wasn't, it wasn't fully cranked up, but it was--
Speaker 1: No, I--
Speaker 2: --in the beginning stages.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: I think the U.S. had, you know, advisors or something there from in the '50s [1950s], late '50s [1950s] on, you know, and then stuff started escalating.
Story_ID: 34837
Speaker 1: Also, you were in high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland] when the March on Washington took place.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got a story about that.  I, I--it's a regrettable story.  I think about it today.  So what was I?  Maybe sixteen years old when the March on Washington occurred.  I was, I had just left the gym at the church.  We had a--we had two churches that had gyms.  You could go there and play basketball and what not.  And I'd just--and this is, of course, in the summer.  And I'd just left the gym, and there were buses lined up in front of the church.  And I walked up, you know, as curious as I was, I said, where're you going?  And they said, well, we're going to Washington.  He said, if you wanna, you wanna go, just get onboard.  I said, nah, I better go ask my mother [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] (laughter) before I get on a bus to go to Washington.  And so I, I went home.  It was a block or two away, and I asked her, I said, you know, people are gonna go to Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia] today.  It's a big deal over there.  And she says, well, how are you gonna eat?  You don't have any, you know--what are you gonna do?  I said, well, I don't know.  They're putting people on the bus.  I'm quite sure they're gonna take care of us.  And so I went back up, and the buses were gone.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, I think about that today and think about the historic speech and all those other things, and later on, I found that, you know, the people went there, and they were in the march.  They got all back on the buses, and they had several different places where they stopped and they, you know, gave them something to eat.  And I really should have gotten on the bus.  But still I don't think my mom would have really liked to have had me get on that bus and kinda just disappear for the better part of the day and half the night 'cause they didn't get back until late, you know, late that night.  But I missed it.  I missed that opportunity.
Speaker 1: Well, you did the right thing, I guess, but, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean I would--it was not like, you know, I was an adult, and I could just hop on the bus and go.  And I always think about that, you know, when people talk about that.  So--
Speaker 1: Well, the good thing is that you wanted to go.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did.
Speaker 1: You know, and did you see it on TV?
Speaker 2: No, no, and I don't remember watching it on TV.  I found out about it later in the, you know, in the newspaper and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 34838
Speaker 1: In terms of civil rights, were either of your parents [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] or any of your aunts involved in the Civil Rights Movement in Baltimore [Maryland]?
Speaker 2: Not, not, not publicly, you know.  We, we all supported the idea.  I grew up with a, I grew up with a guy--his name was Michael Jackson.  Michael was the grandson of, I think her name was Maria Jackson.  In those days, for me, it was Mrs. Jackson.  Mrs. Jackson was the head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Baltimore.  And, you know, we were exposed to the Jackie Robinson Club.  We were exposed to the NAACP and all the things that it did, you know, as I was growing up.  And, of course, Michael was a friend of ours.  You know, he was, well, he was.  He was a good friend of ours, and his mother and father ran a law office.  So the law office was right there in the neighborhood.  And so that was my exposure to, you know, the NAACP and the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--wait a minute, now, you're talking about--are you sure it's not Michael Mitchell.
Speaker 2: Mitchell.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What did I say?  Jackson?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Michael Mitchell, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, his mother, right, was the founder, she was, in fact, the biggest recruiter of members for NAACP in--
Speaker 2: In Baltimore, right?
Speaker 1: In the history of the country, actually.
Speaker 2: Okay, then--
Speaker 1: And made the Baltimore group very strong.
Speaker 2: Yes, Michael Mitchell.
Speaker 1: The Mitchell's, his brother, Clarence Mitchell--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --the III--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --his father, Clarence Mitchell, who was in the cabinet, I mean the unofficial cabinet of J.F.--of Johnson, [President] Lyndon Johnson--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and Parren Mitchell, the uncle, was a Congressman.
Speaker 2: Well, you've corrected me.  It is Mitchell--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and Michael Mitchell, he--we went to [Baltimore] City College [high school] at the same time.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And, that's, 'cause I was thinking, I said, that sounds like Mrs. Jackson, his grandmother, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was--you're right,--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --it was the Mitchell family.  I'm sorry if I've messed up--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No, that's great, though.  No, it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --your film here.
Speaker 1: No, you didn't mess it up.  That's fine.
Story_ID: 34839
Speaker 1: But, you know, we were all friends, Michael [Mitchell] and Carl Woodford, and Kennard Wright and me, all of us, we were at [Baltimore] City College [high school; Baltimore, Maryland] together.  And so, that was all part of the neighborhood then.  You know, I get upset when they talk about the neighborhoods now.  We had a, we--you know, we had Ms. Mitchell, we had our own kind of clinic there.  We had two churches.  If you wanted to go do something in the evening, and your mom wasn't home, you could go to the Community Baptist Church or you could go to, I forget the name of the other church.  But they both had gyms--
Speaker 2: Now, was it Union, the big Union Baptist Church?  Is that the one?
Speaker 1: Maybe it was.  It was right there on Dauphin Street.
Speaker 2: Vernon Dobson--
Speaker 1: I don't know.  I was--
Speaker 2: --was the pastor?
Speaker 1: My mom [Paulyne Louise Johnson Bundy] was Catholic, and so after those early years with my aunt at Allen AME [African Methodist Episcopal Church], and we went to Douglas AME [Church] for a while, my mom said, now that you're with me, you're gonna be Catholic.  And so we went to St. Peter Claver, and, you know, I've been Catholic ever since.  But, and I learned--I didn't know about the ministers and what not except (laughter)--I have to tell you this story.  (Laughter) One summer, it was summer?  I forget whether it was summer or not, but Warner (laughter), Warner decided that he wanted to court this young lady.  And she was on the choir at Community Baptist Church (laughter), and so he recruited me and Ernest and we went with--Warner Shorter is his name, with Warner.  And we joined the choir.  Now, we're all Catholic, we're Catholics.  And (laughter) so, he gets us to join this choir.  The choir, you know, the choir master was glad to have some men join the choir, and (laughter) so we went to the practices, you know, and then it came time for the junior choir, which we were in, to sing at the service.  (Laughter) So I said to Warner, I said, hey, look, I'm not real sure we're supposed to (laughter), you know, go to the Community Baptist Church and be part of their service.  He says, but, yeah, the only way we're gonna get to know these girls is to be in the choir.  And so (laughter), I guess that went on about, for two or three weeks.  And I just, I said, look, this is too much for me, and I dropped out of it.  But, what I'm trying to share with you is that community in Baltimore, you know, everybody knew everybody, you know, we didn't have any back and forth.  So I guess there were some folks that were, you know, a bit hostile, but it wasn't the kind of gangs and nobody had guns or any of those kinds of things when we came along, you know.  I got into one or two fights when I was coming along, but that was it.  I mean if somebody punched you in the nose, you know, you'd--you know, that sort of thing.  So I just thought I'd share that with you.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's an interesting story.
Story_ID: 34840
Speaker 1: Okay, well, back to the [U.S.] Navy now--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you enlisted in the regular Navy [in 1964]--
Speaker 2: I enlisted in the regular Navy, and--
Speaker 1: Now, did--could you keep your same rank when you enlisted?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I came in as a seaman [E-3].  And I immediately went to a holding company over at the Navy, at the Navy base in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].  And I did a number of things there.  I was there for almost a month and a half.  I wound up on the ceremonial guard.  And I was in the funeral cortege or the funeral formation for Admiral Claude [Vernon] Ricketts.  That was a big deal.  You know, we went, we did a week of training to prepare for that, and I was in the Navy company that did that because I was tall enough, and I didn't have any blemishes on my face, and I knew how to do the manual arms, and so I stayed there for about, I guess maybe a month, month and a half.  And then I went to Key West, Florida to sonar technician school.  And I spent the better part of a year at the sonar technician school.  I graduated first in my basic class, and then they put me into an advanced class.
Story_ID: 34841
Speaker 1: And while I was in the advanced class [sonar technician school, Key West, Florida]--I'm trying to remember how this all came about--but I was in what we call A-II School.  I had finished A School, and made E-4.  And I was in the, now in the A-II school, and while I was in A-II School, the idea came up that I could go to this special ship.  And there were about eight or nine of us that they were gonna pick to go to this special ship.  And (laughter) this one guy said, you don't wanna do that.  You don't wanna have your name on that.  You need to go to a destroyer, and I'd just come off of the Darby [U.S.S. Darby] and did destroyer [unclear] escort.  And I said, nah, I'm gonna try this.  And so a bunch of us got recruited to go to this special ship.  And we went up to the Dam Lake [unclear], and learned computers.  And they taught us computer science, and--all the way from Boolean algebra to maintaining these computer systems and from there, I went to an oceanographic unit.  And I went to Oceanographic Unit 1 on USNS [United States Naval Ship] Bowditch.  What they didn't tell us (laughter), and I was married then.  I'd gotten married, and what they didn't tell us is that we were gonna go overseas for a year.  And (laughter), it was gonna be a full year of being overseas.  Well, that wasn't unusual in those days.  People were going to Vietnam for a year about that time.  And so I spent a year on the USNS Bowditch, operating out of Belfast, Northern Ireland.  We went into Rota, Spain.  We went to Lisbon, Portugal, Naples, Italy.  It was a M.S.C.S. [unclear] ship, and I was part of a Navy detachment aboard that ship.
Story_ID: 34842
Speaker 1: So I left out an important part here.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And that is after I left high school [Baltimore City College, Baltimore, Maryland], my girlfriend at the time, you know, came to tell me that she was gonna have a baby.  And so I wound up getting married while I was at Fleet Sonar School [U.S. Navy facility] in Key West [Florida].  And so that woman that is now a grown woman with her own son, she came along in December of 1964.  And she's on her own now.  She's [Bundy's daughter; Andrena Maria Bundy Seawood], you know, married and has her own, own son.  But I was married to her mother for the, for about five years.  And that didn't work out.  It was, you know, the classic case of too young and not the right match for yourself.  And so I don't see her much at all.  I have good contact with my daughter and her family.  They live in Minnesota.  And as I was telling you before, her husband is a Baptist minister, and it turns out that they've spent more time in my father's [William Cox Bundy] hometown area than I ever did.  And so I'm marching along telling you about my [U.S.] Navy time, and I didn't tell you about myself.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's important, though.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 34843
Speaker 1: And so I'm overseas [Oceanographic Unit 1 on USNS Bowditch], and--
Speaker 2: And you're married while you're in the North Atlantic, right?
Speaker 1: Right.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're doing a year in the North Atlantic?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in the North Atlantic and the Mediterranean.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, you know, the [U.S.] Navy didn't see anything wrong with that because, you know, we were in the business of sending people to Vietnam for a while year.  And as a matter of fact, that duty was pretty good, really.  I mean, you know, we went to Germany.  We went to Italy and Ireland and Scotland, and, I mean we just--we made a port stop almost every month.  And so that was a, that was an interesting time for me.  You know, I was a technician working on very sophisticated electronic equipment.
Story_ID: 34844
Speaker 1: And towards the end of that tour [Oceanographic Unit 1 on USNS Bowditch; Atlantic], I said, well, where am I gonna go next?  And that's when they, they said, well, you can go back to sonar school and get retrained to go to a destroyer, but you could also go to a Naval facility.  And I said, well, that sounds pretty good.  And I got sent down to the Naval facility at Eleuthera, Bahamas, and when I arrived there, I was a Second-Class Petty Officer, an E-5, and what was I?  I was eighteen [years old], maybe nineteen years old at that point.
Speaker 2: So this is 1966, I guess?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you were an E-5?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'd been in the [U.S.] Navy four years--since '64 [1964], and this is '66 [1966], and I was an E-5.
Speaker 2: So that's a petty officer?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's pretty fast advancement by the way.  And so I was at the Naval facility, and I was on the oceanographic team at the Naval facility, and then I became a systems petty officer.  My wife was there with me and my daughter [Andrena Maria Bundy Seawood].  And toward the end of my time there, I had the chance to go ride a submarine and my chief at that time had been a submarine sonar technician.  I was a sonar technician, and he would, he had been on a submarine.  He says, you ought to go ride this submarine.  He says, you really don't belong here, says, you've got--you have the ability to kinda do more in the Navy.  And I want you to go ride this submarine.  And so I traveled up to this place where the submarine was gonna make a port visit.  And it was the USS Pargo, SSN-650.  And the commanding officer of that ship at the time was Commander Steve White, and he comes back into my life later on.  So Commander White welcomed us aboard the Pargo, and I had a chance to see what submarine life was about.  And towards the time we were getting ready to leave the ship, he says, how would you like to come and be a sonar technician on a submarine?  And I said, well, that sounds like a pretty good deal to me.  And he said, well, what I want you to do is to fill out your application for transfer, and I want you to send it to me, and then I will send it to the bureau of personnel with my endorsement.  And so I got back to the Naval facility, and a good friend of mine there, Joe Pal, Jr.  He was a personnel man.  He says, what do you wanna do?  I said, the CO of that submarine told me to fill out this application--it was called a request chit. It's called a 1306.  He says, you need to fill it out and send it to him.  He says, but you gotta send it to the commanding officer here first.  I said, well, okay, then you'll take care of that.  But I'm gonna fill it out, and I wanna go to submarines.  And about then the chief that had sent me there in the first place, he goes over, and he says, yeah, that's what we wanna do, fill out the form, and send it in to our CO, and then from our CO, don't send it to the bureau.  You send it to the submarine.  Three weeks later--in those days, you got your orders on a IBM card, there weeks later I got a set of orders to go to submarine training at Key West [Florida] for submarine systems.  And I was then to go to a submarine.  And (laughter), Pal said, man, I never seen anything happen that fast before.  And I said, well, you know, good things happen sometimes.  And I packed up and left Eleuthera [Bahamas] and went to Key West for school.
Story_ID: 34845
Speaker 1: Let me just ask this, now, this seems interesting.  Now, is submarine duty coveted in the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I'm wondering 'cause I've seen like movies, the guys in the submarines, they seem like they're awful cramped in there.
Speaker 2: Well, it's not--it's, that's not a problem.
Speaker 1: And it's, they're down--can, they really can't even see outside either, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'll talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, I mean but, so what is the attraction of being on a submarine (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's the, in my mind, it's the best duty in the Navy.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You work with some of the smartest people in the Navy.  You imagine a submarine today and when I was going in the submarines back then, they were the most advanced warships that we had, all packaged in the, you know, in the, one pretty potent package.  And this is toward the, you know, the--in the middle of the Cold War.  And what we were doing then with our submarines has just been declassified to some degree.  And so it's a pretty exciting duty.  It's, it pays better.  In those days, you got quite a bit more money for submarine pay because it was hazardous duty.  And it was kind of what I wanted to go do--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --and it's science and technology kind of stuff.
Speaker 1: Now, I remember in 1962, I believe it was, it was maybe a year before or around the same time as John F. Kennedy was assassinated, there was a case of a submarine 'cause we talked about it in--I was in sixth or seventh grade, eighth grade, something like that.  And we talked about a submarine going too deep and collapsing on itself in the--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was USS Thresher--
Speaker 1: Right.  That's the one.
Speaker 2: That was on the 10th of April, 1963.
Speaker 1: Yes.  (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And so we just commemorated that again.  The submarine force learned a lot about that, from that case.  And it really, later on, you know, it really proved to be very important in proving what we call sub-safe, submarine safety over the years.  And so, yeah, that was Thresher that went down in '63 [1963].
Speaker 1: I raise just because, just to emphasize the point, this could be dangerous duty from a number of different--
Speaker 2: Oh, it is.
Speaker 1: --angles, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is.  Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.  (Laughter)
Story_ID: 34846
Speaker 1: And so I went to submarine training at Key West [Florida], and, and while I was there, while I was there I had the opportunity to really excel, you know, in the school.  And I did well, and at the end of that process, I got orders to a diesel boat.  Well, that's not where I wanted to go.  I wanted to go to one of the new sturgeon class attack submarines.  And so, again, I went to one of the chiefs there, and I explained what my situation was.  And by the next day, I had ordered to, not just a sturgeon class, but to the USS Sturgeon [SSN-637].  And I reported to Sturgeon in--so that would have been in 1967, I reported to Sturgeon as a First-Class Petty Officer and not submarine qualified.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is 1967 aboard the USS Sturgeon?
Speaker 1: Right.  So I'd spent time at the NAFAC [Naval Academy Foreign Affairs Conference], going back to school, and now I'm at, now, I'm on the Sturgeon.  And so I went aboard Sturgeon in '67 [1967], and I was onboard her in '67 [1967] and '68 [1968].  And in 1969, I left that ship and went to the Naval Submarine Training Center in the Pacific [Hawaii].  But while on Sturgeon, I participated in two missions as they say, that were of significant importance to the United States.  And you can read about that, actually, in a book that a shipmate of mine wrote.  His name is Gannon McHale, and he wrote a book called 'Stealth Warriors' ['Stealth Boat'].  Now, I'm not actually in the book, but I was onboard the ship during that period of time.  And it talks about, you know, the kind of operations we were involved in.  So, if you'd like to read some of that, you can, but more importantly, I had the opportunity to work for some people that really took very good care of me.  The first person was the division officer I had in those days.  He said that, you know, based on what I had learned and what I was demonstrating in the ship that I should think about applying for a commission in the Navy, and that I should apply for, in those days, something called the Navy Scientific--it's called NESP, Navy Enlisted Scientific Program.  And under that program, you would go off and finish college and get a commission in the Navy.  Well, I listened to him, but I didn't do anything about it right away.
Story_ID: 34847
Speaker 1: And I was drawing to the time when I was gonna go to shore duty off of that submarine [USS Sturgeon].  And I didn't really know where I wanted to go.  And I got a set of orders that put me in New London.  And I didn't wanna stay in New London.  The ship was in New London, Connecticut.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It wasn't a lot of fun in New London.  I didn't wanna stay there, and I made a big ruckus about it.  And about the time I was making the ruckus, the squadron commander was walking past the sonar room on the submarine.  And he stopped (laughter).  He came in, and he looked at me, and he says, he says, "Bundy, what's the matter with you?"  I said, I just got these orders, and they wanna keep me here in New London.  I wanna go do something else.  He says, well, where do you wanna go?  I said, Commodore, I really don't know.  I just know I don't wanna stay here.  He says, he says, have you ever seen a hula girl?  I said, no, I've never seen a hula girl.  And he says, well, I've got just the place for you to go.  I'm gonna get you set up and we're gonna send you to Hawaii.  And he left, and two days later, the yeoman, which is the clerk, comes in, and he says, who do you know?  I said, what do you mean, who do I know?  He says, you've got orders to the Naval Submarine Training Center, Pacific, in Pearl Harbor, Hawaii.  And so you're gonna, that's where you're going next.  Like I said before, there were people all through my career that would enter and provide a vector and kind of put me in the right direction.
Story_ID: 34848
Speaker 1: There is one other story that I have to tell about [USS] Sturgeon.  I don't feel comfortable telling you all the things that we did, but--because of the classification, but you can read that book [Stealth Boat, by Gannon McHale].  That got, that stuff got released.  But I came onboard the ship as a First Class Petty Officer.  I qualified in submarines, which is a big deal in the submarine force.  I qualified in submarines, in about three months.  I never went to submarine school.  And I qualified in submarines, and while serving in the ship, there were people who helped me, and there were people that just despised the fact that I was there.  And a couple of 'em, you know, got out of line.  But the other guys in the ship would intercede, and really make a difference.  Well, there were two African Americans in the ship.  It was me and a steward.  He was a Second Class Steward.  His name is Emanuel Howard.  Emanuel came in the Navy during World War II.  Now, remember, this is 1967.  I went from Seaman to First Class, starting in 1963, and it's 1967, and I'm in First Class.  He was in submarines during the war, and he was a Second Class.  So all that time as a steward, he only made it to Second Class, but he had made numerous patrols.  He had made numerous times underway in submarines.  And so we were just coming back from a preparation to go on patrol, and the Commodore, the same Commodore that later on helped me, was coming up the ladder in preparation for leaving the ship, and he turned around to the commanding officer, Jacob, I mean W. Bohannan, he turned to the commanding officer, he says, "Bo, I wanna, I want Howard to come up to the squadron and run my pantry.  He says, Howard is not going to sea anymore.  They always call everybody by their last name.  And the captain turned around and yelled back down the ladder, and "Hey, get, get Howard up here."  Then Howard, all of a sudden appeared, and I was standing there watching what was going on.  And he turned, the Commodore turns to Howard, he says, you go up there, and you get all of your gear, and you report up to the squadron building this afternoon.  You're not gonna make any more patrols.  That was astonishing.  Howard, African American, had been in the Navy since World War II, had been a steward this whole time, and (laughter), I remember a little, about five minutes later, here's Howard, bouncing up the stairs of the ladder with his bag, and he went off the ship.  And that was the last time he ever went to sea on a submarine.  I made that patrol, I was the only African American on the ship.  And for part of it, you know, I thought about it.  There were one or two people that were, you know, a bit difficult to get along with.  But as a crew and everybody else, kind of kept that straightened out.  And that was, it's kind of interesting.  I came back from that patrol, and it was not long after that, that, you know, I got my orders, and I went to Hawaii [Naval Submarine Training Center, Pacific, in Pearl Harbor].
Story_ID: 34849
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was Hawaii [Naval Submarine Training Center, Pacific, in Pearl Harbor] like?  Now, you're there, and what vessel were you assigned to?
Speaker 2: Well, I was assigned to a training center.  I was assigned to the Submarine Training Center, Pacific, as an instructor, and I taught sonar technicians how to do sonar subjective analysis, and I won't get into great detail about that, but it was based on all of my background.  And so I taught them, and what I decided to do while I was there was to attend college.  And so I started working at night.  Instead of being on a day job, I came in about 4:00, 4:30 at night, and we would teach from 4:30 through about 10:30 every day, my students.  And then during the day, I went to college.  I started at Leeward Community [College], and I took a liberal arts program along with computer science.  And I finished there with an associate's degree in about a year and a half.  And that summer, I transferred to the University of Hawaii, and I pursued a liberal arts program, but I took engine--some engineering classes.  I took computer science, and what I thought I was gonna become was a technical writer.  And so I--whenever you go to college, you try and figure out what you're gonna do when it's all done.  And so I took technical writing.  I took a number of journalism courses, and a number of writing courses, some engineering, and I took Russian as a language.  And so I started that and finished in December of 1973.  So it took me about three years to do four years of college while I was there teaching at the Naval Submarine Training Center.  And during that period of time, I made chief.  And so I made chief with eight years in the [U.S.] Navy, and I had finished my bachelor's degree, and I went to talk to my boss.  And I said, okay, what do I do now?  And he says, well, you can stick around and make E-8 and E-9.  I said, but--he said, but I think you're gonna be probably the youngest E-8 and E-9 in the Navy.  And there was another guy who was tracking along with me who had about eight years, and had made chief petty officer.  And that's E-7.  So from 1963, now, where it's 1972, I went from being a sea cadet to being a chief petty officer in the Navy, with a bachelor's degree.
Story_ID: 34850
Speaker 1: And it turns out that at that time, the [U.S.] Navy, and particularly, the submarine force, was looking for officers to go onboard submarines and be weapons specialists.  And so my boss, his name was Captain Lyons, the commanding officer of the training center, and Lieutenant Commander Taylor came up to me, and said, look, you've finished your bachelor's degree.  And what we'd like you to do is to go to Officer Candidate School and become an officer and come back to submarines.  And at the time, I was thinking about getting out of the Navy.  I was thinking about getting out of the Navy and staying in Hawaii.  I had a good friend then who I thought I was gonna just kinda hang around with her and stay in Hawaii.  And Lieutenant Commander Taylor and the captain said, you know, this is a great opportunity for you.  And what we're gonna do is send you to Officer Candidate School.  And so I thought about it, and I went in and re-enlisted.  I showed you that picture and the next thing I knew, I was here in Newport [Rhode Island], going to Officer Candidate School.  And that's how I went from being a chief petty officer to becoming an unrestricted line officer in the Navy.  So I spent, I think either sixteen or eighteen weeks here.  I was the assistant regimental commander for my class.  I graduated first in the class here at Officer Candidate School.  And from here I went to submarine school to officer submarine school in Groton, Connecticut.
Story_ID: 34851
Speaker 1: Okay, now, was it, 1981 that you are appointed Plans and Operations Officer and Commander, Task Force Commander [Plans and Operations Officer of U.S.   Atlantic Command, Nuclear Operations & Commander Task Force 144], right, and--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, there're a couple of things in between then--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that and becoming an officer.  So I was commissioned an ensign in the [U.S.] Navy, and I went to submarine school.  And from submarine school, I went to the staff of, to the staff of (unclear) for about two or three months, waiting to go to school.  And then I went out to Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] to attend weapons school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I should ask you like along the way here, who were some of the key--did you have any key mentors or teachers along the way?
Speaker 2: Well, not so much teachers, but I think people who opened doors for me.  And I mentioned Lieutenant Commander Taylor.  He was my department head at, in Pearl Harbor.  On board [USS] Sturgeon, the chief that I had on Sturgeon was more of a peer than, you know, than a mentor for me.  The commanding officer of that ship, Commander Bohanan, he was really a person that we kind of all looked up.  You know, you wanted like--to be like him.
Speaker 1: Now, this is on the Sturgeon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, on the Sturgeon, yeah.  And my department head in those days was a Lieutenant Commander Guy Curtis.  And he came back into my life later, but he was also very supportive of, you know, what I should do next.  And so while I didn't have anybody that I, you know, sought counsel from, there were a number of people like Lieutenant Commander Curtis who kind of coached me about what I should do next.  In Hawaii, there was a chief that I worked with.  His name was Frank Pierce.  And Frank was more of a peer than, you know, a supervisor.  And he really was the person that really encouraged me about going to college, and, of course, I started into that.  And it was a matter of getting it done.  And it was a good, good life then.  I mean I was teaching school in the evening, and going to college with the students and the coeds and everybody, every day.  And I got involved in writing for the school newspaper, and got involved with the football team, you know.  And that was, that was a pretty good life for me at the Naval Submarine Training Center.
Story_ID: 34852
Speaker 1: And so I left there [Naval Submarine Training Center, Hawaii], went to OCS [Officer Candidate School], came back to the training center to be trained as a Polaris Weapons Officer.  In those days, we had Polaris missiles onboard our submarines.  And I was sent to the USS Sam Houston Gold Crew as the assistant weapons Officer.  And so I went aboard that ship and was qualified in submarines as an officer.  The commanding officer of that ship was John Patrick Wycert (ph.).  And he also was a influencer, you know, he really talked to me about what I should do next, and kind of took good care of me and kept me on the right path.  And so I spent two patrols on Sam Houston.  And I was in the off-crew office back in Hawaii, and he called me in, and he said, "Hey, look, Will.  You have done everything you need to do on your first boat.  And I'd only made two patrols, and he said, I've got you set up to go to the USS Ohio, SSBN-726, which is being built, brand new submarine being built in Groton, Connecticut.  And so--
Speaker 2: So what year is this now?  Let's not get--
Speaker 1: This is 1977, '78 [1978].
Speaker 2: 1977, okay.
Speaker 1: And so I didn't make the next patrol.  As a matter of fact, I packed up and went to New London [Connecticut].
Story_ID: 34853
Speaker 1: So I arrived in New London [Connecticut; around 1977] and I went to electric boat where the submarine was being built.  And in those days, as the submarine was being built, you could walk actually into the side of the submarine.  The submarine's 560 feet long, carried 24 missiles when it was deployed.  And so I went aboard, and checked in with the executive officer of ship and he says, you know, we're not gonna keep you.  You, it's gonna take too long to get the boat built, and you and two or three other officers, we're not gonna just keep you sitting around here.  We're gonna send you off to do other things.  And so I spent two days assigned to the [USS] Ohio, and I went up to Submarine Group II, which was the flag officer command there in New London.  And I showed up, up there, and the chief of staff called me in.  He says, you know, we've been waiting for you to get up here.  You're not gonna stay on Ohio.  I'm sending you down to see Captain Fountain at the development squadron.  So I said, yes, sir.  He says, we're gonna put you on a boat down there.  I said, yes, sir.  And I went down and met with Captain Fountain that afternoon, and he said, well, I think we need you on the USS Richard B. Russell.  And I went to the Russell and the commanding officer there was A. P. Campbell, and the engineer aboard that ship was Bill Norris.  And I went aboard to deploy with, with the Richard B. Russell.  And I spent about five, six months on that ship.  And toward the end of the deployment, we were in Holy Loch, Scotland.  And they told me that I had gotten the orders to go to the Submarine Officer Advanced Course in, wherever it, where else but New London, right in Connecticut.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And so I packed up my bags, and I went there to the Submarine Advanced Officers Course, which is a six-month course.  And I started, started in August and was due to graduate in that December [1978?].
Story_ID: 34854
Speaker 1: It was during that time [Submarine Officer Advanced Course, Connecticut] that I met my wife, Jean.  And, and so we had kind of a whirlwind courtship, and we were married in January of 1979.  And I had finished my education there at, at New London [Connecticut] to be a department head on a submarine.  And I packed up and had orders to the USS Memphis, which was a 688-class submarine, SSN-691.  And I was to report to the ship as the ship combat systems officer.  And that's the junior department head on a fast-attack nuclear submarine.  And so Jean and I were married in Bristol [Rhode Island] on the 26th of January, and we packed up and went to Norfolk, Virginia.  And I had gone down a few weeks before then and found a house.  And we bought a house in Virginia Beach.  And I started my tour onboard the [USS] Memphis.
Speaker 2: The Memphis was a brand new submarine.  It had just finished what we call post-shakedown availability when I came aboard.  And I made the first and second deployments on that submarine as a department head.  The second one was of particular significance in that we were part of the [U.S.] Navy force that was sent to the Indian Ocean during the [Iran] hostage crisis.  And this is in 1980, 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: Now, that was a seven-month deployment.  I came out of that deployment with a set of orders to go to the commander in chief, U.S. Atlantic fleet to go into the nuclear operations office.
Story_ID: 34855
Speaker 1: I don't wanna speed by these too fast.  I have a question about the [USS] Memphis [688-class submarine]--
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: The Memphis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, what were the, what was the capability of the Memphis?  I mean what was it designed to do and how was it used during the Iran hostage crisis and what was--if it was called into action, what action--what would it be able to do?
Speaker 2: I can tell you that the 688-class submarine was designed to be a maritime superior--supremacy submarine.  We had the capability to launch harpoon missiles, Mark 48 torpedoes and the submarine was an extremely fast submarine, nuclear powered.  On that particular boat, we went initially to the Mediterranean, and when President [Ronald] Reagan was about to take office, we decided to move large numbers of [U.S.] Navy and [U.S.] Marine Corp forces into the area outside of Iran.  And we were part of that armada.  And so we left the Mediterranean, went all the way south around the, around Africa and went into the Indian Ocean.  Initially, we went to the Diego Garcia.  And we had Thanksgiving at Diego Garcia.  And then we were sent on submarine tasking, and I can't tell you what we did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: But suffice it to say that we were in the Indian Ocean from November of 1980 through--yeah, we got there in November of 1980, and we got home after a stop in Australia in March of 1981.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there through the inauguration of President Reagan, the release of the hostages.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And as you recall, the Iranians released the hostages when President Reagan came into office--
Speaker 1: Yeah, the same day he was inaugurated basically.
Speaker 2: And that was a smart thing for them to do.
Speaker 1: So, the--one could conclude that the Memphis had a lot of capacity and was--
Speaker 2: We did, and I was the combat systems officer with all of my capabilities there.  As a matter of fact, I can tell you this.  During my time in Memphis, we conducted a large number of torpedo exercises, and while I was combat systems officer, we launched fifty-four exercise torpedoes, over the span of my time there.  And what I did is, as I was about to leave, and we recognized we had done that, I made plaques of each of my torpedo men and fire control men who had been involved in that.  And I gave 'em these plaques with a submarine with a torpedo being launched.  And they, they all kind of, you know, liked that.  And I gave that to 'em, you know, as I was leaving the ship.
Speaker 1: Now, these torpedoes that were launched, they weren't armed or anything--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, they were exercise courses (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --exercise torpedoes.  So, this, were you--was the Navy clearly trying to demonstrate what it could do (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, it's just part of our training--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: --and exercises and we did a number of test and evaluation launches, and, you know, that's kind of what we did.  And in those days, we always launched a lot of, a lot of exercise torpedoes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay--
Story_ID: 34856
Speaker 1: But that was kind of our claim to fame.  You know, we [USS Memphis] did that [torpedo exercises], and I, you know, we went to a lot of interesting places.  We went to Italy.  The ship went to Ashdod, Israel, but when the ship went there, I had to come home for a, you know, a personal matter.  And then I caught back up with the ship, and we spent to La Spezia, Italy.  So we operated primarily in the Mediterranean in those days, and then we came down and went into the Indian Ocean and operated there through the transition of the hostage crisis.  And that constituted an around-the-world trip.  We left Norfolk [Virginia], went into the Mediterranean, came out of the Mediterranean, around Africa, went to Australia, went through the Panama Canal and came home.  That was a seven-month deployment, and so the camera crews were on the pier when we arrived.  The ship was given a unit commendation.  We all got, you know, awards and what not on the pier, and the admiral was standing there.  And I was standing with him and the chief of staff of the Submarine Force Atlantic.  And he says, why are you still standing here?  I said, (laughter) because I need to go down and get my bag.  And he turned around and Jean [Bundy's wife] was there with William [Bundy's older son, William Francis Bundy, Jr.].  And he says, you don't need your bag.  Go home.  You don't have the duty.  Go home.  And so I walked down the pier and gave Jean a big hug, and we're headed off the pier, and that's when the Channel 10 reporter comes up and says, hey, I wanna interview you.  Are you from that ship?  And I said, yes, I, you know, I'm from the Memphis, and so they interviewed me.  And I told you the story that we went to Weems [Virginia] because, you know, we were trying to find something to do one Sunday.  And so when I went up there and talked to the family, they had seen me on TV.  And so, and Memphis was a good tour for me.  I, you know, I went on in '79 [1979], and I left the ship in March of '81 [1981].
Story_ID: 34857
Speaker 1: Now, the scene that you described reminds me of a scene in a, in the movie 'Antwone Fisher' where he dreams of meeting his relatives 'cause he never knew his family.  And you didn't really didn't know your father's [William Cox Bundy] side of the family.  You walk into this church, and they're all there.
Speaker 2: And all--well, you know, all the people that are in Virginia.  I knew my aunts very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, they were always influencers for me.  And my Aunt Sarah, in particular, and my Aunt Eleanor.  But it was just, you know, you know you're home when many of the people that you just are now looking at, you know, resemble you and are people that you just kind of feel a kinship with.
Story_ID: 34858
Speaker 1: But I went to the staff of the commander in chief, U.S. Atlantic fleet, U.S. Atlantic command or it was Commander, U.S. Atlantic Fleet, Commander U.S. Atlantic, which was the four-star admiral that was responsible for everything on the Atlantic coast.  And I was involved in the nuclear operations division.  So I--my job there was to, to prepare fleet ballistic missile submarines for their missions and to manage part of the nuclear operations for our missile systems.  And I did that job for three years.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That was, that was an interesting time too.  I had the chance to invent some things for the [U.S.] Navy that I can't talk to you about, but I got involved in those kinds of things and started going up to the Navy staff in Washington, D.C. [District of Columbia].  The influencer there for me was a Captain Ron Wilsey (ph.).  He kind of took me under his wing and gave me a number of important projects to do.  And that turned out to be a very good tour for me.  And I came into that tour as a lieutenant and I left that tour as a lieutenant commander.
Story_ID: 34859
Speaker 1: And I left there [staff of the commander, U.S. Atlantic Fleet] and went to be the navigation and operations officer on USS Lafayette, and you can guess where that was.  It was back in Groton [Connecticut] again.  And so I went back to New London, Groton area, to be the navigator on USS Lafayette.  And I made two patrols on that ship.  We operated out of Holy Loch, Scotland.  We lived in Gales Ferry in, you know, in Gales Ferry, Connecticut, and my son, William [William Francis Bundy, Jr.], really started, you know, school in earnest then.  And Jean [Bundy's wife] was close to home.  She's from, you know, Bristol [Connecticut], and she had the chance to go home quite often and that was another good tour.  I was the navigator on that ship.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right, now so you were on the Lafayette through '87 [1987]?
Speaker 1: Yes, I left Lafayette in actually '86 [1986].
Story_ID: 34860
Speaker 1: I left [USS] Lafayette in '86 [1986].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I left there [USS Lafayette] to go to be the executive officer on USS Blueback, SS-581.  And Blueback was stationed in San Diego, California.  We operated primarily up and down the Pacific Coast, and we lived in San Diego in those days.  I guess the more notable thing about being on Blueback is that we had a, we had a writer come ride us.  And his name was Richard Hendrickson [Richard P. Henrick].  And we took him to sea for three or four days.  We went out to do torpedo exercises and operate, and while he was there, he was just trying to get the feel of what it was like to be on a submarine.  And he later on wrote a book about a diesel submarine and Blueback was a diesel submarine.  All the others were nuclear powered.  But (laughter), he wrote about a diesel submarine defeating these nuclear submarines.  And it was because he had the chance to sit and talk to us about how we operated the ship and how we, you know, had an advantage over nuclear submarines because we're so quiet.  He also is the author--
Speaker 2: What was the name of the book?  I'm sorry, I'm just--
Speaker 1: I forget the name of the book now because the more important thing that he did was--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --he wrote 'Crimson Tide'.  And--
Speaker 2: And his name again is--
Speaker 1: His name is Richard Hendrickson [Henrick].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he wrote 'Crimson Tide', and I like to think that, you know, the Denzel Washington character, he probably recognized that, kind of got that from me because I was the executive officer on Blueback, and he wrote, you know, Denzel Washington in to be the executive officer on [USS] Alabama for that movie.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and (unclear), (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And I had been involved in the nuclear command and control business.
Speaker 2: Would you suppose that he would have met another black officer of similar position anywhere during that time period?
Speaker 1: At that time in the [U.S.] Navy, there was seven of us in a force of about 4,000, if I kinda got that right--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would just guess that you're probably right, that being on board the vessel that you were on, with you in that position--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--
Speaker 2: --you may have been the model for the Denzel--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think so.  You know, I showed you the, I showed you a photograph of me and Pete Tzomes [also a HistoryMaker].  When I was the XO [executive officer] in Blueback, he was CO [commanding officer] of USS Houston.  And we were the, we were the only two African American officers in the submarine force in San Diego for that period of time, which was about a couple of years.  I think after that, we got one or two junior officers that showed up.  So the characters that, you know, Hendrickson played off of, probably I influenced that, and I'm quite sure along the way, he probably ran across Tony Watson, who was also, you know, a key submarine officer during that period of time.
Story_ID: 34861
Speaker 1: And so [USS] Blueback, I left Blueback in, I guess, '87 [1987] and went to Submarine Group V as the submarine group plans officer.  And it was my responsibility to plan the operations of about twenty-two submarines.  I was involved in a number of things there.  And it was toward the end of that time that I received orders to be commanding officer of USS Barbel, and I assumed command in Barbel in June of 1988.  We operated out of (unclear), Japan, up and down the Pacific.  And in 1989, the decision was made to start to decommission the diesel submarines.  The USS Darter was out there with us, and they brought Darter back.  And then we came back in September of 1989, was the last diesel submarine to leave the Pacific fleet area of operations.  Being in command was, I tell people that it is only in the [U.S.] Navy that you have that opportunity to be the commanding officer of a ship and have a crew and operations that depends on you.  I, I felt very honored to have that role.  When I talk to officers today, I teach officers here at the [U.S. Naval] War College [Newport, Rhode Island], and they, you know, they talk about whether or not they wanna go to command.  And I kind of share with them that that is something that if they don't do it in the Navy, in the rest of your life, you will never have another opportunity like that.  And so we decommissioned Barbel on the 4th of December, 1989.  And I was then given orders to be the chief staff officer in the submarine squadron in San Diego [California].
Story_ID: 34862
Speaker 1: Now, before we leave the [USS] Barbel, are there any stories about being the commander and what it's like?
Speaker 2: I think that the really interesting part is, you know, the people.  I think that the enlisted people and the officers that you have working with you really make the difference in the ship.  We had a number of things that could go wrong in the ship and it was the crew that you have to credit with, you know, overcoming those periods.  And you face that in just about any ship that you're in, but Barbel was a thirty-year old submarine, and it was the crew that I think about most in being able to operate that ship.  We went to Subic Bay [Philippines], we went to Hong Kong.  We operated the ship going into, in and out of Sasebo [Japan] quite often.  And that's, that was our home port.  Jean [Bundy's wife] had the opportunity to be the, you know, the captain's wife, and really take care of the families when we were away.  And, you know, submarine operations are not something that I can go into great detail with you about, but it was, it was a pretty, pretty exciting time for us.  We operated well, I think, and we brought the ship back to Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] to be decommissioned.
Story_ID: 34863
Speaker 1: What was your next assignment?
Speaker 2: My next assignment was Chief Staff Officer at Submarine Squadron III in San Diego [California].
Speaker 1: This would be 1989 or--
Speaker 2: No, this is 1990.  I arrived there in--
Speaker 1: 1990.
Speaker 2: --1990 in January.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That job also was one where you kind of shared the command responsibility with the commodore of the squadron.  We had, I think seven submarines.  And I wound up going to sea on many of them to provide advice to the commanding officer of that--of those ships.  I spent a lot of time helping out with the diversity program in the [U.S.] Navy at that point.  There was really a desire to increase the number of African Americans in submarines and I was involved in that recruiting effort while I was there at the squadron.  The other thing that happened with us is towards the end of that year, Raymond [Bundy's younger son] was born, and that was, that was a big event, you know, for us.  And I forgot to mention William [Bundy's older son] was born in December of '79 [1979], while I was on Memphis [USS Memphis].  And so both of the sons had a chance to, you know, be Navy dependents and I think William got the most of that, you know, since he was with me from '79 [1979] all the way through the time I left the Navy.
Story_ID: 34864
Speaker 1: All right, so you were talking about diversity programs that the [U.S.] Navy had.  Were these recruitment--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --part of what we call the National Naval Officers Association [NNOA].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got involved in NNOA, it had to be in 1978, '79 [1979].  NNOA had local chapters in the various fleet concentrations, and I was part of the chapter in Hawaii.  I was part of the chapter in Norfolk [Virginia] later on.  While I was in Hawaii, I had the chance to visit with Admiral [Samuel L.] Gravely when he was commander of the third fleet.  But the NNOA was designed to provide recruiting, retention and support to African American officers in the [U.S.] Navy, [U.S.] Marine Corps and [U.S.] Coast Guard.  And I became the Western Region Vice President for NNOA during the period of time that I was at Submarine Squadron III, and, yes, it was while I was at Submarine Squadron III and also while I served on [USS] Blueback.  And part of our role was to get out and let African Americans know about the opportunities in the Navy Officer Corps.  And so I was pretty much involved in that throughout my career.  I'm a lifetime member of NNOA.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So NNOA, is that, is it an African American organization?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's what I thought.
Speaker 2: Yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: I just wanted to make sure.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there is a Hispanic organization, and there's an African American one.  The African American organization is NNOA, and I forget the name of the Hispanic organization.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so, now are we ready to--
Speaker 2: The African American organization is called ANSO.  That's what--
Speaker 1: The Hispanic?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, it's ANSO [Association of Naval Services Officers]?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34865
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1993, you go to the U.S. Naval War College [Newport, Rhode Island] to--
Speaker 2: Right, that's exactly right.  I had asked--well, first of all, they, the detailers, those are the people that assign us to our overall assignments, wanted to send me to AUTEC [Atlantic Undersea Test and Evaluation Center] Island or Andros Island to run the Atlantic tests and evaluation range.  And I didn't think that that was the right move for me at the time.  Of course, the detailer was telling me that was the right move, but I told him, I said, you know, I'd like to go to the Naval War College.  You know, Jean [Bundy's wife] is from Rhode Island, and I'd like to come up here and go to school.  And so he said, okay, we'll make that happen.  And we arrived here in August of '93 [1993]--no, August of '92 [1992], actually, August of '92 [1992].  And I started attending school here.  And so this was, you know, a really good deal for Jean.  She was able to go home, you know, to spend time with her mom and dad.  We didn't know that the father was only gonna have so many years left with being here.  And we decided to build a house in Bristol [Rhode Island] and drop anchor there.  And so, as I started to finish school here, again, they wanted to send me off to another assignment.  And I asked the detailer, the detailer at the time, he had, in fact, been a shipmate of mine back in my Sam Houston [USS Sam Houston] days, if I could have an assignment up here.  And he sent me to be the director of the [Naval] Officers Candidate School.  And so I spent, I spent about a year at Officer Candidate School.  I graduated from here in 1993 and spent about a year in--
Speaker 1: Now, this is with a master's degree--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's right, master's degree in national security strategic studies.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I graduated here, you know, pretty high up.  I was in, I graduated with distinction.  You know, they have high distinction.  I graduated from here with distinction.  I really enjoyed my time here.
Story_ID: 34866
Speaker 1: And after, during the time I was here [U.S. Naval War College, for a master's degree], I was selected to receive an award from the Black Engineers of the Year Award organization.  And in February of '93 [1993], I went down to Baltimore [Maryland] to the Black Engineer of the Year Award, and the Chief of Naval operations at the time, Admiral Kelso, presented my award to me.  And there must have been three, 4,000 people in the assembly for that award.  And as you know, that program continues to today, and I've been involved with it ever since receiving my award.  I go to the awards in February every year, and all of the black COs [commanding officers] for submarines, all seven of us, most of us--I think everybody except one has received an award from Black Engineers.
Story_ID: 34867
Speaker 1: And it was during the Black Engineer of the Year Award session, I think it was in 2000, that we decided--well, yeah, it had to be, it was in 2001.  In 2001, we decided to organize ourselves into the Centennial Seven [African-American officers to command submarines in the 20th Century].  And so I'm Number Three.  Number one is Pete Tzomes [also a HistoryMaker].  He had command of USS Houston, and he took command, I think in 1985.  I was at that change of command ceremony in Norfolk [Virginia].  Then second is Tony Watson.  He had command of USS Jacksonville.  Tony was also the first African American to make admiral in the submarine force.  Following that was me with my command in Barbel [USS Barbel], and following me was Mel [Melvin] Williams.  He went on to become a vice admiral in command of Second Fleet.  His submarine was USS Nebraska.  Following Mel Williams is Joe Peterson.  He had command of USS Dolphin, and operating out of San Diego [California].  Then after Joe was Cecil Haney, Admiral Haney is now a four-star admiral, and he is commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet.  And he had command of USS Honolulu, and then there is Bruce Grooms, and Bruce is now a vice admiral with NATO [North Atlantic Treaty Organization].  He had command of USS Ashville.
Speaker 2: Now, now--
Speaker 1: And in addition to that, Bruce and Cecil won the, what we called the coveted Stockdale Awards for leadership.  Your peers nominate you for that award.  So, of the group, those of us that kind of started out in a [U.S.] Navy that wasn't really ready for African American leadership and kind of grew up with that leadership, to the ones that, you know, did very well in what we've paved the way for, have done extremely well in their careers.  There was a Navy chaplain, his--Captain Parham.  I was in a Black History Month movie with him that the Navy produced.  And he said that each generation of Naval officers that comes along will open the door a little bit more for the next generation.  And I like to believe that.  I think that my career that spanned some thirty years opened the doors for the next Naval officers, and, of course, our son, William [Francis Bundy, Jr.], went to the Naval Academy and went on to serve in submarines.  He qualified as a chief engineer in his second, I mean he served as chief engineer in his second nuclear submarine.  And, you know, he is in the Pentagon today in a deputy job.  So I believe Reverend Parham.  He's passed on now.  But he always talked about opening that door just a little bit more for the next generation.  And I think, I think over my time, that's what I've had an opportunity in, to contribute to.
Story_ID: 34868
Speaker 1: Just back a second to the Black Engineer of the Year Award [1993], were they--did the black engineers, were they honoring your contributions in engineering and government service or just government services?
Speaker 2: The award for, the award was achievement in government service, and the thing that made the difference is that I had risen from the enlisted ranks in the highly competitive and technology-driven submarine force to be a commanding officer.  And that's what they were honoring me for.  You know, I--we talked about my time at [Baltimore] City College [Baltimore, Maryland] in the general, technical program.  Well, I went on later to study calculus, was--Captain Guy Curtis, who was the chief of staff at Submarine Force when I was at the (unclear), at the commander-in-chief Atlantic, who came to me and said, hey, we're gonna get you set up to go to nuclear power school, one of the more scientifically rigorous schools in the Navy.  And he said, I want you to go take calculus at ODU [Old Dominion University], and we're gonna go ahead and send you to nuclear power school so you can be a commanding officer.  And so he had been my department head on [USS] Sturgeon, and so I followed his advice.  And I was going through all of the calculus work and I'd already been involved in missile technology and all of the sciences around our missile systems, and, you know, part of the work that I told you I couldn't tell you about, had to do with all of that technology.  And I got, so I got through the first course, and I was in the middle of a second course.  And he called me in, he says, hey, look.  I told you to go back to school, but we're not gonna send you to nuclear power school now.  We have a better plan for you.  You're gonna be one of our Cos [commanding officer] in [USS] Barbel and [USS] Blueback, and so I finished the course, and, you know, history, history turned out to be exactly as he said.
Story_ID: 34869
Speaker 1: When you were listing the other members of the Centennial Seven [African-American officers to command submarines in the 20th Century], I wanted to (unclear), now, is a four-star admiral the highest rank that you could attain in the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there's two--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And that's what Admiral Haney is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Haney and, just Haney or the--
Speaker 2: Yes, and Admiral [Cecil] Haney is a four-star, and he's a Pacific Fleet commander.  Admiral [Bruce] Grooms is a three-star, vice admiral, and Admiral [Melvin] Williams was a three-star vice admiral.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a fleet commander at second fleet.
Speaker 1: Okay, at the time you joined the [U.S.] Navy, there had not even been a black captain, right?
Speaker 2: At the time I joined the Navy, there, the black captain was Captain Parham.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a chaplain.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (unclear) (simultaneous) ranking black in the Navy--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and Admiral [Samuel L.] Gravely came here in 1962 as a commander.  And so I guess he probably was pretty close to making captain when I came in the Navy in '63 [1963], '64 [1964].
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think he was, he made captain in '67 [1967], I think that was, according to this [The HistoryMakers' research outline].
Speaker 2: What, is it '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 34870
Speaker 1: Now, you retired from service [U.S. Navy] in '94 [1994], right?
Speaker 2: Correct, I retired in '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay, and so, and you worked for Rhode Island Department of Transportation [as director]?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I--(laughter), I initially left the Navy and I wanted to do something for the community.  That was gonna be my, you know, kind of pay it forward approach.  And I went to the Martin Luther King Center here in Newport [Rhode Island] to be the executive director of the Martin Luther King Center.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so I went there, and I was there for about two months, and I was sitting in my office.  And one of the associates came running in and said, you know, there are a bunch of police doing a takedown of a house down the street from where we were.  You could actually see it from our back door.  And it turned out, it was one of the associates that worked for me.  And I kind of knew I was kind of in over my head in being in the community.  You know, my Aunt Eleanor [Bundy's paternal aunt] always said to me, says, she said, you know, you work for Uncle Sam.  You don't know what it's like out here.  You're in a pretty sterile environment.  You don't know what it's really like out here.  And so I thought about that, and about that time, a gentleman here in Rhode Island--his name is Keith Stokes, came to me and said, I want you to come meet the governor.  I think we have a role for you in Rhode Island state government.  And so he introduced me to the governor, and the governor wanted me to take over the Minority Business Enterprise Office.  But I had to apply for the job.  I had to compete for it, and, in fact, I competed for it.  There were several candidates who were in competition with me, and I finally won the job.  And so I left the Martin Luther King Center and took over the position as executive director of the Minority Business Enterprise for the State of Rhode Island.  And so I got involved in that, and I was doing a number of things to improve minority business in the state.  And the governor at the time, Bruce Sundlun, was defeated in his bid for re-election by Lincoln Almond.  And I came into the office, and I was starting my work day, and I got a call to go down to interview with the transition team for Lincoln Almond.  And I went down, and I was kind of miffed as to why they had reached out to me.  And (laughter), and I sat down with a couple of the interviewers, and they were all, you know, transition team business people, executives.  And they wanted me to take over the Department of Transportation which did not have a very good reputation in the state.  And I went back and did some homework, to try and figure out whether it's something I ought to do.  And I got in touch with a couple of the flag officers that I knew from my Navy days and had conversation with them and then sat down with Jean [Bundy's wife] and had a real long conversation about that.  And I took the job.
Story_ID: 34871
Speaker 1: And I was appointed the Director of Transportation here in the State of Rhode Island in 1995, in January of 1995, and took over the office.  When I walked into the office, it was kind of a bare room (laughter).  My predecessor had took everything that he owned out of there.  And I walked in, it was kind of a bare room.  There was no turnover.  And we knew that the DOT [Department of Transportation] was in some level of financial distress.  It was a $25 million deficit in a bridge construction project, and there was another $10 million deficit in the road program.  And so I rolled up my sleeves and set up an organization much the way I had in the [U.S.] Navy.  And within six months, we had resolved most of the issues I was sent in there to take care of.  I decided to leave the DOT at the--at that point in time, the governors in the State of Rhode Island had to be re-elected every two years.  And they were started to line themselves up for Lincoln Almond to run again.  And it turns out, you know, you're either a "D" [Democrat] or an "R" [Republican].  And I didn't quite like some of the people that I was getting surrounded with.  Lincoln Almond was a Republican, and there was tension between the various directors of state agencies, and Lincoln Almond's chief of staff.  And I took the opportunity to leave.
Story_ID: 34872
Speaker 1: And I left that office [director of the Rhode Island Department of Transportation] and ultimately wound up at Fleet Boston--at Fleet Financial Group.  One of the--
Speaker 2: So this is '96 [1996] when you leave, right?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: One of the executives in government at the time, his name was Gale Doster (ph.), came to me when I decided to leave.  He says, look, I think you belong in banking, and I'm gonna help you get set up for the next chapter in your career.  And he did.  And I got set up to work at Fleet Financial.  I started there in the corporate properties division and later on was recruited into the operations and technology division.  I worked there from 1996 through 2002 when I left there to come back and work for the [U.S.] Navy.
Speaker 2: Okay, so any stories about your service at Fleet Boston that you--
Speaker 1: That was kind of, that was interesting in that the Fleet Boston organization went through three different acquisitions and mergers while I was there.  And that is really kind of stressful for anybody that works at a company that goes through those kinds of changes.  But I kind of made my way, initially in corporate properties, and then I left corporate properties and became kind of an assistant to the chief information officer.  And I ran his project program.  I was in charge of project innovation and project management development.  And so the company, when I left it, had a project management organization well under--well established.  And we were doing a lot of innovation.
Story_ID: 34873
Speaker 1: So the story I remember most though is [while working at Fleet Financial Group], other than flying around in corporate planes and going to Wall Street and all the other things you do as a bank executive, all of that was very nice.  But it was on September 11th that I had brought together about fifty or sixty relationship managers.  And we were in the, what we call the "Superman Building" in Providence [Rhode Island].  It was the tallest building in the financial district in Providence, and we were on the top floors, a conference center on the top floor of that building.  I forget whether it's thirty-two or thirty-three floors.  And so it's about 8:30 [a.m.], and I've got the meeting going.  I'm up at the podium, directing the meeting, and I could see a couple of the representatives in the back, the relationship managers in the back looking at their pagers.  And there was distress on the face of this one woman.  And I stopped the meeting, and I said, and I called her name, I said, what's the problem?  She says, there is something wrong on Wall Street.  We've lost connectivity with some of our main servers and connections down in the financial district.  And I called a halt to the meeting.  And I've got these 50, 60 people sitting around on the top floor, and I went down to the PAO's office, down on the fourteenth floor.  I had one or two people come with me.  I said, come on, let's go down to the PAO office and see what we can find out.  And I walked in and there on the TV, you know, the towers are coming down or the second one is coming down.  And I went back upstairs and I said, and I told everybody what was going on, and I said, and we're gonna adjourn our meeting.  And what I'd like you to do is to very orderly get lined up.  There're four elevators out there, and I want you, you know, out of here.  And, you know, we will reconvene at some later date.  And so I stayed there and everybody, you know, we got everybody out of the building.  And we evacuated the building.  The people went on to do other things.  And so as I'm about to leave, this woman comes up to me and she says, how could you be so calm during this whole thing?  And you've saved all of our lives.  I said, I didn't save your life.  We did the right thing by stopping the meeting.  This building is--and we didn't know then whether the building was a target or not or whatever was gonna happen.  And I said, so don't be nervous.  She says, I'll never forget this.  I'll never forget you about this.  And so that's my big story from my Fleet days.  We did a lot of things, but it never compared to, you know, the routine day in the Navy.  I mean it just, it was great to be there, but I just, you know, I just wanted to get back and do some things, you know, in the Navy.  So I did.  I came back--
Story_ID: 34874
Speaker 1: So had you been attending classes at the [U.S. Naval] War College [Newport, Rhode Island] or--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, no, I'd already graduated from the War College.  I graduated from the War College in '93 [1993]--
Speaker 1: Now, that's with the masters [degree], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, for the master's degree, but what I had done, when I started working at the DOT [Rhode Island Department of Transportation; as director], I started my Ph.D. [degree] at Salve Regina University [Newport].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But when I left DOT and got started with the bank, I took off a couple of years and then restarted my Ph.D. work in research at Salve Regina, and I finished in 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I finished my Ph.D. while I was--most of it, while I was at Fleet, which turned into Bank Boston, which was later acquired by Bank of America.  And then I actually finished it once I got employed back with the Navy at the War College.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, let me talk about this.  Let's--who was your Ph.D. advisor, and what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: My dissertation was about leadership in complex technical organizations.  And we like to think about leadership in terms of really being an innovator and creating technical change.  And so I did my study, first of all, on Admiral Hyman G. Rickover, the father of the nuclear Navy, and Admiral [William] Raborn, who was the father of the Polaris [missile] program.  And so the initial study I did was to look at their leadership style and how they organized organizations for creativity and innovation.  And then I examined Steve Jobs' [Apple, Inc.] activity.  And then I went to some of the modern innovators that were in the banking industry.  And I used Banking 21, which really brought about the ATM cards, brought about checks that are cashed right at the point of sale, that whole process.  And I had been involved in much of that technology and the transition to online banking.  I was involved in that.  And so all of those things came together to put together an argument about what it takes to be a leader in an innovation environment, in an environment where technology is driving rapid change.  And that's what my Ph.D. work was about.  My advisor was Myra Edelstein, and Dr. Edelstein didn't have to do a lot of steering.  As a matter of fact, I took a number of directed electives with her to really dig deep into the technology changes that we were having at the bank.  And that's what I did for my electives.  So she was my mentor, and I had a reader at the War College, and I had a second reader at Salve [Salve Regina University].  And so I did the advance graduate certificate first, and then I did, you know, finished the Ph.D.
Story_ID: 34875
Speaker 1: All right, so I teach at Providence College [Providence, Rhode Island].  I taught at Salve [Salve Regina University, Newport, Rhode Island] for a period of time, but they had some retirements and changes, and I wound up not being able to continue being an adjunct there.  But I'm a lecturer at Providence College, and they don't call it adjunct there.  And I teach leadership. So I teach basic leadership, some of the theory courses, and then I teach the capstone course there.  And, as a matter of fact, I'm just finishing up this semester with about twelve students who are finishing up their leadership curriculum. So teaching at Providence College has kind of been a joy.  You know, I do much of it online these days, and then we have classes at the school.  And so that's kind of, you know, a break from teaching here at the [U.S. Naval] War College [Newport].
Speaker 2: Okay, now, do you have a leadership philosophy?
Speaker 1: I teach students to develop a leadership model for themselves, and the leadership model starts with virtues and values about how you should live your life.  And we can talk about honor and integrity.  We can talk about moral courage.  We can talk about core values that should form your own personal basis for how you life and how you respond.  And then the next part or the next part of the model is your development as a leader, both in terms of professional development, development as a mentor and being mentored.  So you mentor people, and you also are mentored yourself.  And then the professional development, education, experiences that you have to have, projects that you need to complete.  And then that top of the pyramid, where you start to reach down and bring along other people.  So I like to think about leadership in terms of a model that you develop for yourself.  I don't have a catchy phrase about it.  I really believe it has to do with the model and understanding how to be a change leader in those--that sort of an approach.  And that's the philosophy that I teach in my courses.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 34876
Speaker 1: But I wanna share with you what I do here [U.S. Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island].  Since 2005, I, at the direction of the president of the War College at that time, Rear Admiral Jake [Jacob L.] Shuford--he wanted me to set up a program here to look at integrated air missile defense.  And I brought in students to help me device the command and control structure for integrated air missile defense and ballistic missile defense for the [U.S.] Navy.  And we did that in about a three-year period.  And much of that is in place in the fleet today.  As a matter of fact, many of the students that I had over that period of time went into ballistic missile defense officer positions in our forward fleets.  I also have been involved in undersea warfare development.  What we're gonna do with our submarines, what we're gonna do with some of our advanced technologies and how they apply to undersea warfare.  And so I've been involved in doing that as well.  And we've graduated 160 students from our program.  Some of them have gone on to be in command of ships and submarines.  Others have had significant staff positions, and so I'm pretty proud of that.  I, you know, I got a note from a officer that served with me on Memphis [USS Memphis] many years ago.  He's retired now.  And he's out in the Fifth Fleet area, out in Bahrain.  I used to go there quite often, and I got a note from him.  He says I get out here, and the first thing I hear about is Will Bundy this and Will Bundy that.  And I'm out here trying to move 'em along with something, and you've already been here.  He says, and half of the officers out here are your students (laughter).  And so I wrote back to him, I said, Rick, it's great to hear from you, and I'm glad you and I are able to still help the Navy along.  And then following that, I get a note from one of the students telling me that Rick is there telling stories about what we did in Memphis.  But that's been a real pleasure for me, you know, to be able to share what I know about Navy and war fighting and technology with the officers that are coming along today.  One of the leaders in the submarine force said to me, he said, you have had a more significant impact on the submarine force in your role down at the War College since leaving the Navy than you've ever did when you were in uniform like the rest of us.  And I thought that was a pretty important comment.
Story_ID: 34877
Speaker 1: Well, give us a little background on the U.S. Naval War College [Newport, Rhode Island], just briefly.  What is it and--
Speaker 2: The Naval War College is what we like to think of as the center of thought for the [U.S.] Navy.  It is a, it's a graduate school for midgrade and senior officers of the U.S. Navy, and we also have Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps and Coast Guard officers here and a number of senior civilians from various government agencies.  The room that we're in is one of our foreign officer schools.  We have a junior foreign officer school and a senior foreign officer school.  And so we have, I guess almost 200 officers here from various nations that, partner nations with the United States.  And so we teach a senior course and a junior course here at the War College for professional military education, and my part of the college is across the street at the Center for Naval Warfare Studies.  And in the Center for Naval Warfare Studies we have several advanced research programs, and I run the Vice Admiral Samuel L. Gravely Research Program, and I have anywhere from sixteen to twenty students involved in research.  We look at new concepts for employment of new systems and capabilities and concepts for operating systems that we have today in a better way.  And so that's what I do in terms of my teaching, but we have a faculty of about 200 here.  At any given time, we have about five, I think five to 600 students here at the War College.  And they graduate with a Masters in National Security and Strategic Studies.  There are three core areas of study.  One is national security.  The second is joint military operations and the third area of study is strategy and policy.  And I run an underlying course for research for the college.
Story_ID: 34878
Speaker 1: Now, you've been here [U.S. Naval War College, Newport, Rhode Island ] since 2005, I guess or--
Speaker 2: I was on faculty from 2005 to now.  And I had a year when I was a contractor.  But, you know, my formal time here as a [U.S.] Navy civilian professor started in 2005.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, well, let's see.  Well, we always ask this question, from this perspective, I guess, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: We've seen President Barack Obama in office now for a second term, and some of the treatment that he has received, I think tells us that we still have not solved W.E.B Dubois said, the color line in our country.  That has not been resolved.  And I would hope that over time we do find a way to resolve it.  It's gonna be difficult.  I would tell you that there are days that I think everything's going well, and then I have to deal with somebody that reminds me that race is still an issue in our country.  Even in the position that I'm in, I've had to deal with people right here on this campus that remind that race is still an issue.  So I hope--I have two young granddaughters.  I would hope that in their lifetime, we start to get this resolved and put away completely.  I have a hope that it will be.  I mentioned the Navy movie that we did for Black History Month, and Captain Parham was in that movie.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of it?
Speaker 2: No, I don't now.
Speaker 1: But it was--
Speaker 2: This was in 1982, back that long, long ago.  In that movie I had a role and I talked about the submarine force.  But the guy that talked about aviation was Winston Scott [also a HistoryMaker], and you may remember him in that he was an astronaut.  He piloted the shuttle.  And Winston said, "Regardless of what we may think our lives and our livelihood is better protected in the Navy than anywhere else."  While we were on active duty, there were people and rules that protected us.  Since leaving the Navy, (laughter), and remember Aunt Eleanor's [Bundy's paternal aunt] comment to me about I work for Uncle Sam, and I don't know what it's like really out here.  Since leaving the Navy, I've experienced that.  I've experienced situations that just should not have been the case, and I hope that we overcome that.  Now, my youngest son [Raymond Bundy] just started, you know, as a underwriter in a large insurance firm.  And he's doing very well in that job.  And just the other day he said to me, he says, says, dad, I'm really not sure what you all went through.  He said, but, I'm here to tell you that I'm gonna try and do better with it all.  And I said, that's what I want you to do.  And he had his one-on-one with his boss, and he's being groomed for an executive training program, and things are going very well for him.  And I hope that continues to be the case.  You know, back to Reverend Parham, each of us has had the chance to open the door a little bit more for the next one, you know.  My two sons have, I think benefited from that, and I hope that my grandchildren benefit even more.  And so I have a hope that at some point, we'll solve the race issue in America.
Story_ID: 34879
Speaker 1: Now, you joined the [U.S.] Navy at a time of, about the time that you joined, it was shortly, maybe about nine years in, it was one of the critical periods for racial conflict in the Navy.  There were riots on aircraft--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and I remember Dr. Charles King was the psychologist hired by the U.S. government to come and hold encounter groups with Navy brass and that sort of thing.  Do you remember that period?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't remember Dr. King, but so let me share some of that with you.  I was a, I was either a first class or a chief petty officer during that period of time.  It's 1971, 1972.  You had the riots on the USS Constellation, the aircraft carrier, and they had fights onboard the USS Hassayampa and it wasn't long after that that the Navy instituted a program that we called the "Upwards" program.  And on the enlisted side, you'd have fifteen or twenty--there had to be even numbers of majority and minority sailors would go into a session where you had the opportunity to really talk out some of the issues--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that you may have.
Speaker 1: These were the encounter sessions run by Dr. Charles King.  He was, I remember him because he has a name like Dr. Martin Luther King.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he was a black psychologist.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and so my story with that is Admiral Noel Gayler was the commander of the Pacific Fleet at that time.  And I was recruited to be a minority resource for Admiral Gayler and several of the flag officers in Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] at the time.  And so I was involved in that, you know.  I had the chance to talk to 'em about what my life was like in the Navy and what my aspirations were and really had a chance to share with them, and they had a chance to kind of share their perspective with me.  And then I was able to respond back to them.  So Dr. King set those up.  That was called an executive seminar and--or flag seminar.  And I was a resource person for that, and plus, I went to seminars on my own.  And then, you know, we tried to turn it over into a command managed program.  And I think we're making progress with that, but there are still, still issues.  And the question really comes down to individuals, you know.  If individuals allow members in the command to act out, then that's an issue.  And they need to be brought around about that.  But, gosh, I just--we've come a long way, you know.  The fact that I was invited to come to Officer Candidate School meant that we had made progress from the time I came in the Navy.  You know, Mr. Pie and, or Petty Officer Pie, a first-class steward who had served in World War II and Petty Officer Howard, Emanuel Howard who I spoke about on Sturgeon [USS Sturgeon], all of those guys led the way for people like me.  And I came along and here, I make first class before I'm 21 years old.  I was stationed at Eleuthera and I made first-class petty officer.  And first-class petty officers used to be the officer of the day for the base.  And part of your job was to shut down the club (laughter).  I couldn't go in the club because I was twenty years old.  I wasn't twenty-one.  And, you know, they had strict twenty-one rule about, you know, age rules about drinking.  And so here I am, I'm a first-class, without a hash mark.  I had, didn't even have a four-year hash mark.  And (laughter), and I had to go in and shut the club down, and I went in, and the bartender, he says, you can't even come in here.  I said, look, I'm the officer of the deck, and--officer of the day, and I'm coming in to shut you down now.  Just don't give me a hard time.  And a couple of months later I, you know, turned twenty-one, but so I've seen this progression over my life.  The disappointing thing is that we still have, you know, remnants.  We have people that still act, and it's a matter of respect.  I think that if you sit down and talk about race relations or relations even with, between men and women, it's about respect.  It's giving each other the respect and giving people opportunity to do well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all I have to say about that, I guess.
Story_ID: 34880
Speaker 1: Question by Matthew Hickey (videographer): Who's in the portrait over his left shoulder and how did he impact his career?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's Admiral Arleigh Burke, and there are two intersection points for me with Admiral Burke.  First, Admiral Burke was really instrumental in advancing the nuclear power program and the fleet ballistic missile program, and I benefited from both of those programs.  And so he has had a impact there.  And he is also the namesake for the USS Arleigh Burke, which is our new class of--or our most prevalent class of destroyer, and those destroyers, many of them are ballistic missile defense destroyers.  And so just one of the linkage to Admiral Arleigh Burke.  He was the chief of Naval operations and really was, you know, a forward thinker.  And I've been involved in the ballistic missile defense program for the Navy.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Story_ID: 34881
Speaker 1: When you look back over everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently if you could go back and change it?
Speaker 2: You know, once you get to this point, it's hard to say what you would have done different.  But I don't think about so much what I would do different for me.  It's what I can do to shape the lives of the students that are coming along now and my own children.  For instance, I ran a science technology, engineering and math [STEM] program last summer.  And the reason I got involved in that was I believe that we really need to improve our science, engineering, technology and math education here in the United States.  We need more students to go through that process, and I believe more minority students should go through that process, that education.  And so I set up a STEM program here.  I got funding and we had eighty--we had twenty-five students go through, and we had intended to do another program this year, but the sequester kind of got in the way.  And the money that we would have used to bring in eighty students this year was taken away.  But you asked me what I would change.  And it's not so much what I would change for me but what I would encourage for others.  And that is, I'll take my two sons [William Francis Bundy, Jr. and Raymond Bundy].  As they came along, I made sure that they had the math, the science and the academics so that they could choose what they wanted to do when it was time to go to college.  They could make that choice.  It wasn't gonna be made for them.  And so many minority kids, they wind up not getting those kinds of academic opportunities and all of a sudden, you get to the end and say, I wanna go to college, and you're not prepared to go.  And so that's the first thing that I believe needs to be done.  I did that for my two sons, and I did that for my daughter [Andrena Maria Bundy Seawood] at Towson State University [Baltimore, Maryland].  I encouraged her to go through that process.  And that's why I had the STEM program last year, and if I get to do it, I'll do it again next year.  But that's my argument, that you take the hard courses now, even if you have to do remedial to catch up, you take those courses now so that you can have choices, choices later.  I didn't have that opportunity, and remember, I talked about the general technical program I had at [Baltimore] City College.  And ever since then, I've been catching up.  I had to catch up.  I think I did it pretty well, but I had to catch up.  And I don't think it's a matter of catching up.  We wanna really prepare the students now and the youngsters now so that they, they're ahead of the power curve and can make the right choices later.  So, it's not so much about what I would do differently.  It is about what I can do for people now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34882
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look back over everything that you've accomplished to this point, what today would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: It's 160 officers out there right now that are a legacy that I left behind.  I hope I get to do 160 more before I stop doing this.  The other thing is I hear from them quite a bit.  I just got a note from one of the officers that finished the program [U.S. Naval War College] in 2006.  He was the ballistic missile defense officer for a fleet command.  He is now retiring from the [U.S.] Navy, and he asked me to write a recommendation for him to get into the master's [degree] program at the University of Rhode Island.  And I got a note from him just the other day that says he's been admitted, and he really believes that the letter I wrote for him made a difference in him getting in.  There's another officer that retired here not too long ago, and he now is responsible for a major program at the Missile Defense Agency as a retired civilian, I mean a retired Navy civilian there.  And he credits me with establishing that approach for him.  I hear from the students quite often, and that's the legacy.  My own, my two sons [William Francis Bundy, Jr. and Raymond Bundy] and my daughter [Andrena Maria Bundy Seawood] also are, I hope, legacies as well, but when you get an opportunity to impact as many students as I do here coming through this program, I think that's something that, you know, that will mark me as having made a contribution.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 34883
Speaker 1: Now, you mentioned your children along the way, but this is the time when we just ask you about, you know, just kind of recap your children and family.  You remarried and you've got like two sons and a daughter, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well, the daughter is from my first marriage.  Her name is Andrena Seawood, and she lives in Minneapolis [Minnesota], and she's married to a Baptist minister.  And she has one son.  His name is Matthew, and they seem to be doing pretty well in Minnesota.  My, our oldest son, Jean is--Jean and I, our oldest son is William Francis Bundy, Jr.  He is a lieutenant commander in the [U.S.] Navy, submarine officer.  He's a graduate of the [United States] Naval Academy [Annapolis, Maryland], and he is a graduate of the Wharton School for his MBA [Masters in Business Administration degree] at the University of Pennsylvania.  He is married and has two daughters.  And my youngest son, or our youngest son--I gotta stop saying my, our youngest son is Raymond.  He had a very productive football career in high school and in college.  And he is, he graduated with a degree in finance at Bryant University [Smithfield, Rhode Island], and he is an underwriter for Sun Life in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so those are our children.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, of course, Jean is, she's doing what she likes to do.  She's a hair stylist, and she is a manager of a hair salon, and she's home here in Rhode Island.  And that makes her pretty happy.
Story_ID: 34884
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think.  I think we've covered quite a bit of territory, and I think that if anything I would like my life to be an example for others to follow.  You have opportunities and you need to be prepared to take those opportunities.  The education and the experience that you gather should put in a position to do well, and when an opportunity presents itself, you're in a position to latch onto it and move forward in your life.  I believe that to--you asked me about leadership earlier, and what I thought about that.  And I kind of believe that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, that's really the answer to the last question (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: All right, I hope I did all right.
Speaker 1: You did fine.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: All right.  It's funny.  You answered the question without me asking.
