Story_ID: 581669
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Baker, we're gonna begin with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker Hamilton and I am the interviewer, Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer, and Carla Adams is observing.  Today's date--this interview is taking place on Tuesday, June 21, 2004, at 13404 Pendleton Street in Fort Washington, Maryland.  Now, if you would please just for the record, tell us your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Donald Lee Baker.  D-O-N-A-L-D.  Lee, L-E-E.  Baker, B as in Baker, A-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: And would you tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, 6/4/49 and that would be in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Professional photographer and videographer.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 581670
Speaker 1: Now the next set of questions, Mr. Baker, are just some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get familiar with the process and establish a rapport and all that good stuff.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So if you would share with us please, your favorite food.
Speaker 2: Favorite food would be Atlantic salmon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color.
Speaker 2: It kinda changes.  Probably, probably beige.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: Your favorite phrase or saying.  Do you have one?
Speaker 2: No, nothing that's cool.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 581671
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Baker, if you will, tell me a little bit about your mother starting with her name and where she was born and what you know about her childhood and how she grew up.
Speaker 2: Okay.  She was Bernice Brown Baker.  And I'm thinking right now it was Augusta, Georgia, where she was born, definitely born in Georgia.  And we were adopted, my brother [HM Ronald Baker] and I, and--at I think somewhere around birth, and so it had to be around 1949, 1950.  And she was a very wonderful, very loving, very dedicated mother, you know.  As a matter of fact, the growth that I have with my own son is a result of the nurturing that came from my mother, so she was a very wonderful person.
Story_ID: 581672
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your father starting with his name and where he was born and what you may know about his background and how he grew up.
Speaker 2: Well, he--his name is Oscar Gilbert Baker and he was born in Alexandria, Virginia.  And, I don't know a lot about his background.  I do know that he served in World War II in the United States Navy and he was a great mathematician.  He was a watch--not a watchmaker but probably a watch repair person in terms of his spare time; that was his hobby.  Probably the most serious thing I remember about him is keeping the tip of his finger in a jar and probably, probably my brother [HM Ronald Baker] would probably confirm that (laughter).  We always saw this finger dangling, I think it was his pinky that he lost in an accident.  And so there are things that go away; that's not one of 'em (laughter).  But he was an interesting person, you know, like with a lot of situations where people drink, he drank a little bit too much, but he wasn't violent or anything like that.  But he was, he was okay.  You know, I, I, I still admired him very much because I think he suffered a lot like many African American men of that age did when they were very intelligent, should've been in places much further along even though he was a supervisor at the U.S. Postal Service, which was a remarkable feat even back during those periods of time.  But I think for him personally, he was very disappointed, very disillusioned by the system because, you know, just certain people that belong in certain places, and I think he felt that he should've been somewhere else on the scale employment-wise and socially.  And just--I just don't think he ever got to where he, he did and I think that probably caused some of the problems that he had.
Story_ID: 581673
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about your grandparents starting with your maternal grandparents and their names?
Speaker 2: Well, I really only know one of my grandparents and that was Sarah Fagins and that was my mother's mother, and she lived with us and died in 1966.  And she was a very interesting person.  I say interesting because you remember certain things about your grandmother.  Everybody remembers the hugs and kisses, but I think what I remember most about her was she loved coffee with sugar and cream, a great deal more sugar than cream.  And we used to joke with her 'cause you could always remember her watching "As The World Turns" which was a soap opera, and by that time, that was probably about her third cup of coffee, and by that time, the spoon was clearly stuck in the bottom of the cup because there was so much sugar in there.  And we just found it humorous to play with her about that, you know, and of course we'd get swatted away.  But I think the thing that really I remember the most is when John F. Kennedy was assassinated because we were out.  That was around Thanksgiving and we were out for the school week, and I remember her watching "As The World Turns."  It was about 1:35 in the afternoon here on the east coast and I remember Walter Cronkite breaking in to give the news that the president had been shot.  And, of course, as even today when someone breaks into your favorite show, you're wondering, what are they doing?  Why are they breaking into my favorite show?  And true to form, she was upset and then I watched her as Cronkite gave the news that President Kennedy had been shot and then a few minutes later confirming that he had passed away, and the look on her face--'cause I was the only one in the house that day.  My brother [Ronald Baker] was out still playing.  For whatever reason, I came in the house to get some water or milk or something, but I clearly remember the stunned, destroyed look on her face, you know, even as if we were sitting here now.  And, and it was that look and that expression that she had that really, really, you know, just took--blew me away because it then made me realize how important this man was at least for the psyche of many African Americans up to that point during the early '60s [1960s] and the Civil Rights Movement, at least what they felt, you know, his contribution to the Civil Rights Movement or to their efforts to gain civil rights was, and I always remembered that, you know.
Story_ID: 581674
Speaker 1: I remember when she [grandmother, Sarah Fagins] passed away.  It was during a time when I, myself--excuse me--I, myself was going through a challenge, had injured myself and put two holes in my stomach, ran into the back of a Cadillac.  Now, normally you wanna be driving it, but at, at fifteen, I decided--we were playing football in the street and I went out for a pass, and back in those days, you kinda like--we played like the quarterback was Johnny Unitas from the Baltimore Colts and I was gonna be Raymond Berry who was his receiver, and everybody wanted to always do the over-the-head catch.  And I'm doing the overhead catch, not--you know, not thinking about the fact that I'm in the street.  And here, the old Cadillacs, probably '57 [1957], '58 [1958] Cadillac with the long fins, if you can imagine that.  The rest was history after that.  I ran in and I didn't even remember anything after that.  And I remember I good friend of mine carrying me and placing me on a wall of a neighbor's, 'cause they thought we were playing, they thought I was playing because my--excuse me--my brother [HM Ronald Baker] and I would always play.  You know, so, you know, it was like the sky's falling, the sky's falling.  This time we don't believe you.  And in fact--I in fact was internally bleeding, and if that friend hadn't probably placed me on that wall, we probably wouldn't be having this discussion today (laughter).  So it's like things like that that happened.  I transitioned, but I just--it's makes me--it takes you back into those areas of your mind that sometimes you either forget or wanna forget, but it was just an interesting--it was an interesting time when that occurred.
Story_ID: 581675
Speaker 1: And, Mr. Baker, what do you know about your ancestors?  Were they free people?  Or were they slaves?  Do you know any history like that about your ancestors?
Speaker 2: No, we really don't.  There's two sides to deal with here.  First of all, when you're adopted, it's your family, your adopted family you're dealing with.  [HM] Ronald [Baker] and I who, of course, is my twin, never wanted to know who our biological parents were.  It wasn't important.  The person who loved us, the people who loved us, raised us, and that's where we left it.  But for those of their background, I, I--we have an aunt, my father's sister, who's really like our only living immediate family member who is still alive; I believe she's like eighty-six or eighty-seven now, lives in Washington, D.C., and her name is Louise Baker Chandler, and very feisty and a lot of fun.  And her grandmother--she told us some stories of her grandmother and her mother.  And we remember them being in Virginia, and I remember being at the beside of one of them when we were like five or six years old, and I think that person would've probably been my great grandmother, and I think she might've been dying at the time, but we didn't really know her.  It wasn't like we--it, it wasn't like family that was here in the city; they were outside of the city.  And so I remember her as being our great grandmother, but not much of the story outside of my father and, and my aunt, and my mother.  And that history that goes back kind of eluded us 'cause I think they were like in their later years, when I say later years, probably in their late--middle to late thirties when we were adopted.  So I'm thinking that, you know, a lot of that history, you know, we weren't gathering that type of history during that period of time.  I think everybody was just trying to live.
Story_ID: 581676
Speaker 1: Mr. Baker, tell me, what is your earliest memory of growing up, like one of the very first things that you really remember?
Speaker 2: I remember tumbling down the hill in Augusta, Georgia.  We had gone down to visit relatives; I believe it was an aunt or at least maybe a play aunt, I'm not sure.  But I know we were in the country and I know they had this barrel, and I clearly remember my brother [HM Ronald Baker] and I deciding which one of us or we would take turns climbing into that barrel and see who would roll down the hill.  Now, of course, you're not thinking about the danger that you're in.  This is a metal barrel, and once you were in there and we rollin' down that hill, then it was like, why did I do this?  I'm gonna die.  You know, it was so funny.  And, of course, I believe, I was then one that went down because I don't believe Ronald ever went down that hill after seeing what I looked like when I got out of that barrel.  It was old, it was rusty, and it was so funny.  And I think we couldn't have been more, God, four or five years old, and it was--so that, that was, that was a memory I'll always carry with me.
Story_ID: 581677
Speaker 1: And can you kinda tell us a little bit about what daily life was like for you in your house as a boy?  What was just an average ordinary day like?
Speaker 2: I mean, besides the two or three spankings we [he and his brother, HM Ronald Baker] probably get (laughter), ordinary was probably running in and out of the house too much.  My grandmother [Sarah Fagins] probably--would probably say on a regular basis, "y'all drivin' me crazy."  It was like if one of us wasn't running in the house, both of us were running in the house.  Then, we'd turn around and run back out.  And of course back in those days, we didn't even have air conditioning, so it wasn't like she, she could say you're letting the air out (laughter) 'cause we, we wasn't.  But it was interesting, the, the kids in the neighborhood, we had a pretty big front and back yard and a lot of the kids from across the street and next to us--I remember us playing on one block, and I think that's the difference from maybe kids today or even my son, is that you stayed on the block that your parents told you to stay on.  We could go down to--we were in [Washington] D.C. and we could go down to 41st street or 40th street--we were on, we were on the 3900 block of Blaine Street Northeast, and we could go down to 40th street, but you could look across the street, but you could not go across the street, you know; that was a given.  And, and the interesting thing about that was when I, kinda like transitioned, is that real quickly I met one of my best high school friends, lived across that street two houses and I never met him because neither was he allowed to come across to our side.  They had--everybody had to stay on the block, you know, for safety or whatever, but it was so funny.  And when we started talking about where we lived, we could not believe that we were there at the same time and never met each other, and we knew all the kids on the block.  So it was kinda funny, those, those kind of memories.  And going to the, to the beaches, and of course back then, we didn't--we weren't aware of the segregated beaches, but there were two beaches we always remembered in [Annapolis] Maryland, Carr's Beach and, I believe it was Sparrow's Beach.  And, and that's because--I think my first recollection of being at a concert was Jr. Walker & the All Stars, Motown, singing "Shotgun" at Carr's Beach and I can't even remember why we even up that late.  It was dark.  But it probably couldn't have been too late; it must've been maybe after eight or nine in the evening, but it was so much fun, and that's the only recollection I have of any beach trip, was that particular one because we had--got to meet some Motown originals, and it was so great, so it was a lot of fun.
Story_ID: 581678
Speaker 1: And your brother [HM Ronald Baker] shared with us that your parents [Bernice Brown Baker and Oscar Baker] divorced when you all were about nine or ten.
Speaker 2: Well, no, we were about eight.
Speaker 1: Eight.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: You know, it's a really funny thing.  For me personally, I didn't think about it too much.  I remember that my parents did fight a lot, you know, argumentatively and got a little rough at times, but when it happened, it seemed like it was just a transition.  It just, it, it just felt we were going with mommy and that was that, you know.  And our grandmother [Sarah Fagins] who we called affectionately Grammy, we--you know, she lived with us and we--what I recall, though, probably the only, I guess now that I might consider traumatic, was the house was smaller.  You know, we moved from a much larger house to a small house, you know, something that my mother could afford.  But it didn't seem all that small to us 'cause most of the people that we ended up being friends with lived in apartments, so we still had a house, you know, even though it was semi-detached and it was next door to somebody, but it was still a house, so it was kinda like we just moved onto something else.  And plus, I kept my relationship with my father.  My brother, I don't think he ever forgave my father for that.  He was kinda like ahead of himself, you know, ahead of me definitely in a lot of ways, 'cause he thought about things like that.  You know, I just thought, hey, well, you know, they're not together anymore.  But, you know, I would go visit my father who still lived in D.C., but my brother wouldn't go.  I don't believe he went more than once, you know, and, and probably the only thing that--I mean, he didn't attend his funeral either.  I think he was still that angry when my father died six months after my mother died in 1969; she died in February and he died, I believe, in July of '69 [1969], and I believe that my brother never forgave him for that, you know.
Story_ID: 581679
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about your community in your block [in Washington, D.C.].  Can you kinda describe it for us?  The block that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a vibrant block.  It was a lot of kids.  The parenting was really great.  I mean, the neighbors looked out for other neighbors' kids.  The neighbors disciplined other neighbors' kids.  The other neighbors stayed confused with my brother [HM Ronald Baker] and I because the one thing--and they say one of those twins did it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I don't know which one.  And I can't begin to tell you how many times that we would both get spanked because you didn't know which one.  And I can only remember, and probably Ronald would not have told you this, is that we had thrown some rocks at a window, at a vacant house; it was a vacant house.  But, you know, it was the old days.  Everybody wants to see if they can reach that window.  You little kids, you figure, like, one of us is gonna reach the window.  Well, we did hit the window.  The glass was already broke and we broke it some more.  And for no apparent reason, Ronald blurts out that I broke one of the glass windows at the dinner table.  There was no reason for this.  No one asked.  Nobody said, "Well how was your day?"  You know, everybody's eating dinner.  And I immediately said, "No I didn't, he did it."  And, of course, my father [Oscar Baker] wasn't having this and this was at the dinner table.  "That's right, both y'all gonna get it," and he delegated that to my mother [Bernice Brown Baker].  I, I don't, I don't--I'll tell you the God's honest truth, I don't ever remember my father spanking me, you know.  It was too much work for him (laughter).  He's like, "Your mother's gonna get you," you know.  And momma would wait until 8:00 if necessary, you know, which was like torture.  You talking about--we, we talk of terrorism today; now, that was terrorism.  We had gotten it three hours later.  You knew it was coming, and that was one of those funny things.  But the good part about it was, yeah, I did break the window, but Ronald got it too (laughter) for running his mouth so, therefore, that was, that was, that was payback (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So if he didn't share that with you, I'm sharing it with you now (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 581680
Speaker 1: Mr. Baker, tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Sassafras tea, which I cannot find.  I'm trying--I've been trying to go to New Orleans [Louisiana] online to try to find sassafras tea.  Actually, the Safeway stores here in the area used to carry it years ago, but it was like a bark; it was like a wood bark tea.  But it just had this taste that was so different than any other kind of tea and, and I, to this day, still cannot find it.  But the last time I checked, someone told me that I might be able to find it in, in, in Safe--in, in New Orleans.  But, let's see, some of the sights--parks, you know, the monument, going to the U.S. capital.  I remember that so clearly.  The first congressional member I ever met in my life was--I was, I was at the time in the sixth grade and I met Harry Dawson [sic, William L. Dawson].  Now, Harry Dawson was a lieutenant, and we called 'em lieutenants back in the--in, during the Daley Machine back in the '60s [1960s] and when, when [Richard J.] Daley was mayor [of Chicago, Illinois].  And Harry Dawson was this man about my complexion who I'd never imagined seeing in the capital because all we ever saw were Caucasians.  And this was a--an African American congressman, and I remember getting a black pen--they always gave you--the kids, school kids--they were just black pens with their name on it, Congressman Harry Dawson, you know, Chicago.  But it wasn't--and, and I think about that because it takes me to a documentary that Discovery Channel did called "The Promise Land" that was narrated by Morgan Freeman, and it talked about the migration of African Americans from the South to Chicago, Detroit [Michigan], other places, but particularly Chicago, and having seen that documentary, that's when I found out who Harry Dawson really was.  And I said, well that's the congressman I met when I was a kid; I was in the sixth grade.  And what was so great about that, was I began to realize that this was kinda like a ruthless character.  And being a lieutenant of Mayor Daley may also made you corrupt, so the pride that I had of meeting my first African American congressman, you know, turned into--so that's really (laughter)--it was a--I wish I had met Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] instead (laughter), you know.  But it was, it was really interesting as you go through history, as we talk about these things, you begin to realize where you step into a point of history and not even realize that you were, you know, you were around that kind of history.  So, I--that, that, that kind of sight, sight and sound really made me go back to thoughts of politics.
Speaker 1: What sounds?
Speaker 2: The sounds, sounds of cars traveling up Suitland Parkway from Andrews Air Force Base [now Joint Base Andrews, Prince George's County, Maryland].  Particularly, I remember in the fifth grade, our fifth grade teacher, Miss Jackson, at Garfield Elementary School in southeast Washington, D.C., took us to sit on the side of the hill of Suitland Parkway because Nikita Khrushchev of the Soviet Union and President John Kennedy would be driving by, you know, in a motorcade heading to the White House.  And I clearly remember them coming by in a convertible.  I remember seeing the balding head of Nikita Khrushchev and sitting right next to John F. Kennedy, and that was the only time in my life that I had personally seen John F. Kennedy, was that ride by.  We're talking about maybe like three or four seconds, you know.  They weren't speeding, but I think it was twenty miles an hour was the required speed limit, and I was--it was just a thrill.  And here was the president that my mother [Bernice Brown Baker], my father [Oscar Baker], and my grandmother [Sarah Fagins] voted for, you know, now we get to see him.  I don't believe they ever saw him in person, you know.  If they did, I don't ever recall them discussing it, but it was just, it was, you know, it was just wonderful.  It was really, really wonderful.
Story_ID: 581681
Speaker 1: Mr. Baker, let's talk a little bit about the elementary school years.  Tell me the name of your elementary school and what elementary school was like for you, and if you remember any of your teachers and if they influenced you at all.
Speaker 2: I remember, let's see, elementary school--I remember going to Benning Elementary School, which was in northeast Washington [D.C.].  That was our first elementary school.  We stayed there until second, if I'm not mistaken, second grade because that was the, that was the point at which my parents divorced, and I don't remember much about that.  The only thing I remember is that it's now the location of a Metro stop (laughter), you know, a Metro train stopover in northeast, so I can't--I have very little memories about that particular school.  However, we went to Garfield Elementary School when we moved to southeast Washington; I do remember that school very fondly and not so fondly.  You know, getting beat up every day by, by kids or being mistaken for [HM] Ronald [Baker] and you're always saying, "what did he do today that's gonna get me beat up?"  You know, well, he's probably saying, "what did Donald do today?"  I wasn't an angel either (laughter), so I'm sure that he would probably tell you that.  But, yeah, elementary school was fun.  I liked our teachers except--let's see, I loved Miss Jackson.  She was tough, though.  She was the kind that, you know, back in those days, corporal punishment was normal, you know, and needed, and so when she punished you--like, you know, you hear about the old Catholic sisters slap you on the hand with a ruler or something.  She would come up to you and grab the bottom of your chin and proceed to squeeze the bottom of your chin until what life was left in it wasn't.  It was so painful, and I don't think she had to ever do it twice, you know.  Now, I do remember she had--she did spank some kids, you know, with a--we called it a yardstick, which it was a yardstick, you know, just a three-foot ruler, but it was a yardstick that she would spank them with.  And then, you would be sent home with a note being told that you were spanked, and then proceed to be spanked again because now you've embarrassed mother and father.  I had to come home from a hard day's work to find out that you got spanked for acting up in class.  You know what to do next; head upstairs.  It's over.  You, you lower head and start crying, pointlessly, because there was no sympathy to be had (laughter).  You've already, you've already done it, so, so that, that, that part was, that part was very memorable.
Story_ID: 581682
Speaker 1: And during elementary school, what kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a good student.  I was a good student.  I think--now, one thing did happen that I, I, I did not mention.  I was held back in the, gosh, now--
Speaker 1: Third grade.
Speaker 2: --I have to remember.  I think third grade, yeah.  I was held back and to this day, there's Miss Alicon [ph.], I'll never forget her name, this was the principal.  And, you know, I never, I never really liked to play the race card 'cause I don't think it's important, but this was the interrace card.  This was a light-skinned sister that held a dark-skinned brother back.  And we don't know for--to this day to--for what reason.  My mother [Bernice Brown Baker] challenged it and I was put in a special class.  Well, the teacher there was amazed that I was in a special class because I did not require special training.  I wasn't slow in any--in fact, I was advanced.  She would have me assisting her helping the other kids to read.  And, and once she brought that--she tried to bring that to the attention of the principal, and the principal would not yield.  And I found out later that another friend of mine that I went to high school with who I thought was in the right grade had been held back by the same woman.  You know, my complexion, same thing, very bright guy, went on to do great things in college, was a athlete and everything.  And it was just amazing that we could share that story, like, like thirty years later, like, yeah, that woman got me too, you know.  It was like--it was so funny.  So, but it didn't deter me.  You know, it was disappointing because I was not at the grade that my brother [HM Ronald Baker] was, but the funny thing was, to this day I think very few people knew it 'cause, because at some point in time, we were always in the same school.  So by the time he went to high school, even though he got there a year before I did, most people knew it was two of us and they just figured I was hanging out back at junior high school and I be coming back down the street.  And, you know, by the time he graduated, it wasn't--I don't think when still he graduated they realized that both our pictures were in the yearbook, but then that didn't matter 'cause his wasn't in there for his senior year.  So I think a lot of people to this day were fooled into thinking that we had graduated the same year, but we actually didn't.  In fact, I'm glad I didn't because that year changed my life.  I graduated in 1968 in Anacostia High School in Washington, D.C., and that was a--that was obviously one of the most tumultuous years.
Story_ID: 581683
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what kind of child you were during the elementary school years.  Were you mischievous?  Were you quiet and shy?  Mild-mannered?  What kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: I wasn't shy.  I wasn't mild-mannered.  I guess mom [Bernice Brown Baker] would say, yeah, they were hell-raisers (laughter).  I, I, I was that.  We loved attention.  When you're a twin, you, you get it whether you want it or not.  We were respectful; now, we, we were always respectful of adults and people older than us.  You didn't have to be old, just older than us, and it was, "Yes sir, yes ma'am."  But we were, but we were always mischievous; we [Donald Baker and HM Ronald Baker] wanted to tear things apart.  We were always, we were--wanted to know how things worked, you know.  I remember getting a transistor radio.  Both of us got transistor radios for our birthday, I think it was or Christmas, I can't remember which, that my, my father [Oscar Baker] bought us, and we took those transistor radios apart.  And we're talking 'bout like, what, 1964, '65 [1965], I remember "My Girl" was playing, The Temptations, we took that radio apart and, I swear, we got it working again and it was still about five or six screws missing, and to this day, I don't know where they went, but the radio started working again.  But from that kind of inquisitiveness caused us to, I think, get to where we are today in terms of what our interest in computers and, and the, and why it seems to be so easy for us to, to have moved in that direction.
Story_ID: 581684
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Baker, we were talking a little bit about the elementary school years.  And tell me, at this time in your life as an elementary school age boy, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: You know, I'm gonna be really honest.  I think back then it was about playing, it was about from day to day.  I know there were kids who knew in their heads what they wanted to be.  All I wanted to be outside was playing and meetin' new kids and havin' fun in elementary school.  I, I have to be honest with you.  The, the impact of elementary school I think when we discussed earlier about my congressional visit on Capitol Hill as a fifth grader, and, was it fifth grade?  Maybe it was sixth grade, yeah.  But anyway, on, on Capitol Hill, that--it didn't want me--didn't make me wanna be in politics, but it made me wanna be around famous people, ya know what I'm sayin', around famous people.  I want to know kinda like what they knew, you know, how'd you get to this point or whatever.  I wasn't particularly carin' about being famous.  And I think that happens if you're--some time if you stop and think about it, normally twins, triplets, people who get attention don't normally go out of their way to get the other kind of attention where I think people--you look at someone like an Oprah who had many rough trials in her life, had to set their minds on something else that ultimately propelled them to where they are today or they had certain things happen.  But I've always had my brother [HM Ronald Baker], you know.  I've always had the people that, you know, "Where are those Baker boys?"  Or "Where, where's, where's Heckle and Jeckle?"  You know, we got that a lot, you know.  Those were--they were, they were two magpie cartoon characters back in the day, so we were Heckle and Jeckle and all kinds of funny names.  But I really never thought that much.  I didn't train on what I wanted to really be.  It was just--I really just wanted to have fun, wanted to, you know, meet new people, make friends, play baseball.  We had--baseball, football.  I mean, the things that we were able to play then and I think even what I wasn't even able to do with my son in terms of, you couldn't go out to any field when, when he was a kid unless it was a, a local park and it was insured, all that type of stuff.  We didn't have to do that kind of stuff.  We went out to whatever.  If there was a vacant field available, everybody got their baseballs and gloves, you know--
Story_ID: 581685
Speaker 1: The only thing you had to worry about was our good friend, Douglas McArthur [ph.] and I don't--I'm sure he--his last name was something else, I can't remember, but, but I--we clearly remember him being Douglas McArthur.  And we were in a very mixed neighborhood.  When, when I say mixed, by the time we got out of junior high school, when we moved in the neighborhood, I believe we were probably only like the second African American family there, but we didn't encounter racism, you know, at least not as we knew it.  All the kids played together.  When you got mad, you got mad because of something the individual did.  It wasn't, it wasn't race based, it was, you know--you took my turn at this or you picked up my glove instead of--ya know, I mean, it was nothing other than gettin' mad at the person themselves, you know.  You know, a lot of our coolest friends, you know, were all, like I said, all mixed and it was really, really nice because then by the time the Civil Rights Movement came along, by the time [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed, a lot of those people who were, who were scared were protected by the, by the same people in their neighborhoods.  I clearly remember when Dr. King was killed that everybody that had a car on the block wrote, "soul brother."  Now, you have to imagine how ridiculous that was, writin' on your windshield, "soul brother."  Everybody in the neighborhood knew whose car was whose.  So when our, when our, when our good white friends wrote soul brother on theirs, we had three that wrote S-O-L-E, and you can imagine--there was a good laugh out of that.  And, and I think--I don't think anybody got their car damaged, but it was so funny because they were spelling the, you know, sole of a shoe, and we said no, no, no, it's soul brother as in the soul.  And it was--I, I found that to be very funny when that happened, but it was very close-knit neighborhood.  All the guys played together.  I think it was--really wasn't until '68 [1968] after the riots had taken place in Washington that some of the guys were still--we had graduated high school but they were still playing football and stuff like that.  And we had one of our good friends named Roger Lumpkin [ph.], never forgot him.  He had friends in Suitland, Maryland, and, and, and, you know, most of the guys there were Caucasian, and they played football.  And we--of course, we played football and we thought we were great.  We had some great guys playin' and stuff, so we gonna challenge them to a game.  Well, he looked at it as, you know, our neighborhood challenged your neighborhood, but when we got over there, we played on this very wide strip along Suitland Parkway near Andrews Air Force Base [now Joint Base Andrews].  And when we got over there, that's when things changed.  That's when those guys noticed that the majority of the guys except for Roger and maybe another guy were African Americans, and then some of the comments starting comin' out from those guys, and he was so embarrassed.  I will never forget.  He did not know that they were gonna react like that because he didn't look at color, you know.  We were the guys he grew up with, you know.  Now, of course, some people would always say that was--those were the families that couldn't get out of the neighborhood, but some didn't wanna leave, you know.  They, they grew up--their kids grew up with our--with us, and back in those days, everybody was tryin' to aspire to be something, you know.  I won't say everybody, but most of us, you know.  Everybody--we all--every neighborhood had the neighborhood drunk, and we knew several of (laughter), for they're always standin' up in front of the store at the liquor store, by that time they had already passed out, so they weren't like in the neighborhood influencin' us.  We didn't really care.  You know, when we would go, go get some popsicles or somethin' like that, yeah, there go Jerry (laughter), you know.  You just step over and keep on goin'.  But, but it was really, it was really interesting in that by that time that period rolled around, that--I think that's when a lot of our attitudes began to change, you know.  And, in fact, what are we gonna do?
Speaker 2: This is the late '60s [1960s] we're talkin' about?
Speaker 1: This is--we're talkin' 'bout really '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: '68 [1968]--
Story_ID: 581686
Speaker 1: Sixty--well, 'cause you have a couple things goin' on here.  You've got Civil Rights Movement, you have Malcolm X who had been murdered, but Malcolm X really--his story didn't change most of us because most of us didn't really know that much about Malcolm X, and, and I say most of us who lived in the neighborhood who played together, went to school together.  He was, as some called [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.], a rabble-rouser.  Well, that's 'cause we didn't know what his doctrine was; we didn't know where he was comin' from.  We just knew at that time we weren't tryin' to buy bean pies (laughter), you know, and (unclear) the newspaper, so everybody, don't answer that door, you know.  Don't, don't buy no pies from them because--we thought the bean pies were pretty good, you know, so--they just, don't be buyin' them pies off the street like that.  You don't know where they puttin' them pies.  And then, okay, grandma.  So, so when we looked at it from that, that perspective, a lot of our issues became issues of the day, and that's when you had to change because then you were old enough to be employed.  And by '68 [1968], my mother [Bernice Brown Baker] was very ill and--to the point where my brother [HM Ronald Baker] and I couldn't care for her and she had friends and relatives that were caring for her until her death, and Ronald and I were, like, really on our own, you know.  And it's, and it's a weird feeling.  A lot of people--I used to always tell my son, said, "Son, you can never get in trouble and then come back and give any kind of story to Jerry Springer or anybody else about how bad you had it, because you had everything you needed and most of what you wanted," you know.  And I said I think about what happened with my brother and I, and I often say, I'm very proud of what we've done in our lives because we had the basics put there, you know.  When you're on your own at nineteen and the draft board is chasing you for Vietnam and the Civil Rights Movement, you're in the thick of that, a year after Dr. King's been assassinated, you don't know what to do, you know.  You're out on the, you're out on the street lookin' for a job.  And I think I was very fortunate then, 'cause my first job that I ended up actually--
Speaker 2: Mr. Baker, hang on.  We're movin' a little ahead, so--ahead--
Speaker 1: Oh, Okay.
Speaker 2: But that's okay.
Story_ID: 581687
Speaker 1: But I wanted to ask you a little bit about--one thing I wanted to ask you about is, your brother [HM Ronald Baker] said--and, you know, as a child that back in, in those days, twins and triplets weren't very common--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --until, you know, it was just always, you know, you all would get so much attention, as you eluded to as well, and I just wanted you to talk a little bit about that.  What was that like?  You know, just to have all of this attention all the time from people who were just amazed, wow, you know, they look exactly alike, they're twins, oh, you know, this is such a novelty.
Speaker 2: It, it was--actually it was fun--it was good and bad, you know.  It--I think it probably affected Ronald a lot, a lot sooner where he almost probably didn't wanna be a twin, you know, because, because--the one thing I really always remember was my mother [Bernice Brown Baker] gave us the option as to whether we wanted to continue dressing alike and that was--we were about age seven then.  And I, I almost remember us both simultaneously saying no, that we didn't not wanna continue dressing alike because we really wanted our individualism.  But the thing was, we did understand that being twins gave us a lot of attention.  I mean, we had--there was this one record that we could play on guitar, and I don't know if he remembered it or not, but it was "Peter Gunn" and wasn't but four chords, but the kids would go crazy.  They'd be on--we'd be up on our steps like it was a stage.  All these kids would be down there, oh, Donald and Ronald gonna be playin' "Peter Gunn."  I mean, it was, it was like one--it wasn't even a whole verse.  It was just dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah (singing).  And it was from a TV series, right?  It was so funny.  And a lot of times, I've been told that we missed our calling.  We probably should've been in show business or somethin' like that because we really--we would do fashion--I mean, talent shows.  We did talent shows back then and we could sing a little bit, but we weren't real singers.  There were some guys in our neighborhood that were really, really good, and a group called The Emotions, and as kids, they, they could sing, you know.  But we were good backup singers, you know.  You know, you didn't have a great voice to be a backup singer, but all you had to be able is step, you know, and look like you could sing.  You know, most people--most of the girls were lookin' at the lead singers anyway, so--but we were in the group (laughter), you know.  So it was that kind of attention.  Then there was the unwanted attention at church where, you know, you--'cause, 'cause Ronald, Ronald, Ronald kinda had a smart mouth, you know, so you get popped a couple times or, you know, bein' kinda like disrespectful, you know.  "Oh, you all twins?"  "No, that's my father."  You know, oh Lord, here it come, backhand before Arthur Ashe, you know.  So it was like really, really--Ronald was really funny with that.  But he didn't--I don't think he really liked it at least as I recall.  I don't think--it got to a point where it was more of a burden bein' a twin because we were gettin' attention at times probably when you didn't want it, you know.  But, you know, like anything else in life, you can't have it both ways (laughter), so--
Story_ID: 581688
Speaker 1: So tell me a little bit about your family's experiences in church.  What was church like for your family and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, really look at church more from my grandmother's [Sarah Fagins] point of view.  My mother [Bernice Brown Baker] kinda like encouraged us to go, but she wasn't really a church person herself; my grandmother was, you know.  And you--there was gonna be no foul language in her house, whatever, you know, not that we would even consider it, you know.  You know, I'd rather jump off the Brooklyn Bridge (laughter) then to say, you know, an expletive in my grandma or my mother's presence; it just wasn't gonna happen.  But she was--if you can recall interviewing anybody and ask them what pictures your folks had on the wall, you know, it would definitely be [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], John F. Kennedy, and Abraham Lincoln (laughter).  Those three are gonna be on that wall.  And, and if it were one of those reflective type of pictures that change, you're gonna have Jesus Christ up there too, one on the cross and one ascending into heaven.  And, I only, I only go that direction 'cause I always remember those salesman that came through the neighborhood, and they'd be sellin' you stuff and you'd say, "oh, it's only two dollars a week."  But you'd say, "Grammy, you been payin' on this thing for three years," you know.  And it's the one with the picture which you have a nice little gold painted frame and everything and plugs into the wall, you know, and of course those times when the electricity got cut off, you had to worry about lighting on the picture of Jesus.  You had to pray in front of the front door when it was open.  But, you know, I, I, I mean, I think, I just think, I think of that, that period of church where we were allowed to experiment.  You know, my grandmother attended a church, St. Mark's up off of Georgia Avenue, I think Tuckerman Street, somewhere in that area in northwest Washington, D.C., and it was like, God, at least to us at that time it was like leavin' and goin' to another state.  Because when we caught the bus from southeast Washington goin' to the furthest most parts almost of northwest along--headed toward Silver Spring [Maryland], that was a long trip.  And you had to be at church on time, so we had to leave real early to get to, you know, appropriate buses, street cars, 'cause back then there were street cars running in D.C.  And I think it was a fun time for me in church, watchin' people pass out on the floor.  I mean, I just thought this was somethin' that was unnatural (laughter).  I said, why in the world would people jump up and down and shout and then just fall out.  Don't you know that you get your wallet stolen?  You know, it's like, I never really thought that--I thought--I used to think that some people were faking 'cause there was always sister Jones, every week, you know what I'm sayin'--and, you know, and I'm lookin' at Ronald, like, what did she do last night, every Saturday night that caused her to pass out on, on Sunday at church, you know.  She must've been real--you know, like really bad or somethin' like that.  I, I--we, we just--we used to play around.  Now, of course, my grandmother wasn't there when we were playin' around, but, you know, when you can go by yourself.  But then we tried Catholic church and, you know, Catholic church was like--it was all right, but it was too structured, too--there were too many things going on in terms of rituals and stuff like that, and there was no singin', you know, we come from the Baptist church, you know, you know, that's like going in the--comin' in the back door where all the activity's goin' on in the kitchen and everything and grandma's cookin', fryin' up fish and stuff like that, and you can only then poke your head into the front room (laughter), 'cause you wasn't goin' in there, you know, wasn't gonna mess up that sofa.  You could look over in the front room, it was quiet.  And that's how--that's, that's almost like what Catholic church was to us.  You know, you walk in the front door and it's quiet, you know, and then they're singin' songs we don't know the words to when they were singin'.  The priest is singin', you know (singing).  Ronald's like, "What is he singin'?"  "I don't know but I'm gettin' outta here (laughter)."  You know, 'cause we, we, we associated those sounds with some of those scary movies we used to watch like "Frankenstein" and so Catholic church didn't last long.
Story_ID: 581689
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about the junior high school years.  What was then name of your junior high school and what was that time like for you in your life?
Speaker 2: During high school was, was a, was a good but difficult period 'cause that was the time when I got hurt.  I went to Kramer Junior High School [Kramer Middle School] in southeast Washington [D.C.], which was only a few blocks from Anacostia High where we graduated and went to.  But it was a, it was a time for meeting people, it was a time for first loves, you know, first loves bein' the first girl that actually said hi to you back.  Hey, I was in love at that point, you know.  She didn't have to say anything else, you know.  She said hi to me, you know, 'cause [HM] Ronald [Baker] would say, "No, she's talkin' to that guy behind you (laughter).  You just got in the way," but didn't matter.  It looked like she was talkin' to me, but it was fun.  It was tough at times because we would--bein' at the school at the same time--finally by the time I got in the seventh grade, he was in the eighth.  So then people began to realize we were both there at the same time.  And there were fights, you know, none of which we won (laughter), but, you know, so people will tell you that they won the fight.  No, we always lost.  We were either runnin' or we got caught and lost, simple as that.  And, and I, and I, and I look at that period, and I said it was good because I grew up real quick, you know.  Things were tough, you know, for my mother financially and we realized then that we--there were things we were gonna have to do.  You know, and part of that, you gonna have to get a job.  And junior high school was the beginning of serving the Washington News.  It was, it was the Washington--it was an afternoon newspaper.
Speaker 1: "The Star"?  Was it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --"The Star"?
Speaker 2: We served all three, so I think it was the daily news, that's what it was, the "Washington Daily News" was first and that was like your starter paper route.  Then you had-
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay.  Then you had the "Washington Star" that you--that's a promotion, you know.  And now you makin' more money and you serving, you serving a paper that, you know, more people are getting.  And then of course, there's the ultimate, "The Washington Post."  You tell people "The Washington Post," "oh, man, you got a 'Post' route?  Where?"  You know, and that's--and that was--the "Post" route led to bein' able to buy your first pair of Bally's.  Now why would you serve newspapers, pushin' a grocery cart with your newspapers in it in your brand new Bally's?  Only a fool would do that, right?  You lookin' at him.  Everybody in the neighborhood had to know you had them new Bally's to the point where one guy was tryin' to take them one day.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: That taught me.  It was so scary because they were like--they were, they were, they were called--back then, they were called--they were Bally's but they were blonde loafers.  And back then if you had like Gabardine slacks, a nice pair of blue Gabardine slacks with your blonde loafers and a knit shirt, oh, you--you were the bomb, you know.  Even if you didn't look good, you still were the bomb (laughter).  And I'm tellin' you, the guy saw me serve my papers and I was, I was on my last part of my route, about fifteen minutes left, he said, "Man, I dig them shoes."  "Yeah, man, they hip aren't they?"  He said, "Yeah, they look about my size."  And that's when I realized when he said they look about my size, "oh, he gonna try to make a move."  And the only thing I could think to do was--the last nine people that were gonna get their newspapers didn't get it that day.  I shoved that cart over and hauled.  And I think probably--I probably wore them out on that run (laughter), but they were still on my feet when I got home and that's all that counted (laughter).
Story_ID: 581690
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this time in your life, around the junior high school years?
Speaker 2: In terms of--
Speaker 1: Like--
Speaker 2: People?
Speaker 1: Who--
Speaker 2: Or the environment?
Speaker 1: People, friends.
Speaker 2: In junior high school--well actually, it was music.  We were in the talent shows in junior high school.  And I, I remember clearly The Temptations, The Miracles, Aretha Franklin when she came out with "Respect."  I mean everybody, I mean--that, you know, the--everybody wanted to sing and, in fact, I think [HM] Ronald [Baker] probably has a few of those pictures from when we had our [HM] Smokey Robinson shirts on.  Now for those who don't know what a Smokey Robinson shirt was back in the day, it was an almost silk shirt with long collars that looked like, you know, eagle wings (laughter).  In fact, if we run hard enough, we might've been able to fly, we just didn't try it.  But when you were in a group and you had four or five guys in it, oh, and you could step?  That was, that was it.  That was it.
Story_ID: 581691
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, were you thinking about what you wanted to be when you grew up?  Were you starting to have some dreams and aspirations about what you'd like to do professionally?
Speaker 2: To be honest?  No.  I was thinkin' about what I didn't wanna be.  You know, when you look around your environment--because back in those days, it was like everybody kept sayin' you could be whatever you wanted to be, so I said, okay, well if I can be whatever I wanna be, I don't have to think about it now (laughter).  I think we started thinkin' about it when that, when that induction notice came in the mail.  Okay, now I wanna be in college (laughter), you know, but it was too late (laughter).  But, yeah, during--particularly during the junior high school years that we were thinkin' about what was influencing us was the war [Vietnam War], was Civil Rights Movement.  It was looking at some of the students who were very serious, you know.  Either they had the type of activist parents that influenced them or they were in neighborhoods where there were things goin' on in the community that pushed them toward that.  We weren't.  It just seemed like wherever--whatever was happening in our lives, it was some fun, it was a party goin' on or whatever, the continuous attention, but it didn't seem to be a lot of distractions that made us stop and think, you know, what do you wanna do?  I mean, I really didn't think about it until almost graduation, you know.
Story_ID: 581692
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about high school.  What was the name of your high school and what were your experiences like in high school?  Who were some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Okay, well Anacostia Senior High School was my high school.  My favorite teacher was Warren Kingsman [ph.].  He was a social studies, it was kinda like a social science, sociology, that's what it was, sociology teacher.  And it was during obviously the height of Vietnam war, and what was so interesting about it is that he, himself, was being pursued, and he was looking at, I think, and I don't, don't want to put him in a bad light, I think he was, he was lookin' at some way of not being drafted [into the Vietnam War], you know.  And I think many were tryin' to find a way out, you know, 'cause too many--by that time, too many in their age group were comin' home in boxes.  And so, you know, Canada seemed to be the way (laughter), but he never left.  I mean, he, he stayed.  He was very instrumental in--in, in fact, at our twenty year class reunion, he was one of those that were praised for giving us social consciousness about what our responsibilities here was to our families, to our communities and so forth, and so he was very instrumental.  Mr. Colonna [ph.] was very instrumental.  He was a physical education teacher.  He was very instrumental in that he was very honest.  "Baker, you never gonna be a professional ball player (laughter).  Okay, you can just check that off the list.  When you can't climb the ropes, you know, and you look at the guys in front of you and they say tackle them and you side-step it, you know you not gonna be a professional ball player."  So he was very honest in that way, you know.  "We'll get you through gym class, you know," and I'll say, "Okay, then I'm not gonna try to tackle anybody today," and, and he agreed that I should not try (laughter).  But we had, we had teachers when I think--gosh, in high school--some are--I can think of my woodshop teacher, Mr.--
Speaker 1: So you took the woodshop class?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  You had to take woodshop class, you know.  Otherwise, how were you gonna make a lamp for your mother, you know, that she looks at and says, "Okay, that's a nice baseball bat lamp," you know.  Of course, you begin to get your--lay your head down, "Momma, it's not a baseball bat."  "Oh, I'm sorry, baby," you know (laughter).  But it was--yeah, woodshop.  We had a woodshop teacher at--his name was Mr., Mr. Morrison; I'll never forget him.  The lamp that I made had to be the worst lamp ever made in woodshop history, you know.  It probably just didn't get the accolades it should've gotten.  But I'm tellin' you, he gave me a A in that class.  Now you would wonder, how can you get an A for makin' a lamp that bad?  Well, I just happened to catch him one day, you know, you know, takin' a little sip of the old health juice and we'll, we'll leave it at that; I walked outta there with a A (laughter) 'cause I was definitely a D student (laughter).  That was a D lamp and the D was only for effort, you know (laughter).  But I got a A outta that class.  Those were those fine moments in woodshop history I remember (laughter).
Story_ID: 581693
Speaker 1: And how did you spend your time in high school [at Anacostia High School, Washington, D.C.], as a high school--as a young man?  How--what were some of the things that you did?  How did you spend your free time?
Speaker 2: Well, actually I was part of the chorus.  I was part of the stage crew, but I think my fondest memories was military science, ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps].  And it's a, it's a funny thing about playing soldier and then gettin' a draft notice and havin' to be a real one, and it was--that, that was a reality check for me when I got draft notice.  But before then, I, I made it to the rank of major, which to one of my great friends who's an educator, I think he's still working--he's probably gotten his Ph.D. by now, Wayne Whigham, and I'll say this to you, Wayne.  He hated me for making major because here's a guy who was a great athlete, you know, all the girls loved him at, at school, 'cause he was athlete and a great student, and he only made captain.  And, you know, even at our 20th class reunion, he could not-"now, how could Baker make major?"  'Cause I enjoyed it so much.  They used to call me "little general" because once I put that uniform on, it made me realize that there was authority, but it also made you realize that you could abuse it, you know.  And, I mean, in my case, abusing wasn't like beatin' anybody up; that wasn't gonna happen.  But saying things that you probably shouldn't say that probably will get you beat up after 3:00 (laughter), but I can't hit you while you're in uniform (laughter).  So I learned, okay, the responsibility is here, don't go overboard with this.  This is not real, you know.  This is just, this is just play military.  But I enjoyed it so much because it--the interaction--it was the first time I think I really went out of my way to really study certain things about military, about machinery, about guns, even though I don't carry a gun, never got a license for a gun, only carried a gun while I was in training, you know, after I actually really got drafted.  But, you know, it just opened up another door of possibilities.  And, and many of our friends, in fact, did ultimately stay in the military as a career.  But, but I really, really enjoyed it.  It got your attention from the girls.  You know, when you're in an officer's uniform--you know, Ronald hated it.  Ronald was an enlisted man (laughter), you know, and I didn't let him forget it, you know.  So, you know, these are stripes--those are stripes on your arm.  Now, what are you a sergeant now or a private?  I can't tell, you know, 'cause I got stars on mine, so--and I know he hated that probably to this day, but, you know, don't hate.  But I, I really enjoyed military science.  I, I enjoyed math.  I enjoyed English.  I enjoyed English very much, and I had a favorite teacher in English.  I, I just, at this time, just can't recall her name, but she really encouraged me to write, you know, and I mean I'm still writin' that book (laughter) thirty years later.  But, I mean, it really--she really encouraged me to write because she thought that I was a very good writer, that I--you know, that I, I, my phraseology and everything was very good, and I think if I take my time with it, it is.  But when you're tryin' to write like your own story, you know, it's like, for me personally doin' an, an interview.  I see it from other people's side of view.  I don't see it from myself.  And until you're talkin' about it, you realize, no, you do have a story.  But, you know, how to put that in words, you know, how to write that down, takin' the time to do that.  Every time I think of doing it, I think of that teacher because she said, you can do it, you really should do it--
Story_ID: 581694
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Baker, we were talking a little bit about the high school years.  Now, during high school, were you starting to think, okay--this--what would I--what would, what would I like to do with my life professionally?  That kind of thing.  What were--were you starting to think about that then?
Speaker 2: Not at all.  You know, I know you probably sayin', when did you start thinking?  You know--well actually, there was so much going on.  We were singing and I thought at one point I might wanna sing, you know, again, that was the additional attention, 'cause at that point, particularly by graduation, [HM] Ronald [Baker] had already graduated in 1967, so I was still there in 1968 with my class.  And we had won--in '67 [1967], we had won third place throughout the city with our singing group and Ronald was--in fact, Ronald was a part of that group, and we won third place.  We were singing "Ooo Baby Baby" by Smokey Robinson and The Miracles, and we did a really great job.  We had a lot of fun with it and so I thought, yeah, yeah, you know, I probably could sing, you know, 'cause I had good teachers that would remind you, y'all are all right, but find a job, son (laughter).  You know, 'cause you're not--(a) no, you not gonna be the lead singer, and in case the group breaks up, you still gonna have to find a job.  So we had good counselors in that, in that respect.  They were nice about saying your talent wasn't--you know, wasn't, you weren't, you weren't gonna be on big stage.  But I thought about acting but I--you know, I never pursued it, but that was one of those callings people said, you know, you probably missed.  You should've joined the acting club 'cause I was always faking somethin', you know, and people were fallin' for it, so I said well I must be able to act pretty good, you know.  But--
Story_ID: 581695
Speaker 1: Were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: You know, I thought about it, but I was in a system that didn't encourage you, you know, so you would think, well, you know, I'm not good enough for college.  But then you knew other kids that were around with you, and said, wait a minute, I'm getting' better grades than them, but they were put on a track early.  And that was, that was probably one of the worst things that probably happened to me and many other students back in those days, that by junior high school, they had you in a track system, and when they put you on that track, they didn't just put you on that track, they put you in a state of mind that, well, you know, you should push toward some type of vocational type of application for a job and, you know, you should see what you can work with your hands, you know.  And it made me think very much of what Malcolm X went through when he was told by his teacher, you know, you should work with your hands, you know, you know Jesus was a carpenter, you know.  You can't be a lawyer.  And I thought--you know, you think about things like that and you say, that's probably why I was feeling that way, you know.  I'm in this system here and these kids are in this college preparatory system over here, which is why my good friend, Wayne Whigham, (laughter) probably even still further hated 'cause, wait, wait, you in that track system over there and we're over here, how could you make almost top officer?  You know, and I think that's what made me realize what my mother [Bernice Brown Baker] had always told me; you can still be whatever you wanna be.  Don't tell people--but it was actually toward the end of high school that I really did start thinking seriously about photography, didn't have any equipment, but [HM] Ronald [Baker] had a camera, and Ronald had already graduated.  But what I remembered the year before is that Ronald, you know, would take pictures of the girls, take pictures of the cheerleaders, take pictures, have them developed, come back, girls gather around you.  Hey, this is a no-brainer; I want a camera (laughter), you know.  So Ronald started out with probably I believe he had like a Brownie camera, probably the cheapest little Kodak camera ever made, but he, he took some pretty good pictures with 'em.  But he got serious first about it.  I really kinda like followed him, and, and, and initially, like everything else, all for the wrong reasons.  It was just a way to get attention from girls, so if I had a camera, you know, "okay, you can be a model, you know.  Don't worry about that 300 pounds, we gonna take care of that, but you can be a model," so that's how bad things were (laughter).  But when I, when I really started to understand that Ronald was learning lighting, you know, he was learning how to develop his own film, you know, 'cause I--the funniest thing was, I think when we first started to develop film, all we knew is it was a dark room.  And I don't know if he recalls it or if he shared it, but we would go in the bathroom, turn the lights out, expose that film from all those pictures we'd taken and run it in warm water.  Okay, the light came on but apparently the bulb wasn't on in our heads.  No, it's gonna take a little bit more than y'all runnin' this film through it 'cause it keeps coming out black (laughter).  Why is that?  Okay, so Ronald was the first one to break that, that barrier.  Oh, you need chemicals to cover this stuff.  Warm water isn't gonna be the fix.  Okay, so, so he started doing that and so it was, it was really from his direction that he was going in that I kinda figured, okay then, I, I probably can do this, but I didn't have any equipment or anything.  So by, by the time I graduated, it was about getting a job 'cause by that time my mother was very ill and it was--and she wasn't getting better, and it was that, you know, reality sets in where now you knew since high school was over, you may have to get drafted and go into the Army during the Vietnam War, so you had to be prepared. So that's when we started getting' serious about life.  You know, there's some real things here that's not fun and games.
Story_ID: 581696
Speaker 1: How old were you when your mother became ill?
Speaker 2: Well, we would've been--I would've been nineteen.  Actually, she began--you know, she was having congestive heart trouble, you know, problems for years, you know.  She would in some cases, sometimes be in the hospital or, you know, had passed out at work or something like that and we didn't even know it, you know, until someone would call to the house and let us know that she was in the hospital.  That's how much she was concerned about us worrying about her, but she was always worrying about us.  And so it really wasn't until that time around '67 [1967], '68 [1968], and of course, she finally passed away in '69 [1969], February of '69 [1969], so we looked at it as a point that now we have to pick up, you know, where, you know, mom left off for us, you know.  We had a lot to do.  We had a car that she had just bought, you know.  And there are funny stories about that car too.  She bought a Ford Custom and anybody who knows a Ford Custom, that was the detective, police detectives' car.  That was just the plainest Ford you could get.  It was like--almost like a tan color, and it--so you know we caught it from the guys in the neighborhood.  They--listen, listen now, we had a brand new vehicle and it felt as though we'd, we'd a been better off if we'd a had an old hooptie.  In fact, my mother had a '58 [1958] Buick, which we really liked.  Now, you say, what would you like about a '58 [1958] Buick?  Well, it was one of the first cars that had the automatic beam headlight, high beam adjuster.  You know, it's like this cool little rocket lookin' thing in there and, and, you know, fed out a beam I guess or something and it would shut the lights down or when they had 'em back up.  We thought that was so neat.  So that was the neatest thing about havin' the whole car, you know, was the high beam adjuster, you know.  But when we got this Ford Custom, it was so funny, 'cause the guys called us, here come the Detective Bakers.  You know, they're gonna police, you know.  I mean, we were catchin' all kinds--so when she passed away, one of the things we had to do was decide whether we could keep the car.  Well, both of us didn't have jobs that were gonna allow us to keep payments on that car, so we actually had to give that car up.  And at that point, then you realize, police car or not, that was a nice car to have, you know, takin' now you gotta get back on the bus.  And that, that, that was, that was, that was a tough, that was a tough period for us, it really was.
Story_ID: 581697
Speaker 1: So Mr. Baker, tell me, what, what did you do after you graduated from high school that summer?
Speaker 2: Well actually, the first thing I had to do was find a job.  And actually jobs were plentiful, but when you didn't know what you were gonna do--(video cuts out)
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Baker, the summer of '68 [1968], what did you do that summer?
Speaker 2: Well, having graduated, had to get a job, had to make some income.  I was still actually serving the Washington Post up until graduation day, and I can only say when the prom came around that my mother [Bernice Brown Baker] had to drop me off at the prom.  I didn't have a prom date.  Now, I did have a date for the officer's ball the year before.  I didn't have a date for the prom 'cause I was too scared to ask.  You know, rejection was a bad thing (laughter) and so I didn't ask, but I was still gonna go, and had--ended up havin' a great time.  And after that prom, graduation, then we, we understood we had to get a job.  And that's when the seriousness began to set in because my mother was beginning to show signs of being seriously ill.  And so we got a job--well, she kinda like set it up.  She knew--she saw the place had a help wanted sign, and back in those days, say help wanted was still in the window the next day, it meant the job was still available, and it said they needed a wash technician.  I think that's when names were beginnin' to change to make it seem like you had a job far more important than you really did, so as a wash technician, I was a dishwasher; that was plain and simple.  But, you know, it was plenty of dishes and plenty of hot, soapy water.  So as they used to tell me, "there's plenty to go around, don't worry about it, you'll be here late."  So I--the time actually was like six to one in the morning, and so it means she had to come pick me up.  And I didn't feel good about that 'cause I wanted to walk home and--but she insisted on coming to pick me up.  And things weren't all that bad back in the day, at least I didn't, you know, we didn't perceive it to be all that bad that, you know, your mother would have to come pick you up, you know.  But I didn't turn a ride down but, you know, I knew she was not feelin' well, and she'd have to get up early the next day to go to work, so I didn't really want her out, you know, doin' that, so I thought the next thing I had to do was get a car, but first thing, let's start with the job.
Story_ID: 581698
Speaker 1: Now there was a funny little story to this 'cause my very best friend, Michele Daley [ph.], who is actually a guy, Michele, French for Michael, his mother was from New Orleans [Louisiana], so that, Michele, was prevalent among male names there.  But anyway, Michele being my best friend, my best friend and my brother's best friend and still is today, came up to my job.  Now, [HM] Ronald [Baker] was coming by to actually borrow some money, but he, he did not know that I was a dishwasher 'cause I didn't tell him.  Michele didn't know I was a dishwasher 'cause I didn't tell him.  But they found out because they came in the restaurant and asked for me, and the--I think the manager or somebody said, oh, he's out back and--I take that back.  I did tell 'em that I was washing dishes but we had an automatic dishwasher, that's what it was.  And he came back and saw my arms elbow deep in that sink of dirty water washin' those dishes, and of course, Michele looks over and you know they start laughin'.  "So, where's the automatic part?  Is that under the water there?  You know, your hands?"  And even to this day, they have not forgotten that, and every now and then I will get--catch (unclear) about that automatic dishwasher being ten fingers.  And--but I worked--but what it taught me was what I didn't wanna do.  And I think a lot of times, people--you know, you do think about what do you wanna be?  But through my life, those experiences, it was what I didn't wanna be.  I, I didn't wanna be a dishwasher.  So I said, okay, well I'm gonna do this job or make this money like momma [Bernice Brown Baker] said, but I'm, I'm--this is not gonna be a career.  And then the next thing, a friend of hers found--Mr. Robinson found me a job next to the Ford Theater where President Lincoln was assassinated.  It was a print shop.  You know, life's lessons are very interesting when you get into certain types of jobs.  Now, you would've never even thought about a print shop, you know, being a job where you would meet, you know, various people and stuff like that.  Well, actually if you stop and think about it, where would you learn print?  In high school, you know, in a technical school or in prison (laughter).  You know, where it seemed like every guy that was in there workin' with me had just got out of prison and--but it was a job, you know.  I appreciated Mr. Robinson's effort to get me a job, you know.  I didn't have the skills at that time, didn't know what I really wanted to do.
Speaker 2: What was then name of the print shop?
Speaker 1: I cannot remember to save my life.
Speaker 2: So was this in 1969?
Speaker 1: This would've been in 1968 going into '69 [1969] 'cause I was working there at my mother's passing.
Story_ID: 581699
Speaker 1: I do remember that and I do remember that the manager there as much as I didn't care that much for the job, he was a good man, and he was very, very touched by, you know, my losing my mother, and it'd just be my brother and I left to take care of each other.  And I, I--and I'll never forget that.  I'll never forget his face and I, I don't remember his name, but I do remember how touched he was, how very nice he was to me, and him having--trying to take up a collection with the guys.  You know, 'cause back in those days, you know, people take up collections for you.  Those guys weren't givin' up a dime.  They say, "I'll give you a bite of my sandwich, but that's about it" (laughter), he'd say, "'cause my momma's gone too (laughter)."  He's--and these guys, you know, like I said, these guys are out of prison and they, you know, they were straight with you.  There was no, there was no sugar coating on that, so--and you respected that, you know.  But I learned a lot about hard work in that print shop.  I learned about--a lot about how people loaf on the job, you know, and why people in many respects don't get anywhere in life because they take shortcuts.  When you put together a forty-page packet, you know.  Because they had these like accordion-like gates that stretched out and each had maybe fifty sheets of the same page, page one, two, three, whatever, and you had to go down that line with tacky finger, pick that paper up, and it became an art.  When, you know, your finger, your finger was kinda sticky so it hit that paper and it'd pop up, pop the next one and you--until you got to the end of the line, and you had guys right in front of you.  And they would play games runnin' down the line tryin' to run over you to make sure you kept up the speed or got faster.  And, you know, I--I'm, I'm, I'm just remembering a lot of that and I'm sayin' that was so much fun except when the supervisor, who the nice man I was talking about, the manager, looked at it and said why is page thirty-eight after page eighteen, you know, because we would run so fast and some--missed a page, said well he ain't gonna know, and keep on goin', and it was really funny.  But he--quality control was there and, and, and one--again, one of those things you learn, that was an assembly line, you know, paper bindery kinda thing, but it taught you that you had to be responsible, and if you did miss a page, you supposed to go back and get that page.  There's a customer that's paying for this and paying, paying money that you're making to do this job, you know, properly.  And so it taught me a sense of responsibility by doing that.  So that job lasted until my mother passed away.  And I happened to be--I knew I wanted to get rid of that, get, get out of that job, so I did.  I gave 'em notice and quit.
Story_ID: 581700
Speaker 1: And not knowin' where I was gonna go, I'm walking up 13th Street Northwest [Washington, D.C.] and there's the old 725 13th Street was the AT&T building, where at 719 just before that main building was the employment office, and I'm looking in the window.  I have on a suit and everything and I said, "I'm not goin' in there.  They, they wouldn't hire me."  Well, it just so happens--this is 1969 and telephone company is among those giants in the industry that have been discriminating against African Americans, you know, since as, as long as there's been a telephone, you know.  So laws have been put in place through Civil Rights Act and through [the Lyndon B.] Johnson administration that you all had to start hiring African Americans or you all weren't gonna be getting federal contracts.  Now, that made no sense to me back then, but as you get older and as you understand the political climate, you understand how important it was for someone like a President Johnson who was really a hero to me.  A lot of people--his legacy is hurt probably by Vietnam more than anything else, but he is the reason that the Civil Rights Movement got anywhere and, and I realize that.  And basically what happened was, I was hired on the spot.  I had a manager come out, one of the employment managers, and I believe her name was Miss Thompson, came out on the street, 'cause I was gettin' ready to walk right on by the door.  I wasn't going in.  And she said, "young man, are you looking for a job?"  You know, she said, "you got a suit on, you're lookin' in the window."  "Well, yes ma'am," 'cause everything was yes ma'am; that's the way momma taught us.  "Well, yes ma'am, but, you know, I didn't, I didn't think you all were hiring."  "Oh, yes, we're hiring.  What kind of work would you like to do?"  "Well, I don't know ma'am, I, I was just a dishwasher."  "Well, no, we don't have any dishwashing jobs, but do you like people?"  "Well, yes."  "You like talkin' on the phone?"  "Yes."  "Okay, we have a job called service representative."  And, of course, representative took me back to the days of congress, God, I'm gonna be big time (laughter).  I'm gonna be a representative and I was just walkin' by the window.  Uh, no (laughter).  It's not, it's not that easy.  But actually what happened was, she asked me to come in and fill out an application and I did, and a service representative position was not available at that time, but there was a job available in the mail room at 930 8th Street Northwest, which is now across--well, it's now been torn down, but it's--it was the building, the headquarters building for C&P, Chesapeake and Potomac Telephone Company, back in the '60s [1960s] and prior to that.  They were one of the four local companies under AT&T.  And so I took the job 'cause my mother [Bernice Brown Baker] said, get in the door.  Don't worry about bein' president today.  Get in the door and work your way up.  So I went--got in the mail room and another one of those experiences; I know this is not what I want to do.  Carryin' bags in a suit on a 90 degree, 100 degree day was not cool, but you didn't wanna not wear a suit because you wanted to impress the people, because many of the executives were in that building, you know, and they probably don't know you from Adam, but the thing back in those days, if they spoke to you, it was a big deal.  When the general--the general manager in, in a position there was almost like a CEO anywhere else.  General manager was the general manager of all the four C&P companies, and that, that was big time.  And so when he was coming to, to the mail room to check out, see how you're doin'.  Well, you know, you comin' to the bottom of the room, but back then when you didn't know the politics of, of corporations, this is a big day.  So they would prep you, you know.  If he says, you know, what is your job?  Show him your job, you know.  And you took pride in that and, and those were the kind of things that I took pride in.  I appreciated Miss Thompson comin' out of that door, just, you know--and I could've been another person walkin' up the street 'cause I had passed the post office test.  And the thing was, I got, got like a 98 out of 100, but they didn't send me a notice saying that was I available to work.  Because my father was with the post office.  He had retired by the time--well he--of course, he passed away a few months later, but he was already retired because he had congestive heart failure, and so he had already retired.  But I think they looked in the system and saw that there was already a Baker working for the postal system and they didn't know to hire this, you know, family member, or--I'm just guessing, speculating, 'cause I never got the call back, I just got the envelope sayin' that I had gotten a ninety-eight on the test.
Story_ID: 581701
Speaker 1: So I was easily available for the telephone company.  And then, it got better, and I only say that because as a service representative, first I was the first African American guy in the residential section of about 90 representatives of which about 88 were women, you know, and I'm like, okay, I've died and gone to heaven (laughter).  Well little did I know, no, it wasn't heaven, it was hard work.  You know, I--you had to learn telephone etiquette.  Customer was always right; even when they were wrong, they were right.  If you couldn't handle the call, you had to pass it to your supervisor.  To me, I was never gonna let the supervisor have the call, you know.  In fact, my whole career and particularly in the beginning, only happened once that I had to give up the call and that's because the supervisor came out from a monitoring position 'cause she heard the call and it ended up being a racist call.  And rather than have me go through that, you know, being young and new with the company and also having not experienced that before, came out and excused me from the phone and took over the call, and basically, you know, put the lady in check that was, you know, doing this.  But I learned a lot from that, you know, human nature, business, and what it made me realize is that I wanted to do something, but I couldn't--I just couldn't put my finger on it; I wa--
Story_ID: 581702
Speaker 1: I said, well I really wanna go back to photography.  But as I, as I was thinking along those lines and getting ready to invest in equipment is when we got the draft notice.  It's time to go, you know, singin' one of our favorite songs, "Ooo, Vietnam" [sic. "Wish You Were Here With Me] which happened to be by a group called The Fawns, who were young ladies who we grew up with and went to--went through [Anacostia] high school with.  And--
Speaker 2: So that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --that changed everything.
Speaker 2: --was in 1971, right?
Speaker 1: That was in 1971, January, God--I believe it was January 19, 1971, when we actually had to report for duty.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And you were stationed where?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Fort--
Speaker 1: --we initially went to--for physical at Fort Holabird, which is outside of Baltimore [Maryland], and we thought that was a joke.  It--'cause the guy said in order to have a physical, you had to bring a body with you (laughter) and, and it didn't seem like we had one at the time (laughter).  But, I mean, we were really tryin' to, tryin' to figure out ways to get out, you know.  People can tell you anything they wanna tell you, but African Americans, the brothers were not tryin' to go to Vietnam.  We were havin' enough trouble here, but we were not raised to run either.  You know, our responsibility was they called you, you went.  But we had been called and initially, we were--actually, we were gonna go sooner than '71 [1971] but because our parents died both the same year, it gave you a sense also to understand later on that it didn't even matter that you had lost both your parents, that your father had served in World War II, your grandfather had served in World War I and was buried in Arlington Cemetery; none of that mattered.  It appeared to us that they were tryin' to get every brother in Washington [D.C.], Baltimore [Maryland], and Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] off the streets, and they were bein' very successful at it, and there's too many stories that went on about that.  But when we started basic training, we went to Fort Dix [New Jersey], you know.  That was the--and the first stop was in Delaware at the--just, just, just before the Delaware Bridge at the toll stop and there was a rest stop there, and all I can remember, we were on the bus and we got box lunches when we left out of Fort Holabird, dry white bread with a piece of cheese on it, no mayonnaise or anything (laughter).  If you can imagine that kind of sandwich, that was lunch.  And, you know, of course, the rest gets worse when you get to basic training 'cause there is no lunch.  But we got to basic training and it was, it was tough because it was the first time that I thought that, you know, when I had had my accident and almost lost my life, it was the first time that my brother [HM Ronald Baker], that he almost lost his life.  He contracted pleurisy which was I guess a form just before pneumonia, and they had not told me, you know.  He was in, I believe, company B, I was in company C, and they would not let me see him, and I kinda like went off because, you know, everybody had gotten flu shots, but he apparently had a reaction and ended up with pleurisy which is, is a very dangerous situation health-wise.  And so I can tell you, I, I went to company commander, I went--I just went off, you know, and they let me see my brother.  And he, you know, he recovered and everything and we, we moved on.  But the first time in our lives that we were actually separated, he was at Fort Knox, Kentucky, and I was sent out to Fort Carson, Colorado, which ended up being my very first jet liner flight, and it was Continental Airlines, it was in the Rocky Mountains, and for those who think Coors beer is a regular name now, they do not have a clue.  Coors beer was nowhere past--nowhere east of the Rocky Mountains.  In Colorado, it was called near beer and it was Coors, but was called near beer.  And people say, well why do you call it near beer?  It was called near beer because the alcohol content was low because you were so high in altitude in the mountains--you know, but the funny thing was, I was never affected.  To this day, I was never affected by the height of the, you know, the--being in a high altitude.
Story_ID: 581703
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about 1976 when you took some photographs with your brother for--you all took some photographs for Don King.  Do you remember that?
Speaker 2: Clearly.  Not only do I remember it, but my best friend Michele [Daley, ph.] ought to remember it 'cause his camera was stolen that night (laughter), that night.  But, yeah, we-[HM] Ronald [Baker] was hired by Don King, I think to shadow, shadow them during a Muhammad Ali, Jimmy Young fight, and so Ronald, you know, he brought me along.  He, he, he said he's hiring me, but, you know, there wasn't no paycheck at the end of it, so--but, you know, to get into a major fight to see Muhammad Ali who you've never seen in your life, you know, even though it was toward the end of his career, it was, it was important.  It was important.  And so we went and it was just--it was like a gala.  It was the Capital Centre.  I still probably have some pictures somewhere around 'cause now that the Capital Centre's been torn down and it's a shopping center now.  It's, it's amazing to see the, the state police on horses and it was such, almost such a new stadium back then, and so we were working for Don King, taking these shots of the crowds, former Maryland governor, [Marvin] Mandel, who was eventually jailed, you know, for, for, you know dealings while he was governor, and just so many famous faces were in the, in the, in the place, and back then, I was kinda like almost afraid to approach people, you know.  It was almost--and I think it's because the manners you were raised with, that--not to interrupt people, but then you realize as a photographer, that is your job to interrupt people so you can get the shot, but we were kinda like respectful, so we wanted to kinda like pull back and hopefully we'd be in a position that when they were getting up or something like that, we'd get shots.  But the shots that we were able--that I was--I remember being able to get was, was Don King and particularly Howard Cosell, one of my--Howard Cosell and Frank Gifford.  Frank Gifford was interviewing--God, now I can't even remember the owner's name, but he was--Edward Bennett Williams.  He was the owner of the Washington Redskins, and Frank Gifford was interviewing him and I took a shot.  And it was a very good shot, but what's even so much more about--important about it was that Ronald didn't even know who Edward Bennett Williams was (laughter), so he's like I got this shot, but, you know, who is this guy?  You know, he knew who Frank Gifford was, and he was the guy who was always watchin' the Redskins football team.  And so it was one of those treasured shots that you have because these were people who were now gone, you know, and shots that you otherwise would not have gotten.  But it also made me realize, this is what I wanna do.  I have no doubt.  I wanna be around this kind of almost circus atmosphere where celebrities come.
Story_ID: 581704
Speaker 1: Mr. Baker, we skipped a little bit.  So in 1975, you became interested in DJing and you were a DJ [deejay, disc jockey].  Tell me a little bit about what that period in your life was like.
Speaker 2: Okay, well actually this DJing thing was always something I enjoyed doing.  I would play--we would play--at our basement parties, I would DJ.  Back then, of course, there wasn't two turntables.  You know, we would holler mix and then the next record would come on, we dropping 45s.  But it was in 1974 that it really made--I, I got my confidence.  I went to New Orleans [Louisiana].  My best friend and I, Michele Daley [ph.], went to New Orleans for his cousin who is here now, has been here for years as a pharmacist, went to his wedding.  Well at the same time, that following, that following September, we went back to New Orleans for the Grambling Southern game.  And they were--he was telling his other college friends 'cause he attended and graduated from Dillard University [New Orleans, Louisiana], planned this big party at the Marriott Hotel--what'd he have, God, about a thousand people, and they had a DJ there.  Well I had--we drove down.  We drove all the way to New Orleans, like seventeen hours we drove in a, in a Datsun 240z back in '74 [1974], but anyway we drove--I mean, I'm sorry, that, that became '75 [1975].  And we--so we drove to, to the, to New Orleans, and what happened was, the DJ was playing, you know, bad records.  Nobody was dancing.  And so what they decided to do, they knew our friend Clem Ashford, Clement Ashford, who is the first cousin of Nick Ashford of [HM] Valerie Simpson and Ashford, of Ashford and Simpson fame.  Well, he said, well look, we got a DJ that came all the way from [Washington] D.C.  Now, you gotta keep in mind, New Orleans is slow or certainly was slow then, slower then before the Superdome was built and we had gone there in '74 [1974] when they was actually building it.  We have pictures of the steel structure where they were actually building it.  And so by '75 [1975] when we rolled back in there, he said, "yeah, we got a--we brought our DJ all the way from Washington, D.C."  Now, that wasn't really the truth, but I had my records and stuff with me; I just didn't have a turntable.  He had turntables and I had the records.  We went to the car, got those records, and all I can remember is that the people were gettin' down because I was playing east coast stuff.  He was trying to play stuff that was kinda like some popular in New Orleans, but he wasn't mixin' it, and--but we got to jammin'.  And I'm--and, and I--in fact, a couple people took pictures of me, taken at the party.  It was just, like I said a thousand people in the place, and that was the entertainment part of me that came out, and probably Ronald would, would confer with that, that, I felt like an entertainer, you know.  I couldn't really sing anymore, I couldn't, you know, you know, I wasn't goin' up on a stage trying to act or anything and, of course, you didn't have rap at that point.  So it was like, okay, well I'm gonna be a DJ.  And they liked it so much, they were saying, you know, can we bring you back next year?  I said, well, I don't know, I might be in California next year doing this, you know, you know, now all of the sudden, you know, you got the big head.  But anyway, it was so much fun that when we got back, they opened up a private club called The Foxtrappe.
Story_ID: 581705
Speaker 1: And I had been actually doing a little DJing with them at some of the restaurants before they opened The Foxtrappe because there was a group called Smoke L.T.D. [ph.], and Smoke L.T.D. was a group of guys, a couple in fact who were managers at the telephone company where I worked, and they would give these parties after hours of the, of the restaurants, and, you know, charging three dollars a head and they were making a lot of money.  So sometimes, the DJs would have to take a break or whatever, and so you play a little bit.  And they said, okay, you're, you're doing pretty good.  Well what I did, I did the Quiet Storm.  They had a room where everybody was partying, but they had a room where people that were older than us wanted to sit back, have a drink or whatever.  So I was, I was, you know, I always dug Melvin Lindsey who was basically the creator of the Quiet Storm, his style of music, and people would come in.  It would be like a lounge, you know, where we'd play anything you want.  And I--I think that was what my reputation got.  What, what do you wanna hear?  And I'd put it right on if I could or certainly would fit it in.  So one night at The Foxtrappe, the DJ, name was Frank, went to take a break.  Now, he had a record playing, one of his long disco records playing--I forget which one it was, but was probably about 10 minutes long, "Ain't No Stoppin' Us Now", I think was McFadden and Whitehead.  But anyway, he was playing, playing a record and he wasn't coming back and the record was running out.  So Bill Lindsey who was one of the managing partners, was the managing partner of the club said, well, Don, everybody knows you can play a little bit, can you play this until Frank comes back.  Well, Frank didn't come back that night.  Frank was like--he was out of it, let's put it that way.  And from that night on, they said, okay, if you wanna play, we'll let you play and, and we'll pay you to do it.  And from that time on, I just became Don Baker the DJ.  Now, everybody else had names, but what I was taught, again, about these--from these jobs that I didn't want, you know, that--but I had worked, and that your name is your reputation.  And if your name is on something, then you won't mess it up.  Well, if you mess it up, you had to take responsibility for it.  It was no different than my good friend, Tom Joyner.  You know, the Tom Joyner Show was the Tom Joyner Show.  Regardless who makes the mistake, it comes back to Tom Joyner.  And so I wanted that responsibility 'cause it keeps you honest.  You know, I can't come back and I'll be DJ Rod next week, you know, DJ Spider the week after that like half the cats.  Wait a minute, you look just like the guy that was at the club last week that broke, you know, broke the equipment or something, so they come back with a different name.  I was always Don Baker.  And a lot of people didn't know I was a photographer because they saw me in the DJ thing.  And then we started doing dancing.  We did--the Hustle was one of my favorite all time dances, and we actually taught the Hustle.  And The Hustle--I had 10 guys.  We--I mean, well, I'm sorry, we had 20, 10 guys, 10 ladies, and it was free on Monday nights 'cause Mondays are slow everywhere for club business.  Well, we had the club packed every Monday night teaching free Hustle lessons.  Now, we have old people coming in there trying to--you know, I mean, they just wanna have some hand-to-hand contact with some of the pretty girls, but it was so funny.  It was, it was a, it was a social statement that said people want to interact and I don't care what night of the week it was.  And we just--we did this, God, for about six months.  And we weren't really making any money.  I was getting a few bucks out of it, but, you know, the guys and the girls were dancing 'cause it was fun to them, you know.  And the club was packed, club was making money, so it was, it was one, one of those things.  So, you know, we just taught, you know, Hustle lessons for about six months and, you know, until, you know, that weaned out.  But it was, it was a fun experience.  But it was from that point on, The Foxtrappe basically honed my photography because so many people came to the Foxtrappe.  As African Americans, when your friends or people from out of town, business people, entertainers came to Washington [D.C.], even down to Reverend Ike, and people know Reverend Ike as Frederick Eikerenkoetter [II], and he was the, he was the, the, the famous reverend that says, it is better to have money and not need it than to need it and not have it, and never were there spoken truer words.  And everybody would come to the club, from congressmen to, to entertainers.  I mean, we had--Alex Haley had a book signing there and I got his autograph from, from the Roots book.
Story_ID: 581706
Speaker 1: Did that help elevate your business as--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, tremendously.
Speaker 1: --as a photographer?
Speaker 2: Tremendously.  I mean, I was in between mixing records and I had my camera there because you never knew, knew who would come in.  Richard Pryor came in one night and he had this bandana on.  Now, at that point, it was a dress code.  Well, you not gonna tell Richard Pryor he can't come in and he's got on this bandana.  Well, as it turns out, he was doing the movie "Bingo Long Traveling All-Stars" which was, was a Motown movie that was done by [HM] Berry Gordy about the negro leagues, and we didn't have a clue why he was dressed this way, but some of his handlers said, no, he's doing a movie and that's why he has the headband on 'cause he had to have his hair processed or something 'cause he was playing the Cuban in that movie, the Cuban baseball player trying to break into the big leagues, so, so his hair, you know, was practically fried, so--(laughter).
Story_ID: 581707
Speaker 1: What's, what's your favorite photograph that you've taken?
Speaker 2: Probably my favorite would be; God, I have so many, but the one I would have to say would be [HM] Gordon Parks.
Speaker 1: Why is that one your favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, it's my favorite because it was done at the Corcoran Gallery [of Art].  It was before he did his latest work "Half Past Autumn."  It was when the "Songs of My People" book was published, and he was there.  He was part of that book in terms of a foreword and was pictured in the book, but it was a picture I took of him in color standing by his picture, which was in black and white, the one that appeared in a book, but it was a gallery type print on the wall, and it's--the funniest thing about it is that it seems like all the other photographers were scared to ask him, would you take a picture?  And I'm sitting looking at these guys saying, what a minute, he is a photographer.  He is the photographer.  Why in the world would you be scared to ask a photographer?  We're not asking a senator or a president.  We're asking a man who made his living and who inspired us, you know.  So I went up to him, I said--you know, I said, "Mr. Parks, you know, you've been really a mentor to me, I wanna take a picture."  And for whatever reason, and once you see the picture, you'll understand, I made him smile, and he was holding glasses in his hand, and he's standing by this black and white picture, and the shot is in color, so there was such contrast between color and black and white.  He was very stoic looking in the photograph with the safari hat on where he probably had been out on a safari taking pictures and, and this color, you know, this laugh versus the stoic look and this color versus black and white.  And I gave him that picture as a gift when he had his opening and reception at the Corcoran Gallery for the "Half Past Autumn" book.  And I--and what's important about this is I got the only autograph that entire night because they were not signing autographs; they were not signing the book at all because there was some, God, three or four thousand people that showed up for this thing, and I had gotten in early, went upstairs.  One of the security guys that knew me said that he was up there.  I showed him that I had this 16 by 24 in frame.  His family, everybody loved the picture because they don't see him smile that way often.  And it was really a great moment.  It was really great to have that signature on my copy 'cause I brought two, you know, always be prepared.  I had him sign the one that I had and gave him the one for him.  And, and that is probably my proudest moment 'cause when it's your mentor, when it's people who have influenced you, when you look at his work here in Washington, D.C., you know, pictures of projects that appear that were here in Washington that you didn't even know were here.  You know, you think the projects were built when you were a kid, but they had been there before as military homes and stuff.  And, the work that he, that he just did from a social standpoint was just so great, you know, that it--to, to be able to take his picture was almost better than taking, you know, any other person's picture because they're in your field; they inspired you.
Story_ID: 581708
Speaker 1: Are you influenced by your brother's work?
Speaker 2: Oh, well--much so.  I mean, [HM] Ronald [Baker] to me was like a, a, a lighting genius.  I could never seem to get it right, but Ronald could always show me how, you know, to do proper lighting to get the effect that I wanted to get, hair lights and things like that, 'cause I was always in such a hurry to get it done, and we throw up a light here, light here, 45 degree, boom.  Why do I have those shadows in the back?  Okay, let me show you how you do it.  And so he, he, he influenced me really from the very beginning when we go back to--in fact, shooting cheerleaders and stuff like that, that was the first influence, but the actual work ethic part of it was the fact that people--he was recognized at the telephone company while he was there by executives that wanted portraits taken and wanted photos taken because the other work was so subpar, and they realized looking at his, you know, there was no contest.  And so when you see that coming from your brother, you take a certain sense of pride, and as much as we joke or as much as we would fight or whatever, the fact is, is that he is very good at what he does and, and, and you can learn from anybody that does good at what they do if that's your interest.
Speaker 1: Are, are you all still in a sense competing with one another?
Speaker 2: Twenty-four-seven.  That's never gonna change, you know.  I mean, it's, it's something that you grow up with, you know, and it's part of you, you know.  We are all we have, but at the same time, we're brothers and we're not like some of those other twins, people talk about, well let's wear blue today, okay.  No.  You mention let's wear blue today, I'm gonna mention another color just for spite, you know.  But it's, it's the kind of situation I think where we compete because it makes each, each of us better, you know.
Speaker 1: He told me that when we talked about twins back in the '50s[1950s] and how it is so unusual for people and sometimes people would say, oh, I wonder which one of you is the smartest.  And so I asked him, which one of you is the smartest?  So now, I ask you, which one is the smartest?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I, I think that would be an unfair question, because naturally I would say it was me, you know, but with being honest about it, you know, it's me (laughter).  So, so, I'm pretty sure he probably said it was him (laughter).  So--
Speaker 1: He did.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But, you know, I, I mean, it's not--I don't think it's about being smarter, but I, I think between the two of us, I probably always been more the risk-taker and I think I was probably more the risk-taker in, in a lot of situations because of the accident that almost took my life, and I said after that, who am I gonna be afraid of?  You know, and fortunately and very blessedly, he has not had that experience nor would I ever want him to have that experience, but it toughened me to the point where, you know, I'm not scared of anything.  I'm not gonna worry about it.  If I get--you know, if it happens--if I get caught, I get caught.  But, you know, we would, we would sneak into concerts with cameras.  We did the Mike--the first time we photographed Michael Jackson.  He sneaks a videotape in, and he was scared to use it.  I said the hard part is over, you got it in here.  Tape the show.  We weren't selling the stuff, you know, it was just a matter--we got it into the concert, and--
Story_ID: 581709
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would've chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause I think you are who you are, you know.  I think you could look at it, you know--we can all sit down and say, well I wish I would had chose this path 'cause I'd be a millionaire today.  But how do you know that?  You know, you don't know where your paths would've taken you.  You don't even know if you'd still be here today because of the profession that you chose other than what you've done.  So I don't look back on what I wished or what could've been.  I look on how to improve where I am and who I am today because I've built a reputation, Ron has built a reputation, and people know who we are.  They know who we are around this country and in other parts of the world.
Speaker 1: And what do you think your parents [Bernice and Oscar Baker] would think about that?
Speaker 2: I think they would be proud.  You know, because we could've gone the other way, you know.  I--it's, it's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: You could've been like those anti-Baker twins.
Speaker 2: We could--well, we could've been, we could've been the guy on the corner.  We could've been the guy sitting in front of the liquor store, you know, with MD 20/20 in our hand using that as an excuse that our parents had died and we didn't--we had no direction.  But we had direction up until their death, you know.  And that was a source of pride for us.  And who wants to embarrass--I take the position of the Asian families.  I would never want to do anything to embarrass the memory of my parents 'cause they, they did so much for us that they didn't have to do.
Story_ID: 581710
Speaker 1: And how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered as a, as a very good photographer, but, you know, also as a decent human being.  I try to respect, you know, everyone regardless of what culture they're in, you know.  I take it on a one-on-one basis and I think, pretty much, Ronald does the same.  You know, we intermix with cultures and genres and levels of money, politics, prestige, and it doesn't really change us 'cause we've seen it all.  You know, we've been there around the Bill Gates, you know, and we've been around the guys that we grew up with on the corner who some are still on the corner (laughter), but the fact is, they're still human beings and we wanna be--I would wanna be remembered as not separating humanity as the difference, as the difference between the two.
Story_ID: 581711
Speaker 1: And are your photographs your legacy you think?
Speaker 2: No, I like to think of being a parent was my legacy, that, that my granddaughter is the beneficiary of the way I treated her father.  And, and she's an A student and, and just graduated, twelve years old, graduated from--onto middle school in programs that are high school level, so I'm very proud of that, you know.  By instilling him hard work, he's a very hard worker, 'cause he saw me working hard, and he thought that was normal.  So, I'm, I'm proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  Thank you very much, Mr. Baker.
Speaker 2: You're welcome.  Thank you for having me.
Speaker 1: Thanks, Carey.
Story_ID: 581712
Speaker 1: Okay, this is [HM] Gordon Parks during the reception of the "Songs of My People" book during the '90s [1990s].
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Donna Summer and myself doing a performance that she had in the Washington [D.C.] area back in the--back around '78 [1978], '79 [1979].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is Stephanie Mills who was attending the [Michael] Jackson concert in 1979 and I managed to catch her just before she left and asked her to take a picture.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is [HM] Jesse Jackson in 1975 doing a rally for the King Holiday.
Speaker 2: Now, this is Howard Cosell, known as the great mouth, the great Howard Cosell, in 1976.
Speaker 1: These are the Jacksons performing in 1979 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 2: This is Larry Holmes in 1976 on a--one of the undercards at a Muhammad Ali fight.
Speaker 1: This is Ron [HM Ronald Baker] and myself, a sad representation.
Speaker 2: Who took the photograph?
Speaker 1: I think Ronald put it on a timer.  (Laughter).
Speaker 2: About what year was that one taken?
Speaker 1: Woah.  That had to probably be about eighty--I'm gonna guess around '83 [1983], '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is me with my mentoring hero, [HM] Gordon Parks, doing the 1993 inaugural of [President] Bill Clinton.
Speaker 2: This is me with Jesse Jackson, Sr., at a National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters dinner in about 1997.
Speaker 1: And this is my first encounter with--don't say again-- [HM] Colin Powell.
Speaker 2: Colin Powell.  Yeah, I drew a blank.  Okay, this is me with Colin Powell, I met in 1989 when we both had black hair.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: This is me and famous hall of famer Jim Brown, famous running back of the Cleveland Browns at an event for Neediest Kids.
Speaker 1: This is Ron and I with Mark Curry, the comedian and actor, at the birthday party in 1994 of Bill Clinton.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Now, Mr. Baker--
Speaker 2: Okay, this is former president Nelson Mandela speaking before the Congressional Black Caucus in 1994.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.
