Story_ID: 3967
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey, observing is Ponch Lopez.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Harry W. Brooks, Jr., H-A-R-R-Y, W for William, B-R-O-O-K-S, Junior.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 17, 1928, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, and sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a self-employed business executive at this time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you are a retired--?
Speaker 2: Retired military and retired from my major board, The Freedom Forum.
Speaker 1: Okay, and in the military, you were a?
Speaker 2: Major General, U.S. Army, retired.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 29th of September, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  And you don't have to give your full address if you don't want to.
Speaker 2: We're in my quarters in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Story_ID: 3968
Speaker 1: The first one is, sir, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would have to say a good, solid, medium-rare T-bone steak.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And, sir, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "I give a damn."
Story_ID: 3969
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  And we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Nora Elaine Brooks, N-O-R-A, E-L-A-I-N [sic, E-L-A-I-N-E] .
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Bailey.
Speaker 1: Bailey, okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born April the 16th, 1910, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what can you tell us about her side of the family?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: We can go back to her grandmother who was a Cherokee Indian by the name Little Flower.  And that's about as far as we can go.
Speaker 1: And where did great--did her grandmother live?
Speaker 2: Indianapolis, all of this happened in Indianapolis.
Speaker 1: Okay, was her grandmother born there too?
Speaker 2: As far as I know, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, all right.  All right, so--is there a story about how she as Cherokee wound up in Indianapolis?
Speaker 2: If it is, I don't know it.  My grandmother died when I was maybe--and grandfather died when I was maybe five.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So are there any stories on that side of the family that go way back to, you know, pre-Civil War days or--.
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.  My grandfather was a contractor and helped build many of the buildings in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 1: Okay, what was his name?
Speaker 2: What the devil was his name, his name?  I have to think about that one for a minute.
Speaker 1: Well, think about it, and what was your grandmother's name, do you know--do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Nora also.
Speaker 1: Oh, that's who you said the Cherokee, and her name was--
Speaker 2: Little Flower.
Speaker 1: Little Flower, okay.
Speaker 2: Little Flower was my mother's grandmother.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have a family tree book here somewhere, but I should've brought it out, I'm sorry.
Story_ID: 3970
Speaker 1: Now, did you mother talk about growing up in Indianapolis and what it was like?
Speaker 2: Yes, she did.  Indianapolis was a segregated city and so the neighborhoods were, were segregated.  But we were pretty well isolated from it because we lived in an area that was middle-class and we were very happy there.  My father [Harry W. Brooks, Sr.] carried mail in a white area, which the borderline was only two blocks from us.  So there was some minimal integration going to stores and so forth.
Speaker 1: Okay, what did your mother do for a living?
Speaker 2: My mother was a nurse.  She ran a nursing home.  Before that, in my earlier years, she was taking care of houses, cleaning houses, cleaning the post office, and doing everything necessary to live, particularly right after the [Great] Depression because we were poorer than church mice back then.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you mother have a chance to get any higher education or anything?
Speaker 2: She went to the medical school.  Now, she wasn't a registered nurse.  She was a practical nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I think they met when they were going to high school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they both--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) We all were born--we--she was a, we--she was a teenager when most of her kids were born, and she had fifteen of them, and only about five of them survived.
Story_ID: 3971
Speaker 1: Well, can you give us your father's full name too and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Harry W. [William] Brooks, Sr.  I already spelled--.
Speaker 1: Right, and when--what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His date of birth is January the 18th, 1908.
Speaker 1: Okay, and was he born in Indianapolis too?
Speaker 2: Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Can't trace it back at all.  His father was a white policeman in Indianapolis, and my father was a product of a liaison between this policeman and my grandmother.  So he was raised by someone else.
Speaker 1: Okay, now he was raised in the, he was raised by his grandmother or--?
Speaker 2: No, he was raised by a lady by the name of Mrs. Green, no relation.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so you didn't know your grandmother on that side?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nor grandfather.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, did your father have any stories of growing up?  I mean, did all--how did all that affect him growing up?  Did he know anything about it or--?
Speaker 2: I think he did.  My father was brutalized as a kid and that affected him a lot.  He, he was--when his whippings consisted of a horsewhip, which drew blood.  So when he whipped me with a razor strap, he thought he was giving me a break (laughs).  It was not a break.  I would bleed too.  So I wouldn't say I was brutalized, but he was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess it's, you know, when people look back on those days, and even now, some people use a lot of corporal punishment now.  But it's relative, I guess, in terms of--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) To him, it was relative.  You know, he would say, "You should see what I had to go through."  But I will say, for every whipping I got, I should have had six (laughs) because I was a devilish little kid.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're gonna get to that in a second, but tell us more your father.  Now, he--did he have a chance to graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: He graduated from high school, and he went to the post office and retired from the post office thirty years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he had that one job all the time?
Speaker 2: One job all his life.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, in those days, I mean and even now, it's not a bad job, but in those days, it was a fairly high job for a black person in the community.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he, but he was a substitute during the [Great] Depression.  And they were only paying him I think three dollars a week or something so it was some really difficult times.  But then he became a regular, and he had a decent salary and with, and with my mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] doing what she did, we lived--we had a decent life.
Speaker 1: So you had a lot of benefits and, I guess, from the post office and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Medical, and those sorts of things, yes.
Story_ID: 3972
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you said your mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] was pregnant fifteen times, and--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and she had fifteen pregnancies.  She had a lot of miscarriages.  The hospital killed two of our, of our sisters and brothers but--in the incubator, they baked them.  She had some bad luck with a lot of kids.
Speaker 1: Well, can you tell us who your living brothers and sisters were and where you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: I am number--of the living?
Speaker 1: Well, that--that actually lived to grow up, you know, I mean the, you know.
Speaker 2: I'm still number two.  I have an older sister, Dorothy [H. Brooks], and then myself, and then I have sister Betty [L. Brooks], and then I have a sister who's deceased, and then I have a younger brother, Jimmy [James T. Brooks].
Story_ID: 3973
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I remember a little bit about my grandfather feeding me.  Other than that, I don't remember anything about him.  I remember all the love that my mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] gave me 'cause my mother spoiled me terribly.  I was her baby.  And I was the only boy for many years.
Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My father [Harry William Brooks, Sr.] was an athlete, so we would--I would follow him around as he played horseshoes and baseball and all sorts of things like that.  And that was fun.  And then, of course I became an athlete myself.  And, the neighborhood [in Indianapolis, Indiana], nice neighborhood, nice kids, lots of fun.  Segregation didn't hit me as it hit many people in the United States because the stores we went to were integrated--grocery stores.  And other than that, it was just a lot of nice black people, living in a nice black neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you all had a house, pretty big, good-sized house?
Speaker 2: Good-sized house.  It wasn't as large as this one, but it was a nice sized house that would hold all of us, three bedrooms, family room, dining room, kitchen, sun porch--and my father was a jokester so we had a lot of fun.  I mean he, he had a great sense--I've got his sense of humor--but he had a great sense of humor.
Speaker 1: Give us story.  For instance, what would he do?
Speaker 2: Well we'd--I don't remember all the things Daddy used to do, but we'd get--come to the table to eat.  And he would come up with these stories, and we would be roaring laughing, at whatever he came up with.  It was just great stories.
Speaker 1: Okay, you--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And he'd play cards a lot, great card sense, best I've ever seen.  You know, and some people are good technically.  Other people sense cards.  Daddy could sense cards.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I became quite good too at playing bridge.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any stories he told?
Speaker 2: I, I have to think about that for a while.  I don't remember any, any stories that stand out right now.
Story_ID: 3974
Speaker 1: Well, you said you were into a lot of devilment when you were coming up.  You were busy, you know, getting in trouble and, or doing things that could get you in trouble if you got caught?
Speaker 2: I was hard headed.  Daddy [Harry W. Brooks, Sr.] said, "Don't go out of the yard."  I knew he was gonna kill me when he caught me, and my little friends would come by and I'd be off and running.  But I quickly was cured of that, and I would be good for a while.  And then all my mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] had to say is, "I'm gonna tell your daddy," and I'd be good for three months.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, what sort of things did you like to do when you were a kid?
Speaker 2: Play ball, any kind of ball.  We played ball in the street and we played basketball with the net up on the garage and football in the backyard, the backyard seemed to be huge, but it was not much bigger than this room really (laughs).
Speaker 1: So was your father like a high school sports star, and did he--was he like a--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, he didn't play sports in high school.  This is something he got into intramural with the post office teams and other semi-pro type teams.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what did he play other than horseshoes, you said--?
Speaker 2: He pitched in softball, not hardball.  He pitched and he played first base.
Speaker 1: Now, growing up, now, did you ever see any of the Negro League baseball games?
Speaker 2: Yes I did, yes, I did.  He took me down to see--I forget the name of that team.  I think it was the Indianapolis Clowns [Negro League baseball team].  He took me down to see them in Indianapolis [Indiana].  Yeah, we had some good experiences.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what about--well, who lived in your household when you were growing up?  Was it just you--your immediate family or did your grandmothers live with you or grandfather?
Speaker 2: No, no, grandmom and granddaddy were dead, so it was just me and one sister [Dorothy H. Brooks] for eight years--and then the other sister [Betty L. Brooks] was born, and then right before I left for the [U.S.] Army, the next sister was born.  And the brother [James T. Brooks] came in about the time I left for the Army.
Story_ID: 3975
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  What grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I started out in School 42--Public School 42 [Elder Watson Diggs School #42] and probably stayed there 'til the fourth or fifth grade, and then went to School 87 [George Washington Carver Elementary School #87] in Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And stayed there until I graduated to go to high school.  I'm in the hall of fame of that school and I went back and, I was surprised at how small those chairs were.
Speaker 1: At Crispus Attucks High School [Indianapolis, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: I went to Crispus Attucks, yes.
Speaker 1: So, you think the chairs there are small?
Speaker 2: No, when I went back to 87 [Public School 87].  See, when I went back when I was promoted to brigadier general, they made a big thing of it in Indianapolis, and I was in the hall of fame of the, of the grade school.  So they gave me a police escort and everything, and I went back to 87, to the classroom that I was in.  Some people still remembered me, but they had to be pretty old at that time.  And someone said, "You used to sit in that chair."  I don't believe that I sat in that chair--that chair had to be worn out 'cause that was twenty-five years later.  No, no, that was thirty years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, now, well, tell me about grade school.  What were--were you a good student in grade school?
Speaker 2: I was always a good student to the degree that I wanted to be.  If I liked the subject, I would do very well in it.  If I liked the teacher, I would very well in it.  Otherwise, I'm a B student.  But if I liked the teacher, I'd A it every time.  And this is back at 87.  I was about having a good time, but my mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] saw that I took care of business.  I couldn't bring any real bad grades at home or then she'd turn me over to the 'monster man' [father, Harry William Brooks, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Okay, what were your favorite subjects?  I mean did you have a favorite subject at all or a favorite course?
Speaker 2: I guess I was somewhat inclined toward mathematics, which all proved out to be very useful over time.  I remember that we took classical music.  And I enjoyed that so much, and I've carried that with me through the years.  Social studies, history, I enjoyed those things.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite composer in classical music?
Speaker 2: I don't even remember now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There's lots of songs that I like very much, but the composer's name and, you know, and Beethoven's Fifth [Symphony], and things of those nature, I do like.
Story_ID: 3976
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever play an instrument?
Speaker 2: Played the drums and I was captain of the band in high school, playing the drums.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you play sports in high school?
Speaker 2: Yes, I lettered in football, had a good time.
Speaker 1: What position did you play in football?
Speaker 2: Right half.
Speaker 1: Right halfback, like that's in T-Formation was going on?
Speaker 2: Right.  I just can't understand why the coaches and the players couldn't see some of the variations that we have today in the way the teams line up and shift and all that.  Ours was straight six, two, two, one--no matter what (laughs), no matter what the situations were--six, two, two, one.  And it makes no sense, if you look back on it and look at all the options that you have now.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You'd never think of putting eight men on the line.  Are you crazy (laughs), it never occurred to us.
Speaker 1: Well, so, in those--I know-, later on, I guess the right half became the flanker or was it, or what was it?
Speaker 2: No, that was after my time.  I, it was still right half [halfback] when I left.  And I played ball in the Army and it was still right half [halfback].  We didn't have the I-Formation and all that fancy stuff.
Speaker 1: So you were at Crispus Attucks High School was a tradi--was for many years the only black high school, the traditional black high school in--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The only school for blacks in the city of Indianapolis [Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and named after the famous Crispus Attucks from Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Boston fame.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That school was a marvelous school.  They took--and they paid for it in athletics 'cause they took the best athletes in the city and put them all in one school, the black school.  And they brought in and they went out and recruited Ph.D.s from all over the country--faculty was outstanding and the discipline was superb.  I mean you'd dare not be running up and down the halls when you're supposed to be somewhere else.  I just can't imagine at Crispus Attucks things going on that I see going on in these schools out here now.  And it's a matter of expectations.  The kids, if they're allowed to get away with things, they will get away with things.  But at Crispus Attucks High School, you knew you could not get away with it.
Speaker 1: It was that simple.  And--.
Speaker 2: And it's the same thing in the [U.S.] Army.  It applies to the Army.  If you have high standards, discipline, defined rules, you're not gonna have a lot of those problems.  And a lot of those young kids will not get into trouble.  But if you turn them loose, you'll fill up the stockades with them.
Speaker 1: Okay now, a lot of the teachers today complain that parents are either absent or don't care or interfere with the education of the students.  Do you agree with that or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think a lot of that is going on.  The parents are failing the kids and teachers can't do it all.  The parents have to establish the rules and say whatever the teacher says, you do it.  My greatest fear was having to take my father [Harry W. Brooks, Sr.] back to school to get me in.  That, that would be my worst nightmare.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, so, were you pretty popular in high school and grade school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think--I've always been somewhat of a leader.  So, fortunately I didn't lead toward too many bad things.  Most of it was good things.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did you--I mean did you at some point think of yourself as a leader and, you know, and in what context?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm--you know, when you play baseball and, and the guys say, "Well, we'll make so and so the captain of this team and so and so the captain of the team," I'm invariably picked to lead one of those teams.  You know, I was always out front on those things.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was just kind of, people just kind of understood that, or you just kind of fell into it?
Speaker 2: And "Who's gonna quarterback today?"  "Well, we'll make Harry a quarterback and he'll call the plays."  Yeah, I--I was a leader in that respect.
Speaker 1: So do you think you were just willing to take responsibility or do you think you were aggressive or what do you think?
Speaker 2: I think I was aggressive and I was a natural leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And kids sense it.  If you put 'em all in a room for--for a week, the leaders will come out, and they'll decide who--who will be the leader.  And then--I guess they will gravitate toward the person they think will get the job done, even little kids.  You know, lead us out of this or lead us toward that or what--'cause you seem like you know what you're doing, whether you do or not.
Story_ID: 3977
Speaker 1: Now, who were your role models growing up?  Did you have like particular people that you looked up as, that you saw as a role model, even, I mean people you knew and people you might not know, like it might be somebody in the media or something or somebody you read about?
Speaker 2: My mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] was my greatest role model.  She worked so hard, and she was so diligent.  I just admire her back then and what she had to do to keep--keep things straight within the house.  And my father [Harry William Brooks, Sr.] was a role model in the sense that I--I knew that he got up every morning at five o'clock, shaved and went to work.  And every morning, if I didn't get up 'til seven, but every morning at five o'clock, I heard daddy going into the bathroom, shaving and do his thing.  And that kind of got me into an expectation mode of what a man is supposed to do.  So Daddy was a role model in the sense of setting a standard of, this is what a man does.  And a man brings his check home.  And a man puts food on the table and a man disciplines his children.  Now, he wasn't perfect by any means, but he did teach me those things.
Speaker 1: Now, did your father spend any time in the service?
Speaker 2: None.
Speaker 1: Did any of your relatives that you--?
Speaker 2: No relatives spent any time in the service.  In fact, they all--one of the relatives--when I went in and became a lieutenant, somebody said, "He'll never make it." (laughs)  I said, "Okay." (laughs)  "Junior will never make it."
Speaker 1: Okay, did any of your teachers make an impression on you?
Speaker 2: Several.  Even back in grade school, and, you know, the ones that made the greatest impression were the ones that were the hardest.  The easy teachers, I've forgotten their names.  The hard teachers, I still remember, Miss Thomas often the ones that were really tough on us and made us learn.  They were the ones I remember.  The ones that let us run wild, they--they weren't doing us any favors.
Story_ID: 3978
Speaker 1: Now, when you were in high school [at Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana], did you, were you--did you run for class office or were you an officer in any of the organizations in high school?
Speaker 2: Only the captain of the band.  I even quit school once.  I quit school in the eleventh grade because I got it in my mind that I wanted to get married.  And so I quit school and went to work for the Fairmount Glass Company [later Glass Containers, Inc., Indianapolis, Indiana], hauling red-hot glass up a forty-five degree hill.  That lasted for about a week and I came to the conclusion that this is a pretty child--but I'm going back to school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you felt you had to drop out to marry her?
Speaker 2: I was gonna drop out, drive trucks, whatever it took to marry that girl.
Speaker 1: Did they say that you had to have a job before you married her, or what was the--what was the--?
Speaker 2: Well, her mother cut her off from me, thankfully--or cut us off from each other--and that encouraged me also to get back in school and go to work on my future.  And I must have been fifteen, sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's one of those turns in the road that make a lot of difference.  I still would have been something, but I don't know what.  I would have gone back to school eventually, even if I had to go to get a GED [General Education Development] and then to college, I would have found a way.  But that was a bad turn in the road that didn't last very long.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your parents say about that [dropping out of high school to get married]?
Speaker 2: My mother [Nora Elaine Bailey Brooks] would try to keep me from doing  this, but at the same time, my mother said, "You do what would make you happy.  You're strong enough to do it."  And she probably knew that I wasn't gonna follow through on that, and she probably just stood there, and said, "I'll just wait for him to come back and go to school 'cause he will."
Story_ID: 3979
Speaker 1: Now, you were in high school during World War II, right?
Speaker 2: World War II.
Speaker 1: And pretty much the whole time, I mean, right.  Did you graduate in '46 [1946]?
Speaker 2: Graduated [from Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] in '47 [1947].
Speaker 1: '47 okay.  And--.
Speaker 2: Would have graduated in '47 [1947] except for the hitch in the road.
Speaker 1: Okay, so were you following the War, I guess, the whole country was, but what impression did World War II make on you?
Speaker 2: I was following the war pretty much.  I read papers, I read newspaper--I read newspapers then and listened to the radio, and didn't have, of course, didn't have television back then.  And I just knew it was a terrible thing.  At the same time, I was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] in, at Attucks, and I was an officer.  I did a lot of marching up and down, and I had it in my mind that I was gonna go to the military, if for no other reason, but to get the G.I. Bill. [federal support for veterans' education, housing and business].
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had a good idea you were going to the service after high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, did it ever cross your mind you might be able to go to college without going to the service?
Speaker 2: I had--I had two scholarships offered to me from football.  Both of them were in the Deep South, and I wasn't prepared to go down there.  One of them was Tuskegee [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and the other one was some little school somewhere.  And I got another one up in Anderson, Indiana [Anderson University, Anderson, Indiana]--but I wanted to choose my own school.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your impression of the Deep South in those days was pretty dim?
Speaker 2: I guess I was getting some pretty scary stories of black and white fountains and people in the back of the bus and riots and hangings and so evidently, I had enough of that fed to me that I said, "I'm not gonna do that."
Story_ID: 3980
Speaker 1: You didn't wanna go South to school [college], and so the military seemed like a good option?
Speaker 2: A good option--and so I didn't follow up on some scholarships I was offered.
Speaker 1: Now, were you aware of some of the--now, there was a lot of turmoil in the military in terms of black soldiers in those days, and it seemed to be coming to a head [over the issue of integration]. Were you aware of some of the struggles?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I wasn't aware of a lot of the things going on in the military that were really bad.  The worst thing that I'd ever seen were, years later, which we'll get to later.  I knew that the [U.S.] Army was segregated.  I knew that I was going into a segregated black unit, and I knew that there had been some problems but the extent of those problems was not known to me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so I just thought I'd mention 'cause these are times of a lot of friction and transition in the Army, you know, a lot of--and all, and all the people I know, the World War II vets talk about that being the, as much a war for them as the war, you know.
Speaker 2: Not nearly as bad as '68 [1968] to '72 [1972].  We'll come to that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Okay, now, so--so when did you enlist and--and where did you go, first of all?
Speaker 2: I enlisted May the 19th, 1947, went to Fort Knox, Kentucky for processing and went to Fort Dix, New Jersey for basic training.
Speaker 1: Okay, well was, were you pretty much prepared for basic training?  You pretty much knew what it was gonna be like, having been in ROTC [Reserve Officers Training Corps] or--?
Speaker 2: Yes, I could stand at attention, turn right and left, fall in, and all those basic things, I knew.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, any incidents in basic training that--now you were with an all-black unit?
Speaker 2: All-black unit with mostly white officers.
Story_ID: 3981
Speaker 1: Fort Dix, New Jersey, you're there in 1947?
Speaker 2: 1947.
Speaker 1: Basic training, any, any stories about basic training that--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Six months.  I remember, the thing I remember the most is how tough one of the sergeants was, a Sergeant Smith.  And again, you remember the people who are the toughest, that taught you something.  And Sergeant Smith, he was an older fellow.  He must have been forty years old, which to us was old.  And we--we're all teenagers.  And he was tough, and he was good.  And I'm sure he caused--I don't think I was headed in the wrong direction, but I think he, he caused some of the guys that were headed in the wrong direction to get on, get on stream and be good citizens.
Speaker 1: So, where did you go after basic training?
Speaker 2: After basic training I went to an assignment right there on post in a place called Detachment Two--an administrative assignment.  One of the things I picked up at Crispus Attucks [High School, Indianapolis, Indiana] was how to type.  And so being a good typist, they found a place for me there working in the headquarters.  So I was typing and playing ball.
Speaker 1: Okay, baseball?
Speaker 2: Softball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And everything else.  I played everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when did the--or if I'm jumping ahead, stop me, but when did the idea to go to Officers Candidate School [sic, Officer Candidates School] hit you?
Speaker 2: I was quite good in the, in the softball arena, and I was hitting close to .500 [batting average].  So the white lieutenant colonel was the one that brought it up to me, and said, "We ought to send that, that kid to OCS [Officer Candidates School]" because that caused me to have visibility--the baseball.  And he's the one that brought it up and said, "I want you to apply for the OCS."  And I was a corporal then, I subsequently made sergeant.  But I was a corporal, and he said, you know, he said, "You're a good kid, and you're smart.  You know the fundamentals of being a soldier.  We think you'll make an officer."  And at that time, they had opened it up for non-college graduates.  A lot of times during my service, you couldn't go to OCS unless you were a college graduate.  So that element of luck and timing came into play right there, where they opened it up, someone was interested in me.  They gave me the application.  I took the test.  I scored high on the test and I was off.
Speaker 1: Okay, so where did you go to Officers' Candidate School?
Speaker 2: Fort Riley, Kansas.  I married [Doris Greene Brooks] before I went there though.
Story_ID: 3982
Speaker 1: Now, did you meet your [first] wife [Doris Greene Brooks] in--?
Speaker 2: In high school [Crispus Attucks High School, Indianapolis, Indiana].
Speaker 1: High school, okay.  So this is your, this, is it the same high school sweetheart or that you were gonna get married to when you were fifteen or is it somebody different?
Speaker 2: No, a different one.  When I say her mother shut her off, she shut her off.  I didn't see her again for two years or something.  But this one came from Georgia, from Atlanta, when we were juniors.  And I fell in love with her, and for some reason, she waited for me for eighteen months after I went into the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: That's a long time in those days.
Speaker 2: A long time period (laughs).
Speaker 1: When you're young, you know, eighteen months is a really a long time.  You know--
Speaker 2: So I went in the Army in May [May 19, 1947], and we married in October of the following year.  And I still don't know what she saw in me back then.  She certainly--and two stripes wouldn't do much for a family.  But she saw something, and--it turned out she was right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you went to Fort Riley, Kansas, you're married.  Do you have any children on the way at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was pregnant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was very much pregnant.  In fact, when she visited me, she was a big balloon there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--.
Speaker 2: Which inspired me to work even harder (laughs).
Story_ID: 3983
Speaker 1: Tell us about Officers' Candidate School [sic, Officer Candidates School, at Fort Riley, Kansas].  What was it like and did, in those days--now this is, this is an integrated situation I suppose, right?
Speaker 2: OCS [Officer Candidates School] was integrated.  It seemed to me we had about eleven or twelve--more than that--maybe, maybe a third or twenty percent of the--of the cadets that started.  And only a percentage of them graduated of, of the total class, were--were blacks.  But basically, it was integrated.  And some of the sergeants were, were redneck, but they didn't do things to bust us out of school, if we could do whatever they said whether it was impossible or not, if you could get it done.  We had some rednecks.  The interesting thing about that was one of those rednecks reported to me when I was a major general many years later (laughs), he walked in my office and saluted me and we had a chance to reminisce--but I, I'd forgiven, long forgiven him.  I didn't, I didn't do anything to him.
Speaker 1: When you say a redneck, what did he, I mean did they--?
Speaker 2: He was a prejudiced son of a gun.
Speaker 1: Did they use racial slurs and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No, they didn't come, come right out and use racial slurs, 'Boy', 'Boy'--if you can call that a racial slur, yeah.  They would use names like that.  You know, they try to bust out in OCS.  They, they are working to see if you'll break.  And so they're gonna put physically and mentally through a lot of torture to see who's tough enough to take it, regardless of color.  And then you add the color factor to it, and you can tell when you're getting the crappy end of the stick.  You just do it, and do it well, and do it so well that they say okay.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, is there anything memorable about OCS other than what you've said so far?
Speaker 2: It was tough.  OCS was tough.  It is not an easy road.  It's not a road I'd like to travel again, but I came through it in good order.  The classes requiring mental agility weren't too tough.  And again, I was an athlete.  I almost maxed the physical training portion of it--which helped me 'cause it gave me respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so you completed OCS in 1949, right?
Speaker 2: Completed OCS in 1949.  My first, second and third choice for a commissioning was infantry.  So the [U.S.] Army in its infinite wisdom sent me to Quartermaster Corps [African Americans were typically assigned to supply and service units.].  So I went off to Fort Lee.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, where is Fort Lee?
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh, oh, right, yeah, I guess it would be, now that I think about it.
Speaker 2: Yes, and that's where my boy [Harry William Brooks, III] was born, my firstborn.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so what was that like?  Quartermaster Corps is a traditional home for black units usually. Am I right?
Speaker 2: Back during the World War II, where they didn't believe that blacks could fight, they would stick them into stevedore companies and laundry companies and all sorts of companies like that.  And the Quartermaster Corps had most of those things.  And my first assignment awaiting schooling was in a company which--they put thirty-five black officers in that company with eighty black soldiers because they couldn't put the, the officers anywhere else and we really didn't have anything to do 'cause it was just too many officers and that was, that left a very bad taste in my mouth.  And I started to leave the Army then.  I said, this is, if this is what I got to go through life, it's--I don't want to do it.
Speaker 1: But it, now, you wrote a critique of the Army in terms of the racial--it was called, it was called the--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Many, many years later.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Talking about racial, racial unrest.
Speaker 1: You were talking about 'The Gathering Storm?' ['The Gathering Storm: An Analysis of Racial Instability within the Army', 1970]
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But okay, we'll get to that then, but what--so they have like, it's like having too many chiefs and not enough Indians, right, where you all are--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, and they didn't have anything to do, and then you had a captain who was half nuts who really wasn't fair to us, and he was a black guy too.  And he wasn't fair to us, and when your only--your only responsibility is to line up the beds in the morning and that's your job for the day and you said I didn't become an officer to do this.  I'm too good for this. But then after a few months of that, we went off to school.  And school was good, school was integrated and we learned a lot of things there and then they assigned me to go to [Kobe] Japan.
Story_ID: 3984
Speaker 1: Some people that we've interviewed that were officers in those days have discussed the schooling that they received and they tell us that they received an inordinate amount of schooling because the [U.S.] Army didn't know to know what to do with them so they kept training them, you know, did this happen to you?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, I don't doubt that.  That didn't happen to me.  Mine was a normal thing, you could--you'd come to basic training as an officer and then at some point, you get advanced training.  So after my basic training, I was sent off to an assignment in Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about that.  Now, you went to--?
Speaker 2: [U.S.] Army was still segregated.  We're now in 1950.  And I went to an all-black unit on Kobe, Japan, which primary job was to man the depot, the Kobe Army depot [Kobe Quartermaster Depot], a major--a major depot.  We had an east camp and a west camp.  The west camp was for the black soldiers and the east camp was for the white soldiers.  And they stayed segregated until maybe a year into the Korean War when the order came down that this doesn't make any sense.  We don't have enough people to keep up this, keep this up, and the [U.S.] President [Harry S. Truman] had already put out the order [Executive Order 9981] about integrate the Army in 1948.  And so we integrated the units and brought them together.  So east camp and the west camp became integrated.
Speaker 1: Now, well, how was that received by the soldiers, I mean how--what happened?
Speaker 2: As I recall, there wasn't much of a problem with that, you know, a sporadic incident here and there, but we were working hard down at the depot, sending things to Korea for the soldiers--actually, at one time, preparing for the soldiers to be kicked off the peninsula [the Korean Peninsula].  We were preparing the cots and everything else that the soldiers would need if they were--had to leave the Peninsula, and as you know, we almost had to do that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was by no means certain that they were gonna--?
Speaker 2: Prevail, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there were--did you hear stories of racial conflict in the Army in Korea and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure there were some.  The 24th Regiment was all black.  It was in Japan--very poorly trained, very poorly trained so it went over there and got smashed up, which you would expect if you're not trained.  You might as well send a mob over there.  They did, they just weren't well trained.  And there were obviously having racial incidents in Japan.  So it's obvious--evident that it would continue when they got over to Korea to some degree until a third threat came up, and that would be the enemy--the Chinese and the other people.  You--now then you start finding somebody who's gonna help you stay alive.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, so your job was really to supply the troops in--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, I was logistician during that, during that time.
Speaker 1: And what part of Japan were you stationed in?
Speaker 2: Kobe.
Speaker 1: Kobe, that's right, you said that.
Speaker 2: My baby [Larry V. Brooks] was born in Osaka [Japan].  My baby died in Osaka, which is about thirty miles from Kobe.  Kobe is known for that major earthquake that took there a couple of years ago.
Speaker 1: Okay, is that--where is that in relationship to say, Tokyo [Japan] or--?
Speaker 2: About three hundred miles south, typhoon country.
Speaker 1: Now, a lot of black troops were stationed on Okinawa [Japan]--at one point.  Is that near Kobe?
Speaker 2: No, that's maybe a two or three hour flight from Japan.  It's part of, it's part of Japan now.
Speaker 1: It's an island over there.
Speaker 2: It's an island, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, well--?
Speaker 2: Now, they really had some problems over there, racial problems.  We'll talk about that down the line.  I had to go over there to investigate some things.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, take us through this now--your career as an officer.  What happened next?
Speaker 2: Okay, I stayed in Japan, and I left because my son died.  And we brought him back to Indianapolis [Indiana] to bury him--and they assigned me to--.
Speaker 1: This was your second child, right?
Speaker 2: This is child number two.
Story_ID: 3985
Speaker 1: They assigned me to Fort Sill, Oklahoma.  I'm still in the Quartermaster Corps.  And, of course, I'm in the South.  And I was assigned to the base quartermaster, and put in charge the laundry and the commissary.  And my boss was a Southern colonel that couldn't pronounce Negro to save his soul (laughs).  And it was "Negra" from the--he couldn't.  I mean he couldn't if you put a gun to his head, he couldn't pronounce Negro.  But he had a good heart and he was fair to me.  He died, and I gave him a blood transfusion, and we developed a good relationship--old Southern colonel from Waycross, Georgia, Colonel William O. (unclear).  I'll never forget him.  So I stayed with the Quartermaster there from '52 [1952] until about '55 [1955] when I applied to transfer to the artillery, a major and important move in my career.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And after they sent me again to school to learn the basics of being an artilleryman they sent me to Germany.  And I served as a battery commander in the 519 Field Artillery and started a string of my units being number one.  So I commanded that battery, which was an integrated battery.  And then I left there and was transferred--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Well, wait a minute, before we leave that, how did you make your units number one?  I mean what were some--how did you do it?  I mean that is a--people just don't happen on number one.  They, there's a way they do it.
Speaker 1: No, because I, I can give you a truism.  If I walk through a training area, and I look to the right and I see soldiers out of uniform and trash on the ground and tents not erected right and guns not cleaned and I look on the left and everything is almost perfect, the guns are cleaned, the soldiers are in uniform.  Everybody has their nametag, saluting is going on.  If I take the commanders of those units and change them and come back in a week, or two, A would become B, B would become A.  It's the leadership that makes the difference, and the leader sets the standard.  I never blame a soldier for something that goes wrong.  It's his leader that causes the problem.  Now, my units were good, and number one 'cause I set high standards.  I worked them to death and they were always number one.  And soldiers like to be number one.  They like competition.  I always pushed sports, and I would plays sports with them.  I pushed education, for them.  I kept them busy and I set standards of discipline.  I hate to use this analysis, but I have to.  Soldiers are like children.  If you don't set some rules down, they'll run wild.  So you say, "We're gonna have a formation at eight o'clock.  I want your butt in here, in the formation.  And if it's not, you're gonna pay."  And once that sinks in, you don't have anybody missing formations.  You say, "We're gonna, we're gonna run this particular formation until we get it right."  It's just like football.  "We're gonna run this formation until we get it right."  And then you hold your chain of command responsible.  So if I see a soldier out of uniform, the first person I want to get my hands on is his sergeant.  And then to sweeten the pot, I get ahold of his captain and ask him the question, "If I have to come down here and straighten up this mess, what the hell I need you for?"  And they get the message.  And then those lower ranks start functioning.  And when they start functioning, units start straightening up, discipline is good.  And then when you have inspections and then if you got the experience to get them through the inspection and come out with high scores and then give out awards.  Awards are important.  You'd be surprised what a little bitty streamer will do if you put it on a guide arm for a company, that says 'Best Battery'.  That means a lot, and we they come up with little trick things like the, the 'Smug Bastards Cup'.  And we have a--some crisis come up like an inspection--the unit that wins becomes the 'Smug Bastards'.  Little things like that build morale, and morale is--high morale is contagious and standards are contagious and it's unusual, you don't have people going AWOL [Absent WithOut Leave].  If somebody see you, "What are you doing going AWOL in my unit, and messing up our record?"  It, it really is, it's, it's an art, I guess.  And then you got to have good people.  Obviously, a commander can't do a damn thing by himself, so you got to have good sergeants and, and good lieutenants, and if you don't have good ones, you got to get rid of those and bring some others in that can play the game.  But you do permit mistakes.  You can't go around saying "No mistakes."  A unit that makes no mistakes is not doing anything.  My units were always good.
Speaker 2: Okay, well, that's a good, you know, I'm, I'm glad we did that 'cause it clarifies how this is done because it's not a--it's one thing to say they became number one.  It was another to say how it was done.
Story_ID: 3986
Speaker 1: When I was a colonel, we had--I had five units, five battalions, six hundred men each [in 72nd Field Artillery Group] and there was another group that had five battalions, six hundred men each, and this was all large artillery, sergeants, Honest John [artillery rocket capable of delivering a nuclear warhead], eighty inches and so forth.  A very complex formula about grading the effectiveness in the unit, annual general inspection, technical inspections, Army tests, dah, dah, dah dah.  My units came out, one, two, three, four, five--no, one, two, three, four and six.  And I wasn't happy about that, 'cause I wanted it one, two, three, four and five, but imagine how this guy [the other group commander] felt when all my units were coming up high because I was able to take those young lieutenant colonels that were commanding those units and teach them the lessons.  I remember I went down to Colin Powell's unit when he was working for me [Brooks was Assistant Division Commander of the 2nd Infantry Division in Korea] , and said, "Let me go over some of the tricks of the trade."  He was having some problems with racial disturbance.  And I said, "Let me--let me go over some of the tricks of the trade with you, that experience has taught me."  And he listened, and he followed them, and he came out just fine.
Speaker 2: What did you tell him?
Speaker 1: The first things I told him was to ignore some of this foolishness like, the dashikis after hours.  People were making a big deal out of dashikis after hours.  I said, "Who cares about the dashikis?  Let them wear the damn dashikis."  Slave bracelets, they were wearing the slave bracelets.  I said, "After hours, I wouldn't give a damn what they did as long as they don't get in trouble.  Colin, don't fight that battle."  And then, set the standards of discipline.  You're gonna have one or two bad apples in there.  Find them and cut their throats and get them out of there.  Get those sergeants functioning and your unit's gonna be fine.  And he commanded the First [Battalion] of the 32nd Infantry, as I remember.  And he didn't need a lot of help from me.  He just needed somebody's shoulder to cry on when those soldiers were going wild.  And I provided that.  He did fine.
Story_ID: 3987
Speaker 1: The time period you're describing is--sounds like late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], maybe but the--late '60s [1960s], I guess with the, when they started wearing dashikis and slave bracelets and that sort of stuff, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this all happened--the bad times happened starting with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] being assassinated in '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Well, now, where were you at this time and what were you in charge of and tell me about the situation?
Speaker 2: I had moved to the Army General Staff, and I was working on the Army General Staff in doctrines.
Speaker 1: What--what rank were you then?
Speaker 2: I was a lieutenant colonel.  When I was a major I went off to Command General Staff College [U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, Fort Leavenworth, Kansas] , and then I went to reserve units, supervising reserve units up in New York.  Then I went to the Army General Staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where--?
Speaker 2: It was '68 [1968].
Speaker 1: Okay, where were you in '68 [1968]?
Speaker 2: In '68 [1968] I was on the Army General Staff.
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: Working--at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And I was working in doctrine, and my job specifically was the doctrinal part of developing a gun ship, and working on gun ships.  So tributes (CHECK THIS OUT! ??? please listen to this, something Units?) were the furthest thing from my mind back then.  But the--I knew they were having problems.  The serious problems started right after King was assassinated.  I went off to the Army War College [U.S. Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania] in '69 [1969], graduated in '70 [1970], was offered a job go to West Point [United States Military Academy at West Point, West Point, New York] to become the first black regimental commander, whatever the hell that is.  That's active Army, not, not a cadet, or to take command of the field artillery group.  The emba--emissary that came to see me about that said, "Harry, you have a choice."  I had been promoted to colonel.  And I said, "Okay, suppose I go to West Point and do this social thing, and I know we're gonna do well because I'm dealing with cadets.  I'm not gonna have Snuffy up there acting a fool on me.  Do I still have to come out and get a, a line unit as a colonel to be considered for promotion?"  And he said, "I'm afraid so."  I said, "That makes my answer easy as hell.  I'll pass the history making, social thing.  I'll go on over to Europe, the 72nd Field Artillery Group.  Snuffy's over there acting a damn fool.  I'll get him squared away and have fun over there."  That was a key decision in my, in my promotion.
Speaker 1: Now, when you refer to 'Snuffy', you're talking about?
Speaker 2: Average soldier (laughs).
Speaker 1: Snuffy Smith [referring to the comic strip 'Barney Google and Snuffy Smith'].
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs).
Story_ID: 3988
Speaker 1: So, it was the Army War College [The United States Army War College, Carlisle, Pennsylvania] 1969 to '70 [1970].  All right, and you--?
Speaker 2: Interesting thing about the Army War College is that there were only two blacks at the Army War College--and that was the largest contingent they'd ever had up 'til '70 [1970]. Two.
Speaker 1: Who was the other one?
Speaker 2: Jim Hamlet, [Major General James F. Hamlet] one of the major general--He's deceased now, Commander of the 5th Division at Fort Carson. The numbers are much greater now but again, those are those early days of breaking trails, showing that we could do those things and do them and do them well.
Speaker 1: Now, how many Generals were in the Army in those days?  I would guess Benjamin O. Davis was--?
Speaker 2: Benjamin O. Davis was 1945 [sic, Benjamin O. Davis, Sr. was promoted to Brig. General in 1940.]. The next promotion was 1968.  And that was General Fred Davison. It takes a number of years to build a general officer.  In 1972, five colonels were selected for promotion.  And that, that made every newspaper in the country because it was an unusual number, because up--I was the sixth ever.  There were just not that many back then.
Speaker 1: So you were sixth black general ever?
Speaker 2: Ever.
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, okay.  That's--that's--that's something.
Speaker 2: See, most of the things we've done, we're the first at, you know, first to command a division at this location, first to be in this job at the Army General Staff, first to command a full artillery group.  Most of the things we've done, we were the first.  And--it's a stepping stone.  If the fellow before me has done well, it makes it easier for them to assign me to it because the expectations are there.  So if I do well, then--since I left the 25th Division two other blacks have commanded it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's--now he wasn't big then, but now he is, Colin Powell, now when did you meet him?
Speaker 2: When I left--when I was promoted--I was made the assistant division commander of the 2nd Infantry Division in Korea.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so this is '72 [1972] when you meet Colin Powell.
Speaker 2: In '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay, so that --?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Only I think he came in '73 [1973].
Story_ID: 3989
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell us about this position [ Director of Equal Opportunity and Race Relations] at the Pentagon [Virginia, near Washington, D.C.] and what happened?
Speaker 2: Race relations and equal opportunity.  The [U.S.] Army was in total turmoil.  We had riots--and not just the Army--all Services.  And the newspapers missed this, but we had riots going on all over the world: Okinawa [Japan], Travis [Air Force Base, Fairfield, California], Hawaii [Fort Shafter, Hawaii], the posts down south--this--it was just a terrible situation.  The Army was about to lose its capability to defend the country.  It was that bad.
Speaker 1: Now, you said before we got on--oh, I know what it was.  In the last reel, you were saying that it was the assassination of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] that really set a lot of things off.
Speaker 2: That started the riots in the cities.
Speaker 1: Now, this is--?
Speaker 2: And those same people that were in the riots in city were coming into the Army.  So the phenomena follows--in a year or two, that phenomena comes right into the Army.
Speaker 1: Now, what made the difference?  Do you think it was the attitude of the new black soldiers that made a difference?
Speaker 2: Hostile. Great amount of hostility, didn't trust anybody, all kind of new things were popping.  Again, we--the haircut policy, dashikis, slave bracelets, soldiers segregating themselves in the mess hall, off-post riots, soldiers having the black area in a town and the white area in a town, like in Okinawa and, and Korea.  It was an awful situation.  We had almost a sit-down strike at West Point [United States Military Academy at West Point, West Point, New York] because the number of black cadets had grown from eight graduates to a hundred and seventy-eight cadets.  And these cadets came in asking questions like, "Where are the pictures of the black soldiers.  There are no pictures and no statues.  It's like we've never served."  I mean they were--they came in with a certain amount of hostility.  I had to go up to West Point to quell what was starting to be a riot at West Point.  And when I--in my position as Director of Equal Opportunity and Race Relations.
Speaker 1: Now, to put this historical perspective.  One of the first black students at West Point, and I forget his name right now.  I know Henry O. Flipper came out of West Point [as the first black graduate] but this was a man, I think before Flipper.  I think--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I remember Flipper.  And I know who you're talking about.  I can't think of the name. [Johnson C. Whittaker who entered the USMA in 1876]
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) It's a man who was beaten, had his ear cut off and then charged with doing it to himself, and dismissed from West Point.  I mean he was the only one there, and, you know, this is--well, I'm just trying to say this is--so, now all of a sudden, you've got a hundred and forty-eight black people, and it seems like the numbers make a difference in terms of--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) And, and we had the same problems.  People were saying, "Well, what's the haircut policy?  This white guy can wear his hair that long, and it's flat.  I'm gonna wear my hair that long, and it's up here.  How come I can't do that?"  And, again, "Where are the pictures?"  It was a big thing.  "Where are the pictures and the statues of blacks?"  So I had to go up there with a three-star general and talk to these people and get them calmed down.
Story_ID: 3990
Speaker 1: So what did you tell them?
Speaker 2: Number one, I told (laughs) them, "We gonna cut your throat if you don't get yourself organized."  See, I, I--I'm a disciplinarian.  And the first thing I'm gonna tell you, "You gotta stay within the rules.  If you don't stay within the rules, you're gonna get in trouble.  And we not gonna miss you when you get marched to the stockade.  Now, if you understand that, let's starting dealing with your grievances.  What are your grievances?"  Most of the grievances are small.  Again, "Why can't I wear this slave bracelet after hours?"  And I told the commandant, "Let them wear the slave bracelets after hours.  Who cares?"  As long as they--when the formation takes place, they are in West Point [U.S. Military Academy at West Point, West Point, New York] uniforms.  And, you know, little things like that.  Anyway, we got it calmed down.
Speaker 1: Okay, just a matter of--?
Speaker 2: Communicating with them.  And somebody's listening to me.  You know, these guys were very aggressive at that time, throughout the Army.  Somebody's listening to me, and then there was an attitude among many general officers in the Army back then that the solution was to put the bad guys in jail, and that's all.  You know, my, my solution also was to put a bad in guy in jail, but I had tried everything else that I could because I know that a lot of young soldiers--are followers and if you can cut the head off and keep these young people from running out there getting in trouble, they won't go to jail.  That's why I didn't have anybody in jail.  I had--actually had a period of time--I had--out of 15,000 soldiers--I didn't one person in the stockade.
Speaker 1: But anyway, going back to the race relations and so forth--I [as U.S. Army Director of Race Relations and Equal Opportunity ] organized a general officers' committee consisting of the general officers from each of the staff sections of the Army General Staff.  I'm still a colonel.  So I was the executive director, and my boss who was the three-star general, would get the information.  This committee met and started looking at what policies did we have that's causing this problem?  One of the policies that we had was that we were sending these soldiers--black soldiers--into soft-skill jobs.  And so you tell the computer--"Where are the black soldiers?"  And you look over there and you see truck drivers and ditch diggers and labor-type things and they're massed up there.  We said, well, "Tell me about what's going on over here in the hard skills."  And you have computers, survey, things of that nature.  Then you tell the computer, "Based upon the requirements and the qualifications, are there enough black soldiers in the Army to fill those slots?"  Run the computer, and you know what the computer said?  "They're there.  You're just not doing something right."  And so we started changing policy [in May, 1971] to move black soldiers--qualifying black soldiers into those jobs.  And we did something that somebody would say was wrong.  For example, if there was a requirement for eleven to go into one of those jobs, we would arbitrarily tell the computer, "The first eight that are assigned are black. Find people with high scores--good records and put them in those jobs."  And that goes on.  But you see, the soldier doesn't know that we're doing all that.  He's still restless out there.  He doesn't know, that's the equal opportunity side of the house.  Then--now they've got this race relations, and then you've got these noncommissioned officers who had no idea what they're doing--we had these general officers and these other officers who don't really understand the--the phenomenon and dynamics of what's going on.  So we had to set up training for them to understand the race relation problem.  And we established--the DOD [Department of Defense] established a race relations institute down in Florida and started sending people down there to get training.  We required that each brigade-level unit have a race relations person, preferably a rather senior NCO [noncommissioned officer] or officer to advise the commander on how to deal with dynamics of what was going on in that unit.  And so we did that throughout the Army.
Story_ID: 3991
Speaker 1: Now, I remember, I recall in the early '70s [1970s]--a riot on an aircraft carrier that was publicized quite a bit in the [U.S.] Navy.  And they hired a, and it was like--this was in the media too a lot--.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) I remember.
Speaker 1: Dr. Charles King was a psychologist and race relations specialist that was hired to, you know, ameliorate the situation and do crisis counseling, you know, around culture diversity in the Navy.  Did you have anybody like that in the Army?
Speaker 2: We had a lot of them.  There was a guy--I forget his name--that wrote a book about this--he's still writing about the problems of race relations in the Army.  I forget his name right now, but he was an expert.  We were bringing in consultants. Excuse me.  We had a general officers' training.  We had to bring our general officers in and train them as to what was going on and what do about it.  And then an affirmative action plan.  And this committee had to pass on the affirmative action plan which my office wrote.  And a such thing as putting a minority on each board because the troops were complaining about promotions.  And the record backed them up.  They weren't fair.  We'd look at the number of people going to the stockade and look at similar offenses between whites and blacks--they both do exactly the same thing--the black goes to the stockade, these other kids gets, gets administrative punishment.  And so you have to talk to commanders about, you've got to watch this sort of stuff 'cause troops see it, and they're furious.
Speaker 1: Now, is this about the time that you wrote the book--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I wrote that in the [U.S. Army] War College [Carlisle, Pennsylvania].  I wrote that with--a white officer--Bill [sic, James M. Miller]--I'll think of his name.  We made that our thesis in the Army and we went back and--and dealt with some of these problems of--apparel, punishment.  We ran the gauntlet on it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, the book was called?
Speaker 2: 'The Gathering Storm: The Study of Race Relations in the Army' [sic, 'The Gathering Storm: An Analysis of Racial Instability within the Army'].
Speaker 1: 'Racial Instability'--,
Speaker 2: 'In the Army', yeah--1970.  It's outdated now--still got some fairly good points--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--?
Speaker 2: Anyway, I was--I was very lucky to come out of that with my skin because it's not a popular position.  Many of the things I recommended, general, many general officers disagreed with.  "We don't need that, we don't need these race relations people here in our unit."  Chain of command will take care of it.  Well, I believe in chain of command.
Speaker 1: Well, you know what they say, you know, people always say that the police department is the toughest culture to change, but I imagine the Army--I mean, is probably just as tough, you would guess?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not as tough to the extent that when we say, "Get something done," we can get it done.  Now, if I tell--if I say, "Tomorrow we're gonna run five miles.  I want everybody with a red sock on their right foot and a white sock on their left foot," that's what I'm gonna get.  Well, even the police department can't get that kind of discipline.  And if I say, "In the mess hall, I don't want this segregated bullshit, I want you guys to come in, and as you come in, take a seat.  I don't want the hovering over there in the corner."  And after they realize you mean what you say, and they do it, and the guys get to know each other, and then things start to settle out.  But it takes strong leadership.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, was there a lot of backlash, you know, about, you know, from the white officers and the enlisted men?
Speaker 2: I would say there was some backlash.  But most of them were saying, you know, "Well, what the hell is going on?"  They just were puzzled.  The superintendent of West Point [United States Military Academy] didn't have a clue what was going on.  So he was like this.  You mean, "Well, what can I do?  What am I supposed to do with this problem?"  So it wasn't so much the backlash.  It was just saying, "Somebody educate me on the this phenomena that's going on with these soldiers."  And were able to, able to make some progress on that.
Story_ID: 3992
Speaker 1: Let me go back to the 2nd [Infantry] Division [in Korea, where he served as Assistant Division Commander from 1972-1974].  I had three black colonels that became lieutenant generals or higher that reported to me.  And two of them were at my retirement party at the Freedom Forum in January . And then there were, I've had five, I've had five black officers who have become lieutenant generals or above that worked for me, and I'm very proud of that.  I, I would like to think that some of my style or some of my philosophy or something that I did, rubbed off--a little bit of it--on them.
Speaker 2: It's probably more than likely (laughs).
Speaker 1: A little bit.
Speaker 2: All right, give us their names.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna have to think about that a minute.  We'll catch it after this next tape--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) 'Cause Colin Powell was one of them, right?
Speaker 1: Well, Colin was one of them.  Hank [Henry] Doctor is another.  He commanded the 25th--he commanded the 2nd Division.
Speaker 2: This is 1972 in Korea, right, 2nd--2nd Infantry?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, the 25th Division, it was--let's catch this on the next tape; give me a chance to think about those names.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Hank Doctor was in the 25th [Division].  He went on to become the IG of the Army [Army Inspector General], and then there was another one also who went on to become the Controller of the Army, and then another went on to command the 5th U.S. Army.  I'll think of the names in a minute.
Story_ID: 3993
Speaker 1: Well, tell me about your promotion to brigadier general?
Speaker 2: That's a tough, (laughs), that's a row to hoe.  They picked sixty-two out of four thousand.  And a board meets for thirty days, consisting of fifteen general officers and they deliberate.  They normally break down into three groups of five, and they select and come up with a list of two hundred, each of the five groups.  Any person that's on the--in the first fifty or something of the two hundred--if they're on all three lists, they're in.  After that, you start going through the voting process again.  You, you get their records and you have to rate them on a scale of one to six--and this is a long, hard process.  I was--I was on a board myself in '75 [1975] to select general officers.  And it's important to have a minority on the board.  My board, for example, [African American] General [Fred] Davison was on the board.  And I don't know whether this came up or not, but it could well have been that somebody looked at my record and said, "Well, what about when this guy was a laundry officer back there in Fort Lee [Virginia] in '49 [1949].  He wasn't doing anything."  And the minority general has to stand up and say, "He wasn't given any opportunity to do anything.  Have you thought about that?  There were no assignments for them back then.  They couldn't command battalions.  They couldn't do anything so you've got to kind of just wipe that part of their career away and start considering them after they had a chance to compete."  So that's one of the reasons we put minority officers on that--on those boards, to tell the story--that the others didn't know.  And, and the white officers would say, "I didn't know that."  And then they understand you.  They say, "I had no idea those things were going on.  I never thought about it."
Speaker 1: Well, it seems incredible that they would never think of it, but it's true, though.  There are a lot of people don't, because they're--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) I understand they wouldn't think about it cause they, it's not in their, it's not in their scope.
Speaker 1: It's not in their world, right.
Speaker 2: That's right.  So that's the story of the affirmative action plans and the very interesting race relations assignment [Director of Race Relations and Equal Opportunity].  And then I was promoted, along with these five--four other guys.  I was sent off to be an assistant division commander [of the 2nd Infantry Division, in Korea] , and that's when I ran into [Colin] Powell and, and the others.  And then I stayed over there--I got hung up there because of the Watergate [scandal, with White House staffers testifying before Congress and presidential impeachment proceedings looming]. I was supposed to be over there for thirteen months.  A Board had selected me for promotion to major general, but they couldn't get our names through the White House because of the Watergate scandal.  So that caused me to stay in Korea an extra five months because I had been selected for promotion, which couldn't be announced because it hadn't been approved yet, 'cause it hadn't gone to the White House.  And I had been selected to command the 25th Division, which couldn't be announced.  So I stayed over in Korea seventeen months.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--did you--you became the commander of the 25th Division in what, '74 [1974]?
Speaker 2: '74 [1974].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a brigadier. Because they still hadn't released those names for the promotion to major general (laughs).  So they had to play a little game.  They, they put me in there saying--called me the acting commander.  And then I kept--I took command in May.  The Watergate thing cleared up and allowed it to go through in August.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--August of '74 [1974], you become--(simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I put--I was still commanding, but I only had one star.  They hadn't put the second star on.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you become a major general--?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --in '74 [1974].  Okay, now, tell us about, what is the 25th Infantry Division so we have some idea of the scope of what we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Okay, 25th Infantry is one of, I guess at that time we had twelve divisions.  A division is the fighting arm of the United States consisting of infantry, artillery, aviation, engineer and all the support elements.  You normally have in a division, 16,000 men.  At that time, it was men.  Later on, we had women come in, but in the 15,000 soldiers--our job at the 25th Division was to be prepared to move anywhere in the Pacific to take up arms as directed.  Therefore, we were all essentially, always on--essentially, on alert to move.  And I had troops going to Korea, going to Japan, going to Australia, coordinating and training with them for the possibility we would have to move out and fight.  Now, when the 25th went to Korea during the Korean War, they went from [Fort Shafter] Hawaii.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were stationed in Hawaii?
Speaker 2: Hawaii, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And when they went, they were poorly trained.  A lot of men were killed because they weren't trained and that wasn't gonna happen on my watch.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you sharpened up that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes (laughs). Oh yes. We had a good division.  We were considered the best division in the Army--best trained.
Story_ID: 3994
Speaker 1: Well tell us about your, your period of time in charge of the 25th [Infantry Division, U.S. Army]?
Speaker 2: It was a wonderful--the 25th was a wonderful assignment, but somebody has to do that over there in [Fort Shafter] Hawaii, but again, you have maneuvers going on all the time.  You have to train them.  You have heavy physical training.  I made everybody run three miles every morning, and I ran with them.  It--it's a--it's a great thing, and I really pushed education.  One of the things I'm most proud of--when I went to the 25th--we had a, a good education program in Korea, but when I went to the 25th where I was the head cheese, I called in the education officer.  And we said, you know, "I want 10,000 soldiers going to school within the next four months."  And he looked at me like I'd lost my last mind.  He said, "Sir, do you know what you're saying?  Where are the classrooms?  Where are the teachers?"  I said, "That's your problem.  I want these soldiers in school, and I want no drop-off on the training, which means we got to find a way to do this, at night or on the weekend, in the mess hall or whatever is necessary."  We ended up with 10,000 people going to school.  And one of the things I'm most proud of is I received a--an award from the public school system in, in Hawaii congratulating me for 1,542 soldiers graduating from high school.  And I had 400 soldiers with either bachelor degrees or associate degrees.  And we didn't miss one step on their training.  It wasn't easy, but once you get--see, I'm a boot-strapper myself.  I went to school at night for twelve, fourteen years.  But once you get into the habit of doing your job and going to school and you realize that it's going to enhance your life, you can get in with the program.  And those soldiers did.  I'm real--I'm really proud of that, that award.
Speaker 1: Well, that's really a significant story, you know--probably changed the lives of a lot of people.
Speaker 2: Oh, it changed the life of a lot of them.  And a lot of those soldiers getting their high school degree were black.  And the interesting thing about the black soldiers is that they always watched, they're always watching.  And I could be coming--see, I had a helicopter right outside the--my headquarters.  And when I'd go out to go somewhere, there's a whole bunch of soldiers standing by saluting and so forth, and you could see the black soldiers over there, hitting each other, see. That calms them down too.  That's another thing that calms them down, knowing that there's somebody like them in charge--but they know they can't take advantage of it.  So, and I was very proud of them, my soldiers, 'cause they didn't really--they didn't act up on me.  They knew better.
Speaker 1: And that's something.  I heard a story once from a historian who was on an airplane and, yeah, and they were all going to history conferences, several black historians on the airplane, and the pilot came out to say, to greet everybody.  It was a black pilot, and he, he told this story with tears in his eyes, you know, about how much that meant to them to see--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that black airline pilot walk out there.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) That's right.
Speaker 1: I mean they'd never seen that before.
Speaker 2: That's right.  I remember when I saw my first one.  And I said, "All right.  We're getting there."
Speaker 1: I guess a similar kind of a--experience here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're getting there.
Speaker 1: How did feel? I mean--did you feel about being a role model for, you know, so many?
Speaker 2: I thought it was my obligation to set an example for them, and they knew I cared.  I actually--when you asked me favorite saying? I had a sign over my door saying "I give a damn", and I had an open-door policy.  If you really got a problem, a serious problem, come see me.  I will be in my office, such and such a night from 6:00 [pm] to 8:00 [pm].  You're a private, and you got a serious--don't come up with any bullshit.  If you got a serious, serious problem that cannot be resolved by the chain of command, come on up to the office.  You will get to see me.  So opened up that communication, but I'm also telling the commanders, "If you have these people come here, and they know they're free to come up there 'cause they know, and they know me, and it's a problem you should have solved, your ass is grass.  Find out that soldier's problem.  Talk to your soldiers.  Ask them what's bothering them and fix it!"
Story_ID: 3995
Speaker 1: What were the significant events of your tenure as head of the 25th Infantry [Division, at Fort Shafter, Hawaii]?
Speaker 2: Well, there were no worldwide things going on.  Again, I sent a lot of troops all over the Far East.  And I traveled to see them--Australia.  I was told I was the first major general to go to certain parts of Australia--American, American major general.  See their, their highest-ranking officer is a major general, one.
Speaker 1: Now, we had just pulled out of Vietnam, right?  And, then,  we pulled out in '74 [1974], '75 [1975] about that time.
Speaker 2: About then, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--did that like--I know it was some uncertainty about what we were gonna do.  I think Cambodia was having a lot of problems--?
Speaker 2: Well, I would get intelligence briefings every morning, and they would assess how hot things were gonna be.  I always had to have a unit training to leave.  So they're out there taking shots and doing other things that get them ready to go but the rest of it was just tough training.  And I, and I would get a briefing from every brigade and three battalions on a quarterly basis.  And I used to use competition to the max.  Competition is a wonderful thing.  That's the same thing I did when I was captain.  I'd always have some, some way to recognize and make those guys work hard to achieve the highest standards possible.  It was a fun command.  If I had been offered command of the 2nd Division--and people were talking about that--that would have made me stay away from my family for thirty months.  I probably would not have taken that one.  That would have been where I would have drawn the line.  I love command, but I also love my wife [Doris Green Brooks] and my children [Harry W. Brooks III, Wayne L. Brooks, Craig E. Brooks], although they would have let them come over to Seoul [South Korea], and I would have had to stay up at Camp Casey [Tongduchon, South Korea], which is north of there.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that's--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The 25th Division was a good division.
Speaker 1: Now, that's probably the hottest place then, I guess, in Korea at that point, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Korea is tough, is a tough place.  And you're right up against, you're right up on DMZ [Demilitarized Zone] with your troops.  My son was stationed up there once, at one time too.  One of the Jims [probably referring to Lt. General James R. Hall or Lt. General James F. McCall, both of whom served under Brooks as colonels] was up there also (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay, so now, so you were in, you were the commander of the 25th until when?
Speaker 2: I retired in '76 [1976].
Story_ID: 3996
Speaker 1: I was recruited to be vice president of the largest Fortune 500 company there,  Amfac, Inc. [later, Amfac/JMB Hawaii, Inc.]  And--.
Speaker 2: This is in Hawaii, right?
Speaker 1: In Hawaii.  And I stayed there with Amfac until '80 [1980], and Amfac moved me to San Francisco [California].  And I was promoted to executive vice president, and as far as we know, I was the first [African American] executive vice president of a Fortune 500 company, and became chairman of the horticulture group [of Amfac].  And then in '84 [1984], me and two colleagues bought out one of the divisions, a leveraged buyout, a major leveraged buyout.  In other words, we put up two hundred and fifty thousand dollars and borrowed sixteen million dollars, and that is leverage--kept that company until '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Now, what's the name of this company?
Speaker 1: Advanced Consumer Marketing [Corporation] was the umbrella company.  And Gurney's Seed and Nursery, [Gurney's Seed and Nursery Company] which is a hundred, was a 137 year old nursery company out in South Dakota, was the company we bought we from Amfac.  So I left Amfac and became an entrepreneur.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you did this until 1989?
Speaker 1: When we sold--I sold the company to, to the management.  In the meantime, we had formed a computer company, and we became the largest minority IBM [International Business Machines Corp.] dealer.  And I have to say, I barely got out of that one with my skin.
Speaker 2: Now, what happened there?  I mean, you know?
Speaker 1: When dealing with computers, number one, in order to get the discount that we were getting, you have to buy fifty--or five thousand IBMs a year.  Now, you get these IBMs and the, the technology is changing every six months.  So you got these things sitting in the warehouse becoming obsolete all the time.  Then if you start having problems with the customers, like a downturn at the university or something, it becomes a raging nightmare.  And so I did get out of that one 'cause I'd got--I had to put up a personal, we had to put up our personal guarantee on these things.  And I--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Now, you were, now correct me if I'm wrong, but I think that from the time period you're describing in the mid '90s [1990s], I guess, early to--,
Speaker 1: Late '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: --late '80s [1980s], IBM was going through, I think IBM hadn't really produced the Windows edition until the mid '90s [1990], right?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Was this the, this the period that you were involved in this business?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: 'Cause the technology was really changing fast.
Speaker 1: Technology was changing.  And I looked around, and I had several million dollars of inventory that wasn't worth a nickel.  So IBM also was giving--I was supposed to have the highest discount possible which is what we call a Level C.  But IBM quietly was giving a greater discount to the ComputerLand [retail store] and a couple of others that I was competing against for these bids.  So I'd go in there bone low, and get my brains bashed out.  And I said that's not possible.  These companies can't be selling at a loss.  So we discovered what they were doing.  And there was a suit threatened.  And then they were happy to take those obsolete son-of-a-guns out of my warehouse (laughs) because I was gonna sue them for everything I could.  So anyway, we got out of that one all right.  I had branches in Atlanta [Georgia], San Francisco [California], Los Angeles [California] and--where else did we have?--Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: And what did you call the business?
Speaker 1: That was Advanced Consumer Comp--Advance Consumer Marketing was the umbrella company for both the horticulture and the Western Computer Group, which was located in San Mateo, California.  We were number twelve on the, the list of our black magazine.  What's the name of our top black [business] magazine?
Speaker 2: 'Black Enterprise'?
Speaker 1: 'Black Enterprise'.  We were up to fifty-three million dollars and then we were recognized as the Minority Company of the Year by the [U.S.] Department of Commerce.  And that was in 1989.  And we were the 'Black Enterprise' Company of the Year in either '89 [1989] or '90 [1990].
Speaker 2: That's something, that's remarkable.
Speaker 1: So we were breaking trail and giving a lot of people jobs.  (Pause) But we got out all right.
Speaker 2: Okay, so when did you leave the computer business?
Speaker 1: I closed down all those businesses and exited in about '94 [1994].  And then I've been a consultant since then, and that simply means being on boards of directors.  Consulting is an IRS [Internal Revenue Service] word.
Story_ID: 3997
Speaker 1: And I was on the board of the Freedom Forum for twenty-five years.  And that's a--that was a major board.
Speaker 2: Okay, now what's Freedom Forum do?
Speaker 1: Freedom Forum was a billion-dollar foundation dedicated to free press, free speech and free spirit and it has a 'Newseum' [in Arlington, Virginia], which we closed two years ago in order to open up a 'New Newseum', [in Washington, D.C.] right on Constitution Avenue in 2007.  It's gonna be a two hundred and fifty million dollar technological marvel.
Speaker 2: Yeah now the Newseum, explain what the Newseum is.  I've heard about it before, but for people who are listening--.
Speaker 1: It's a museum, a museum dedicated to news.  You'll get in there, and you'll see the first typewriter, and you'll see a picture of when this lady was electrocuted and they took a picture of her they weren't supposed to take it.  You'll see front pages from all over the world.  You'll see the Berlin Wall [Berlin, Germany], and you'll see--things that relate to the news.
Speaker 2: Okay, so it's a museum of news-related materials.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and then you have a lot of interactive stuff that the kids can do and, and grown ups.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: They had it, offices on, in--all over the world at one time, London, Africa, South America.  We closed those when the, when the market went bad on us two or three years ago, we went--we lost about three hundred million [dollars].  And that sobered us up fast.  We had to shrink.
Story_ID: 3998
Speaker 1: What are some of your hope and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Hopes and concerns.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I am pleased at the advancements that are being taken now that many of our young people take for granted.  They're moving into the ranks.  I see a lot of vice presidents.  I see a lot of CEOs [Chief Executive Officers] when we didn't have them, still a sprinkling of executive vice presidents, but there's a number of them now.  Just like this friend of mine, Steve Bell, right here in [Las] Vegas [Nevada] who is one of the top three of Caesar Entertain--Caesar Entertainment.  So I'm pleased with that progress.  My heart hurts so badly when I still see what's going on and the kids being lost down there in our--the lower strata.  And I know that many of them can be saved.  Many of them are smart kids.  And the 100 Black Men [The 100 Black Men of America, Inc.] here are trying to do what they can to help.  Other organizations are trying, but it's a bad situation.  And it's, it's talent being lost.  That concerns me and that bothers me.  And as much as we can do to raise, raise up a kid and get him in the Underground Railroad out, out from, away from that situation, it's something that I would like to see done.
Speaker 1: Are there any initiatives that you're involved in that kind of formed a station on that Underground Railroad?
Speaker 2: Well, I work with the 100 Black Men.  I do go over and talk to the kids from time to time.  I do go over and talk to the community colleges.  A lady I just met teaches over there.  So I go over and talk to the kids--and try to pump them up and give them some thoughts about how, how life really is and what they have to do.  And I--I want to do more, me and my friend, Don Miller.  We--we really want to do more.  We hadn't found--found the key yet.  But we want to do more.  And we've got the time to do it.
Speaker 1: Okay, when you were in the corporate world, was it easier than the military or how would you compare the two in terms of being able to get things done and manage people?
Speaker 2: Well, nobody's going to jump when you say jump (laughs).  That's not gonna--that certainly is not gonna happen.  But being one of the first, if not the first [African American] executive vice president [at a Fortune 500 company], I was fortunate to do it in Hawaii.  So I wasn't running up against prejudice and discrimination in my company.  It was--it was a smooth transition.  And all I had to do was deliver the goods for that company.  And so that wasn't too bad.
Speaker 1: Was this mostly an Asian company or a white American company or--?
Speaker 2: I would call it a--that's a good question.  No one's ever asked that question.  Fortune 500 company, on the stock exchange, CEO, white, six of the seven top officers, white.  So I'd have to say it's a white company.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also many of the stockholders are from Hawaii and are Hawaiian.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 3999
Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things you've done, and there's been so many things in the military and in private industry, is there anything major that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: Not a lot.  I don't think there's anything from a professional standpoint that I would do differently, except not get involved with computers.  That I would, I would avoid.  Professionally, I think I did the best I could.  I'm proud of the medals and things that I received.  It's hard to believe, for me to believe I did that, but I did.  There're a few things from a personal standpoint that I would do differently, but it's too late.  My, my first wife [Doris Greene Brooks] is gone.
Speaker 1: Okay--.
Speaker 2: You pay a price.  If you're going to really be successful and put in as much time and commitment as people like me do, something has to be sacrificed, and unfortunately, too often, that is your family that takes that.  When I was working twelve hours a day and going to school, somebody wasn't getting my time.  And that was the family.  Even though I love my children.  I mean I fawned over my children and I spoiled my children, but the time that I put in my job and going to school at night for so many years--if I had--it was a price to pay.
Speaker 1: So how are your children today?  I mean are they, you know, how did they make out?
Speaker 2: They're doing fine.  This one here [Craig E. Brooks] works for UPS. [United Parcel Service]  One [Wayne L. Brooks] is in Miami [Florida] working for a home alarm system, and one [Harry W. Brooks III] is in Washington [D.C.], retired from the [U.S.] Army as a major, working with the veterans in the state of Maryland.
Speaker 1: Okay, so are you planning anything major soon?  Are you writing a book or anything or--?
Speaker 2: No, I've got a couple of international things that are working, but international things are tricky.  You don't need for many of them to happen.  One a year is a wonderful event.  If this one that I'm working on goes, I'm going to give a lot of money away, and I'm going to be passing money out to those I care for and I love.  And I will give onto some of those projects that will help kids.  And that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look--oh, did your parents, what did they think about your success in the military?  Were they--?
Speaker 2: My mother [Nora Elaine Brooks] didn't understand it at first.  My mother used to tell her--well, I was commanding a group.  And the group had thirty-five hundred soldiers.  And my mother used to brag that you--she used to say, I bet he has seven people working for him.  She had no idea (laughs) of the magnitude of what I was doing.  She lived to see a division parade and thousands of soldiers go by saluting, saluting her son.  She lived to go on a boat at Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] with my two stars on it, and every ship, people rising up to salute as the, as that little boat went by.  My mother was pleased.
Speaker 1: So it made some impression on her.
Speaker 2: It--Mama understood that.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, did your father live to see--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) My father, when my father [Harry W. Brooks, Sr.] died I was a lieutenant colonel in Vietnam.  In fact, when I went to Vietnam, I could, I knew he wouldn't be alive when I came back 'cause he was quite ill.  But he was proud of the fact that I made lieutenant colonel.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, when you look back at all the things you've done and some of the medals you received and the promotions and the business accomplishments, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the legacies I have is all those people I got into school.  And I ran into a couple of them.  From time, from time to time I run into some of them.  In fact, I got a letter from a guy who has a funeral home.  And he talked about when I first hit their division, he said, "Sir, that division was so screwed up, they couldn't find their way to the front door, much less fight a war."  And he said, "You'd only been there a few days, and things started to change.  And I saw you running one day, and I was getting ready to fall out, and I said, if he cannot fall out, I'm not gonna fall out."  He said, "I was seventeen years old.  I didn't have a clue what I was doing.  I was running around with the wrong people.  I turned my life around, went to school, got my education, bought a funeral home, and I am doing wonderful.  And I owe it all to the time you hit that division."  And he said, "And my wife did the same thing.  She went to college."  And he wrote me that, and he, he, he was not far from Fort Lauderdale [Florida]  And I met him, I had a chance to meet him.  And he just said, "I wanted to let you know that you, what a difference you made of my life."  That's a legacy.  And these other things, some will be remembered, some won't.  I do have a bust at the Indiana War Memorial [sic, World War Memorial, Indianapolis, Indiana] , me and--there were only three black generals ever in the state of Indiana.  And I was first, General [Norris] Overton was second and General [Jim] Hall was third.  There hasn't been another one since.  And they've got our busts in the--,
Speaker 1: This is a bronze--,
Speaker 2: --in the museum. Yeah.
Speaker 1: --bronze busts, right?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And so that will be a legacy so the kids could see that one of them from [P.S.] 87 [George Washington Carver School 87, Indianapolis, Indiana], [P.S] 42 [Elder W. Diggs School 42, Indianapolis, Indiana] and Crispus Attucks [High School, later Crispus Attucks Middle School, Indianapolis, Indiana] can, can achieve.
Story_ID: 4000
Speaker 1: Now, we haven't talked about this at all, but does--has religion played a role in your success or life that much?
Speaker 2: I consider myself to be a very religious person, but very quiet.  I pray a lot.  I don't go to church as I could or as I should.  It's a terrible thing to say.  I'd walk five miles to hear a great preacher speak.  But if a great preacher is not speaking, I'm not going. (laughs)  I'm gonna watch football or whatever else I want to do and then me and my Lord will communicate down the line.  And we get along very well.  I am a very religious person.  I have trees and bushes named after deceased people in the back that I talk to.  And me and God communicate.  And I am a religious person, but it's a secret.
Story_ID: 4001
Speaker 1: Now, you did mention when we came in, you have eleven televisions here where you can--you don't miss any action on television.
Speaker 2: I don't miss any action on television.  (Laughs) I've got television coming and going.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there anything we haven't  mentioned that you want to share with us?
Speaker 2: I don't--I've said one thing, that we never can accomplish these things alone.  I've had--I've been blessed with some great friendships.  My best friend of forty-four years died in 1994--colonel, United States Army.  He taught me everything I knew about artillery, and I taught him everything he knew about nuclear weapons.  And his son is named after me, my son is named after him, and that legacy will--will go on.
Speaker 1: What's his name?
Speaker 2: Ernest Frasier, Colonel Ernest Frasier.  He died--he's out there in Arlington [Arlington National Cemetery, Arlington, Virginia].  I will be buried in Arlington, and I'm sure our spirits will run around there and laugh and have a good time.  I have a best friend here in Las Vegas [Nevada], Don Miller.  And my oldest friend is a fellow down in Fort Lauderdale [Florida] named Ernest Davis.
Speaker 1: Okay, now the last question is and it's similar to legacy, but not the same.  Sir, how would like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I want to be remembered as a guy--as a guy who--one who cared about people, who was a damned good leader and who left a mark while he was here, mostly on people, not on things.  And I, and I think I did.
Story_ID: 4002
Speaker 1: And going back to question that you asked me earlier, I'm very proud of the number of officers who worked for me who went on to become general officers and three-star and higher.  And there were five black colonels that worked for me.  General Jim Hall, lieutenant general, Lieutenant Jim--Lieutenant General Jim McCall, Colin Powell, Lieutenant General Andrew Chambers, and the former IG [Inspector General] of the [U.S.] Army, Lieutenant General Hank Doctor.  Now, they obviously made it on their own merit, but I hope that some of my style and philosophy or just a little bit rubbed off, and then they were able to pass it on to their young officers.
Story_ID: 4003
Speaker 1: Okay, this is a picture, of course, of the Secretary of State, Colin Powell.  The picture, of course, is when he was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs.  I am proud to say that he provided me with his picture and listed me as one of his mentors and teachers, and I'm certainly extremely proud of him.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of U.S. Secretary of State, Colin Powell in his U.S. Army uniform, ca. 1990s.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4004
Speaker 1: This is my father-in-law, Mr. Greene who has, who has passed on and gave me a beautiful, beautiful wife, Doris [Elizabeth Greene] Brooks.
Speaker 2: [Mr. Greene, father of Harry Brooks, Jr.'s first wife, Doris Elizabeth Greene-Brooks, not dated, from the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4005
Speaker 1: That's a picture of the bust of me that is in the Indiana War Memorial in Indianapolis, Indiana.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. (right) and an unidentified man at the unveiling of his portrait bust at the Indiana War Memorial, Indianapolis, Indiana, February, 2001.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4006
Speaker 1: That's a picture of me and my son on the Harry W. Brooks Street, which was named that street for a short period of time and would be made permanent after I have gone on for my reward.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. (left) and his son, Harry Brooks, III, standing in front of the street sign that bears his name, ca. 2000s.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4007
Speaker 1: Another picture of my bust with my son and my second wife, June [C. Hezekiah] Brooks.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. (center) with his wife, June C. Hezakiah-Brooks, and son, Harry Brooks, III, at the unveiling ceremony at the Indiana War Memorial, Indianapolis, Indiana, February, 2001.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4008
Speaker 1: Another picture of the--of the bust there, is in Indianapolis with a full description of my service.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. posing with his portrait bust at the Indiana War Memorial, Indianapolis, Indiana, February, 2001.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4009
Speaker 1: Now, this is a picture of my three sons, from right, Wayne, Harry, and Craig.  This is at Harry's wedding in 1988.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. with his three sons at his son Harry's wedding, 1988; (L. to R.): Craig Brooks, Harry Brooks, III, Wayne Brooks, and Harry Brooks, Jr.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4010
Speaker 1: This is of when I was young [U.S. Army] corporal, about the same time that I married and shortly before I was selected to go to Officer Candidate School.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. as a U.S. Army corporal, 1948.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4011
Speaker 1: This is picture of my beautiful bride, Doris Elizabeth [Greene] Brooks.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Harry Brooks Jr.'s first wife, Doris Elizabeth Greene-Brooks, ca. 1948.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4012
Speaker 1: Now this is a picture of me receiving the Distinguished Service Medal at the time of my retirement in 1976.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. receiving the Distinguished Service Medal upon his retirement from the U.S. Army, 1976.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4013
Speaker 1: This is picture of my son, the paratrooper, Harry W. Brooks III, Major, United States Army, Infantry.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Harry Brooks, Jr.'s son, Harry W. Brooks, III, in his U.S. Army uniform, ca. 1990s.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4014
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my promotion to brigadier general, General [Bruce] Palmer [Jr.] on the left and my wife, Doris [Elizabeth Greene-Brooks], on the right.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. (center) with his first wife, Doris E. Greene-Brooks, and General Bruce Palmer, Jr. at his promotion to brigadier general, ca. 1974.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4015
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, Harry William Brooks, Sr., at his retirement after thirty years in the post office.
Speaker 2: And he's the one on the left?
Speaker 1: He's the one on the left [center]
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr.'s father, Harry Brooks, Sr. (center) and unidentified men at his retirement from his position at the post office, Indianapolis, Indiana, not dated, from the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4016
Speaker 1: This is a picture after I retired and made the buy-out and started Advanced Consumer Marketing.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Harry W. Brooks, Jr., ca. early 1990s.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4017
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the Fort Dix [New Jersey] Sports Hall of Fame.  I was given trophies for partic--participating and, in some small cases, starring in various athletic events.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. awarded a trophy upon being inducted into the Fort Dix Sports Hall of Fame, Fort Dix, New Jersey, ca. 1950s.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4018
Speaker 1: This is my command picture, shortly before I retired as the commanding general, 25th Infantry Division [at Fort Shafter, Hawaii].
Speaker 2: [Portrait of General Harry W. Brooks, Jr., commander of the 25th Infantry Division, Fort Shafter, Hawaii, 1976.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4019
Speaker 1: And this is a picture of my mother [Nora Elaine Bailey-Brooks] to whom I owe everything.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Harry Brooks, Jr.'s mother, Nora Elaine Bailey-Brooks, not dated, from the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4020
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in a work uniform or fatigues as the commanding general, 25th Infantry Division [Fort Shafter, Hawaii].
Speaker 2: [Major General Harry W. Brooks, Jr., commander of the 25th Infantry Division, Fort Shafter, Hawaii, ca. 1974-1976.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4021
Speaker 1: Me [Harry W. Brooks, Jr.] with my sons.  This picture was taken about fifteen years ago.  From right would be Craig, Harry, known to us as 'Butch', and on the left, Wayne.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. with his three sons on a visit to Hawaii, ca. 1989; (L. to R.): Wayne Brooks, Harry Brooks, Jr. Harry Brooks, III, and Craig Brooks.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4022
Speaker 1: My baby picture, which my mother delighted in, and I wish I had a little baby just like it.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks, Jr. as an infant, Indianapolis, Indiana, ca. 1930.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
Story_ID: 4023
Speaker 1: This picture was taken when I was a captain with my wife and son, Wayne on the left and my older son, Harry on the right.
Speaker 2: [Harry Brooks Jr. with his first wife, Doris Elizabeth Greene-Brooks and sons Wayne L. Brooks (left) and Harry W. Brooks, III (right), ca. late 1950s.  From the collection of Harry W. Brooks, Jr.]
