Story_ID: 17007
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, will you please state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Charles E. Burrell.  C-H-A-R-L-E-S, Edward, E. Burrell, B-U-R-R-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And could you state your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born Toledo, Ohio in 1920, October the 4th.
Speaker 1: All right, now, can you give us today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Today's date should be the 24th--?
Speaker 1: First.
Speaker 2: First.  21st.  I knew it was somewhere around there.  When you get my age, you lose track of all days.  Months don't even get important.  Twenty-first of 19-- 2002.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: In Denver, Colorado.
Speaker 1: All right.  At the--.
Speaker 2: Double, Doubletree Motel [sic, Hotel], yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Right now?  I'm retired (laughs), happily, yeah.
Speaker 1: Retired musician.
Speaker 2: Retired musician, yes.
Story_ID: 17008
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I have five 'People' magazine-type questions I need to ask you before we really get into depth.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food?  Beans.  I love beans with a passion.  I was brought up on beans, all kind of beans, you know.  And I still love them, like I'd rather have beans than anything else, you know.  As a matter of fact, my favorite is lima beans, you know, 'cause I cook those about once or twice, at least a month, you know.  We have a family outing here, and I--Grandpa cooks up the lima beans and, of course, I had to laugh because my grandson, I heard him say--we have another one, "Oh-oh, lima beans (laughs)."  But that's my favorite food really.
Speaker 1: Sir, what's your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color.  Oh, yes, beige.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: No.  Any time is a favorite as long as you wake up, and when you don't have any pain, that's good.  That's the best time, you know.  I do actually like Denver better than most places because for years they had seasons here, and I loved seasons, okay.  Of course, now, every place else it's the same thing where you, where you don't have seasons.  You have either one or, one or two varieties of weather, summer and winter (laughs), you know, which is--but I love the seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vaca- yeah, Denver, Colorado (laughs).  My most favorite one in the world.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I have a favorite phrase, in which I've always followed I think, and that was, "When you go through life, be serious, but not too damn serious," okay.  And that will--that covers a multitude of everything you can think of, okay, you know.
Story_ID: 17009
Speaker 1: All right, well, let's talk about your background.  When were you born and where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Toledo, Ohio, 1920, October the 4th.
Speaker 1: And tell us about your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was the stable- the stabilizing influence.  She had seven children, and she was the anchor.  And my father worked for the--what they called the Garbage Department in Detroit [Michigan].  Nowadays, they call it the Sanitation Workers [Department].  You know, he was a garbage--as they called them, a garbage collector.  He drove the garbage truck, and as they say in France, "He wasn't worth much."  As a matter of fact, he wasn't worth anything.  You know, he was a rather noncommittal father.  His big thing was well, he gave you good genes, and that's all you needed to have, okay.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: And speaking of that, can you tell us about--first of all, can you give us their names, and then tell us about their backgrounds, where they came from and if they have any stories about the origin of their families?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father came from Houston, Texas.  As a matter of fact, he came from a place called Shepherd, Texas and with I think, if I remember correctly, thirteen or fourteen children in his family.  And he was the youngest and spoiled rotten.  And I can tell it now because it's all out, but he had to leave Texas because he had killed a man, okay.  And he killed him in self-defense, okay, but it was a white man.  You know the rest of the story, okay.  So in other words, he came to--to Denver and met my mother who was born in Denver, Colorado.  And her father was a minister.  And my father swept my mother off her feet, okay, and just took her up and married her, you know.  And they had seven children, you know.  As a matter of fact, they had eight and one died.  But they had seven children.  And then they went back from here--my mother was born here as I said before, okay.  And her name was Denverado, Denver, Colorado, Denverado.  That was her name.
Speaker 1: What was her last name?
Speaker 2: Howard.  Her maiden name was Howard.  But they said, people said, "Your mother's name was Denverado?"  "Yeah."  "Oh."  Take them a second to figure that out, but that was her name.  Anyhow, my father--.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Ruben Orestas Burrell.  (laughs), Okay.  Oh boy.
Speaker 1: He was quite (unclear) unusual name--.
Speaker 2: He was quite--yes, very, very.  He was quite a, quite a character.  But, you know, ironically, nobody ever found out that he had any musical talent until maybe, forty years later?  Because I didn't know that he could sing, you know.  And I heard him singing one day with a quartet from the Garbage Department out at the place, and I heard this high--it was higher than soprano voice.  I said, "I wonder who that could be," you know.  And I looked in there, and there was my father.  I said, (with surprise) "That's Dad?"  Of course, it was vice versa.  I didn't know he could sing, and he didn't know I played the bass until I'd been playing for--my, until my graduation from high school.  So I'd been playing from the time I was twelve until nineteen.  That's seven years.  He didn't know I played the bass.
Speaker 1: But he wasn't around much?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  He came home from work every afternoon--I would never forget--came home from work every afternoon at 3:00 [P.M.] o'clock and got his nap until 4:00 [A.M.], and then went down to his (sarcastically) social club, okay and enjoyed the festivities down there.  Of course, that's another story when you talk about social clubs of those days.  It was--na- (unclear) we can call something else today, but we don't.  But anyhow that was what he did, and we never had dinner with him.  Never, and never had a Sunday dinner with him.  NEVER, okay.  That's why I said my mother was the anchor.  She kept the family together.  And he used to leave her ten, fifteen cents, a quarter a day for the children to eat on.  That wasn't too spiffy, you know.  And so the boys had to get out at an early age and start hustling.  And we all did, you know, all four of the boys, the three older boys rather, hustled, you know.  And we'd bring in three cents here, five cents there.  And make, you know, enough--enough to make things go, you know.
Story_ID: 17010
Speaker 1: So you were born in Toledo [Ohio].  The family moved to Detroit [Michigan]--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) When I was three.
Speaker 1: Three, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh, when I was three.  And that's where my--you know, (unclear) education in terms of schools because in those days, schools were integrated because there were very few blacks.  They were integrated, but they were really--it's kind of--I look back now, and it was a pret- hectic little time, you know.  You, you had to be a fast runner.  That's probably why I never gained any weight.  You had to be a fast runner in those days. (laughs)  You got to get over the hump, you know.  We lived I think about three blocks from school, and you ran all the way.  You didn't walk, you know.  You ran all the way to the front door.  You know, and had your dog there, okay, to protect you.  So that was a big thing in those days.  People look at you and say, well--they thought it was a joke.  But it was no joke.  It was serious, you know, very serious.
Speaker 1: So did your mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] have to work too?
Speaker 2: Well, with seven kids, you didn't do much working.  She cooked.  That's what kept us together because her leverage with the--getting the children to do things she wanted to do, in other words, disciplining the children, words were, "Well, look now, if you can't do what I say do, don't come to the table the next meal."  And brother, if you missed one of Mama's cookings, one home cooking, one meal, you were straight for life 'cause you made sure you did everything she wanted you to do and did it right, you know.  And you kept clean, you know.  So that was the name of that game.  She had no problems, you know, really.
Speaker 1: Where do you fall in the order of the seven siblings?
Speaker 2: Let's see, one, two--third down the line from the top.  My sister, whose name is Katie--incidentally, I can put this in there because I'm very proud of what she did.  At age eighty, she was ordained as a Baptist minister at age eighty.  She is now eighty-eight [years old] and she lives right here in Denver [Colorado] now.  At age eighty-eight--she was the boss of the family, okay.  When Ma left the house, Katie took over.  And she took over with a vengeance, and she kept all seven of us straight--six of us straight.  Never had no problem because if something happened, all we had to do is say, "Well, I'm gonna tell Katie."  "Oh, don't do that.  Man, I'm--(laughs) I'll straight up, you know.  Everything is fine," you know.  So she was the disciplinarian, you know, although I--and she still is.  You know, at eighty-eight [years old], so, you know.
Speaker 1: Are all of your brothers and sisters still alive?
Speaker 2: No, two of them passed.  My oldest brother passed.  He had diabetes from when he was fourteen [years old], and they--but they predicted he wouldn't live past fourteen.  And he made it to forty [years old], okay.  So he had a very good, productive life.  And, by the way, my youngest brother, who was a real talent.  He was the greatest tap dancer I've ever seen in my life.  I know because I was there, because he tap danced with a fellow named Baby Lawrence.  But the big thing in those days, the reason he couldn't get anywhere is because--two, they were black and they were both junkies.  Okay, he turned to be a junkie, and my brother, youngest brother, at fourteen [years old].  And the reason was because there were no boys there to discipline them there.  And Ma wanted to give them the things that we didn't have, and she spoiled them, and he got, you know, turned on with the wrong group, you know, at fourteen [years old].  So he become a first-class junkie, but the finest dancer.  If I had had one-tenth the talent that he--in my body that he had in his body for dancing, I wouldn't speak to anybody because I'd be so good. (laughs)  That's what I used to always think about because he was a--just a gift, like Dianne [Reeves] is, my niece, okay.  It's the same thing.
Story_ID: 17011
Speaker 1: You sound like you lived in a very interesting environment coming up.  Can you describe some of the sights and sounds and smells of your childhood?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, yes.  Well, we lived in a predominantly Polish neighborhood, okay.  It was Anglo neighborhood.  And the place where we lived was a little mini-ghetto, which was only--one, two three--about four blocks.  That's where all the blacks lived, okay.  And they used to call it the Humboldt Street in Detroit [Michigan], and they used to call it "down in the hole." (laughs)  That was way down there.  If you're down there, that was the lowest part, and you moved up the next block, you moved uptown--one block, okay.  And, but the whole thing was actually--there's a railroad track right there which--the railroad, the trains went through.  And that kept us supplied with something to do in our early life, you know like--well, pilfering--like stealing coal off the railroad, but we did that--two reasons, one to make a little extra money and the other was to keep warm (with emphasis), because we didn't--you know, we had a belly--potbelly stove in--in the middle of the room, and that was all you had, you know.  So it was kind of interesting.  And then, let's see, I'm trying to think.  We had all types of people in the neighborhood, but one thing for sure, we never had any problems really, because what happened is the people took care of the youngsters.  And you talking about an incorrigible youngster, I, I don't remember one because what would happen is, if you would do something wrong, 'Madam Fan' would look out her window, okay.  And she'd come over and see my mother [Denverado Howard Burrell], who they called 'Aunt Dutch,' and tell her that you had done something wrong.  And you got a whipping, baby, like you can't believe, okay.  And most of the time, you got a whipping before you got home from Fannie because you were doing wrong.  Well, that kept the youngsters clean.  And most of the youngsters that came from our neighborhood amounted to a lot more than they--than the kids do today, much more because they had discipline, you know, okay.  And the neighborhoods, the black neighborhood was protected because we knew how far to go.  You didn't venture out in the white neighborhood unless you walked through it, you know.  And that was about as far, as far as you got, but you kept it pretty clean, you know.
Story_ID: 17012
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, what did the neighborhood look like?
Speaker 2: What did it--oh, you can't believe  it.  It was shambles, really, you know, because where we lived were--had the worst houses in the world.  And the house where we lived (whistles) was on stalks, round stalks about that big, you know.  And underneath it was always a cesspool of fungi, water and crap, okay, where the rain got in there, okay.  And this was our house where we lived, okay.  One--one bedroom for four boys, about that wide, okay.  And one bedroom for the three girls, okay.  And one bedroom for Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] and Dad [Ruben Orestas Burrell], okay.  But it was a shambles, believe me though.  But we had all kind of nice little friends there like bed bugs, cockroaches, you know, which you had to battle every--all the time.  When the weather got warm, you had to--well, we had to burn what we used to call burn the beds--okay, bedsprings.  That's when you had coils in them, okay.  And these are vivid things that I remember.  And by the way, I also remember in that neigh--same neighborhood, out of that, even in those times came a very, very wonderful athlete who joined, went to the--hmm, the world thing that they have for athletes--.
Speaker 1: Olympics.
Speaker 2: Olympics, yeah.  His name was Walker, okay.  He lived next door to me, and he used to high jump every morning at five o'clock, 5:00 to 8:00 [A.M.], he would high jump, okay.  And he won one of the big prizes at the Olympics back in the '30s [1930s], okay.  His name was, his last name was Walker, okay.  But there's another, out of the same neighborhood came a big lawyer, who later on became at the--on the Mayor's staff in Chicago [Illinois], for Mayor [Richard J.] Daley.  His name was--(sings)--it's takes a little while sometimes for these to click in.  [James] Jimmy Simmons, okay, he was on the Mayor's Committee for many a year.  And he made a big difference in Chicago.  But he was from the same area that we all were from in, in Detroit [Michigan] there.  See, so they had a lot of guys who really came out and amounted to something.  Of course, they had the normal flow, but the neighborhood was not the backbone.  I'll put it that way, okay.
Story_ID: 17013
Speaker 1: Okay, was--was music important in the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Oh, nothing but--yeah, every, every Saturday, they had what they called Saturday Night Fish Fry, and, and that was, of course, with people playing the piano.  And the fellow who lived next door played the guitar so that was all the music we had in the neighborhood.  Okay, we didn't know anything about anything else.  Of course, and we lived right next door about maybe--you could touch the house next to you, okay.  We lived next door and my mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] used to tell us, keep the windows closed on, on Saturday.  Don't open the windows, and we always opened the windows (laughs) and saw what was going on at what they called the Saturday Night Fish Fry, you know.  They'd be over there at the--what they call the House Rent Party, where the admission was ten cents.  And that admission went toward paying the rent, okay.  And they paid it though, every--didn't miss a time, you know, but they had things going on over there.  And I used to sneak out and be over there under the piano, you know.  And mother--Mom didn't know I was sneaking out.  "I'd jump out of this window here, and go into that window and get under the piano and listen to piano players play," because they had all kind of what they call stride--I didn't know what it was then, stride piano players, you know, boom, jang, boom jang, you know.  And they'd play the Blues honey, and I'd be sitting there sometimes for three or four hours underneath the piano listening.  And I wasn't aware of why I was doing it, but I enjoyed it, you know.  But as I was saying before, it was kind of a ragged neighborhood, I'll put it that way, you know.
Speaker 1: What else did you--what did you see under that piano when you were sitting under there?
Speaker 2: Well, I--oh, I saw all things that youngsters weren't supposed to see (laughs).  And it was funny because I used to laugh, you know, and my oldest sister, Katie, used to be there.  She was there too illegally.  And she used to dance.  I saw--she was a very, very clean girl.  She--all she did was dance, you know.  And so we had a relationship going on.  She didn't tell on me, and I didn't tell on her, you know.  So in other words, it was just a, a big thing for you to do, you know, to, to kinda get social, you know.  So where it's not a--I look back now and it was a very wonderful thing because the fact that it made me realize some things about life, people, you know, that people are only people, and you have all kinds.  It takes all kinds to make everything possible, you know.  So that was a--it was a learning experience.  I'll put it that way.
Story_ID: 17014
Speaker 1: Well, what other things did you do to amuse yourself or pass the time there other than--well, I know you had to work, but--well go ahead and tell me.
Speaker 2: No, no, well, I really--it was always a thing because all of the family had different friends.  We all had different sets of friends, okay.  And in my case, my friend was a ambitious fellow who liked to sell papers in the morning, you know.  He was white fellow, and we were close--thick as thieves, you know.  So I'd be up every morning, 4:00 or 4:30 [A.M.], helping him sell papers.  And I'd get a nickel, ten cents, you know.  That was big money in those days, you know.  Here and there you would pick up this and that, but I always kept busy just going, you know.  We always went a lot, and I went to the playgrounds and we walked a lot.  That was our trademark for the Burrells--they were walkers, great walkers 'cause we'd walk over the city.  It'd be nothing for us to be, probably several miles from home in the morning by seven o'clock, okay.  But we'd walk.  We'd have a purpose.  We'd walk down to the bakery probably--a big place called C.F. Smith's Bakery, way down--to almost seven miles from the house to get a loaf of bread for three cents, a hot loaf of bread, you know.  And then if we had five more cents, we'd get some, what they called store cheese.  And that was grand, you know, so your day was made, but I kept busy all my early life.  All of us kept busy, you know, going, doing things.  We never sat on our butts.  And reading--oh, my big thing was this--every Saturday too, I went down to the--a place called Scripps Library [Detroit, Michigan] on Trumbull [Street] and Grand River [Avenue].  I went down every, every Saturday and spent two or three hours in the library reading.  And that was my thing because for the first I think ten or fifteen years of my life, I carried a pocket dictionary with me because Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] says, "If you want to be something, you have to have an education."  And the first way to get the education was to learn how to articulate and learn the language properly.  And I did, you know because every day I made the resolve to learn a diff- a new, different word, every day.  So in other words, I went through the, the dictionary.  And that took time, years, as a matter of fact.  And I still have one that I use, you know, a few of the words that I'd like to know a little better, and the derivation of these words, I would learn.  And that was my, my whole thing with the family.  But they all, more or less were motivated to learning, you know.  They were lazy people.  You know, they were all--and we had a good close family because Mom didn't allow this thing called, "You're better than he and she's better than you," and all that because to make that, to make that stuff possible, what she said, early in life, was that she sat all seven of us--I'll never forget, all seven of us down in a row.  And she says, "Look, we have, we might have a problem here."  She says, "And I'm gonna clear it up now."  She says, "Now, anyone of you that thinks I like any one of you better than the other is crazy.  I love you all the same, and I'll whip your little asses if you get out of line all the same."  Ooh!  We had no problems, you know.  It was nice.  We had no hang-ups like they have today, you know, a kid didn't know they--talking about the--"Who am I?"  We knew who we were.  She told us.  "You're people."  Yeah, she used to say that, "You're no better than anyone, but you're damn near as good, okay."  And that stuck with us because it gave us a philosophy, I realize now, a foundation for being ourselves.  All of us now have begun to be--out of the seven kids, which two of them passed--now two of them went to college and graduated, including me.  And that was not a bad percentage, you know, for kids out of the, the 'hood, as they call it nowadays, you know.  That was pretty good though.
Story_ID: 17015
Speaker 1: Now, now did you mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] talk about where she got her sense of respect for education?  You said her father was a minister--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) A minister, yes.  That's where she got it, right here from her father.  And because her father and her father's brother, who was later ordained as a Bishop, [Reverend] E.J. Howard, in Waco, Texas, you know, that's where she got all of her background and her stemming from her--she was just a normally good person, like you find people who have a set values and they're just normally good.  You find, and you find those that are normally bad, but she was just normally good.  And she, she enjoyed life, okay.  And she knew what life was all about.  She had, I think maybe a high school education, but a Ph.D. in life, if not more because she knew more about life than I've--than anyone I've ever met, and I've met quite a few people in my life.  But she was just an ordainly, wonderful person inside.  And she had a, a fondness for, for being perceptive, okay.  She could tell--we'd always say, "How did Mom know we're doing that?" you know.  Said, "She got eyes in back of her head," you know.  We used to laugh, but she always knew.  When we went to her with our little problems and things, she'd always listen to us, you know, and say, "What do you think?"  And if you were too far wrong, then she'd stop you and say, "No, that's not the way it goes."  And, of course, she taught us a very important lesson in life, early in life, and that was Mom was always right, even when she was wrong.  And we learned that.  That's what they call good respect, because you respected her, you know.  And then, 'til her dying day, in which I was with her when she was eighty-three [years old] in 1979, I had never talked back to my mother and none, none of the kids, except my younger brother.  Of course, he--we had to take care of him when he got older.  I mean in terms of discipline, but no one.  If Mom said, "The moon was made of green cheese," "Yes, mother, okay."  You know why?  Because you don't want to miss that next, next meal, baby, you know? (laughs)  'Cause she had something--every time was an festive occasion, every meal was a festive occasion.  She could take nothing and make a very festive meal out of nothing.  I look back and all that food was good we had, you know.  It was just sensational.  And I never knew how she did it, but she did it, you know.
Speaker 1: I'm just going back a second.  What denomination was your mother and father [Ruben Orestas Burrell]?
Speaker 2: Oh, my father was Baptist and my mother was Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Oh, okay, so the Bishop Howard was a--.
Speaker 2: On the, on the Methodist side, E.J. Howard, on the Methodist.
Speaker 1: Was that A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal]?
Speaker 2: Yes, A.M.E.  African--yeah.  That was on that side.  And by the way, he was the first one that bought my first bass for me when I was, I think, fifteen [years old].  He came to Detroit [Michigan] and bought my first--$100.00 bass, okay, at a place down on Woodward Avenue, downtown Detroit, named Grinnell's [music store].  He bought the first bass, and he said--he used to call me 'Chunky', like my mother, "Chunky, now, you can pay me back, you know, a little at a time."  And I paid him back five dollars a month.  Now, you can take it, feel how long it takes five dollars a month to pay a hundred dollars off.  But it took me quite a spell to pay it off, and when I made the last payment, he sent me a check back for $100.00 and with these words were, "I believe in you."  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a beautiful story.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 17016
Speaker 1: So when did you get interested in music?
Speaker 2: When I was twelve [years old].  Through one of those--as I often say, a fluke.  You know, I hadn't thought about taking up an instrument or anything, but one Friday afternoon at three o'clock in the afternoon in junior high [Condon Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], which was the seventh grade, the teacher came around whose name was Harrington.  And he announced that they had a few more instruments left in the music room, and did anyone want to play with the band.  Well, I--oh yeah I raised my hand, "Yeah," you know, I'm bored to tears at three o'clock Friday afternoon.  And I went in there, and he looked and he said, "Oh my," he says, "Well, Charlie, all we have left is a, a big old aluminum bass," which was in the corner, a big brown, heavy alum- aluminum bass, you know.  I said, "I'll take it," and my love affair grew from there.  You know, I never looked back.  And I did all the things, thank God, right that I had to do in terms of making, making it possible to play it, but I made the big mistake--I didn't know it then, of learn--of trying to play bass first before you played another instrument, to set your intonation and in your mind, as to notation, to hear better, because if I'd played piano like most of the affluent kids did, piano or violin, I would have been much more equipped to play the bass.  But I started the hard, hard way, but I stuck with it.  And little by little, I clawed up and everyday was a--like I said, everyday was Christmas, you know.
Story_ID: 17017
Speaker 1: Could you name each one of your siblings, including yourself and put them in order for us?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  It started with my older sister, Katie.  And then came my brother, oldest brother, Ruben [Orestas], Jr., and then me, and after me was my next brother whose name was Joseph Perry Burrell, name after, one of the reverends, and then after he, came Vada.  Next in line came--.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Vada?
Speaker 2: V-A-D-A.  And that's Dianne Reeves's mother.  And then after that came, let's see, Allan, okay.  He was a tap dancer, and the last one was Mary Beth who lives here in Denver [Colorado], right now.  And that was the, the seven children.
Speaker 1: And could you state again and spell the name of your uncle who, and talk about what denomination and what church he was from?
Speaker 2: Uncle E.J. Howard from the Methodist, Afro-Methodist [African Methodist Episcopal] Church, in Waco, Texas.  That's where he was the Bishop.
Speaker 1: And why do they call you 'Chunky'?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a little funny story (laughs)--Yecch!  When I was about--oh about ten, around there or something, you know, the people used to come in, ladies used to come in--in those days, they didn't have too many fat people because you didn't eat that much.  Okay, so my mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] was a little plump.  She was five-foot [tall] and 225 pounds.  So I was going on the fat side at about ten.  And the people used to come in and say, "Oh, isn't he just cute.  He's gonna be just like his mother, nice and round and pulled in."  And I said to myself, "I don't think so!" (with emphasis)  And I started from then to, to watch my weight.  I stopped eating all the cruddy, crappy foods and started getting more exercise, and I never had a weight problem.  And she called me Chunky until I think the day she died though, you know, 'Chunky'.  Oh, God.  But like, she lost weight too in her later life.  She decided to lose a hundred pounds, and she did, you know.  But that was later on in life, but that's why they call me Chunky because I was just like my mother.  You know, and I said, "Well, I've had enough of that."  So I, I got on the bandwagon, okay, early in life and got off that Chunky thing, you know.
Story_ID: 17018
Speaker 1: Could you tell us about school and can you name the schools you went to--I mean you started in?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I started in kindergarten at a school in Detroit [Michigan] named--called Chaney, C-H-A-N-E-Y, which was only one, two, three blocks from where we lived.  And that was a very interesting time in my life.  I found out when I was in my, maybe third or fourth grade, that I couldn't sing because they used to say--my teacher, Mrs. Hart, used to say, "Ah, Charles, I love you darling, but you lay out on this one, all right?"  And I never could figure out why.  I was, you know, until later when my--when I used to get home, and my mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] used to say, "Charles, don't try to sing, honey."  I couldn't figure it out because I thought I was singing, you know.  I had no voice whatsoever, no pitch, no nothing, you know.  But anyhow that was in Chaney School.  And I graduated, obviously, from there in the 6th grade and went to another school called--intermediate school called, Condon [Condon Junior High School].  And that's where I got my education--started getting an education for music in Conden.  And for three years, like I said before, I was studying bass then too and paying for my own lessons.  It was a quarter a lesson.  That was big money.  And I got a lesson every week, and I hustled bottles, rags, went on errands, okay, and did everything that I had to do to make that quarter.  And my mother never paid for one of my lessons.  never (with emphasis), okay.  And from that school, which was Condon, I went to the very prestigious Cass Tech, Cass Technical High School, which was probably one of the most--the most famous music school in the country then.  It was not only music, it was for liberalism, okay.  You could go there to be an aeronomics man, a pilot or a designer or anything.  See that was Cass Tech.
Speaker 1: Sir, can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: C-A-S-S, T-E-C-H, Cass Tech.  And that's the school where all of the famous black musicians went to, including my good friend, Al McKibbon.  And that was where I got my big start because in Cass Tech, you had a combination of the fundamentals for being a professional musician.  You had what they called harmony, theory, orchestration, counterpoint and in piano, drums.  You learned to play four or five different instruments, okay, in Cass Tech.  So they kept you busy that entire four years, but when you graduated from Cass Tech, you were a professional musician because most of the white musicians that graduated from there went directly into the Detroit Symphony [Orchestra].  Of course, I didn't because of, obviously, ulterior reasons, you know, skin not right.  But anyhow, when you graduated from Cass Tech, you were a first-class--and then after I graduated from there, I, I spent a couple of years night-clubbing, in the best night clubs in Detroit.  And then I went into the Navy.
Story_ID: 17019
Speaker 1: I--I'd like to go back--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --to high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And maybe we're going a little too fast, but in high school, what--you were immersed in music, I know that--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: But were you--and you talked about your love for reading.  Were you a real good student in high school?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I wasn't a real good--I was a, what I'd say, I was determined, I'll put it that way.  No, because I didn't have the, I realize now I didn't have the background that most of the kids in there who had the pleasure of, of reading those little books and things and coming along, you know, and their moms and dad read.  And you went to plays and things.  I didn't know anything about that, you know.  So I had to go from the grass roots, from the very foundation, but I never missed a day.  And one thing, another thing is, in my entire schooling life, I never missed one day of school, from the time I went to kindergarten to the time I graduated from high school, I never missed one (with emphasis) day of school.  And that's what kept me on the straight and narrow because I wanted to learn.  I found it fascinating to learn, you know.  To me, learning is, was so important.  I mean it was--I, I just got excited about learning, about learning of different cultures, different people and how to approach different situations, you know, and see the world situations, and also to learn about Civics.  And that's where I learned about Civics and everything else in high school, in Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] because they kept you busy.  And as far as music goes, it was one of the--the reason it was the most elite school in the country is because they had thirteen principal--principal musicians from the Detroit Symphony [Orchestra] giving free lessons, and they taught there at Cass Tech.  So you got a lesson at least once a week, and I was so dedicated, they gave me two, you know.  So I got a lesson on Monday and a lesson on Friday.  So I was high on the hog, but we had--that was our big experience.  And they taught you also, not only did they teach you music, they taught you respect.  I know one of my teachers--I look back now, and I realize they were teaching more than just, just music.  They were teaching life, you know, how to be people.  You know, because every now and then, one of them would invite me over, you know, to their house.  And that was a big thing, baby, in those days, you know.  And they were all white, you know, invite me to their house and sit down to have, you know, a little meal, you know.  And that was opening my eyes to what you--what's out there, what you can do with--can do with life, you know.  But like I said, Cass Tech was really my biggest influence on my life in terms of music.
Speaker 1: Are there any instructors that stand out, that really (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, yes, sure, sure, definitely.  One whose name was Alvin Selvey (ph.).  He played drums, and his brother was the president of the union in Detroit at that time, okay, or became president.  Now, he was a drummer and he was--yes, and he was crippled from the war.  And the finest drummer.  I'll never forget in my life.  I mean I still look back now and the drummers today don't know what it means to drum like he did.  He had what they called a roll on--smooth roll is like silk.  I never will forget, like tearing silk.  (Soft whistling sound), you know.  And I thought that was the most God blessed thing in the world, you know, because it really was.  And also my bass teacher whose name actually was--dum-dum-dum--Gaston Brohan.  He was the principal bass player at the Detroit Symphony, but he taught me very well, but he taught me very wrong.  And a lot of things--I later discovered that the reason he didn't do it because--right, because he wanted to leave a little scar there so I couldn't get too far because in those days, as I said before, you know, there was no--unheard of to play with the symphony for a black.  But anyhow, you got your lessons, and I got tuba lessons from a  fellow who played tuba at the Detroit Symphony.  His name was Oscar Legassey.  I think he may even be still alive.  I saw him two or three years ago.  He was ninety-three or ninety-four [years old], still working in the shop.  He gave me my tuba lessons, okay, at Cass Tech.  So I had him and every kid that--every instrument you had, you had the individual teacher from the symphony to give you private lessons.  So that was the way that was handled.
Story_ID: 17020
Speaker 1: Now, how did you get interested in classical music?
Speaker 2: I was always interested in classical music from the first--from the time I was twelve.  Of course, as I was saying, I heard on this little set, miniature radio set they set they had which was called a Crystal Set.  All the oldsters know what I'm talking about, but the youngster, look it up.  And on the Crystal Set where you put a little needle in there, you know, and your headphones.  Your headphones cost ten cents, okay.  And your headphones, and I was--I won that, as a matter of fact, selling O'Henry [brand] candy bars, okay.  And you look--and I was playing with this thing one evening, you know, just playing around with--it was dark, you know, and I heard this noise--I mean not noise, but I heard this sound on the--"What is that?"  And I finally got it.  And I later discovered that it was the San Francisco [California] Symphony [Orchestra] under the leadership of Pierre Monteux, okay.  And they were playing 'Daphnis'--I later discovered this too, 'Daphnis and Chloe,' by [Maurice Joseph] Ravel.  And all these things were Greek to me in those days cause I didn't have the faintest idea, but that's what inspired me, you know.  And I'll never forget the next morning I told my mother, I said, "Mom," I says, "I'd like to play with the San Francisco Symphony."  Of course, she looked at me and it took her a couple of days to answer me.  And I didn't know what was going on.  She said, "Okay, son.  You can do it.  But remember this--," and she put the Golden Rule down, "--every day, be true and practice every day, no less than four hours a day."  And she was right 'cause I have--for twenty years, I didn't take a vacation from bass, at least four, four to eight hours every day, with everything else I did, you know.  Practiced four to eight hours every day, you know, because I had to come in the slow route, but I came the methodically--method--the right way, okay, to learn, 'cause what it took some kids to learn in a year, it took me three years, you know, okay.  But I didn't mind, had nothing but time, you know.  So I was patient, very patient, but then, that's the way it learned, you know, to take it easy, you know, slow, and don't get discouraged.  Much patience, you know, which my mother taught me again, patience.
Speaker 1: Was music the only thing that you aspired to in those days?  Did you have any other--.
Speaker 2: Yes, young girls.  No (laughs)--I didn't say--I didn't mean that, it that way.  No, I liked swimming.  That was my only other out, was swimming because I used to swim at least an hour or two, you know, every day too.  And all of this and so we were going.  You asked me what I did.  We were always going.  See from the time we got up to the time we went to bed, we were going because that was the only thing I ever did, swim--besides play, play the bass.  And that was my--they kept busy, you know.  Plus, my little escapades with the opposite sex, and you know, but so I had a good time, an excellent time, you know.
Story_ID: 17021
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you were in high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], were you involved in any of the (unclear) in high school?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Activities.  Oh, yes, yeah.  Every Saturday we had what they call a, the band, the--it was a band from all over the--a mixture of all--orchestra, that's right, City Orchestra.  That's what it was.  Every Saturday, and [Alfred] Al McKibbon, bass player I was talking about, he and I were the only two blacks in there at that time.  So we would practice for I think three hours every Saturday at Cass Tech with this big orchestra.  Okay, and that's where I got my real foundation for learning how to play orchestral music, you know, classical music.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you--when graduation time came, what were your plans?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I didn't have any plans.  You know, just to survive, you know, and get out--of course, I was going to college, obviously.  That was my first thing.  I was going to college, and that was 1939.  So I knew what I had--and Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell]--as a matter of fact, our mother prepared us nicely.  When we were young, when I was ten, twelve and fourteen, she says, now, kids, here's the way it's gonna go.  When you finish high school, what are you gonna do, and we were all so brainwashed, "Leave home, Mom" (laughs), okay.  And she had us all set.  So when I came--finished high school, like I got through with graduation, the next day I left.  I was nineteen.  And I got out and got my room.  I left her home, you know, left home.  And got out on my own and started scuffling and I was lucky because by that time, I was playing little jobs around the city, you know, little jazz bands, here and there, and making a little money.  And I fell there because of people that helped me along the way and got a steady job at a place called the B & C Club in what they called Paradise Valley in Detroit [Michigan].  And you--that was when I was, oh, nineteen, got a job there, and played there for almost two years.  And that's what helped to get me on my feet.  You know, but the main thing is that I left--had to leave home.  I could come back, Mama said, on Sunday and get a meal, but you had to leave on Sunday evening (laughs).  She was so smart because she made you appreciate yourself, you know, and learn to respect yourself.
Story_ID: 17022
Speaker 1: How did you get into Cass Tech?
Speaker 2: Well, you see, if you had enough music behind you in the elem--in the junior high school [Conden Junior High School, Detroit, Michigan], you automatically could go to Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], see.  And if they deemed you good enough, they would say, "Well, he's good enough."  They would recommend.  So I got a recommendation to go to Cass Tech, although my credentials were a little less than most of the kids that went there because most of them had the opportunity to have studied three or four or five years before with their teachers on instruments which would give them more clarity in terms of music, you know, because most of the kids there were almost professionals when they got there in the 10th grade.  But I was a real amateur, but big ambition, you know.  So.
Speaker 1: Now, in terms of the technique, you said you had to struggle on some level because one your instructors taught you wrong?
Speaker 2: Yes well, Brohan, Gaston Brohan, God bless his soul, on the bass taught me a lot of things which it took me three or four years after I later learned that they were incorrect, to, to rectify.  But I realize now that he didn't do it out of racism.  He didn't do it because he didn't know any better.  He wasn't that good a bass player in the first place.  I can say it now because looking back over sixty years, I can, I have the ability to say that--and not viciously, but just saying that he was not good a bass player.  They just tolerated him because they couldn't find anybody else in those days.  Now, I realize what was happening, okay.  But the big thing with him was that when, when he consented to teach me, he told me to my face, "Charlie, I'll teach you on one condition--if you don't try to play the Classics professionally."  And, of course, I said, "Yes sir," okay, and you know the rest of that game, don't you?  That was playing the game.  And I said, "Oh, I'll fix you," okay.  So it's, "Yes, yes," you know.  And everything that--you know--went in one ear and out the other.  The bad things, and then Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] taught me that, you know.  In other words, "Throw the bad things on the ground, but take the good things and walk."  And so that was what happened with Brohan, but like I said, it was not the vicious and racist thing then.  I realized it was a thing that he just didn't know any better.
Speaker 1: But that statement though--
Speaker 2: Oh, that statement was real racist, you know, that was real racist because I told someone now, the first piece of music he put up there for me to play was 'Old Black Joe,' and boy, if that doesn't tell you something (laughs), you know.  And like I said, you learned to roll with the punches all, you know, I knew what he was doing, you know.  I knew what his game was.  It wasn't--didn't, didn't shock me, you know.  I was beyond shock after coming through the 'hood for those years (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: So you had to be pretty tough (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Oh, you had to.  If you weren't tough, you couldn't make--tough, but gentle, you know.  Mom taught me that too, you know, "Always be honest, tough and gentle, you know.  And stand for what's right, but don't cause any problems, you know, but don't back off too far because if they get you in the corner, come out swinging."  And at her tender age, she would come out swinging too, you know.  Boy.  So she taught us in that way.  But anyhow, the Cass Tech thing, except for the teaching thing was that, the big thing was that you got a teacher, and he put you on the right track.  And he taught me some fundamentals, which were magnificent, but, you know, along the way, he taught me things that took me three to four years to--what they call bow techniques, which he didn't know, and I didn't know he didn't know because I didn't know, see.  So it took me a little while, but like I said, before he--that was his, the best he could do, what they had, with the exception of that one little statement he made, we got along, you know, beautifully.
Story_ID: 17023
Speaker 1: You had us in Paradise--
Speaker 2: Paradise, Paradise Valley, right off of Gratiot Avenue, yeah and St. Antoine [Street], right downtown [Detroit, Michigan].  Right near the [Detroit] Receiving Hospital and Stroh's Brewery was around the corner.  So we had quite a time there, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was that like?  What were sights and sounds and smells of Paradise--
Speaker 2: Valley.  Oh, they were magnificent because they had home cooking going on all the time.  Oh, they had some of the best cooking.  They had about three or four black restaurants and that was it down there.  But they were always cooking.  You could always smell greens, beans and ham hocks, corn bread and sweet tater pie, as we used to say.  And what was the other good--yum oh, peach cobbler, you know.  So we lived, we worked right down in that area there, you know.  And that's where we ate, you know.  And it was glorifying.  I look back now--and they even had a hotel named the Adams Hotel [Detroit, Michigan].  And in the basement of the Adams Hotel, it was called, oh, a big rumpus room down there where they could accommodate a big band.  Okay, and that's where this good friend of mine, [Alfred] Al McKibbon, played with a band down there [Bernard] McKinney [later Kiane Zawadi]--not McKinney Cotton Pickers.  It was another one of those big bands of that era, okay.  And that was in that--coming through that same thing.  You know, and you had people from all walks of life.  That's what they congregated.  And normally, predominately black.  As a matter of fact, it was all black.  You didn't see any whites down there in those days because they knew better.  You know, there was--they wouldn't cross a line and we wouldn't cross a line, see.  Gratiot Avenue was the line.  And you went there, and if you went on that side, you were--something was wrong.  You had to get back on this side to survive.  But the, except for the whole atmosphere was beautiful.  And they had down there all the hustling people, and the pimps and probably meet the prostitutes, you know, but all--most of them are good people.  I look back now, and some of my best friends were, hey, those, little naughty people, you know.  But they would--they helped you.  You know, they believed in those days, that people who would come along who had any ambition--and they could tell, they would help you.  'Cause I remember I got many a free meal down there, didn't have that dime to get that dinner, you know.  And somebody said, "Well, look here, baby, what are you doing?" you know.  I explained to them I'm getting ready to go to college.  "Well, okay, give this man a meal on me."  And ten cents, "Hey," you know, that inspired me.  "Thank you," you know.  And I never, never forgot those things.  Never, you know, and like I said before, people educated you.  They helped to educate you because they wanted you to succeed.  But, now, if you were a fool, you wouldn't succeed.  But I think I was a little smarter than that.  Mom, again, you know.
Speaker 1: So you were able to survive on your own?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  I had no problems.  Absolutely none.  I never went back home to Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] for anything, never, only on meals on Sunday.  As they used to say now, meals on wheels, you know.  I was right there every Sunday, you know, because we used to congre--that was our social hour for family.  The whole family my entire life was there from 1:00 o'clock in the afte--after church, until 5:00, 6:00 or 7:00 o'clock [P.M.], the whole family.  And that's where we got socialized.  And that's we had no, no statements in terms of, you know, what they call conditions, I guess, they call them these days.  We didn't have that, wasn't allowed in the family because if you say something and it was wrong and you got arrogant, your brother would knock you down, and say, "Aw, shut up."  "Huh?"  Or a sister on the other side would pinch you, you know, "Hmm," and you suddenly got the message, so you didn't--you know, you're right.  And they came through, and I'd say most of them, you know, were nice, had no problems, absolutely none.
Story_ID: 17024
Speaker 1: Now, you went to Wayne State--
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --University in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How did you get into Wayne State?
Speaker 2: Okay, I got into Wayne State because after I had gotten in the service--I couldn't have afforded it money-wise--but after I had gotten into the service then I went on the G.I. Bill [Federal assistance to veterans for education], see.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, maybe we should talk about the service.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that might be a smart move to lead into how I got to Wayne.  Well, 1941--oh, this is funny, in 1941, I never will forget, I had about five or six outstanding--they call them traffic tickets, okay.  And I'm try to think what they were for, speeding, you know, I was going thirty miles in a twenty, twenty mile zone, big deal with a Model A Ford [automobile], okay.  Anyway, they had me up for those--and parking tickets, that's what it was, yeah.  And this one evening, I heard a rap on the door and looked out the hallway of this hotel, motel--on my house where I was living, okay.  And I saw down in there, two big white, red--we used to call rednecks.  They were two detectives.  I knew who they were.  And I was on the--a floor and a half up.  So my brother was in there.  We had the apartment together and I ran and jumped out the window, okay.  And they came in and they didn't find me.  But by the next day, you know, I went down and enlisted in the Navy, okay.  So I was in the [United States] Navy, they had accepted me in the Navy the next day.  And that evening, the detectives caught me, and they said, "Oh, we've got you."  And I said, "Oh, I don't think so."  And I said so-- they said, "What do you mean?"  I said, "I'm Uncle Sam's man now."  And they looked at--"Huh?"  And they saw this thing that said I was in the Navy.  You should--I never will forget the look on their face, you know, a disgusted look that they couldn't whip somebody up like me, you know.  But anyhow, that's when I started.  And I got in the Navy, and I was fortunate enough to be there at the time when the first black unit was called at Camp Robert Small [at Great Lakes Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois], the first black unit in the Navy, okay.  And by that time I was--
Speaker 1: Where were you?
Speaker 2: --In Great Lakes [Naval Training Center], forty miles north of Chicago [Illinois].  And from there I--well, of course, I fought the battle of Chicago for three and a half years, and, and won...
Story_ID: 17025
Speaker 1: Yeah, you went to Camp Robert Small--.
Speaker 2: It was called Camp Robert Small, the first black, all-black obviously, camp in the second World War up in Great Lakes [Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois].  And it was about--it was right across the street from what they call the main camp, yeah.  And even while I was there, I didn't anything to do but raise the flag in the morning with the tuba, so I had all, the whole day free.  And I used to still practice there like a demon, and I studied for almost three and a half years with one of the bass players in the Chicago [Illinois] Symphony [Orchestra].  His name was Rudolf Fahsbender.  His son is still playing bass around the area.  But his name was Rudolf Fahsbender.  So I studied with him for three years while I was in the service, you know, and had the wealth of the exposure.  And then I had the big wealth of being with all the--some of the best jazz musicians, obviously, in the world because up at that, Great Lakes at that time, there were such jazz musicians as Clark Terry, Osie Johnson, the fellow who arranged for Cab--for Count Basie for years, Wilkins, [Ernest] Ernie Wilkins and [James] Jeter and [Charles] Charlie Pillars who was from the very famous St. Louis [Missouri], Jeter and Pillars group, [William] Willie Smith, who played saxophone with [James] Jimmy Lunceford was there.  And I'm trying to think who--there were a dozen more.  And [Albert] Al Grey, the famous trombone player was at Great Lakes.  And there--and by the way, one I never mentioned before, but I'm going to mention now, his name was Donald White.  He was a, a cello player, okay.  And he played the peck horn to get in the band, but he was a cello player, and he was the first black in the Cleveland [Ohio] Symphony [Orchestra].
Speaker 1: Sir, what is the peck horn?
Speaker 2: Peck horn is a little e-flat instrument which is, it's like a French horn, but it's very limited.  And it's a little smaller thing and in the band thing, you played--the tuba plays "Boom," the peck horn plays "Oo-mph."  It's an upbeat, so you figure, "Oo-mph, oo-mph, oo-mph."  That's why they call the peck horn, "Oo-mph, oo-mph," okay, you know.  And the tuba say, "Whoo, oo-mph, oo-mph," and he played the peck horn.  But anyhow, he was the first one that was conscientious enough--he played cello to play with the Cleveland Symphony, first black, Donald White.  And he's still alive.
Story_ID: 17026
Speaker 1: So all of these great musicians were congregated at Great Lakes [Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois]--.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you all play together formally?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had two bands up there, called the A Band and the B Band.  And I was not in the clique to play in the A Band because that was what they called the St. Louis [Missouri] clique, okay.  So I was excluded from that, and thankful, because that gave me more time to practice on my tuba and to practice on string bass and to take, take lessons.  So, in other words, I didn't have to do that and I was thrilled that I didn't have to do it because it was a plus in my case.  Because I told you I studied in Chicago [Illinois] for three and a half years with Rudolf Fahsbender of the Chicago Symphony [Orchestra], while I was in the service, you know.  And I also played with the Northwestern [University] Orchestra [Evanston, Illinois], okay, in the evenings, you know, once or twice a month.  I played the--that orchestra.  And I also played the Civic Orchestra [Chicago, Illinois], which was a community orchestra in those days.  I played with them, and started learning how to really control the instrument in terms of technique for the Classics.  But those, the whole thing or escapade of the service was a real blessing because it made it possible for me then to go--with the G.I. Bill of Rights [Federal assistance to veterans for education], to go to Wayne [State] University [Detroit, Michigan] and complete my education.  So that's what happened in terms of the big transition, you know, okay.
Speaker 1: So you were really prepared to go to college when you (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)--Oh, yes, well, you see what happened, as I was talking to you before, is that normally when you finish high school, finished Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan], you went to universities and they gave you music aptitude tests for a week or two.  And if you passed those, all you had to take were the academics.  So all I had to do when I went to Wayne University was take, take the academics 'cause I had had everything else.  I had had theory, harmony, orchestration, counterpoint, formal analysis, and I knew how to play four different instruments.  So, in other words, I didn't have to do anything but go in.  And so I played with the band and had a good time, playing with the band and learning just the fundamentals of the rudimentary things in terms of getting a college degree.  So I had no big problem, you know.
Story_ID: 17027
Speaker 1: So when did you graduate from Wayne [Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan].
Speaker 2: I, I didn't graduate.  I was within two weeks of graduation in 1949 when I was called into the Dean's office--oh, this is funny, called into the Dean's office.  And he says, "Charlie, I have some good news and some bad news, you know."  "Oh, really?" you know.  He said, "Yeah, the good news," he said, "I'm proud that you're getting, gonna get ready to graduate from Wayne, you know."  He says, "It's a very prestigious school," read the riot act to me like that it was, yah, yah, yah, yah, okay.  He said, "But the bad thing is--he was the head of the Music Department for the City of Detroit [Michigan].  Okay, his name was Smith.  He was the head.  So he said, "The bad thing is as long, he looked right at me and said, as long as I'm the Head of the Music [Department] in Detroit, there'll be no black teachers, music teachers."  Now, that was in '49 [1949], okay.  And I looked at him.  I didn't react like he had thought I would react, like cannibal, you know, or savage.  I looked at him, and said, "Oh, okay."  And I turned around and walked and then the next day I was on the bus coming to Denver and haven't looked back, you know, cause Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] said that, you know, "Sticks and stones, same old thing."  So, you know, I got on the bus with my--I'll never forget, with my bass, put down underneath there, you know, and my little ditty bag which as I had from the service, and came on to Denver [Colorado].
Speaker 1: You had relatives here in Denver?
Speaker 2: Yes, like I said, my mother was born here.  And I had two or three aunts here then at that time, and an uncle and my sister was also here from Detroit because she came out here--my youngest sister, for her asthma.  So I had a whole host of family out here, you know, but I just--I wanted to go to Denver because I'd been here prior to that for a ten-day vacation.  And I loved it, you know, it's the first time in my life I ever slept really in the summertime, you know, without any interruptions, you know, like weather-wise or those other little varmints that come up from the mattress, you know.  So in other words, it was another eye opener though, in terms of a step forward.  I'll put it that way.
Story_ID: 17028
Speaker 1: Well, what did you do when you arrived in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was very lucky because my Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell], Mom dear Mom, taught us how to be, how to hustle as we used to say in those days.  You know, you didn't sit on your buttons.  You hustled, you know.  So the day I got here, like I'll never forget, I got here like on a Monday, and I was on the street car, which went out to--in those days, the street car, to Fitzsimons [Army Medical Center, Aurora, Colorado].  I went out there and put in an application and got a job on Tuesday as an orderly.  You empty bed pans, you know.  And Mom said, "An honest job, honest dollar, beats a crooked dime any day of the week," okay.  She was right.  So I went out there and got a job as an orderly, and to make a pot--put beans on the table.  I was married then.  And I think about the second or third week I was out there, I was on the street car, and this fellow was on the street car with me going on the Colfax Street, streetcar, and he had this long instrument case, you know.  And I happened to recognize what it was.  It was a bass case.  And I asked him, I said, "What is that?"  And he says, "Such and such and such."  And we struck up a conversation from there and I discovered right after that that he was a principal bass player with the Denver Symphony [Orchestra].  And I asked--his name was John Van Buskirk [ph.D].  And I asked him, I said, "John, could I study with you?"  "Sure, Charlie," you know.  So I started studying with John for maybe two or three weeks or a month, two or three months.  And all of a sudden they asked me, "Would you like to take an audition with the Denver Symphony?"  It almost scared me to death.  "Of course," you know.  And from there, I took an audition and, of course, the average person doesn't understand what an audition can entail, but my audition was a two-hour audition with Saul Caston, a two-hour audition.  One hour and fifty-five minutes, he talked to me.  One hour and fifty-five minutes, he talked to me.  I played a G scale, very slowly for two octaves which took five minutes.  And he said to me, "I like you, you're hired."  You see what was happening?  I later learned that he was psyching me out to see if I would fit, okay, because that was, those were the race days baby, okay, to see if I would fit, okay, if I didn't have any hang-ups.  And I guess he later discovered I didn't have any hang-ups so he liked me.  So everything went from there.
Speaker 1: What kind of things did he say to you?
Speaker 2: Oh, like--he didn't--it's not that old, old clich of "Some of my best friends," you know.  No, he didn't pull that.  He was--well, see he, first of all, he was formerly a trumpet player with the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] Orchestra for thirty-five years.  And so he had had an encounter with blacks before that, maybe about 1939 when I was telling her, the young lady about what happened to this marvelous trumpet player whose name was [William] Billy Horner, who went--and he was seventeen, he went with the Leopold Stokowski All [American] Youth Orchestra, okay, because Saul Caston recommended him.  But, and they were going over on a European tour, and Billy Horner could not go because of the fact he was black.  So that was Saul's first encounter with the blacks.  So here I am, twenty-five years later, and I think he had a chance, you know.  So he asked me how did I, you know, how was my schooling?  What did I, I learn, you know?  Who had been my teachers?  And what did I like to do in life and how many children?  Was I married?  The whole mundane thing, but we talked for one hour and fifty-five minutes, you know.  And he saw something in me, I guess, you know, and he liked it.  And like I said before--and make no mistake, I later discovered that actually playing the bass, playing a scale...
Story_ID: 17029
Speaker 1: All right.  You had this interview with the Detroit [Michigan] Symphony [Orchestra] that lasted two hours?
Speaker 2: In the Denver [Colorado] Symphony [Orchestra].
Speaker 1: Denver Symphony, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Denver Symphony with the conductor of Saul Caston.  It lasted two hours, one hour and fifty-five minutes was, I called it pleasant interrogation.  And five minutes, played the G scale for him for five minutes, two octaves up and down.  And as I was saying before, with the average bass player, they can play, as they say, all over the place, fast and, you know, furious, but ninety-five percent of them cannot play slow.  And I learned that.  And so I learned how to play slow early in life, methodically slow to make it right.  And I guess he saw something in me so he hired me.  And there was never any problem with any orchestra.  As a matter of fact, I was treated like--it was so disgusting.  They treated me too well.  I thought something was wrong.  You know 'cause it was always, "Hello Charlie," "Hello, Charles," you know.  It was Charles, it was not Charlie, Charles.  Okay, "Hello, Charles," you know.  And they just treated me royally, you know, until well, we had a little episode there.  But they just, they treated me royally.
Speaker 1: What was this episode?
Speaker 2: Oh, that episode was after we had a tour in 1953.  We were coming back--or '54 [1954] rather, from--in Roswell, New Mexico, the Symphony was coming back to Denver off the tour, Roswell, New Mexico--.
Speaker 1: And that's the flying saucer place, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  Yes.  Well, anyhow, we were supposed to play there.  We got there in the morning, and the bus unload, the buses unloaded and all this sort of thing.  And we walked in the lobby and the clerk said, "He can't--pointed to me, he can't stay.  He'll have to stay out in back in the service quarters."  And the lady whose name was Helen Black, who was the manager of the Symphony, and I turned around and says, "Okay, everyone pack up.  We're leaving, we're not gonna--we don't play here."  And I had to go to and cool her, and said, "Miss Black--" I says, "--that's not the way to handle that, okay."  With my wisdom, I didn't know that I had it.  I said, "That's not the way to handle it," you know.  "You go ahead and play, you know, for the honor of the orchestra."  And I happened, happened to have my car--that's right, on that tour.  And I said, "So I'll meet you back in Denver," but in the meantime, I was playing in a night club with the Al Rose Trio, see, playing six nights a week. So I figured this way, "Well, I can get back there and play with the orchestra--with the band, and still collect my money from the remaining two weeks they had on this tour."  And that wasn't a bad deal.  Oh, I was playing the game nicely.  So after that happened, Miss Black--and I cooled her down.  And I told her, I said, "I'll meet you back in Denver."  You know, I was very sad, you know, she thought I was just, just beside my point--self, you know, with despair and, you know, depression and all that.  And I played the role, "Ahh, you know."  But I said, "Well, I'll meet you back in Denver."  So I got back to Denver and went back to work the next night with Al Rose and the trio for two weeks so I collected two salaries from the--there and from the symphony for two weeks--didn't bother me.  But that was, like I said, poor thing, that was, that happened, you know, right there in the middle '50s [1950s], you know.  You could not stay at that hotel.
Story_ID: 17030
Speaker 1: Now, you had to negotiate two seemingly different worlds, the classical music world--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the jazz world.  How did you manage to--.
Speaker 2: I did negotiate three, my wives.  I never had--it wasn't bad at all.  I learned how to handle all of them, you know.  Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] taught me, thank God for Mom.  She taught me how to diversify yourself, but yet stay clean.  That was the main thing, okay, because when I was downtown, I was clean.  And when I did--and I practiced diligently all my life, I have, you know.  And when I was out in the joints, I had a good time with the barbeque and pig feet and beans, and all that.  And then talking that talk and drinking good booze, but I always drank good booze.  I never, never drank bad booze.  I always drank cognac, you know, Remy Martin.  I learned that years and years ago, you know.  The average person can't even pronounce it, and I thought when I first heard it, it was "Ray-me Martin" (ph.).  Someone straightened me, "No, Remy Martin" (French accent), you know, "Okay."  Sounded good to me, and so I got on that, and all my life I've had that, you know, that and good cigars.  So I've had no problem.
Speaker 1: Now, with these wives. (looks upwards sarcastically)  Now, when you arrived in Denver [Colorado], you were married.  Now, how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: Yes, her was Vivian, then Latham.  And I met her in Detroit, right after I got out of the service [U.S. Navy].  And she was, I think seventeen [years old], was she seventeen--yes, she was seventeen.  I was twenty-three [years old].  And I fell in love, obviously right away.  And then one thing led to another, and her mother finally decided that I was okay.  And so her mother, to get her away from me, sent her down to Alabama, okay, to be with her folks so, you know, I wouldn't be rushing this thing.  So she got down there.  We, we're conversing and talking.  And so, her mother said, "Well, if you want her, why don't you go down there to marry her," you know.  So I went down to Alabama on the train--and that was another one of those experiences in my life that I never will forget because when I left Detroit [Michigan] going down to Alabama to marry my, my bride, I got to Cincinnati [Ohio].  And I'd been hearing about the M & D line, Mason-Dixon line all my life.  I didn't know what it was until I got to Cincinnati.  So I was on the regular coach with three sweet potato pies that my mother-in-law had baked for me and sitting there, you know.  And the man, the conductor comes through and says, "Okay, you, you, you, up in the first car."  "Me?"  "Yeah."  So they--it was segregation.  They put us in a car behind the engine where all the smoke was, the pigs, the goats, everything was down there, chewing tobacco, you know, and people on the floor, you know.  It was devastating.  And the smoke was thicker than thieves in there, okay, in that one car.  Well, that's where they put me, okay.  And I went down.  I, I survived, you know, went down and married my bride and came on back up.  But that was an experience too in life.  I think, like I say, that was fifth, forty, yeah, '45 [1945], you know.  They were still having that stuff down there.  So that was a big thing.  And like, no, the big thing is my, my wives.  I speak of them very endearingly.  We're all understanding, okay.  And their parents were the ones that were understanding.  They made it possible for me to succeed because my first wife, who I married in Great Lakes [Illinois], their parents were marvelous, okay.  They wanted me to become the very best I could, and they knew I was interested in education.  And they stood behind me, okay.  And they took care of my two little daughters, you know, in that day, which was a big thing.  But they said, "We believe in you."  It was a classic example, okay.  And then my second wife, after she did me in, we had two kids.  We, we got along.  I treated them just like good people, had no, no friction because if there was a decision to be made about the kids, we made it.  If she said, "They need such and such," they needed it.  We didn't divide it and so the kids all, became to love both of us, okay, in those two, two spheres.  And then my third wife, the same thing with her.  Her parents were marvelous in terms of helping me.  And my fourth wife--I guess you say, "How many wives did he have?"  I had quite a few.  My fourth wife was the one I'm married to now, for thirty-five years, okay.  Her parents were marvelous people too, okay so in other words, I was blessed with having marvelous in-laws.  That's why when people on the T.V. [television] talk about their mother-in-laws, I get angry because as I say, I had the best mother-in-laws in the world and father-in-laws, you know.  They couldn't have been any better, you know.  So that's what happened with getting along with that thing and learning how to temper the Classics, the action with the Classics with the, with the jazz.  It was very simple.  You just didn't, didn't mix the two, that's all.
Story_ID: 17031
Speaker 1: What were some of the highlights of your musical--,
Speaker 2: Experiences?
Speaker 1: --yeah, experiences here in Denver [Colorado]?
Speaker 2: Hmm.  There were so many of them, I can't begin to relate how many of them there--but with the orchestra, I can tell you one of my most outstanding experiences was being able to play a half a program with [Benjamin] Benny Goodman.  That was back in 1983.  Benny Goodman--oh, maybe before that.  Benny Goodman was on the stage--as a matter of fact, it was back in the '60s [1960s].  He was on stage playing the [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart 'A Minor Clarinet Concerto' for the first half of the program.  And the second half, he decided to do by himself.  I mean, you know, but he got up and started playing the second half.  And as the boys say, "He was dying on the vine," you know, that puts it mildly, okay.  So I was sitting back there, and I knew what he was doing.  So he was playing this song, and I never will forget, it was 'Sweet Georgia Brown.'  I knew that by, you know, playing years of that.  So I started playing the bass in back of him, and he heard this sound back there, and he looked around.  And he couldn't believe it.  And he'd--yasher (ph.) is what they called it, yasher, okay.  He looked back, and he waved, with his clarinet, you know.  So I carried the bass all through the orchestra and (unclear), played the whole second half, Benny Goodman and me, okay.  The whole second half.  And that was--I have a picture of that too, but that was quite an interesting experience with me.  And as I said before, of course, the most outstanding experience in my whole life was when I walked on stage in San Francisco [California] and my ambition had been since I was twelve to play under the very famous French conductor, Pierre Monteux.  And my big thing out there was when he walked on stage, he was eighty-five then or eighty-six [years old]--walked on stage and to conduct, I felt that my whole life had been consummated and was all well worthwhile.  I had arrived.  I had been there, done that and arrived, okay.  So that was the greatest moment of my life, actually.  I think it took me about a week to get over that because I was so--I didn't know I was so emotional, but I was so emotional inside, you know.  The people looked at me and said, "So are you all right?"  I was crying for a week because I was happy, you know, because I had played under Pierre Monteux, and I had tried for forty years to get there.  So that was a culmination of forty years of patience, hard work, and keeping clean, okay.  And that was my biggest experience in my whole life.  I've had hundreds of other experiences because the average person that I've been associated with has given me a reason, okay.
Speaker 1: Did you tell Pierre--
Speaker 2: Monteux.
Speaker 1: --Monteux your story?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  No, no.  No, he didn't have time for me, little small me, but--and after, he didn't have to know it, I knew it.  And that was a big thing, you know, to play under Pierre, you know.  Like I said, I called my mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] back in Denver and said, "Mom, I've played under Pierre."  She says, "I told you you could make it, didn't I, okay?"  And I said, "Thank you, Mom," you know.  But that was my great moment in my life, really, was being, being on the same stage with Pierre Monteux.  And when he lifted the baton, I was just in heaven, okay, heaven.  Everything to me was heavenly, okay, like a stroke from upstairs, you know.  I couldn't believe it.  And like I said, it took me a week to come down off that high in terms of just being able to eat and sleep because I was so emotionally attracted, you know, and satisfied with it because like I said, for years--you have no idea, you know.  It took a long, long period of time to get there, eighteen years of studying, you know, ten years of playing with the Denver, the Denver Symphony [Orchestra].  Yeah, it took a little, little while there, you know.  But that was all it.
Story_ID: 17032
Speaker 1: What were your favorite pieces of classical music?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's a very complicated question because I don't have any favorites.  I love all of them.  The only piece I hate with a passion is [Maurice Joseph] Ravel's 'Bolero.'  That piece, I can't stand.  Everything else, I love it.  I have no problems, but I just can't stand that 'Bolero.'  I think it's the repetition of it, and the same thing over and over for fifteen minutes.  I--and the bass players are playing--"Bom, bom, bom, bom."  Honey, after about five minutes, you know, you start lifting your arm with this, "Bom," you know, and you lift this, because it's just so taxing, you know.  It was a marvelous piece, a show piece and people love it, but I don't like it.  And as I said before, that's the only piece I don't like in the classical repertoire, okay.
Speaker 1: And the rest of them are of equal--.
Speaker 2: Equal importance, yes.  Everything, yeah, I love them [music composers] all.  The [Dmitri] Shostakovich, [Ludwig van] Beethoven, [Johannes] Brahms, and anything [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart, you know, all of them, love them.  And [Bela] Bartok, love all of them because they, they're structures.  That means this is what the classical atmosphere is all about, just a big structure, okay.  So I love--so far I have no favorites, but the one I don't like.  That's the only one, and, of course, jazz-wise, I love everything in jazz, you know.  The biggest criteria in jazz is that it swings.  And it's good.  And if it doesn't swing, and it isn't good, I don't like it.  But it's not because of whose playing it, it's because of how it sounds, okay.  That's the criteria, in other words, whether it sounds good, you know.  Of course, I'm happy-go-lucky.  I realize now that I like happy music.  And even sad Blues are happy because it makes you feel good inside.  And that was the big balance between what I was doing with the, I call it the downtowners and the uptowners, you know, to keep me on an even keel, not to get to crazy with this or that, to stay in the middle and enjoy both of them, which is what most people should do.  But I guess I can't do that.
Story_ID: 17033
Speaker 1: Are there any technical things that you do that are special, which you've learned over the years?
Speaker 2: Yes, well, I probably learned to be about--not bragging, one of the best jazz bass players with a bow, maybe in the world, but it took me thirty years to do that, okay.  It's not a big thing.  I didn't do it intentionally, it just came naturally 'cause I was learning, you know, and to learn how to swing, because one of my students who is Major Holley, but the call him 'Mule', he played with the--with the bow, but he sang.  He hummed with it too, like a fellow called [Leroy] 'Slam' Stewart who was the first to do that sort of thing.  Well, I don't hum.  I play.  It's what they call "cold turkey," what you see is what you get (laughs), okay.  And it's very difficult because it's hard to learn how to, how to bow the instrument.  So I have--most of the good musicians that come to me for learning how to handle a bow.  It's a simple thing, but it's so complicated, you know.  So that's, that was my specialty actually with the bow.  But I wasn't too bad with what they called plucking, you know, the pizzicato.
Speaker 1: Did your classical training prepare you to use the bow better in jazz?
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the only way I can use the bow.  That's what prepared me was my classical training because you don't get any classical--you don't get any bow training with the bow--with the jazz.  If you do, it's all--half of it's wrong because you don't what to do.  No that was my training.  In other words, they're both dove-tailed into each other.  My being able to bow came from the Classics.  My being able to pizzicato came with the orchestra came from jazz.  So I could pizzicato with the orchestra better than anybody because I had the jazz experience and vice versa.  In jazz I could play with the bow, and no one else in those days could play with the bow, okay.  They didn't have time to study, and it takes time, takes time, takes time.
Story_ID: 17034
Speaker 1: Who do you think are the--are the--.  Well, who do you like in terms of classical bass players?  Who do you think are the better ones?
Speaker 2: Well, there are so many of them.  That's a very unfair question because there's room for--there are room--is room for a lot of them out there, and I don't have any favorites.  The ones that play, play well, most of them play well.  And other than that, you just have the good ones and the mediocre and the bad.  And that's about how simple it is because like I said before, I learned early in life that you don't categorize musicians because you don't categorize doctors.  You don't categorize lawyers, do you?  Okay, and you don't categorize the man on the street that's sweeping.  Who's the best street sweep--street sweeper?  So why should you categorize the best musician.  You don't put it that way.  You say, who, who do you respect, okay?  Oh, I respect most of them that play well in the classical field, like most principals.  I don't know all the principal player--bass players, and one especially whose name was Gary Karr, who turned to be a soloist, who I respected, very much so because he knew how to play.  But by the same token, I didn't get carried away and want to become a Gary Karr because you don't do that, because there's only room for one of those.  But there are other bass players over the country--I think my bass teacher was one of the finest whose name was Ludwig Juht up in Boston [Massachusetts].  And I respected him.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, can you spell it?
Speaker 2: Ludwig, L-U-D-W-I-G, Juht, J-U-H-T.  Ludwig Juht, you know.  And, of course, I've had several along the way who have been my favorites of the time, but I really never thought about it because you're either good or you're not, okay, good or mediocre.  And most of them in the symphonies are, are good, good low, good high mediocrity, I'll put it that way.  But those who play principal, normally, they're outstanding, most of them are crazy, but they're outstanding, you know.  I, I've often said, if you want to be a principal, you have to be nuts.  And you know, if you're not crazy, it helps, you know, because you aspire to do something which is what--out of the realm of what the instrument is designed to be.  It's just like taking--going out on the football field and have a, a lineman training for quarterback.  Excuse me?  You don't do that because it's, it's--they're two different things there, okay.  One is training line, big, heavy, move--slow moving.  This is fleet-footed, light, okay, and that's the other instrument.  This is a bass, see, and you stick with what you have.  You have some solo bass players now because of the way, now, the way the instrument is set up and so forth.  You have big solo bass players, but that doesn't mean a thing, you know.  There's nothing like, as the boys say, "Playing the root of the thing, down home, holding it down," you know.  That's what a bass was made for, to play down on the bottom, to build--so they could build on it.
Story_ID: 17035
Speaker 1: I want to backtrack a little bit and ask you why you left the Denver Symphony [Orchestra] for San Francisco [Symphony Orchestra]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, my ambition was to go to San Francisco [California], even before I got to Denver [Colorado].  But after I had been here almost ten years, and I think I got my apprenticeship in and got enough under my belt so I could be capable of taking an audition in a bigger orchestra.  And that's why I left to make my move, to make my fortune and see if I could make it elsewhere.  But, of course, at first I stopped in Los Angeles [California], okay, momentarily, to get a feel of things.  And from there, everything just blossomed into place because the San Francisco Symphony [Orchestra] was down in Los Angeles then. And they were doing the opera season, and this big, tall bass player, who was six foot five or six [inches], named [Philip] Phil Karp, okay, I mean just happened to hear me play.  And we became immediate friends, okay.  And he said, well, he was in San Francisco with the San Francisco Symphony, and I was in Los Angeles studying with a fellow named Reinshagen, okay, Herman, Herman Reinshagen.  And so Reinshagen called Phil Karp in to talk about, you know, different things.  Phil Karp in the meantime, knew that Arthur Fiedler had an opening that summer in the bass section because they couldn't get enough basses to play the Fiedler, [San Francisco] Pops [Orchestra] concert out there in San Francisco.  So Phil Karp called, not called me, wrote me a letter, which I have, wrote me a letter and asked me if I'd be interested.  And I was, and I drove right up to San Francisco.  And I didn't even have to audition for, for him.  He just, "Come on, play."  So I played with--that was my opening up in San Francisco with Arthur Fiedler in the Pops that summer.  And then that fall, what's his name, the maestro up there, who was the Maestro of the [San Francisco] Opera Company. Kurt Adler, okay, asked me if I'd like audition for the symphony.  So I had to audition for the symphony.  So I had to audition for the symphony under Kurt Adler, who was the opera man, okay; and with Phil Karp there.  And I made the audition, and that's--and the rest, I guess you say, is history.  And after five years in that, five and a half years of that, I went to--that's right, I went to bank.  And I discovered I had twenty-six dollars.  "Hey," I said "something isn't clicking right here.  I'm living too high on the hog," and I was.  So I said, "I'd better go back to Denver where I can, where I know I can make--save it, and save my life."  And I did, and I came back to Denver in '65 [1965].  And the smartest move I've ever made because I had a call then from Denver, from Helen Black, who was the Business Manager [of the Denver Symphony Orchestra] here, asking me if I would like to return here to be Principal bass player.  Well because the fact that the Principal bass player, John Van Buskirk (ph.) who was a friend of mine, and the Assistant Principal was a fellow who gave me my bass, the one that I owned for forty-five years, I wasn't about to do.  So I said, no, I'll come back and be third man on the totem pole.  And I did, and from that, everything fell in place.
Speaker 1: Well, that was--.
Speaker 2: Very interesting, yeah, extremely.
Speaker 1: So how did that make you feel to know that you were, you were--.
Speaker 2: It made me, it made me feel good because I realized one thing in terms of the classical saying, which is what another one of my old, smart teachers taught me about the profession.  He says, "Now, when you go in there--," he says, "--remember this one thing:  Principal, Principals are here today; gone tomorrow.  Tutti, means everybody in the section, is here forever."  Oh, that was a smart lesson.  I said, "Ohhh."  So I said, "I'll get to be up here as far as I can, but not Principal or Assistant because those are, are vulnerable."  In other words, see, they'll do you in if you're up there, so you stay back here and you go hide, and that's what I did.
Story_ID: 17036
Speaker 1: So does the Principal, like--is there more pressure on the Principal?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes.  That's, that's pressure paradise.  You know, normally Principals are half crazy, if they're not crazy, they're, they're either nuts because there's too much pressure, too much pressure, too much.  And over those days was, the pressure was insurmountable, but, of course, now they have the unions to help protect them.  But you still have the pressure from within, the orchestra, which is unreal, you can't believe how much pressure there is, you know, animosity within the, the orchestra.  Even--all, all orchestras.  Make no mistake.  There's that animosity there that you can't believe--viciousness and, and, you know, like if you make a mistake, the first thing they say, "Oh, he made a mistake.  He missed that E-flat.  It should have been E-natural, you know."  Well, see, of course, they don't have it in jazz, 'cause if you make a mistake in jazz, say, "Hey, baby, get up and play, baby.  You all right," you know.  You know, "Aw you're spanky," you know.  "You hit a wrong note?  Everybody else hits wrong notes, so we get up and play."  And you, "Okay."  In other words, it was something that made you feel a part of a team.  They didn't give you that feeling like, "Ohhh, you know, I have to play right."  And that's what happens in the Classics because--and if you're on the first stand, it's even worse because if something happens in the section, the conductor looks at the Principal, not the section and says, "What are you doing there?"  And if it was somebody down in the section, okay.  Well, it's your job as a section leader to admonish the person down there.  How do you do that half the time because half the time, if you go down and say, "You made a mistake on such and such," as arrogant and crazy as the youngsters are today, they will tell you where to go, and how to get there and the fastest train, and when to 'leave Dodge,' okay, because they know that they can do it and get away with it, 'cause you can't--you shouldn't insult them like that, okay.  So, in other words, the first man, the Principal, has a very, very, very, very tough job.
Story_ID: 17037
Speaker 1: Now, who have been some of your students?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, I've had--(whew), I've had all kind of students.  I've had bass students, vocal students, piano students, people that I helped, okay.  And I like to say that with pride, I had the pleasure of teaching George Duke.  Of course, it's one of the best things that ever happened in my life, and Marin County [California] from the time, when I was in San Francisco [California].  For almost five years, we would spend, after church, every Sunday, every Sunday for five years, almost ten hours playing.  And he turned out to be magnificent.  Everyone knows who George Duke is.  Now, the second of my goodies was probably having the pleasure and thrill of being around Dianne Reeves who was a natural, and still is and is coming someplace.  She has arrived, the great voice since Sarah Vaughan.  I had the pleasure of being there to help her over the rough roads when she was in her [age] fourteens, fifteens and seventeens, around there, to get over--to get her feet on, in life.  And in terms of the other musicians, I guess I had--one of my good students was a fellow named--they called him 'Senator', Eugene Wright.  He still lives in Chicago [Illinois] and he was, was playing with the boy who played this song called, 'Take Five,' (sings tune)--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Brubeck
Speaker 2: --Brubeck.  He was [David] Dave Brubeck's bass player, okay.  So he was one of my students here in Hawaii.  That's where he, he was under me studying there.  And also another bass player named 'Gump', G-U-M-P, [Edward] Eddie Calhoun, who was with Erroll Garner, okay.  He was his bass player.  And my third biggest one was Major Holley, who everyone knows as 'Mule', and he was a bass player without, without peer over the country.  But my most--again I think my most famous student was a fellow named Knight, [Anthony] Tony Knight, K-N-I-G-H-T.  And he was in Denver [Colorado] back in the '60s [1960s], early six--middle '60s [1960s].  And he had studied with everybody in the country, and then he came to me for two years in Denver and studied with me for two years.  Two years, and his payment was a box of cigars for the lesson, but a lesson used to last anywhere from three to five hours, at least.  So he studied with me for two years, and went right away, he went to audition for Cleveland [Ohio] Symphony [sic, Cleveland Orchestra] under George Szell, the toughest conductor to, to be--to audition under in any--than anyone, okay.  So he auditioned for him, and got in on the ninth--Ninth Chair, okay.  Ninth Chair.  That was my student, and in two years, he was Assistant Principal.  And in three years he was roving Principal.  That was my contribution to the, to the classical world.  So I must have done something a little right there because like I said, for two years.  And he had been out on the audition trail before that and never could get off first base.  I knew what the trouble was, and like we said in the beginning, it's the bow, okay.  It's the bow, you know.  It's sometimes the artistry of the bow.  It's learning how to be yourself, how to extend yourself with the bow.  Now, as the boys say, "When to deal and when, you know, to fold," (laughs) you know, with the bow.  And that's what you have to do.  And it's the secret.  It's very simple, but it's a secret.  And that was my favorite--my most outstanding student, I guess.  And the last really student was Tony Knight with the Cleveland Symphony.
Speaker 1: Is he still playing?
Speaker 2: No, he passed away a few years ago, yeah.
Story_ID: 17038
Speaker 1: George, yeah, could you spell George Szell?
Speaker 2: Zell? Z-E-double L--S-E-double L.  Sell.  George Sell. [sic, George Szell]
Speaker 1: He's the conductor--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) He was a conductor of the Cleveland [Ohio] Symphony [sic, Cleveland Orchestra, Cleveland, Ohio], yeah, for years, a big conductor.  He was a tyrant.  I loved him though, because he was a good conductor.  I had the pleasure of playing under him too in San Francisco [California], which was glorious, you know, and he liked me, okay, because I, I went up to him and said, "Maestro, thank you."  See, the animosity that was in the orchestra--within the orchestra, and the--and the conductor is vicious (with emphasis), okay.  And I went up to him and said, "Thank you, Maestro.  It's been a thrill and a pleasure playing under you."  He looked kinda "Huh?", you know.  He loved me.  He'd looked over there, smile.  They said, Szell never smiled at anyone, really.  But he smiled at me, you know, George Szell.
Speaker 1: Do you ever reflect on the--this, what you described as tyranny and animosity in classical music and why it might be?
Speaker 2: No, I knew it was there.  I just circumvented it.  I, I walked around it.  I didn't socialize, but Mom taught me another lesson, you know.  "Don't play sex games where you eat," and the symphony was where I ate--ate, and I didn't play sex games, okay.  I knew better, okay, 'cause when I was through, I'd walk out the door and go home to my wife, okay, which I loved dearly, and my kids and had a good time, okay.  And I never looked back because that--the first thing they want to do is condemn you for being, you know, this or that and so forth.  But I never had a problem with that.  They had the problem within themselves, but I never had an internal problem because I stayed on the outside of them.
Speaker 1: Did you see other black people become, you know, musicians at the Denver Symphony [Denver, Colorado] over the years?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I saw a few of them become what I call, how would you put this in nicey-nice terms?  'Brainwashed,' I'll put it that way, abused and misused.  We had a--a few years ago a viola player here.  His name was [Chauncey] Patterson--black, okay.  To show you want can, what the orchestra can do for you.  Now, normally, in--in the orchestra, when someone plays a solo, a couple bars or eight bars or so forth or something, everyone shuffles their feet, you know, what I'm saying--bar, bar, bar--you know, like this.  Well, this is a fellow, they told him at 8:30 [A.M.] in the morning that he was gonna play, have to play a concerto when the Principal violist got teed off with the conductor and, and called in sick at eight o'clock in the morning (laughs).  So they got this fellow, Patterson, and he had, okay, one hour to prepare this violin concerto--I mean viola concerto, one hour.  He did it; play it like, like a god, okay.  And the crucial part, after he had played it, there were no feet shuffling, no this or anything, no applause.  And it almost did him--it almost devastated him.  I had to take him aside and explain the facts to him.  I said, "Look"--his last name was Peterson [sic, Patterson], "Look, let me tell you something.  Now if they had applauded for you and clapped, I would be concerned, because that would mean that you only luke--low mediocrity."  I said, "But because they didn't, that means that you're top, you have a chance.  You're the tops, okay.  And so stand tall.  Let's call your mother."  We called his Mom, okay, and he was good to go.  He was ready to commit suicide.  His name was Patterson, okay, viola player.  That was just not too long ago, okay.  In the symphony here when it was, as a matter of fact, it was the Colorado Symphony [formerly the Denver Symphony Orchestra, Denver, Colorado] then.  That's within the last ten years, okay.  So these things are--they're vicious; make no mistake about it, they're vicious there.  But like I said, I always kept away from them because I, I didn't have time for it, you know.  The jazz kept me cool, you know.
Story_ID: 17039
Speaker 1: As you said in the beginning, you said, you shouldn't take yourself too seriously.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  And most of them were taking theirselves--themselves too serious.  That's the whole, whole platform.  They won't be people, you know, allow themselves to enjoy it--and enjoy as the boys say, "Smell the roses, you know.  Don't just run by.  Smell the roses, baby."  They don't do that.  Everything is right, wrong, you know, (unclear).  Don't do that.  Life is not that way, you know.  So like I say, "I just look at them.  I just shake my head and scratch my nose and go on," you know.
Speaker 1: Do you think you've achieved a certain balance with these two worlds?
Speaker 2: Oh, I know I have.  I always have, from the time I started--started the both of them.  And not only those two worlds, but the black--black world and the white world.  Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] taught me that, to achieve the balance.  "You're in the white man's country, hey, read the book, okay and do what you're supposed to do."  And you don't have to be a '[Uncle] Tom' and all of that sort of thing, you know.  No, no, you're your own person.  You stand tall, you know, see.  But I have never had a problem with that balancing, either the jazz or the Classics, you know.  The jazz, I have a little problem because in about, I think in the '50s [1950s], the jazz players be-became a little arrogant and crazy.  They started going to dope, to heavy dope.  And heroin, I knew that from being back in the ghetto, that you didn't recuperate from heroin, okay.  I knew that, you know.  Plus, my music always kept me high.  I never wanted anything.  I think I smoked, I had one puff of a--as they say, of a joint, that's a marijuana, back when I was seventeen.  And I said, "What is that?" (laughs) "Give me a Coca-Cola [beverage]."  And I never looked back.  I hadn't did anything since then, okay.  But no problems then.  None.
Speaker 1: So what about your family?  Your--you have children, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I have--I have four children, and God bless them, they're all marvelous and four--four children by my wife.  So that means we have four blacks and four whites.  And they're marvelous.  Just like that, like one big, happy family.  You know, they call me Dad, you know.  And the other ones called her Mom, you know.  So we had no problem.  It's an integration long before the time, okay, 'cause this started back in '67 [1967].  And my wife, thank God, she's the brains behind--as a matter of fact, I like the--I'm glad you asked me that because my present wife, as you often say, the man behind, "the man behind the gun," she is the man behind the gun, and I'll admit that any time, any place, anywhere to any person, okay.  If it hadn't been for her, I couldn't have made it.  I mean as far as I have in--as smoothly as I have, you know, because she jumped in there and did the thing that--that helped me, you know.
Story_ID: 17040
Speaker 1: Okay, what are your hopes for the black community?  What do you see--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, frankly, I see nothing but tragic if they don't go to school and learn to read--the three R's, reading, writing and arithmetic.  I think, I see nothing but tragic, pure tragic because you can't get ahead without an education.  And I've always preached, education, education, education.  With that you can open doors.  Without that it's almost impossible.  Now, some other people say, "Well, he didn't have an education and he's a CPO."  I say, "Look that was a rare occasion, a rare happening.  It doesn't happen that way every time," you know.  That was an unusual thing.  Like--it's like hitting the lottery.  (laughs)  How many chances do you have to hit the lottery, okay?  See, so I tell them the same thing is to get an education.  And I'm afraid that they're letting it go by now because they're not getting the bal- balance in the wealth of the classical side and the jazz side.  It's very difficult now, because the jazz side has gone crazy.  But the classical side entails being able to enjoy the Classics, the Opera and the Ballet.  And this, to me, is a, a big beautiful thing out there which will occupy most of your time if you just indulge in that.  But most people say, "Well, I don't understand it."  I say, "You don't understand Jesus Christ, but you'd like him normally, so hey, how do you go about that?  You see?"  You know, don't give me that, "I don't understand."  Just expose yourself, you know, and be a part of and look for tomorrow and not instant success today.  So like I said--but I'm very fearful, but they're not coming up like they used to.  You know, and black and white, it's not only blacks, whites too, same thing, you know.
Story_ID: 17041
Speaker 1: Sir, is there anything that you haven't said that you would like--that we haven't asked, that you would like to address?
Speaker 2: Well, the only thing I would like to say is that there was one person who in my interviews over the years, I've left out, but I would like to put this straight and let you know that the most important bass player in my life, in all my whole life and still is--is a fellow by the name of [Alfred] Al McKibbon, M-C-K-I-B-B-E-N [sic, McKibbon], who is now in Los Angeles [California].  And he's eighty-two years old.  And I'll tell you because he's a year older than me, as a matter of fact.  And he was my mentor and my reason for playing bass.  And if I ever played bass half as good as Al McKibbon played, I wouldn't even speak to anybody, I'd be so arrogant.  And he should know that.  That's what I wanted to add to it.
Speaker 1: Can you go into that in a little more detail?
Speaker 2: Al McKibbon?  Well, see Al McKibbon, now, people don't know, but he was in the same--we went to the same school, Cass Tech [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan].  He was a year ahead of me--a year ahead of me in school and forty years ahead of me on the--in the--on the bass.  But he was one of the greatest bass players I have ever known because--he was six foot three [inches] or four then I think, you know.  And he could do more with the bass--with a hundred dollar bass, and make it sound like a Stradivarius [violin], okay, because he had that ability to make it--but musically, he was just a giant.  And I used to go and listen to him at a club called Frogs Club in Detroit [Michigan], an after-hour club which was right around the corner from where I played at B & C Club, maybe three or four years.  I went every night they were playing, around to the Frogs Club and listen to Al to see how do you do this?  Okay, I was smart enough to know that I had to do that.
Story_ID: 17042
Speaker 1: ...And any young artists that you're impressed with who are coming up that you consider--.
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: Um-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh, I wouldn't know now because I've divorced myself in the last three years, I've just kept completely away from it.  I just do nothing but practice on my bass every morning.  And I--I have my records--,
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I have my records which I now do, but the younger musicians, I'm afraid for them because I'm afraid they're--they're learning--they're overpowering themselves in terms of what they're doing.  I think they're forgetting the fundamental philosophy of what you're doing and why you're doing it.  Now, if you're playing jazz, sweetheart, play me some jazz, okay.  And if you're playing the Classics, play the Classics.  But don't play me a whole lot of notes and tell me that's jazz when it is not.  You have to have a certain relationship of where you're going and to get the feeling for it.  And that's how simple that is.  It's like West Coast Jazz and East Coast Jazz.  We know that East Coast Jazz has always been predominantly a heavy style of jazz, okay, a heavy style of jazz.  Okay, it's--and then the West Coast was a lighter weight of jazz which is the very nice, you know (sings tune).  That's what I was saying about [Alfred] Al McKibbon being such an outstanding musician.  He was back East.  He was one of the heaviest bass players I've ever known in my life and had a magnificent ear and a sense of rhythm that was impeccable.  No one to that day and to this day can touch Al McKibbon, okay, in playing the bass.  He is my God (with emphasis) on the bass, okay.  And if there's ever a man deserved--he's an unsung hero, I'll put it that way.  And I know why he was unsung, but I won't go into that.  That's not my prerogative to go into that, you know, because it's a simple thing.  I'll tell--he'll probably hear this, but to his face, his mouth was too big, okay.  Okay, Al, I love you dearly, but you opened your mouth at the wrong time, okay, instead of being quiet, you should have been still and you would have been accepted any place in the world.  But that's why.  You always voiced your opinion, and it was very--too vociferous, okay.  You opened your mouth too soon, but as I said before, make no mistake, the greatest bass player in my--in my--my life has been Al McKibbon.
Speaker 1: What kind of things was he saying that would get him in trouble?
Speaker 2: Okay, about the honky, okay.  "White man ain't gonna tell me what to do," you know.  And when you came through the [John] Dizzy Gillespie school, which is the Be-Bop school, most of those were fools, turned into complete idiots because a fighting structure, the social structure.  You didn't do it and get away with it.  If you did, something was highly wrong.  And you, or either you knew how far to do it.  You do it like Duke Ellington [Edward Kennedy Ellington], okay, or like [Cabell] Cab Calloway or like [Count] Basie [William Allen Basie] or like [Louis] Louie Armstrong, you can name hundreds of people that lived within the thing, but if you're an outsider and you start talking what they call "race talking" and you're a black man, they won't have it.  You can't get any place, okay.  They--and you know, speaking your mind, telling everyone they're crazy or something.  You don't do that.  You learn how to play the game and poor Al didn't play the game right.  And, of course, he probably looks at me now and says, "Well, so what?  But that's his prerogative, but he's still the best bass player I've ever known, barring none, you know, jazz bass player.  You know, and he could be a concert bass player if he wanted to be, but he knew better than that.  He learned as a bow, but he never used it, but he could, okay.
Story_ID: 17043
Speaker 1: Could you just address the issue of blacks in classical--in the classical arena, I mean still vocalists have done better, you know--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) In--,
Speaker 1: --than--than in the--in opera--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --opera, sure.
Speaker 1: --than there have been--the case of--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --In the, in the--.
Speaker 1: --You look at the symphony today--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --Instrumentals, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the symphony when you started (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, it's a simple--it's a simple procedure.  When you're a vocalist, you're out in front.  You're only one person.  You're there this week and gone next week.  But when you're a musician, you're a part of the organization and they look down their raggedy noses at you because the fact that, one, you're black and obviously, the old stigma of black is not quite as good, you know, you feel it.  It carries over right into the arena of the classical arena, and--and that's why I believe blacks don't go--of course, I think the main reason that blacks don't go in today is money, economics.  They're smarter, you know, why?  They certainly realize, "Well, why should I go and subject myself to ten or fifteen years of this regimented playing, studying, practicing eight hours a day, and then become a part of an organization where they really don't want me?  Where you're isolated.  Where you're nothing, neither black nor white.  Plus, if I take that same thing and go to college for two or three years, I can get a job in high tech.  Wow!  And make anywhere from sixty, eighty, ninety-thousand or a hundred thousand dollars.  So why should I waste my time--,"  Okay, economics with the symphony.  That's the main reason right now why blacks don't--don't go for classical music because, "Hey, why waste my time?  I can make money, you know, doing all--all other things except the Classics, you know."  Don 't waste your time.  And I tell them, honestly, "Well, don't be--don't waste your time unless you're dedicated.  If you're dedicated, I feel sorry for you, but go.  You can make it, but just be, be prepared to face the onslaught of what it takes to do that, okay.  Don't ever give up, don't ever give up if you want to go.  But be prepared," you know.  And that's what the whole arena is, except for in terms of--of--of the relationship between the soloists--black soloists especially, and the orchestra.  But, of course, the black soloists had to be twice as good as the white soloists to get the recognition--I know I was there for years--to get the recognition, you know.  But when they're tops, they can't do anything with them but say, "Yes, that's magnificent," okay, because they've been renowned over the world, just like Dorothy Maynor, okay, when she was singing with the orchestra back in the '50s [1950s].  And like (sings)--the big one--Marian Anderson, okay.  She was so far ahead, above this--Leontyne Price.  Well, these were individual--isolated individuals.  But be--for every one you have, you have a hundred of them down there that are being ostracized and condemned because they're not quite that good.
Story_ID: 17044
Speaker 1: What is it like for you being alone with your bass?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--I'll tell you first of all, it's, it's therapeutic, okay, because all of my life, anytime I touch the bass, it's like taking a big high, every note is important.  Every note--even now, is a thrill, you know.  And when I practice every morning,  which is a half an hour, forty minutes, I go in there and I touch the bass, and I just look sometimes and say, "Yeah, I can--yeah, you couldn't play that yesterday, could you?"  Meaning sixty years ago, okay.  But every morning, as I said before, a new, exciting thing.  You know, and whenever I play it's always new and exciting because that's the way I feel inside, okay.  And the Classics, they keep me honest as all get out because I'm still practicing things now that I started practicing when I was sixteen, okay, like [Richard] Strauss [music composer], which is--'Ein Heldenleben' [symphony], you know, 'A Hero's--Life' [trans.] and 'Don Juan' [opera] and all these things.  But I can play them now better than anybody, okay.  No one can outplay me on it, but I don't need it now, but I--satisfaction inside.  Like, for instance, the opening of 'Don Juan', it took me I think, a hundred thousand hours to learn the opening of Don Juan, okay.  That'll give you an idea of what it is.  But even right now, when I go to practice in the morning, as I said before, it's stimulating.  If I practice, my day is fine.  If I don't practice, there's a hole there, for only just a half an hour, see.  But like I say, every day and every note, you know, it means something.
Story_ID: 17045
Speaker 1: What about Charles Mingus?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, Charlie.  Well, I think I first met him--it was 1950 or '51 [1951] I guess, here in Denver [Colorado] at a club out here in northeast Denver called the Zanzibar.  He was with Red Norvo.  And he was a young--nice guy then, you know, clean as a whistle, you know, and no arrogance, just a nice, simple fellow.  Now, that was in the early '50s [1950s], okay.  And then he--a fine bass player.  Then he went to New York, and as I say, "He got turned out," because the New York musicians there turned him out.  So I met him again in 1959 when I first went to, went to San Francisco [California].  He was playing in North Beach [San Francisco, California] up at one of those clubs.  Now, when I first met him, he was about 160-[1]70 pounds, I guess, slim, trim, elegant, nice shave and everything, you know.  The next time I saw him up there on North Beach, as they say, in San Francisco, I didn't recognize him.  He was about 295 pounds, that wide and had hair all over his head, you know, and hadn't shaved in months, you know.  He was about that wide, as a matter of fact, you know.  And his big thing was grabbing people off the street, ripping their buttons.  "What was this?"  That was Mingus, you know.  He had gotten angry, and the reason he'd gotten angry is because of race.  I can tell it like it is.  I mean the 'Great White Father' got to him, and he didn't know how to handle it.  So he--fought with, would fight back, okay.  And by fighting back, he never got the recognition that he should have gotten because he was too angry.  You can't do that.  It's impossible, you know.  If he'd a stayed half way cool, he'd have one of the greatest recognitions of--of anyone out there yet because he was a talent, a big talent.  You know, I wouldn't like to hear him play myself, but for the average person, they loved to hear him because he was a superb talent, okay.
Speaker 1: So how do you maintain your cool?
Speaker 2: Easy.  It's no big deal.  You get your sleep.  You get your exercise.  And you--my thing is all my life I've been swimming at least twice a week.  You know, and that keeps me cool.  Plus, just practicing.  That keeps me very cool, you know.  And every time I think I've--I've just about hit the high part of my life, my bass tells me, "No, you didn't quite do it right.  So do it over."  So in other words, it keeps you on a level--even--even keel, you know.  And then, too, just my genes.  I'm sure my mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] has a lot to do with that because I look back now, and she was cool.  Oh, she was cool.  She was "Cooler than a fool in Liverpool [England]," you know.  And, but knew what was going on.  And that's what I looked at, you know, when I was younger.  I suddenly realized that's psychologically like I'd like to be, okay.  Be able to think, but don't be angry.
Story_ID: 17046
Speaker 1: When you came to Denver [Colorado], you know, from Detroit [Michigan], the time when you came to live, you met your grandmother--.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Grandma Kate.  Katie Howard, yeah.  So she was a--an elegant lady, up in her eighties.  And every time you saw her, she was--looked like she'd just stepped out of a band box, okay.  They had her--her daughters, my aunts, had her fixed up like a doll.  She was up in her eighties and she was as elegant as they ever come, okay.  When the kids passed by, they would nod and say, "Miss Kate," okay.  And then, "Miss Kate," you know.  She'd say, "Good morning," sitting on the porch, you know, all decked out, just from head to toe, you know.  Yeah, Grandma Kate.
Story_ID: 17047
Speaker 1: The thing about the classical, you know, the, the environment--you know, the classical environment--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) The in--inner, inner, inner workings of an orchestra--,
Speaker 1: Right, and what goes--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --and what goes on there.  I'm glad you asked me about that because that I explained to one of my--my cousins just recently.  I just became aware of it, within myself, you know.
Speaker 1: I want to ask that question since I (unclear). The other is when you're--the similarities between swimming and playing, you know, that (unclear)--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) --Um-hmm, yeah, psychologically, okay.  You ready?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: First of all, the connection between swimming and my instrument was this, that I learned years ago that because of playing the bass, I would always play this way with the bow.  Now, this is learned back, way back when I was in San Francisco [California].  So I would get irritations of the muscles here because I was always playing this way.  So I went and jumped in the pool.  After six months' visitation with the doctors and all that sort of thing, I went and jumped in the pool and started doing the breast stroke.  And I haven't looked back.  And that was 19--hmm--'59, '59 [1959] and I haven't looked back.  So in other words, that has kept me cool.  Plus, in my later life, I learned that every morning what I do is chin [chin-up] on my apple tree, one time in the morning, chin and hang.  And I've had no back problems or bursitis or all the 'sitis', I've never had any of those.  Very lucky, you know, in terms of that respect.  Oh, another thing I'd like to tell you, I think you asked me about the relationship of the atmosphere of how it is on--with the classical musicians on stage and so forth.  I have to say, as in all sincerity, that's the most vicious, brutal setting in all the world.  You do not realize that.  And me, being a Negro especially, because I suddenly--after all these years, I've suddenly realized, "Well look, I don't belong to the white race because they don't accept me.  I don't belong to the back--black race because they look down their noses at me because they don't accept me.  So where am I?  I belong in the middle," but Mom [Denverado Howard Burrell] taught me how to handle that too.  In other words, be true to yourself, my family, okay, and my friends.  And that's the way you handle that.  But as I said before, in terms of the atmosphere in the orchestras--all orchestras, make no exception, okay--if they tell you they get along, they're, they're telling a lie (with emphasis).  They don't.  Inside, they're boiling with animosity, you know, great animosity.  And I don't know where they got that because when I was with the orchestra, if someone did something, I was always there to support them, you know, always there to give some support.  But ninety percent of them now, even more--these don't--they're young and arrogant and crazy.  They don't give support, you know.  Like I said, but it's brutal out there.
Speaker 1: So it's become the standard musical culture in the Classics--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It's, it's a brutal--it's a brutal atmosphere.  You know, one I would not recommend to my worst enemy.  And I know because I'd been there.  And especially if you're black, you know, and you stand back and avoid that, but--enjoy it from afar, but don't get mixed up in it because it's not worth it, unless you just feel like you have to.  But be aware, as I said before, that you are different.  And they're gonna put that thing on--let you know at some--psychological or something, some way or another, they will let you know it, you know.  And this thing about trying to teach you nice--how you--I can smell a rat even before it gets, gets to stinking, you know.  Give me a break, so we all know that.
Story_ID: 17048
Speaker 1: Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, just as a person, you know, a guy that had his feet on the ground, that believed in his family and in the race and hu- in humanity.  People.  I mean I love people.  You know, and that's been my big because without me there couldn't--it wouldn't--without people, there wouldn't be me, you know.  So as I said before, it's no big deal.  I did what I thought I had to do.  And I enjoyed every second of it.  Every day of my life was almost like Christmas.  Now, there're very few people that can look back and say that, okay.  The bad days, that didn't--they were not that bad because the good days compensated for the bad days, you know.  And the loves in my life were magnificent, all.  Period.  I--you know, I'm not making--apologize about it because it was excellent, you know.  Everything had its place.  But the main thing, it's just simple Charlie, you know, Charlie Burrell.  You know, and, and let it go.
Speaker 1: What do you think your musical legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I hadn't thought about it because others will write about that.  It's not for me to write about it, okay, because I can't--I really can't say within myself.  But they can write about, and they probably will.  There are those out there who know how to do that.
Story_ID: 17049
Speaker 1: Now, did your father [Ruben Orestas Burrell] ever see you play?
Speaker 2: Perform?
Speaker 1: Perform.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at my graduation--my high school [Cass Technical High School, Detroit, Michigan] graduation, and that was it. (laughs)  In his entire life.  That's the only time he ever heard me play was in, in the high school band at the--orchestra at the graduation.
Speaker 1: What did he think?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  And someone I know that I, I heard him talking out in the foyer afterwards.  Someone said, "Well, I didn't, I didn't know your son played in the orchestra."  And my old man was such a jiver, he said, "Oh, yeah--I've known--he's done that for years.  My mother [Denverado Howard Burrell] said, (whispers) "He didn't even know you played bass, son."  So I just laughed at him.
Speaker 1: But your mother was very proud.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she was proud.  She was at my first concert here in Denver [Colorado].  She came in from Detroit [Michigan] at my first concert in Denver, here with the Denver Symphony [Orchestra], okay.  Came by bus to see 'Chunky' play, you know.  She was so proud, and that was all I needed.  So with that and me being exposed to Pierre Monteux [Conductor, San Francisco Symphony Orchestra], hey, what, how much better could you get?  You know, how much more in life could you ask for?  Not much.
Story_ID: 17050
Speaker 1: That's is my dear wife, Melanie Markay (ph.) Burrell, who played cello with the Denver [Colorado] Symphony [Orchestra] for thirty-five years.  And we're still married for over thirty-five years.  And we have four children between us.  Four--she has four and I have four.  Four white and four black and we get along beautifully.  And she's been my inspiration.  The man behind the man behind the gun.  That has been it.  Her name is Melanie M. Burrell.  And that was taken in, in with the orchestra in 1990.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell with his wife Melanie Markay Burrell, Denver, Colorado, 1990.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17051
Speaker 1: That was taken in 1984, down on the Mall, which is 16th Street in Denver [Colorado] when I had my trio with me.  And the trio was comprised of Louise Duncan on piano and Kevin Smith on drums.  1984, during the lunch hour.
Speaker 2: [Newspaper clipping of Charles Burrell performing, Denver, Colorado, August, 1984.  Copyright 'Rocky Mountain News,' Denver, Colorado.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17052
Speaker 1: Okay, that was a session, made in about 1980 where a fellow named Larsen [sic, Larkin] was a photographer.  And he took these pictures of me.  And it's the first time in my life I ever OD'd [overdosed] on cigars.  I think I smoked a whole box of cigars while he was taking these pictures.  And by--coincidentally, he won, I think the second prize--grand price--national prize for photography.  His name is Fred Larkin.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell posing with his bass violin by Fred Larkin, Denver, Colorado, 1980.  Copyright Fred Larkin, Denver, Colorado.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17053
Speaker 1: That is the same--in the same studio, same time.  Mr. [Fred] Larkin took that picture also.  And, of course, you see there, smoking the cigar.  As I said before, it was quite a grueling day with the box of cigars I consumed.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell with his bass violin and smoking a cigar by Fred Larkin, Denver, Colorado, 1980.  Copyright Fred Larkin, Denver, Colorado.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17054
Speaker 1: And this is a classic picture of my niece, the famous Dianne Reeve [sic, Reeves] when she was seventeen years old, one of her first little jobs she did, as you can see with her uncle along the right side.  So she's now, I think forty-five, so it'll give you an idea--as a matter of fact, it was twenty-three years ago so you can figure it up from there.  Dianne Reeves.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell's niece, singer Dianne Reeves, age seventeen, 1973.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17055
Speaker 1: And this is the Maestro [orchestra conductor] out in San Francisco [California] in 1959 who hired me.  His was Enrique Jorda, okay.  That was the Maestro at that time, San Francisco Symphony [Orchestra].
Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Enrique Jorda, Conductor of the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, San Francisco, California, 1959.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17056
Speaker 1: Okay, now, that was back when I was smoking a pipe, also smoking a pipe and cigar.  And that was when I first got to San Francisco [California] and got with the symphony [San Francisco Symphony Orchestra] there, on one of my little practice sessions.  But then I think--yeah, that was a pipe in my mouth then.  That was before I switched over to the, the infamous cigars.
Speaker 2: [Publicity photo of Charles Burrell with his bass violin, San Francisco, California, 1960s.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17057
Speaker 1: This picture was taken 1966 [sic, 1967] of the then Denver [Colorado] Symphony [Orchestra] under the director--leadership of Vladimir Golschmann, in those days.  The princ- the fellow on the right side, is named--was named John Van Buskirk.  He was the Principal [bass player].  And next to him is the Business Manager whose name was Harry Saffstrom.  And, of course, the third one down is Charlie Burrell.
Speaker 2: [Concert program from the Denver Symphony Orchestra, March, 1967.  Copyright the Denver Symphony Orchestra, Denver, Colorado.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17058
Speaker 1: Now, this was on the [16th Street] Mall [in Denver, Colorado].  Once again, we were doing the noontime charade, I call it.  And that's Kevin Smith playing drums there.  This was about 19--oh, almost twenty years ago.  So you figure that--1982, '83 [1983], somewhere around there.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell performing with Kevin Smith at a noontime concert on the Mall, Denver, Colorado, 1982-1983.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17059
Speaker 1: In Detroit [Michigan] in about 1946 or '47 [1947].  And the fellow on the extreme left is named [William] Billy Horner.  And he was one of the first blacks to be with any major white organization.  And he's the one that went with Leopold Stokowski in the All [American] Youth Orchestra back in 1937.  And the fellow--two from him, is named [Alvin] Al Hayes, who was with the vibraphone player for many years as an arranger and trombonist.  And that's me, obviously on the bass, my little half-sized bass, which I thought was a charm in those days.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell (second from right), Billy Horner (far left), Al Hayes (third from right) and others performing at a jazz club, Detroit, Michigan, 1946-1947.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17060
Speaker 1: And that was taken in 1982.  And the fellow on the right's name is Miller, Allan Miller [conductor and filmmaker].  He's now head of the organization in New York [New York] at the Kennedy (pause)--Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts].  And, of course, that's me in the middle--there on the left side with my, my marvelous instrument.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell with Conductor Allan Miller, Denver, Colorado, 1982.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17061
Speaker 1: And that's just one of those--that was almost eighteen years ago, and just one of those impromptu sessions where I was playing and somebody happened to take a picture of me playing with my cigar, you know, having fun.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell performing with his bass violin, 1984-1985.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17062
Speaker 1: And that's a picture of the band--the black band--one of the black bands came out of Camp Robert Small in Great Lakes [Great Lakes Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois] in 1944 [sic, 1945].  And the fellow on the extreme left there with the trombone is one of the famous trombonist of this day.  His name is [Albert] Al Grey.  And on the right side, second row down is me with the tuba.  And that was taken at Grosse Ile.  That's outside of Detroit in Michigan, Grosse Ile.
Speaker 2: [The Great Lakes Naval Training Center band with Charles Burrell (far right) on the tuba and Al Grey (far left) on trombone, Grosse Ile (Detroit), Michigan, 1945.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17063
Speaker 1: This is a little aggregate of musicians at--we used to play just for the fun of it.  And you'll find in the front row there, middle, is my ex--my wife, Melanie [Markay (ph.) Burrell], who played cello then.  And to the left of her is a lady named Campbell, who was with the Denver Symphony [Orchestra] then.  And in back of her is another lady who was with the Denver Symphony.  And in the back row, you'll see Charlie, hanging out there.  And, let's see, this was taken about 1980.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell (back row, center) with his wife, Melanie Markay Burrell (front row, second from left), and members of the Denver Symphony Orchestra, Denver, Colorado, 1980.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17064
Speaker 1: That's me at the organ at our cabin in 1961.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell at the organ, 1961.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17065
Speaker 1: And that's Donald White, the cellist with the Cleveland Symphony [sic, Cleveland Orchestra, Cleveland, Ohio] and my brand new car in 1965, a '65 [1965] Chrysler.
Speaker 2: Hold on, please.
Speaker 1: [Donald White, cellist with the Cleveland Orchestra, posing with Charles Burrell's car, 1965.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17066
Speaker 1: That was a picture of Louise Duncan, pianist extraordinaire.  That was taken in 19- 1985, yeah, at the Fairmont Hotel in--no, later than that, but it was taken in one of the big hotels downtown, okay.  Louise Duncan and me [Charles Burrell].  We played--we played together for seventeen years.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell and Louise Duncan, Denver, Colorado, 1985.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17067
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's one of my good buddies from San Francisco [California], the Principal clarinet player out there [with the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra], and I forget his name.  It's on the back.  But anyhow me and a big fine instrument that I was using at the time there.  Philip Fath is his name, that's right, Phil Fath.  That's the clarinet player who was there in San Francisco in 1960.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell and Philip Fath before a performance with the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra, San Francisco, California, 1960.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17068
Speaker 1: That's yours truly last week (laughs).
Speaker 2: Next, please.  Great shot.  Who took that, sir?
Speaker 1: His name Steve, for the 'Rocky Mountain News' [newspaper].  Steve--I can't think of his name, but he was a--he was renowned, world-renowned, you know--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 1: [Charles Burrell posing with his bass for the 'Rocky Mountain News' newspaper, Denver, Colorado, June, 2002.  Copyright Rocky Mountain News, Denver, Colorado.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
Story_ID: 17069
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an old clipping.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) You're in the [United States] Navy playing the bass.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was in 1941, '42 [1942], okay.  And on the right down there, stooped down, you can see of all these--holding the clarinet?  That's [William] Willie Smith, who was one of the famous alto [saxophone] players in the world back in those days.  He was with [James] Jimmy Lunceford's orchestra.  And then he was with the Navy [at Great Lakes Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois], as you see there.  And after he got his Section 8 from the Navy, which means that, you know, he staged insanity, he joined an orchestra in Las Vegas [Nevada]--Harry James's orchestra the next day (laughs).  And on the left, obviously, is me.
Speaker 2: [Charles Burrell (far left) with members of his Navy jazz band Great Lakes Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois, 1941-1942; Front row, L. to R.: Charley Pillars, Sykes Smith and Willie Smith; Back row, L. to R.: Charles Burrell, Len Bowden, Russell Boone, Ed Penigar, C.L Franois and Ike Perkins.  From the collection of Charles Burrell.]
