Story_ID: 4519
Speaker 1: This HistoryMakers interview is being conducted by Robert C. Hayden, the interviewer.  The videographer for the interview is Scott Stearns.  The date of the interview is October 16th [2004] and the location for the interview is the home of the HistoryMaker at 48 Blue Castle Road [sic, Drive], Mashpee, Massachusetts.  Mr. HistoryMaker, would you give me your full name and would you spell your name for me?
Speaker 2: John Garvey Bynoe.
Speaker 1: And would you spell it?
Speaker 2: Boston-B-Y-N-O-E.
Speaker 1: And Mr. Bynoe, where were you born and when were you born?
Speaker 2: In Boston, Massachusetts on the twenty-fifth of October, 1940--19--19--.
Speaker 1: We can come back.  We can come back.
Speaker 2: I was born 1926.
Story_ID: 4520
Speaker 1: Before you retired, Mr. Bynoe, what was your occupation?  What was your profession?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was an attorney.
Speaker 1: All right, and the last position that you held before you retired, what was your title?
Speaker 2: I was the director for--the director of Office of Civil Rights for H, HEW [U.S. Department of Health, Education and Welfare]  in Boston [Massachusetts].  I was the regional director for, for Region One, Boston, Massachusetts.
Story_ID: 4521
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, I guess, is--I, all, just about everything, yeah.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) is, yeah, red, I guess.
Speaker 1: Red?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you used to try to escape and get away from the job and things, where did you like to travel?  What used to be your favorite vacation place?
Speaker 2: I used to go Barbados.
Speaker 1: Barbados, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: I think spring and autumn.
Speaker 1: Spring and autumn, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you use often?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to, yeah, we used to be on the Barbados, 'Barbados Advocate' for years.  They had a newspaper in Barbados.  And, and it was the, the motto on, on the--I can't even remember it.  I'm getting--.
Speaker 1: Okay, maybe we'll come back to it because we're gonna talk about your parents coming from Barbados, and maybe you'll think about it as we, as we go along.
Story_ID: 4522
Speaker 1: Let's talk about, a little bit about your family background and your family history.  What was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: Edna, Edna V. Bynoe.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Barbados.
Speaker 1: And do you recall the year that she was born?
Speaker 2: 19--1896, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you know about her background and her growing up in Barbados?  Did she tell you much about that?
Speaker 2: Well, somewhat, yeah.  Her, she always talked about her father was very mean (laughs), and he used to send her out, oh, after midnight to go get water for him from the well.  And she'd always be scared.  And they call, what they call the dupies (ph.) comin' at 'em, and she thought he was a mean devil man.  That was her feeling, yeah.  Her mother was a beautiful woman, her mother.
Speaker 1: Did you know her mother?  Did you know your grandmother?
Speaker 2: My, my sisters did, my sisters and my brother.  They grew up in Barbados for a little while--.
Speaker 1: They did.
Speaker 2: Before they came here, but I didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna come back and talk about your brothers and sisters in a few minutes.  Do you recall any other stories that your mother told about her growing up in Barbados?
Speaker 2: Oh, one day she wanted to, she would not go in the water, so they took her out in a boat, left her out there for two days.  Then she decided, she came in and swam that way back in.  And she became a excellent swimmer.
Speaker 1: Excellent swimmer?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) and she told us, she'd go, she'd go out to where the--she, she, the big boats come in, she'd right out to them, all the way out.
Speaker 1: What was her personality like?  How do you remember your mother as a person?  What was she like?
Speaker 2: She was a, she was a mother, a mother of mother's.  Nothing too good for her children, and she wanted her children to get the best of everything.  And that, you know, she did.  She could do--couldn't go enough for us.
Speaker 1: Now, when did she leave Barbados?  How old was she when she left?
Speaker 2: When she left Barbados, she was, she was nineteen, when she was--she came here 1920, '20, so she must have been about eighteen, nineteen years old.  And she came here.  My father [John Leo Bynoe] left there in 1919, and he went to Canada.  The war was then on, and he went to Canada and stayed up there, I guess two or three years.  Then he came back down to Boston [Massachusetts], and he first came down into Boston, into Cambridge [Massachusetts].  And a lot of people here were from the West Indies, and he settled in Boston.
Story_ID: 4523
Speaker 1: Tell me your father's name.
Speaker 2: John Leo Bynoe.
Speaker 1: John Leo?
Speaker 2: John Leo Bynoe.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: In Barbados.
Speaker 1: And do you recall the year that he was born?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1896 [sic, 1894], I think.
Story_ID: 4524
Speaker 1: Were they [parents, John Leo Bynoe and Edna V. Bynoe] married when they came to Canada and the U.S. or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They were already married?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Why did they leave Barbados?
Speaker 2: Well, it was an opportunity to come to a new country, learn something, yeah.
Speaker 1: What did your mother do when she arrived in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: When she first came here?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: She used to go out to Day's Work, working for the rich people.  And then she went to hair dressing school later on.  And she taught, you know, hair dressing, and she started--after she was here for a while, she started doing hair in the house, yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you father first went to Canada, what did he do there?
Speaker 2: When he first went to Canada, I guess he did whatever he could, yeah.
Speaker 1: Why did they separate, one in Canada and one in Boston?
Speaker 2: Oh, he went to Bos--he went to Canada, and then she came and joined him in Boston.
Story_ID: 4525
Speaker 1: You have brothers and sisters.  Could you give me their names and, and their birth order, and the year they were born?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Victor [C. Bynoe].  He's the oldest.  Then my sister Edn--.
Speaker 1: Edna?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Sylvia [I. Smith], Ella [I. Callender], then Edna [B. Smith] and George [L. Bynoe] and, no, no.  Edna, and then, yeah, yeah, George and Barbara, a sister that died, and Edna, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, which ones were born in Barbados?
Speaker 2: All of them.
Speaker 1: All of them?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you're the only child born--?
Speaker 2: Born here, yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the U.S.?
Speaker 2: And George.
Speaker 1: George, you and George--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --were born in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 4526
Speaker 1: What was your father [John Leo Bynoe] like as a person?  How do you remember him?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was a, well, worka-workaholic.  He used to, he used to work at the--for instance, he used to work against--down at the boats yard, you know.  Then he got job with the Boston [and] Albany Railroad.  The day my son was--brother was born, he got that job, and he had it till the day, till he retired.  He was a carpenter.
Speaker 1: For the--?
Speaker 2: Member of the Boston Albany Railroad.
Speaker 1: Boston Albany Railroad.
Speaker 2: That's right.  And he was a, a member of the carpenter's union.  Nobody believed it.  He was a carpenter's union till he retired in '60 something, 1960, and he got that job because he was a trained carpenter, and he used to be able to do all the--back in those days, they had the trains, people had, they had to do all the carts, carts went in on--the cabinet work, and you know, fitting.  He had to make it, you know, beautiful.  And he used to do all that work.
Story_ID: 4527
Speaker 1: When your parents [John Leo Bynoe and Edna V. Bynoe] came and settled in Boston [Massachusetts], what street did they move on?  What was the neighborhood like?  Where did they settle in Boston?
Speaker 2: Oh, they came to Boston, they lived on, we lived, lived on, on Windsor Street, and then at Sherman Avenue.  And from there, we moved over to the house where we lived al our life on Williams Street.
Speaker 1: On Williams Street.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when you were born, where were they living?
Speaker 2: I was living on Sherman Avenue. 716 Sherman Avenue.
Speaker 1: What are your earliest memories as a child growing up on Sherman Avenue?
Speaker 2: On Williams Street.
Speaker 1: On Williams, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, I remember living on Williams Street, and we lived next door to the Cooperson (ph.) house.  And we had, I knew all the different neighbors lived out there, Alvin Lewis's (ph.) family, the Martins, all the Baldie (ph.) Martin.  And we all lived right in that little cocoon, yeah.
Speaker 1: What did you do as a child in the neighborhood?  What kind of things did you and your playmates do growing up on--?
Speaker 2: Oh, we used to play out in the--there was a big alley behind my house.  And all my buddies used to come out there, and we'd go out there and play baseball.  We didn't have enough room.  When you go look at it now, you wouldn't believe it, but we used to have a base, a little baseball diamond and everything else.  And then we used to play tin, tin, tin can (unclear)  They come out and catch somebody, and they'd run, and they called it (unclear)).  And we tried to catch somebody who had sneaked off, bring them back in.
Speaker 1: What was family life like for you?  Were there any special observances and things that your family did every year?  Do you--how do you remember your family life?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, we used to, yeah, we--every year we have a, we would have, always had a big dinner on Sundays, and my mother used to--she was a member of, had a lot of friends who lived there on Williams Street.  And they all used to cook up all kinds of West Indian foods and they'd bake goods and shared them with each other.  And my mother was a terrific cook.  She could make fish cakes and every--all the West Indies--Ind--West Indian foods, yeah.  She used to make all that, kind of things.
Speaker 1: What was the ethnic group racial mix of your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: West Indians.
Speaker 1: Mostly West Indians?
Speaker 2: West Indians, yeah.  West Indian families, yeah.
Speaker 1: What, what sights, what sounds and what smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, when they, on, on the weekend, when all the different houses would be cooking all kinds of peas and rice, and, and they would smell the, all the pigs feet and black pudding and all those different delicacies that, you know.  And I remember my mother used to make it, and neighbors would make the same thing.  And they all would be, you know, taking out upon each other and, yeah, sharing.  She used to make coconut bread and, and sauce, yeah--and all that would be, be here for all the friends who would come by.
Speaker 1: Were there any special sounds that verber--reverberated through the neighborhood that remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: No, not really, other than, other than that we'd hear a lot of people coming by.
Speaker 1: Did the clatter of the elevated rail--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was there, but that never--.
Speaker 1: Never?
Speaker 2: Yeah, after a while you didn't even hear them, yeah.
Speaker 1: What other memories do you have about growing up on Williams Street in, in Roxbury [neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts]?  What other memories do you have that we might not have talked about?
Speaker 2: Well, I think we used to go down to the park and do all kinds of things down there, and play ball and, and--.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the park?
Speaker 2: Madison Park.
Speaker 1: Would you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: M-A-D-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Madison Park?
Speaker 2: Madison Park, yeah.  That was right in front of the Sherwin School.  And as kids we used to have relays around the park.  And we'd have four kids running, running relay teams, running around the park, come right back to school.  And we used to, we had a, one teacher, John B. Dacey, John B. Dacey, who was always, his boys--that's what he called us, and he'd, had us all learning how to run.
Story_ID: 4528
Speaker 1: Were you ever visited by relatives from Barbados?  Did people come to visit you from Barbados?
Speaker 2: Yeah, later years, my, all my aunts, my, my--came over.  They didn't come to visit.  They came to stay, and they all came and they lived with our family.  And then they'd go out, find their own jobs.  And my aunt and their kids and all of them came.  And then I had a cousin who grew up with me, Edgar, he came in 1939.  And he grew up in my house like a brother.
Speaker 1: Did you and your parents or brothers and sisters ever go back and visit Barbados?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, my mother [Edna V. Bynoe] used to go back and later years after they, you know, able to do so, she used to go back.  In 19--19, in the 1970s and '80s [1980s], my mother used to go almost every year to Barbados.
Story_ID: 4529
Speaker 1: What elementary school did you first attend?
Speaker 2: I went to, I first went to the Lafayette [Elementary] School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Lafayette?
Speaker 2: That was right behind my house over on (unclear) Street.  And when I first went to school, Alma Lewis tells a note, that she took me to school the first day I ever went.  We, yeah, we went, that was school the first three grades.  Then I went to the Sherwin School [Boston, Massachusetts], which was down the end of my street.  That was from the fourth grade to the, intermediate to eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, what are some of your memories about the Lafayette and the Sherwin School?  What, what are some of your memories of being there?
Speaker 2: Lafayette School, I remember that, we all were, yeah, we were there, and we were there, they never expected too much of us, but when I went to--,
Speaker 1: What was they?
Speaker 2: --Sherwin School.
Speaker 1: They is?
Speaker 2: Teachers, you know, we, we were little kids, you know, little knuckleheads, you know.  Then we went to the Sherwin School, and then that was like growing up.  We had fifth grade, sixth--you know, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth grade, and, you know, teachers, they, they, I don't know, they never seemed to expect too of us.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to go on to [Boston] Latin School [Boston, Massachusetts], but the teacher never thought I was smart enough to go, yeah, yeah.  And we went on, when I went on to [Boston] English High School [Boston, Massachusetts] cause that was a top school.
Speaker 1: You went on to which school?
Speaker 2: The--.
Speaker 1: High school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, English High.
Speaker 1: English High School?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was, after Latin, and that was the top school.  And I, I had no problem there.  In four years, I never brought a book home.  I used to be able to study in class.
Story_ID: 4530
Speaker 1: Did you have any ideas or notions when you were in [English] High School [Boston, Massachusetts] about what you wanted to be and what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I knew I wanted to be a lawyer.
Speaker 1: You did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where did you get that from?  How did--?
Speaker 2: I remember the Lindbergh case [1932], Lindbergh specifically.  I read newspapers.  And Charles Lindbergh's son [Charles A. Lindbergh, Jr.] was, kidnapped, and I used to read the questions and answers from lawyers, trial lawyers, and I, you know, I just, it really gave me--I really thought that was something else.  And I, and from that point, I decided I wanted to a lawyer.
Story_ID: 4531
Speaker 1: You said that the academics at English High [School, Boston, Massachusetts] were pretty easy for you and you, you were a good student.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What other, outside of school activities were you involved in, in high school?  Did you work, did you have a job?
Speaker 2: High school, yeah, I used to work up to the store, up at, up on Washington Street.  It was a store and a market, store up there.  And I used to help out in the drugstore down the corner, run errands.  And I used to do all kinds of little things, yeah.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in any school organizations, clubs or anything, other things at English High?
Speaker 2: No, no.  No.
Speaker 1: How about sports?  Were you active in sports?
Speaker 2: No, no, we had our own little football team up in, in Madison Park [Boston, Massachusetts]-- in Columbus Playground.  We used to play football out there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Sand lot football.
Speaker 2: Yeah, sand lot football, yeah.
Story_ID: 4532
Speaker 1: Tell me about your church life and your family's church life as you were growing up.  What church did your family attend?
Speaker 2: My attend--when I was a kid, I used to go to Brethren Church down on Sherman Avenue [Boston, Massachusetts], Brother Freska (ph.).  And we were there for years.  That was what they called Brethren Churches, you know, west and east.  And then we came to Boston and my sisters, they started to get, attending St. Cyprian's.  They had a young, a young people's program there.  And--.
Speaker 1: Could you spell, could you spell Cyprian's for us?  Saint, and could you spell Cyprian's?
Speaker 2: Yeah, St. Cyprian's, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Cyprian's, C-Y-, oh, God, Cyprian's, Saint Cyprian's, K-, no, I can't.
Speaker 1: Okay, we can, we can add that later.  So what kind of activities were they involved at St. Cyprian's?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was in a, the drum corps.
Speaker 1: The drum corps.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was about thirteen years old, twelve or thirteen years old.  And we had a drum and bugle corps.  And we used to go out and parade on holidays.  And we went to south Boston and they threw bricks at us (laughs).  And we marched out there.  And the picture was in that, in that, in that parade.
Story_ID: 4533
Speaker 1: Where did you get your middle name from, Garvey?
Speaker 2: Garvey.
Speaker 1: Tell me how you got that name?
Speaker 2: My mother [Edna V. Bynoe] was a Garveyite.  She was, so she used to all the New York meetings and everything.  And she, yeah, she named me John Garvey Bynoe, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was a, what was a Garveyite?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: What was a Garveyite?
Speaker 2: A Garveyite was Garvey's, the people who Garvey, were the Garvey's of--.
Speaker 1: Marcus Garvey.  Who was Marcus Garvey?
Speaker 2: Marcus Garvey was a black man who believed in, that his children, that their, the future belonged to their children, and that he had to make, opening a way for their children to come along and up rise.  He'd say, up, you black folks and shoot, shoot for the high, highest for your children.
Speaker 1: Was your father [John Leo Bynoe] also a follower of Garvey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Garvey, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: He was.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did they ever take you to the meetings of the Garvey groups in Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.  We used to meet at Louverture Hall.  That was the name of the hall.  (Unclear)--they had a hall, had a hall called Louverture Hall.  They were named after Toussaint Louverture, the Haitian leader, yeah.  And we used to go there.  Every Sunday afternoon around four o'clock, they'd have their meetings, and we'd go, the kids in our little, like a boy scout uniform, and we'd march around the hall singing--what we used to sing?  (Unclear), I can't even remember the song, yeah, we'd sing--oh, oh, God.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  I can picture you walking around and--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we used to sing, oh, Lord, it was some (unclear) we'd sing, oh, come on.  We would march around the room.
Story_ID: 4534
Speaker 1: Was there any one individual as you were growing up and going through high school that was very influential on you at that time?  Does anybody stand out?  Was there any one person who made a big impact on you as you were growing up, besides your parents [John Leo Bynoe and Edna V. Bynoe]?
Speaker 2: My brother, my oldest brother, Victor [C. Bynoe], he was always a conqueror.
Speaker 1: He was a what?
Speaker 2: He was a conqueror.
Speaker 1: A conqueror.
Speaker 2: Conqueror, yeah.  He, he went to Northeastern [University, Boston, Massachusetts], and that was unusual for kids to even get in college in those days.  And he won the prize every year.
Speaker 1: How did he help you?  How did Victor help you?
Speaker 2: He was--he used to keep his behind, behind me, keep his behind in my backside so I wouldn't get in trouble.  And he, yeah, he was, yeah, he was a father figure, but my father didn't want him putting his hands on me.  He said, "That's my son, you know, he's not your child."
Speaker 1: How much older was Victor than you?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Speaker 1: He was the oldest, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Tell him, you know, "Keep your hands to yourself, you don't hurt my son."
Story_ID: 4535
Speaker 1: When you left English High School [Boston, Massachusetts], you graduated, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: I went to work in, in Bethlehem's [Steel Corporation] shipyard.
Speaker 1: Where was that?
Speaker 2: In Quincy [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: In Quincy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, all of us, all the guys I knew were there from different schools, came there (unclear) we all went to work in the shipyards.
Speaker 1: And what did you do?
Speaker 2: I was a tack welder.
Speaker 1: A tack welder?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How much did you make?  You remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, God, I was almost a dollar and eighty [cents].
Speaker 1: How long did you work at Bethlehem Steel?
Speaker 2: I was there two years, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then what happened?
Speaker 2: When I got ready to go, called in the draft, so I left the shipyard.  So I decided to take it easy, and I worked at Howard Clothes, downtown Boston, and I was there for about two or three weeks.  Then I went into the service in two weeks.
Speaker 1: So then you went into what branch of the service?
Speaker 2: U.S. Army.
Speaker 1: And how long were you in the army?
Speaker 2: From May, May of 19-1945 till October 8, 1946.
Speaker 1: And what rank did you come out with?
Speaker 2: Staff sergeant.
Speaker 1: Staff sergeant?  What did you do in the service?  What was your responsibility and role?
Speaker 2: I was a--I became a, I, I was always lucky.  I met a captain named Oleen (ph.).  Most of the guys in the service, when they had no education, no, from down South, and Captain Oleen said to me, you know, "You're, you're a bright young man.  You graduated school."  That was a big thing, out of high school graduate.
Speaker 1: Now, you were in an all-black segregated unit?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.  And I was like the, you know, I got to--I always got to be, the officers all took, liked me.  In fact, they wanted me to go--when I left they wanted me to go to Candidate--OCS [Officer Candidates School].  They told me that I'd be a, I'd get out at thirty-eight, and I'd be there a whole--you know, and I have it all together now.  I said, "No, I'm leaving.  I'm going back.  I'm, I'm going to law school."
Story_ID: 4536
Speaker 1: You left the service, and what was next?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went on--I told them I was going to law school.
Speaker 1: You went to law school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Where?
Speaker 2: I didn't go to school.  I went out to, went to (unclear) college they had set up for veterans up at Fort Devens [Ayer, Massachusetts] , and I went up there for about six months.  Then I got sick and went to the hospital.  I had a (unclear) attack, and I had to stay in the VA [Veterans Affairs] hospital for about, oh, a month or six--two or three months.  And then I came out and I was out and just not doing too much.  And next you know, I was getting married (laughter), yeah, and, to my young sweetheart, yeah.  And I went to--next, next thing you know, we were married in, in 1948, it was, yeah.
Speaker 1: When did you start law school?
Speaker 2: I didn't start law school until way, way, till, till I went to, I had to get enough hours of college to get in the, into law school.  So I went to BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], and I was going to school where I was going, weekends and nights and, and getting enough hours to be eligible to get to law school because in Massachusetts, you could get into law school if you had ninety hours of studying.  I didn't have to wait.
Speaker 1: Can't do that today.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have to wait, so I went on.  I had enough hours, and I went down to, what's the name of the, the school, and I made enough hours and I was (unclear).
Speaker 1: What law school did you graduate from?
Speaker 2: I went to, the school--it's now New England School of Law [Boston, Massachusetts], but at, that was Portia Law School [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Portia Law School.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  That was a school originally for women, yeah.  But after the war, we all went, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you passed the bar shortly after that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--well, I, I passed the--I went to law school for four years nights.  And I passed the bar, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, while you were going to law school nights, what were you doing during the daytime?
Speaker 2: I was working for the federal government.
Speaker 1: For the federal government?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--.
Speaker 1: And what were you doing?
Speaker 2: First, I started as doing things in the post office and all kinds of things.  Then I got a job at clerk, clerk in the social security administration.  And I worked for the federal government, I was doing a supply clerk.
Speaker 1: So this was all the time that you were in law school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 4537
Speaker 1: Once you finished law school, what was your first big employment, job after school?  What, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I was still working for the federal government.
Speaker 1: You were, still stayed with the federal government?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: In what department, what area?
Speaker 2: I was in, I was in--I moved over to Social Security Administration, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there, oh, God, from, I was in Social Security from 1951 till in 1958, wait, when did I retire?  Oh, my--I retired, I retired from Social Security from 1958, yeah.
Speaker 1: Then where did you move to, after you finished Social Security?
Speaker 2: Oh, I moved over to, Social Security, I moved over to, I moved to the [U.S.] Department of Health, Education and Welfare [HEW].
Speaker 1: Department of Health, Education and Welfare.
Speaker 2: Which was, which was all part of Social Security, but I over to the regional office, when they came up with the Office of Civil Rights--.
Speaker 1: And they came up with an Office of Civil Rights?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was your role at that point?  What did you begin to do?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was just a--before that I was a social security, man--district manager.
Speaker 1: But once you went to HEW Civil Rights, what was your position?
Speaker 2: When I went to, when I went to, when I was taking, when I left the Social Security, I was only a district manager, assistant manager in Salem, Mass [Massachusetts].  Then I came down to Norwood [Massachusetts] the first district manager of color.
Speaker 1: Of color?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was in 19--yeah, yeah.  And I was there for about a year, and then this opportunity opened up.  I was not eligible because I didn't have enough, I wasn't in grade long enough.  In those days, you had to be in grade so many, a year, before you could move on.  And I didn't the time, grade, but the, regional, regional director felt so strong about me coming to Boston [Massachusetts], that he went down to Washington and talked to John Gardner, who was then the Secretary [of U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare], and told him I was the man that he needed for the job in New England.  And they took me, and, and they took me in that job and they wrote it or however they used to do it.  And I went in as a--rather, rather than going in as a, a fifteen, which the job was, I went in as a grade thirteen.  That's how they worked their things.  And I came into Boston, and I had a whole lot of material on [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] and my relationships in the Alphas [Alpha Phi Alpha Fraternity, Inc.] and all I'd done.
Story_ID: 4538
Speaker 1: You began to become involved and were very active in a number of civic, political and community organizations--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and activities.  Tell me about some of the community activities that you were involved in and were part of and a leader of.  What were some of the things that you worked in the community.
Speaker 2: Well, I was the first, I was president of the Roxbury Community Council.  That was like my first thing, and I just, and then that was like a fore, forerunner to, to A, B, C, D.
Speaker 1: The Roxbury Community Council [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And they were trying to do what? What were they--?
Speaker 2: We were just trying to get, get care, healthcare in the community.  And the work we did was the fore-forerunner of the health center up in, in--health center up in Roxbury.
Speaker 1: What other community organizations were you deeply involved with?
Speaker 2: I was with the, all of them--NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the Urban League, everything.
Speaker 1: What was your role in the NAACP?  Were you an officer or?
Speaker 2: I was a board member for years.  But I was a board member.  I also was a board member for the Urban League.
Speaker 1: What are some of your memories of being an NAACPer?  What were some of your fondest memories of working with the NAACP in Boston?
Speaker 2: Well, I think when we brought the national conference in there in 19--oh, God, was--1940--I forget when we brought the convention, national convention here.  And we, after that, we brought the--.
Speaker 1: That was 1952, I think.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: At Union United?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  This was a--we brought the convention here.  I can't remember.  And then we had the Urban League National Convention in Boston, we brought that there.  Then we brought the, the other business week.  They had National Business Week Convention.  Yeah, I was chairman of all those national conventions in Boston.
Speaker 1: Now, what is your major community organization that you belonged to?  I think there's one that kind of stands out that--?
Speaker 2: NAACP.
Speaker 1: Well, now, isn't there something else that you were a director and leader of for a long time and--?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Mason--no, that was later.
Speaker 1: Oh, but you were very active in the Masonic Lodge?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was afterwards.  It was, I didn't get until 1954--1984.
Speaker 1: Oh, '84 [1984]?  It's that recent?
Speaker 2: When I went to the, that's when I became a member of the Masonic Lodge then.  Before that I wasn't, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, what were some of the positions that you held in the, was it Prince Hall Masonic Lodge?
Speaker 2: I held, I held all positions from the, I was the grand master.  I was every, every officer in the, you know, from lodges, lodges and grand lodges, yeah, yeah.  I had a lot of lodges.  I had lodges from--I went from, from the master of my lodge right up through, in all the, through all the right up, way up  in the hierarchy.
Story_ID: 4539
Speaker 1: I understand you also ran for political office.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I--.
Speaker 1: Tell us about the positions that you ran for?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I ran for state senator.  That when I first came out of government.  And how I lost it I don't know, but I did.  The people who were opposing me, later became my friends, if they had, hadn't gotten the race, I'd a won. I'd have been the senator from Roxbury [neighborhood in Boston, Massachusetts].  (Unclear) Bowen beat me by, I forget how many votes, but all, they had all these other people in the race, and that washed me away.
Speaker 1: Did you work with other African American people who were running for office?  Were you involved in helping with other campaigns?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of the people that you worked for to get elected?
Speaker 2: Way back, yeah, I used to, I used to struggle to get Banks, Lawrence Banks.  He was, he was a Republican, but he was a, he used to run, run, run for office all the time.
Speaker 1: And who were some of the others that you, that you mentored and supported and helped to, to get into office?
Speaker 2: Oh, Mel Keno (ph.) came, came along, yeah, yeah, can't even remember all of them.
Story_ID: 4540
Speaker 1: There was another association, organization or let's say a place in Boston [Massachusetts], a very famous place in our black community in Boston, that you reigned over and directed and ran for many years.  And you spent evenings there and nights there.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell us about--.
Speaker 2: Professional Businessmen's Club.
Speaker 1: Professional Businessmen's Club.
Speaker 2: This was a club formed by black businessmen in 1946 and, it was there for years and years and years, had a nice building on Massachusetts Avenue.
Speaker 1: Tell us about this building, it was the Professional Businessmen's Club?  Tell us about this building?  What happened there?
Speaker 2: That was the place where the businessmen used to hold their meetings and they, they were very proud of their, cause they used to hold meetings and hold the different public affairs there.  And it went on for years and years and years.  Then in 1963, it started falling on hard times.  They couldn't take care of it any more.  And I came in--.
Speaker 1: So in comes John Bynoe, and you did what?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I came in.  I started teaching.  I tried to help them reorganize it, which we did.  And there was a suit, it was, they were sued by a former member who was suing them, and sued the building.  And we came in, and picked up the building.
Speaker 1: Now, who was we?
Speaker 2: Me and I went and got a mortgage, and put it back together, and held the club together.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened in this club?  You were there from 1963 and the club continued for how long?
Speaker 2: Nineteen, the club continued until 1956, was it, oh, no.
Speaker 1: Well, it's '63 [1963], you came in and kind of took things over.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It ran, I think, through the '70s [1970s], '60s [1960s], '70s [1970s], '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what kind of things happened at, we used to call the P&B Club?
Speaker 2: It was, it was just, it was a community, it was something, it was a place where we met.  People came from all over.  A lot of people were traveling for the government in those days, and this used to be, they'd come and hang out in Boston.  And they got to know a lot of people in Boston, and it just became the, kind of hang out, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What, can you describe the club, the inside of the club?  What was it like inside?
Speaker 2: It was a old, a old--back, back, it was a old-fashioned building like a--it was big house, yeah.
Speaker 1: What'd you have--what was on the, on the ground floor of the--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ground floor was a big open space with a bar, and then upstairs, the first floor, there was a nice meeting room.  And--.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the groups and some of the organizations that used to use the Professional Businessmen's Club?
Speaker 2: Everybody, everybody.
Speaker 1: I remember you told me at one time that a lot of organizations used to come there to get started.  What were some of the groups that--?
Speaker 2: Oh, started, yeah, oh, yeah.  Well, Unity Bank started there.
Speaker 1: Unity Bank.
Speaker 2: Unity Bank, yeah, a young man from Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] with the idea of putting a bank together, which he did.  And it started here.  [Operation] Exodus [now Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity (METCO)], the busing school program started there.
Speaker 1: What was Exodus?
Speaker 2: Exodus was a program to get the black schools out of the discriminatory school system.
Speaker 1: Get the black students into?
Speaker 2: In the regular school system.
Speaker 1: Into predominantly white schools?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And we had, oh, God, start there, Exodus.  I can't even think of them.  We did all kinds of things there.  Trying to remember we did--.
Speaker 1: Well, you were running the Professional Businessmen's Club every evening, Saturdays and Sundays, and you were still director of the Office of Civil Rights of HEW [U.S Department of Health, Education and Welfare]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 4541
Speaker 1: Can I come back to the Office of Civil Rights, HEW  [U.S Department of Health, Education and Welfare]?  What are some of the things that you accomplished at the director of Region One, HEW, sir, what were, what--do you recall some of your accomplishments there?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think the biggest accomplishment was the number of people that I brought on, staff-wise, and finding people who, who were, who were, you know, who were qualifiable and, and they put together a tremendous staff over the years, the years.  But it wasn't easy, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the challenges and issues that you had to face as the director of the Office of Civil Rights?  What were some of the things you had to work on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to work on women in sports, college enrollments.
Speaker 1: College enrollments?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Discrimination?
Speaker 2: Yeah, discrimination, yeah.  Yeah, they--.
Speaker 1: Were hospitals, did they come into--hospitals?
Speaker 2: Hospital, yeah, hospitals, nursing homes, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you travel much as the director?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Oh yeah.  I was into Washington [D.C.] and all over the country, you know, at meetings and everything, you know.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the national politicians that you worked with during your NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] years and as the director of the Office of Civil Rights in Boston [Massachusetts]?  Who are some of the major political people that you worked with and knew?
Speaker 2: [Senator] Ed Brooke, Ed Brooke.  The, oh, in New York, [New York Assemblyman] Percy Sutton.
Speaker 1: Percy Sutton?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were very active with the, the Kennedys, weren't you?
Speaker 2: Not really.
Speaker 1: You weren't?
Speaker 2: Not really, they were, there was a fight between the Kennedys and McCormicks, and I didn't get involved in that one, no.
Speaker 1: Were there, were there any fights that you recall your being involved in?  Any major controversies that you were in the middle of?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, not really.
Speaker 1: Are there things that you would like to, to talk about or ad to this interview that I haven't asked you about--,
Speaker 2: Well-.
Speaker 1: --in terms of your life and your experiences?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, no, I think you covered quite a bit.  I, I'm just trying to remember all, all the different, all the people who came to my assistance, all the staff I had to work with me.  And they were good people, and they all were trained by us.  They came, they didn't come with degrees.  A lot of them end up going to law school and getting law school degrees later, but we took people in who were, they were in tried to help them qualify more and more.  And we brought a, you know, I brought a, a staff in there and they end up being that I ended up with over eighty people working in the office when I--.
Speaker 1: Eighty people.
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I, when I left the Office of Civil Rights, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what year did you retire from the--?
Speaker 2: 19, 19--I retired from the Office of Civil Rights, I just gave it to you, when was it?  1989, it was a--.
Speaker 1: 1989?
Speaker 2: I think so, yeah.
Story_ID: 4542
Speaker 1: John, I guess it was 1982, the first big, major testimonial to you was given by the Urban League.  Do you remember that evening?
Speaker 2: Do I remember, yeah, I do.  It was a, down at the--it was a Super Bowl Sunday at the, at the, at the--.
Speaker 1: Does that bring back some of your memories of working with the Urban League? They honored you.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Urban League and NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], they all came together, [Executive Director of the NAACP] Ben Hooks and, yeah, yeah.  Yeah, it was--.
Speaker 1: What was your major contribution to the Urban League?  As you think back, what do you think your major contribution was to the Urban League--,
Speaker 2: Well, I think--.
Speaker 1: --of Boston [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: --when the Urban League went out of business in Boston here, Ken and myself brought, what's his name?  Vernon, Vernon--(pause).
Speaker 1: Jordan?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Jordan?
Speaker 2: Vernon Jordan.  We asked him to come up to Boston, and we talked about getting the Urban League to start again.
Speaker 1: Start it up again?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and with the assistance of the--we-- his contacts with the WBZ [Boston, Massachusetts] then, we got the manager over there to come in and start getting people together for the Urban League--.
Speaker 1: So you got support WBZ TV, I remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And we didn't get board members, then we started bringing board members together, and I selected them, we got people.
Speaker 1: Were there any special programs of the Urban League that you have a lot to do with as you remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the special Urban League programs?
Speaker 2: We had a program that went on, it's still going on with the, the school, it's still in the, the Urban League, oh, God, Patterson, what's his name?  Jimmy Patterson came.  He was heading up the program over there.  And they went into the school systems and--.
Speaker 1: The program that I directed after Patterson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, what's the name of it?
Speaker 1: Massachusetts Pre-Engineering Program [MassPEP].
Speaker 2: Pre-Engineering Program, yeah.  It was founded, we founded that program, and it was a good program in teaching math and engineering.
Speaker 1: To?
Speaker 2: Students in the regular school system, in the regular school system.
Speaker 1: I believe for a long time, you served on the board of directors--,
Speaker 2: I, yes, yeah.
Speaker 1: --of Massachusetts Pre-Engineering Program?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So that's one of your proudest programs in--wanted to remember--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Any others that come to mind that, that you had a lot to do with besides that one?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we did that, that was, oh, we started the, the--getting kids to go, we got the kids into, with the, the NAACP program for students.
Speaker 1: ACT-SO?
Speaker 2: ACT-SO [Academic, Cultural, Technological and Scientific Olympics] , yeah, yeah, we, yeah, we helped support them for years.
Speaker 1: So a lot of your community work with the NAACP, the Urban League and other groups had to do with helping our young people, our youth?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.  That's right, yeah.
Story_ID: 4543
Speaker 1: John, here's another program booklet from a testimonial in October of the year 2000.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And who was honoring you here?
Speaker 2: That was the, when I retired, I was second, sixty-second Grand Master.  I was retiring as master, Grand Master of the, of, Grand Master or the--.
Speaker 1: Of the Prince Hall?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Prince Hall Masonic Lodge [Boston, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What do you, what do you consider your most important contribution to have been to the Masons?  What, what is your major contribution, do you think?
Speaker 2: Well, my major, major idea was to the building, bring, bringing, trying to bring the building back and I rebuilt the whole parking lot and (unclear) and build the building back.
Speaker 1: How many members were there of the Prince Hall Masonic Lodge?
Speaker 2: I don't know at the time, I don't know.
Speaker 1: What were the other activities of your lodge?
Speaker 2: Lodge?
Speaker 1: You had a great clubhouse, a meeting place.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was used by the community.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of the other programs that you oversaw as the Grand Master?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, we, we concei--conceived to bring a tribute and homage to the lodges and different organizations that were part of it and getting recognition for the other Freemason groups throughout the country.
Story_ID: 4544
Speaker 1: All of these organizations in Boston [Massachusetts], NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League, the Masons [Prince Hall Masonic Lodge], all got involved with the school desegregation court order in Boston.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What role did you play in the school desegregation court order implementation in Boston?  Were you involved with that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, that was, that was the major of the, of the desegregation of the school system in Boston, but we, the major, the NAACP on the, under the direction of Tom Atkins [President of the Boston Branch of the NAACP], took that on himself.
Speaker 1: But you were involved, and you played a role there.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, yeah.  I gave, gave all the material I could get to Atkins to use in these cases.
Speaker 1: What kind of material did you supply?
Speaker 2: Oh, all kind of records of the number of students and transfers of students, the whole--.
Speaker 1: All the data on the data of public school students?
Speaker 2: All the data, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was provided by your office of, Office of Civil Rights?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was, it was dug out by, by Office of Civil Rights and also by the Washington [D.C.] office did a lot too.
Story_ID: 4545
Speaker 1: You've always been interested in history and you've supported historical events and historical places, there is one special historical place in the Roxbury [neighborhood of Boston, Massachusetts] community now, which is very near Williams Street where you grew up.  Could you tell us about the Roxbury Heritage, you were involved in the Roxbury Heritage State Park.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I, after I retired, I took on that job, as head of the heritage of the park here.  And it was, it was a consuming job, and I couldn't do it because I, I wasn't too well, getting too well at that time.
Speaker 1: You were getting what?
Speaker 2: I was becoming, you know, ill, yeah, and I didn't have much energy.  But I used to, took it on, and we used--tried to do things up there to bring the Heritage Park, intervene.
Speaker 1: And that was preserving both the pre-Revolutionary War and the post-Revolutionary War history--,
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 1: --of that neighborhood of Boston.
Speaker 2: That neighborhood, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, people still associate the Heritage State Park with your early efforts--,
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --to work at that and keep it going.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 4546
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way you've lived your life?
Speaker 2: You know, I look over these pictures and so forth--my file, and I said, you know, I, I am very fortunate, you know, some people have one shot at it.  So to have a second shot, I said, and after my illness, I've had three shots of living a life and being a (unclear) with something.  It's unbelievable, you know, if I wrote a book, I would be three outs and still strong, yeah. That makes sense.
Speaker 1: Would you have chosen a different career path, do you think?
Speaker 2: No, I've been, I've always been John Bynoe, every, helping everyone I could, I possibly could, yeah, helping people.
Speaker 1: Are there any things that you still want to do that you haven't done yet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want to get a book--all this material, I mean I've saved here, I want to get it together and just make sure it goes to the right place.
Story_ID: 4547
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think, I think that, that it, it's beginning to evolve into a larger community, community, just Afro-American, but I think it's moving into a larger sphere of, of, of--we have more and more, becomes more evident, not just black children, but Spanish kids, and everybody, they're coming together, colors, it's, it's growing.  I don't know, we got more Indian families coming in now, studying from all over the world, and it's becoming larger.  Even the--it's just, you know, it's just broadened out.  It's looking forward to when, you know, see, it's sad, people don't understand it, but when they look at, we had the Indians, the East Indians in the islands for years.  And they were just disconnected people, but a lot of West Indians came from East, East Indian families.  They were right in the islands there.  And these people are no different.  They're, they're not disconnected from anybody else, but somehow these cast systems and different, they just push people aside.  But I think that in the, in the near future, you're gonna have groups of people, people coming together to new leadership, you know.  I mean we're talking now about, you know, people who were, Muslims and all that.
Story_ID: 4548
Speaker 1: What are your thoughts about the civil rights situation today for black Americans? Where are we now in civil rights?  You've, for a long time worked in this area.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What's your assessment of where we are now with civil rights today?
Speaker 2: Well, I think it's, I think we're, we're going to the path, we're going to the point where our children don't even realize what we've been through for them.  They don't know what, what work, sacrifice, what, what we made, what sacrifices we made for them to arrive at where they're at, and--.
Speaker 1: How do you think--what do you think we should be doing then so that our young people will have the knowledge and will have the information about the sacrifices that you and others have made and the work that you and others have done to get us this far along?  What do you--how do you think we should deal with that?
Speaker 2: I think it's too late.  I mean all the, they've come along, and they, they've arrived before they've even arrived.  They just accept it that they're now in charge.  And the question is, what are they in charge of, and what do they want to build on, what is their foundation?  They don't have one,
Story_ID: 4549
Speaker 1: This is a recent award that you received.  Could you read that to us?
Speaker 2: Yeah, John Bynoe, civil rights champion, fortieth anniversary of the Civil Rights Act of July, July 13, 2004.
Speaker 1: Who presented that you, John?
Speaker 2: The department of health, human services.
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Department of Health, Education and Welfare [HEW]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: How'd you feel about that honor?
Speaker 2: I was, surprised, yeah.
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you?
Speaker 2: That I've been blessed with Lord, to live this long, to been in all through illnesses and sicknesses I've had, and to come out, come out smelling sweet [laughs], and feeling good.
Story_ID: 4550
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As John Bynoe, John Bynoe, the guy who tried his best to do as much as he could, and, hey, not everyone's gonna love you, but if some have a decent word for me, what more can have?
Speaker 1: What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  They may say the [laughs], they may say the wrong.  No, I'm all right.  I'm happy. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: History is important, because it's, it sets forth the goals for the youth generations to come.  That's what's, this is important.  Without any goals, they'd be lost.
Speaker 1: One last question, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I want my legacy, I'd like my legacy to be that of all that I've been through life, good and bad and indifferent, that in the final days it appears I am still trying to do something worthwhile for others as well.
Story_ID: 4551
Speaker 1: Baby picture.
Speaker 2: Your baby picture.  How old were you?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: How old?
Speaker 1: I guess, maybe a year.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe as a baby, ca. 1927. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4552
Speaker 1: That was twelve years old.  I was the, made the first black drum and bugle corps in Boston [Massachusetts] at the St. Cyprian's Church, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 1: And where are you?
Speaker 2: Right--right there. Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Off camera discussion)
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe in the St. Cyprian's Church drum and bugle corps, Boston, Massachusetts, 1938. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4553
Speaker 1: That's my mother, ninety-four years old.  Yeah, she lived all the way.
Speaker 2: And her name again.
Speaker 1: Edna Vilo Bynoe.
Speaker 2: Anything else you want to say about her?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: Anything else you want to say?
Speaker 1: Ma, I'm still living your life, as you gave me the life.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe's mother, Edna Bynoe, age ninety-four, ca. 1990s. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4554
Speaker 1: That was the, I was at, the two-year college up at Fort Devens.  I was on a football team and Brock Davis of the Boston Yanks was, trained us, and they were really hoping that we'd have a good team, but I used to be a half back.  And one year, of my year, I'll never forget, when we were playing Lowell Tech, and I ran, ran for the sidelines, and I got, when I went almost through, to the end of the line in the field, and they hit me down.  And I got up, and I came up, I was all white, the line (unclear), and, oh, the crowd, had a big crowd, and turned out (unclear), I'll never forget that.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (second row, second from right) on the Fort Devens football team, Ayer, Massachusetts, 1947. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4555
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's when I was good looking.  My son here, Kevin, looks like me there.  That's when I was in the service in, in Goettingen, Germany.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe in the U.S. military, Goettingen, Germany, ca. 1945. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4556
Speaker 1: About how old were you there?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I was, (unclear) law school.
Speaker 1: Fifty eight, 1958?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty eight (1958)?
Speaker 2: Maybe so.
Speaker 1: [John Bynoe, ca. 1958. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4557
Speaker 1: You were just talking the law school, it's now New England Law School, but it was Portia?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Portia Law School.
Speaker 1: How is that spelled, sir?
Speaker 2: What was, with a, it was a lady's, a school for women, Portia, and then it became, you know, both men and women.  And then when they got, after the got recognized, or what was it, they--.
Speaker 1: Accredited.
Speaker 2: Accredited, then they became Portia School of Law.  Yeah, you had the politicians getting in and made it right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where is that located?
Speaker 2: Right in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: [John Bynoe graduates from Portia Law School, Boston, Massachusetts, early 1950s. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4558
Speaker 1: That's when I was appointed to, as a district manager, social security in 1954, something like that, what's that?
Speaker 2: How about '65 [1965]?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five, [1965], yeah.
Speaker 2: And do you know the other gentleman in the picture [Walter W. Mode] ?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was a regional director, the guy who gave me all my, gave me every shot I ever had, got me all the way, yeah, took me all the way.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (left) is appointed as District Manager of the Social Security Administration District Office, Norwood, Massachusetts, 1965.  From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4559
Speaker 1: That was when we had the convention here in Boston--.
Speaker 2: Which convention?
Speaker 1: Of 1967.
Speaker 2: And which convention was that?
Speaker 1: NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], national convention, and that's, on the left is myself, Bishop Smallwood [sic, Rev. Stephen G. Spottswood], Ed Brooke, who was a senator, Roy Wilkins, Kivie Kaplan, Senator [Edward 'Ted'] Kennedy, and Andrew Brimmer and Lem [Lemuel] Wells, Ken Guscot and right behind him, Edmund (unclear).  I don't know what that picture was in the middle, I couldn't see it.  That was done at the, just when he was getting the Spingarn Award, I think, Ed Brooke was getting the award that night.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe and others at the NAACP Convention in Boston, Massachusetts, 1967. From left to right: John Bynoe, Stephen Spottswood, Edward Brooke, Roy Wilkins, Kivie Kaplan, Edward 'Ted' Kennedy, Andrew Brimmer, Kenneth Guscott, Lemuel Wells. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4560
Speaker 1: That's when I ran for the State Senate, and I, yeah, yeah.  When I ran for the [Massachusetts State] Senate.
Speaker 2: [Button from John Bynoe's campaign for a seat in the Massachusetts State Senate, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4561
Speaker 1: That's when I was the Grand Master of the Most Worshipful Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts.  I served in that for nineteen--right after I retired from 1994 right up till 1999.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe serves as Grand Master of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, late 1990s. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4562
Speaker 1: That's John, John Maddox.  He was the Grand Master preceding me.  I followed him as Grand, Grand Master of Prince Hall Grand Lodge.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (right) with John Maddox (left) of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge, Boston, Massachusetts, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4563
Speaker 1: That was when I was chairman of the Grand Lodge, Grand Master's Conference in Boston in that year, and I was sitting there.  I chaired the, yeah, yeah, right there, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: [Chairman John Bynoe (bottom row, center) with other participants of the Prince Hall Grand Lodge conference, Boston, Massachusetts, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4564
Speaker 1: That was when [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.] appeared at the Ford Hall, Ford Hall forum in Boston in around 1956 or seven [1957], I guess.  And I was there with John Wilks who was quite a Republican.  We, we all knew John very well.  John was Martin Luther, Martin Luther King was a member of Alpha Phi Alpha, Sigma chapter of Boston.  And we always held him in the highest esteem.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (left) with Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. (center) and John Wilks (right) at a forum event, Boston, Massachusetts, ca. 1956. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4565
Speaker 1: That's my brother, Victor [Bynoe], and his wife, Jessie, and Louise.  We're up Canada.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe with relatives in Canada, not dated, from left to right: John Bynoe; wife, Louise; brother, Victor Bynoe; sister-in-law, Jessie. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4566
Speaker 1: Aunt Ella sitting down.
Speaker 2: Ella, and Sylvia, no.
Speaker 1: Aunt Helen.
Speaker 2: Huh?  Who is that?
Speaker 1: Aunt Helen.
Speaker 2: Helen.  And then Sylvia and then who's the last one?
Speaker 1: Aunt Edna.
Speaker 2: Edna and then standing up, I can't see it.
Speaker 1: That's you on the left, then Uncle George--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Uncle Dougie.
Speaker 2: Uncle who?
Speaker 1: Uncle Dougie.
Speaker 2: Dougie.
Speaker 1: And then Uncle Victor.
Speaker 2: Uncle Victor, okay, yeah.  That's my mother, my mother was in a nursing home.
Speaker 1: [John Bynoe's relatives visiting his mother at a nursing home, not dated, front row, from left to right: Ella Callender, Helen, Sylvia Smith, Edna Smith. Back row, from left to right: John Bynoe, George Bynoe, Dougie, Victor Bynoe.  From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4567
Speaker 1: That's my birthday gift from my wife, last--two or three weeks ago, yeah, right out on the porch, yeah.  Jimmy, my son, Kevin and Louise and myself.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (seated) with his wife, Louise (right), and sons at a birthday party, 2004. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4568
Speaker 1: Jimmie (ph.) [James Bynoe] and Kevin and all our children, my grandchildren, and his wife, yeah, Kevin and--Jimmie's wife and his sister, yeah and my grand children, yeah.
Speaker 2: What was the occasion?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: George's christening.
Speaker 1: [John Bynoe's son, James Bynoe, with his wife, children and grandchildren at a christening, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4569
Speaker 1: That's George--John and his family, my oldest son.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe's eldest son, John (second from right), with his family, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4570
Speaker 1: My wife [Louise Bynoe] and our two sons and my granddaughter at her birthday party.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (seated) with his wife, Louise Bynoe (center), and sons [James and Jonathan] at a birthday party, 2004. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4571
Speaker 1: That's my brother, Victor, yeah, over at the nursing home seeing my mother, and my nieces visiting, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: This is visiting your mother, nursing home?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: What was that one again?
Speaker 1: That was Victor and my nieces at the nursing home for my mother's birthday party.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe's brother, Victor Bynoe, and other relatives celebrate their mother's birthday at a nursing home, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4572
Speaker 1: When I was campaigning for [Michael] Dukakis, traveling over, in Des Moines, Iowa.  I was there for, I guess, on the, on the Dukakis campaign.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe (right) with Michael Dukakis (left) during his campaign for president, Des Moines, Iowa, February 7, 1988. From the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4573
Speaker 1: That's all my family when I was, it was at--when I, when I came, when my (unclear), one of my last acts as Grand Master, and I, all my family came--.
Speaker 2: That was the beginning of your Grand Mastership?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  That was all my sisters.
Speaker 2: [John Bynoe's family members attend a Prince Hall Lodge event in his honor, not dated, from the collection of John Bynoe]
Story_ID: 4574
Speaker 1: And that's when I had one left.  I still had one leg left.  I still had one leg left.  The first winter down here.
Speaker 2: When was this taken?
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: When was this taken?
Speaker 1: October, just the winter, last winter, no, 2001 [sic, 2003], I guess.
Speaker 2: At your home, where?  This was taken where, at your home?
Speaker 1: Right here, right here.
Speaker 2: Where?
Speaker 1: In Mashpee [Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: [John Bynoe in Mashpee, Massachusetts, 2003. From the collection of John Bynoe]
