Story_ID: 552031
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Frank, common spelling, F-R-A-N-K, middle initial D-E-E--or spelling, D-E-E, Brown, B-R-O-W-N [HistoryMaker Frank Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Eight, eighteen, fifty-three [August 18, 1953], Omaha, Nebraska.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's your occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently, it is city council representative, District 2 [Omaha, Nebraska], and I am the executive director of Housing In Omaha [Housing In Omaha, Inc., Omaha, Nebraska], which is a non-profit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: It is October the 10th, I believe, October 10th?  Yeah.
Speaker 1: The 7th (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry (laughter), October, October--it is October 7th, 2007.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at city hall [Omaha City Hall], 1819 Farnham [Farnham Street, Omaha, Nebraska].
Story_ID: 552032
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am to ask you on behalf of management and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer.  They're sort of a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: They're sort of a warm-up, actually.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, sir, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I see it, I eat it; it, it has to be--if I had a favorite, probably lobster.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Haven't been on one in a couple a years--Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase, or saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Get it done.
Story_ID: 552033
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your father's [Warren Brown, II] side of the family and your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but we'll start with your mother's side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lyda, L-Y-D-A, Montgomery, M-O-N-T-G-O-M-E-R-Y [Lyda Montgomery Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her place of birth is Clarinda, Iowa, and it's March of 19--March 7th of 1936, twenty-si- '36 [1936], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: There's a book actually that one of her brothers put together, has been working on it for the past ten years, and we know that, that my great-grandmother, she was Scott Irish [sic.] and somehow left at one, at one of the reservations.  I think her mother [sic.] had an affair with a, with a--back then a Negro trapper, and so she was born and left on--left at a, at an Indian reservation and raised, and that was my grandmother [April Montgomery].  And before that--
Speaker 1: Okay, so the great-grandmother was a Scotch Irish woman who was--
Speaker 2: Grandmother [sic.], I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandmother was Scott Irish and, and, and married to a trapper in, and I think he was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, your grandmother was?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So--okay, okay.
Speaker 2: French and--I think the, the, the trapper was French and, and Na- French, Native American, and African--African American or Negro at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her husband, born and raised in Clarinda, Iowa, they met, got married and had eleven children, including my mother.  Later, left Clarinda and moved to Omaha, Nebraska where he started an auto repair shop.
Speaker 1: Okay, so let me go back again, just for clarity here.  Your grandmother was the product of a relationship between a Scotch Irish woman and a black trapper.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, okay.  And then your, your, your grandmother married a man from Clarinda, Iowa?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And, and--okay, and your mother was born.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay, all right, okay.  Are there any stories about--I mean that sounds like a--you know, beginnings of a novel or something.  So are there any stories from (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Well, we had one family reunion that I--'cause I'm very young and, and--naturally, and we had a reunion over in Council Bluffs [Iowa], and her relatives which she could find--eventually, she found her, her sisters, and they lived in Iowa, and at the reunion the blacks sat on one side and the whites sat on the other side, and I remember that because the kids would naturally play, but we wondered why wouldn't everyone just come together, and that was probably in 1961, '62 [1962] when we had the family reunion and the only one--the only major family reunion on that side.
Speaker 1: It's '61 [1961] and '62 [1962], so you actually got black and white relatives together in one room; that was--
Speaker 2: Right, at a park.
Speaker 1: --that made something for '61 [1961].  Now '61 [1961] was a time when there's still legal segregation--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --in the southern states and, you know, and--
Speaker 2: It--they met, and it was the only one, and we haven't had one since then.  The--I can remember, though, she had two sisters that lived not far from Omaha in Council Bluffs, and we couldn't go--we would pick them up and they would come to Omaha, but we would have to meet them at the corner of their farm, and then they would get in the car and we'd take 'em to Omaha, and then after they ate dinner and, and I guess fellowshipped, we would take them back to Council Bluffs but we couldn't go over to their house or let people know that we were related.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they actually were--
Speaker 2: They were--
Speaker 1: --were passing for white, or?
Speaker 2: She had a--she has the same mother, but different fathers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they were white.
Speaker 2: They were white.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So they didn't wanna make people think they might actually be passing for white when they actually were white (laughter).
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: These were concerns of a--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --yeah--a society like this.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  And so that's about it on my, on my mother's side--the interesting points.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, tragic, but.
Story_ID: 552034
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Lyda Montgomery Brown] have, have any stories about growing up in Iowa, what it was like for her?
Speaker 2: She had fond memories; it was an integrated place, Clarinda [Iowa], and for a small town, a number of African Americans, and so she, she, she loved--she loved the place and went back two years ago for an all high school reunion 'cause many of the people there are dead.  She has fond memories of Clarinda.  In fact, I haven't heard her tell of a bad story at all.  But, but here in Omaha [Nebraska], there are many bad stories involving racial inequity.  So it was, it was kind of an eye opener, she says, to see that people--she could, she could pass for white if she wanted to, but wouldn't do it, but I remember going to a store in downtown Omaha as a child, and they wouldn't let us sit at the counter, and she was very tired.  It was Christmas and she had been shopping and, and so it--not--the building's not too far from city hall [Omaha City Hall, Omaha, Nebraska].  It was a, a Woolworth store [F.W. Woolworth Company], it had a little eatery downstairs, so there were three of us.  I've got a brother [Warren Brown, III], but he wasn't with us, and she kept telling 'em--they said, "You could sit here, but those kids can't."  And they kept telling her that, and finally, people who were around 'em said, "Let her sit there; she's got three kids, let her sit there."  And they, they eventually did, but at the age of probably six or seven, that was my first real taste of racism, and still back then, I didn't know what it was about, but I just knew for some reason we couldn't sit there, but, but she could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when did she come to Omaha?
Speaker 2: Back in the late '40s [1940s], the late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So had she--did she finish high--so she, she finished high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)  Yes, in Clarinda.
Speaker 1: --in Clarinda.  And then what brought her to Omaha?  Was it a job or something, or?
Speaker 2: My grandfather; they sold their farm and moved to Omaha.  In fact, I said '36 [1936], bor- she was born around--yeah, it was '36 [1936], but--sorry about that.  It, it was my, my grandfather's--my grandfather, Herschel Montgomery, Herschel who said, "Everyone move," and so they moved to Omaha for more opportunity.
Story_ID: 552035
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name, and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Warren, W-A-R-R-E-N, Hugh, H-U-H, Brown [Warren Brown, II].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now Hugh is spelled H-U-H?
Speaker 2: H-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: Oh, H-U-G-H, okay.
Speaker 2: H-U-G-H.
Speaker 1: All right, all right, Brown.  And, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: His is 1932 in Ardmore, Oklahoma.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Is--okay.  Is Ardmore one of the black towns in Oklahoma?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I thought it was.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  He--I don't know too much about his, his grandparents other than that--what's documented in, in the pictures--or his parents for that matter.  I do know that, that they were Mexican or Latino and, and black, and they migrated to Ardmore where they worked a farm.  And he was born and he moved to Omaha [Nebraska] because of a--he was--he, he had a--he was hit by a car and for some reason couldn't get treated in, in Ok- in Oklahoma, or did get treated but his leg was hurt, and so he moved to Omaha for school, and took his brothers and sisters with him--his one brother and two sisters--and his dad [Dee Brown] also moved here, too and--but he was--he basically took care of them, and then he went into the [U.S. military] service, left there, worked as a waiter, and he also worked with what they called the bomber plant [Glenn L. Martin Bomber Plant] back then, in the '60s [1960s], at Offutt Air Force Base [Nebraska], making parts for, for planes, but the nickname that they used back then was the bomber plant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And later, he joined with his sister, Mary Metoyer, M-E-T-O-Y-E-R, and they bought Nebraska's first African American bar in the '50s [1950s] at 24th [Street] and Lake Street.  It's torn down since (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The first one, the first African American--
Speaker 2: First African American bar in Nebraska.
Speaker 1: What was the name of it?
Speaker 2: The M&M lounge [M&M, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Spelled in the conventional way that M&M is spelled, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not the Detroit way [Eminem] (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With M and M (laughter).
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 552036
Speaker 1: From what I understand 24th Street in those days, was a jumping street, lots of music and entertainment and such.  Was that, was that your recollection of it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it--my, my uncle who is--he's the youngest.  My Uncle Rolland, R-O-L-L-A-N-D, he had a '57 [1957] Chevy, and this is 1964.  We would--me and my two sisters [Sondra Brown Young and Marlene Brown Gunn] would ride with him up and down 24th Street.  Because of, of segregation, you really couldn't go past 30th Street, and there was nothing to do for African Americans back then.
Speaker 1: Now let's get this straight.  Now, this is--what you're telling me is--so you could only--you couldn't go past 33rd Street you said, on the--
Speaker 2: 30th Street.  You could, but there's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In a car?
Speaker 2: In a car you could, but there's nothing to do and, and people didn't welcome you back then once you crossed 30th Street.
Speaker 1: So would you be--for instance, if I would--if I decided to say, "Hey, kids, let's take a ride."  We get in the car and we drive past 30th Street, and what is likely?  We just drove around looking.  What would likely happen to us?
Speaker 2: It depends on where you went.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you went to a, to a restaurant, you could probably get in, but they--you wouldn't feel welcomed.  Some places wouldn't let you in, and the farther you went west--and keep in mind, back then Omaha [Nebraska] was very small comparatively to other cities, so seven- 72nd [Street], 84th [Street], that was about it; you'd hit cornfields.  And the, the, the whites were moving out east of--west of 30th St- or east of 30th Street they were all moving out, and more African Americans were coming in.  So you had no reasons because you had every shop you wanted, retail, commercial, it was right there on 24th Street or in that area east of 30th.  So there was really no reason to go west of 30th.
Speaker 1: And it wasn't anything--the, the world we have today with the suburban (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sprawl?  No.
Speaker 1: None of that was going on.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So if you actually went out--outside of town, you were actually in cornfields, that you were saying.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That's pretty much it.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You had the packinghouses in South Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], and whites and blacks would mingle from, from what I'm told, and what I saw, picking up my, my relatives and--as a child in the backseat watching, you know.  They, they would shake hands, they would even drink together in the bars, but some places you just couldn't go to.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's like the, the place downtown, you could go shop in the building, but when it was time to grab a meal, you couldn't sit in certain places.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there was what they call de facto segregation; it wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: --legislated but it was practiced.
Speaker 2: Right.  And even in, even in the covenants  of certain areas that were being built around 87th Street or, or eighty- 80th Street, in south--southwest Omaha back then, they wrote in the covenants, "No blacks, no Negroes."  In--recently, there was an issue involving a--an area around Westside High School [Omaha, Nebraska], which is about 87th and Pacific [Street], there's a new development going in there, and so they were gonna pass the existing covenants, and so I read it and saw that they didn't allow Negroes.  And so I said, "We've gotta change all this, and in fact, let's go back and look at all of the covenants, and I want neighborhood associations to do that, and other people and, and developers to make sure this language is taken out."
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So that was done.
Story_ID: 552037
Speaker 1: Does your father's side of the family have any stories from--now they--you said they came to Ardmore [Oklahoma] from someplace else.  Did you know actually where they came from?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.  That, that just hasn't been documented, documented.  We heard, we heard it--my father [Warren Brown, II] passed away three years ago and my brother--my--his, his brother Frank D-E-E [Frank Dee Brown], who I'm named after, he passed away a year after my father passed away, and his sister passed away--one of the two--probably eight years before that, and my Aunt Mary [Mary Metoyer], who is still alive, who the bar [M&M, Omaha, Nebraska] is named after, she's--she has Alzheimer's and it's severe, and so she's still alive.  But we don't know up to that point of where they came from Mexico to Ardmore.  We don't know what happened after that--I mean before that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is another question about the name.  There's so many Dee Browns that pop up.  Was it D-E-E?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who was the author of 'Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee' [Dee Brown].
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: There's the guard [Dee Brown] for the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois] who just, he just went to the pros last year.  There's another Dee Brown that played for the Boston Celtics spelled the same way, D-E-E Brown.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you just said you were named for another relative had a D-E-E--
Speaker 2: My Uncle Frank, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was wondering where that, that combination comes from, you know the D-E-E Brown (laughter).
Speaker 2: You, you know, I, I don't; I don't know where, where D-E-E came from.  He was married to [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee before Ossie--who just passed away two years ago?  Her husband--
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Ossie Davis?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  My Uncle Frank was married to Ruby Dee (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh, your uncle was.  Was he?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Frank--okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and that's where she got her middle name Ruby Dee.
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, but his, his last name was Brown, though, right?
Speaker 2: But he went--he was one of the first, one of the first actors--black actors, Negro actors, African American actors, and very popular back in the '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s].  He graduated from Langston [Colored Agricultural and Normal University; Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], and from there his career took off and he worked for Schenley's liquor [Schenley Distillers Company; Schenley Industries, Inc.], he was a salesperson, and he was a, he was a--what people referred to back then as a midget, 4'2".
Speaker 1: Really?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had some disease as a child.
Speaker 1: But he was an actor yet, and still--
Speaker 2: Right, played in several--played in a movie with Boris Karloff called 'Bedlam.'  He made, he made--he was in three movies.
Speaker 1: Now, his name was--his full name was--?
Speaker 2: His stage name's Frank Dee.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was Frank Dee Brown, like mine, or mine like his.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was in 'The Wizard of Oz.'
Speaker 1: Oh.  And 'Bedlam,' you say, with Boris Karloff, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And was married to Ruby Dee before--
Speaker 2: Right.  She married him.  He was--she was going to school in New York [New York], and somehow met, fell in love, got married.  And I've got the letters.  When, when he passed away, I went through all of his belongings and, and it's--which is a room full; it's just tremendous.  He was in Ebony magazine; there were several black magazines, African American magazines back then, and he was on the cover because he was such a, a mover and shaker and an idol and icon back then.  He was a person to know.  He's got pictures with the Rat Pack, with many of the black boxers, Muhammad Ali and--.  But going back to Ruby Dee and that relationship, they were married for probably three years, three to five years.  And while she was going--after acting school, she was doing some Broadway plays or minor stuff, then she met Ossie Davis and he stole her away from my uncle.  And, and there's letters about my uncle, she's saying, "Quit threatening Ossie with that gun."  And, and it, it's, it's, it's just--it's interesting to read all that 'cause later on in life, no one knew that Ruby Davis--Ruby, Ruby Dee had been married to anyone; they thought Ossie and Ruby had been married forever.  And when actors come to town, I show 'em the pictures because of my friendship with [HistoryMaker] John Beasley, and I say that--they, they--we talk about each other and, and then the name pops up.  They said, "Ruby Dee--," and I say, "Yeah, she was my aunt, but no longer, and here's what happened."
Speaker 1: Now, that's an interesting story I've never heard, and I've heard Ossie Davis tell his story, and Ruby Dee talk about how they met, and he's never mentioned.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: He's never mentioned.
Speaker 2: Never mentioned.  And even in her book ['My One Good Nerve,' Ruby Dee] I don't think she mentions him, but it's well documented through Ebony and others--other magazines that, that they were a couple and a great couple.  Then after, after they divorced, he became sort of a playboy, and all the famous actresses, when they would come to New York, he was their escort.  And there was a column, a news (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even at 4'10", you know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Four foot two.
Speaker 1: And didn't--4'2"!
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, and that didn't stop him?
Speaker 2: No, no.  And he was, he was just--he was an icon back then.
Story_ID: 552038
Speaker 1: The gossip--there was a New York gossip column that--when he would--a famous actress would come to town, they would see them together and this columnist would write--columnist would write about it.  And that happened in New York [New York].  He was, he was in--he lived in Houston [Texas] for a while, and then he just--he moved to Omaha [Nebraska] his later years, and passed away here.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's interesting.  Now, I always assumed that the [HistoryMaker] Ruby Dee really stood for Davis, but she would--you know, somehow changed it to--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --for theater--theatrical reasons.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry I turned that off.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  No, it's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's an interesting story (laughter).
Speaker 1: It is.  A lot of people--it's, it's amazing, a lot of actors didn't know that she, she was divorced, and even on 'Entertainment Tonight,' when he passed away, they did a story with all these black ac- even white actors and, and they said that it was the, the longest lasting marriage in Hollywood, and people would go to them for advice when they had problems.  And little did they know that, that, that she was divorced, and when she--she was invited to speak at Creighton University [Omaha, Nebraska], my uncle was living here, this is probably ten, fifteen years ago.  And I would say, "You gonna go talk to her, Uncle Frank [Frank Dee Brown]?"  He goes, "No."  It's just part of his life he doesn't wanna remember at the time, or didn't wanna remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So he--did he retire from Schenley [Schenley Industries, Inc.]?  Is that--
Speaker 1: He retired from there and--yes.  And he even, on some issues has, has spoken before [U.S.] Congress, senior citizen issues, probably eight years before he passed.  So, he was heavily involved in, in, in issues that involved African Americans and seniors up to, up to his passing.
Speaker 2: Now how did he get involved in acting?  Did--is there--do you know how he got started or?
Speaker 1: From the story he told me, the, the first move was, was 'Bedlam,' and because of, because of his size and the novelty of--.  Very educated, extremely--you know, he graduated from Langston [Colored Agricultural and Normal University; Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma], but the, the Philip Morris guy who was short [Johnny Roventini]?
Speaker 2: Right,
Speaker 1: I don't remember the--"Call from--," you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) "Call for Philip Morris!"
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: The old commercial.
Speaker 1: He, he did the same thing for Schenley's liquor.  He had a vehicle and an outfit, and they had--there's pictures of him and the, the Philip Morris guy.  So, after that, he was asked to appear in 'Bedlam,' and then a Western and, and then the--who was it--the guy that, that made 'The Wizard of Oz' [Victor Fleming]?  They got to know each other.  He has an acting card, or he had an acting card, he was a member of the guild [Screen Actors Guild; Screen Actors Guild - American Federation of Television and Radio Artists (SAG-AFTRA)], and they asked him to appear--they asked him if he wanted to be in 'The Wizard of Oz.'  This guy was putting this movie together and it involved short people, and I've got correspondence where he didn't get paid and he was asking for his money from, from--because it bombed back then, 'The Wizard of Oz,' and then it later become a--became a big hit afterwards, but--
Speaker 2: So they didn't pay up all the ac- (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Right, he was constantly asking, writing, writing and asking for his money, and eventually he did get paid, but he, he was such a--an interesting character that everybody wanted to take his picture with him because he was so popular.  Like I said, Sammy Davis [Sammy Davis, Jr.], the Rat Pack, and he worked at a couple of bars when he was living in, in, in Houston while he worked for Schenley's liquor, and they, they just wanted him around; everybody wanted him around.
Speaker 2: It's interesting, that's an interesting story that--.  I just wondered if he took acting lessons here in Omaha 'cause I guess his--of his generation, you know, Henry Fonda and Marlon Brando came out of here--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and so did Johnny Carson (laughter).  So I don't--
Speaker 1: Exactly.  He never--he came to Omaha to visit, but only back in 19--it was probably '89 [1989] that he moved here.  He retired from Schenley's in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], he owned a build- he owned a building in Har- in Harlem [New York, New York], a, an apartment building, which was very unique, back in the, back in the '50s [1950s].  He owned property.  I mean just a major figure back then that, that people don't know about, but just a lot of interesting facts and, and history, and a very big icon.
Speaker 2: So, when did Mr. Dee pass?  I mean--
Speaker 1: Three years ago last September--last month.
Speaker 2: Okay, so 2004.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 552039
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So my Uncle Frank [Frank Dee Brown] was a very confident man and all of the black actors--Sidney Poitier, [HistoryMaker] Harry Belafonte--when he, my uncle would come to Omaha [Nebraska], he would tell us stories of his past, and we didn't believe him.  And he said, "Ah, Sidney Poitier and those guys would come of- come over to my apartment and we would--we--they would sit around, drink up all my liquor, play the piano, keep me up all morning, I'm the only guy that work- who's working, and they would leave."  He said, "They did that all the time."  We said, "Okay, Uncle Frank."  He, he paid for my education to Virginia Union University [Richmond, Virginia], and Sidney Poitier was on the board, so he came to Virginia Union and, and I was working for the student newspaper [Panther] at the time, and so I interviewed Sidney Poitier and I said, "I gotta ask you a question about a guy, his name is Frank Dee and he's my uncle."  He goes, "Little Frank?"  He said, "We used to go over that guy's house and drink his alcohol and his liquor, and keep him and Ruby [HistoryMaker Ruby Dee] up all night."  And when my uncle passed away--my uncle was a film buff, he took pictures--films.  He, he took pictures of Sidney Poitier in New York [New York] playing at a, at a baseball game with African Americans, or Negroes, or--at the time where he just took off his jacket and started hitting the ball and rounding the bases and laughing it up with people and he's got--my uncle has lots of film like that, so--it's just very interesting.
Speaker 2: So, so are these films preserved now?  I mean are they, are they--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Well, not preserved to that (laughter) to the point of--preserved that--
Speaker 2: Somebody needs to--you can still see 'em, you can run them through a projector and--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, yeah, I have 'em.
Speaker 2: These are like 8mm film?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right, and I've gotta do that when I find time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you gotta hurry up, though, make sure they don't deteriorate.
Speaker 1: Yeah, 'cause they're start- they're brittle and they're starting to break, so--
Speaker 2: That's right, right, right.  And put on the--digitized, or something.  So--
Speaker 1: The, the--he, he has one of--I'm trying to think of the, the singer's name--the slicked back hair.
Speaker 2: Nat King Cole?
Speaker 1: No--
Speaker 2: Billy Eckstine?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And he was--he's at a pool, my uncle's taking pictures of him at a pool and, and so--now there's all great--these old great films of, of black people back then that he knew, and we thought that he didn't know.  So it was just kind of unique and interesting.
Story_ID: 552040
Speaker 1: Any other stories?  You said there was a couple other stories, but is that--does that end about Uncle Frank [Frank Dee Brown] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) That, that's about it about Uncle Frank.
Speaker 1: Okay.  He sounds like an interesting person that people need to do some research on, I guess--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in terms of black--the black arts.
Speaker 2: You know he knew Robeson [Paul Robeson] and, and others, they were good friends.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was he--so he was an activist, too, then, on some level.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: So, okay.
Speaker 2: And the local politicians and state politicians, when they would run for office, they would talk to him trying to get the, the black vote.  And he would tell 'em about the concerns and--he and I would argue all the time because I'm a Democrat, he's a Republican, my uncle was a Republican and--but, but it was all fun in nature and, and I don't know why he stayed a Republican because he was a liberal--more liberal than I am, but I just think he just liked to argue, and he wanted to argue with the people in power who were the Republicans at the time, so he could get his point across since he was a party member.  So he was just--he was very politically savvy.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, quite a remarkable person here.
Story_ID: 552041
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your parents met?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  You know, I just--I think that--I, I don't know, I don't know.  They, they've told stories about it but it changes so much so, it--you know--at a store, at a dance, it just changes an awful lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they met here in Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And this would be--what?  In the '50s [1950s]?  Ear- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Late '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 2: Late '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities and their, their talents and proclivities, I mean who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: Probably my dad [Warren Brown, II], my dad.  And, and I keep going back to my mother's [Lyda Montgomery Brown] birthday--it's '32 [1932], 1932, so I wanna correct that.  But I would say my dad.  He, he worked every day, never missed a day of work, great, strong work ethic.  And up until the last two years, I was here every day, I've been in office [Omaha City Council] for ten years now, and I was here every day for eight years, but I got involved in other things and couldn't make it here every day.  But in school, never missed a day of school, television--never missed a day of work at TV, twenty-five years, I was at work for twenty-five years, and that was my father, so I guess my, my father's child, so--I like to work.
Story_ID: 552042
Speaker 1: Now you've got a brother, right?  And--
Speaker 2: Warren [Warren Brown, III].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so it's just the two of you?
Speaker 2: And two sisters [Sondra Brown Young and Marlene Brown Gunn].
Speaker 1: Two sisters, all right.  And where do you fall in the order?
Speaker 2: The youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Oh.  Not really, not really.  It was just a--I, I remember it was a fun time, it was a great time, but I mean there's little memories, but anything great and spectacular, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What--can you just--now, you, you were raised in North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what was your, your block like and--
Speaker 2: Everyone knew each other.  We were raised, like they said, by the neighborhood.  If your parents were doing something, you're walking home and you cause a little bit a trouble, they would come out and grab you, or by the time you got home, you'd get a spanking because everyone knew each other, and so.  And, and you talk about a fond memory, those probably, probably was the best, being, being--knowing everyone, and everyone looking after you because you are sort of their, their--you were their child as well; the extended family.  And could walk from school to my house, which is a mile away, and it's just--everyone saying, "Don't do that, boy, don't do this."  You know, back then they could say that, but--or say, you know, "Have your mother [Lyda Montgomery Brown] call me."  "Okay, Mrs. Snell [ph.], I'll--when I get home, she'll call you."  And those ki- you know, those kinds of things, it was a, it was a real family back then and, and I think it was just--probably that's the most, fondest memory I have of growing up, that it w- you felt safe.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were you--.  Now, what did your father [Warren Brown, II] do for a living at that time?
Speaker 2: He was--when I grew up--let's see, born in '53 [1953], so in '56 [1956], he started working and managing the bar [M&M, Omaha, Nebraska] with my aunt [Mary Metoyer], and became one of the owners, and so from then until he passed--he retired about five years before he passed away, and then--he had worked at the bar mainly all of his life.
Story_ID: 552043
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I can remember--you know, fall to me is just such a great time because it was sort of the introduction to Thanksgiving, Christmas, and families got together.  The snow--you couldn't wait for it to snow, you know, because that brought the neighborhood together to, to ski down the hi- not ski, but take inner tubes or something plastic and slide down the hills--sleds.  And you just--it was just the camaraderie and the great times, and the friendships--the safeness, you know.  It just--it's cold, but it just produced a warmth back then, and you could, you could--you weren't afraid, like kids are today to venture out, and there were loyalties back then that you don't have today.  The smell of, of--then you could burn trash, I don't know why but, but you could burn leaves, and I loved the, the smell of burning leaves--just wonderful, and it just reminds me of playing football, and I only played in high school [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska], briefly, but, but you knew you--and when I smell someone burning leaves somewhere in, in October, it just reminds me of, of, of a good time--of a great time in, in my life growing up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: Music--I love music--music from that era.  Five Stairsteps, 'O-o-h Child.'  I--you know, just riding up and down 24th Street and seeing everybody in their Sunday's best, and I--that old music being played back then, Marvin Gaye, Tammi Terrell.  And, and when I wanna escape into that era and that sort of safe--safeness and warmth, I'll play that kind of music, and it's sort of my, my hidden place to go to where I could actually relax, to put on the old music and, and just sit there.  It's just such a great time, and I wish kids today could, could experience that.
Story_ID: 552044
Speaker 1: It is something you reflect on, what kind of music the kids of the day will play when they get older--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --if they'll be playing the same kind of music or what (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  And they, they take samples from that old music and incorporated it into their rap and hip hop.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they actually have, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's, it's just a shame that, that they couldn't see from that era and prior--.  I mean there were troubles back then, but not to this magnitude, and to see how people got along, and you could actually walk down the street at eight o'clock at night and not be shot at, so, they'll never experience that.  I hope someday that maybe their kids might, but what, what has happened and transpired from that era to this era it's, it's--I think it's just very tragic.  These, these kids don't know how to have a--they don't know how to be kids, first of all, they're being raised at a time where they see violence in video games, they think that's the real world.  And they lock themselves up in their homes after school, and most of 'em play video games and watch television.  And back then the houses were so hot, Mom would cook, she would say, "Get out of the kitchen and go outside and play."  You had to go outside and play 'cause there's no air conditioning, and you would meet your neighbors and the families would take walks because of no air conditioning.  I think air--I think air conditioning was the fall of neighborhoods (laughter) because you couldn't stay inside (laughter), you just couldn't, it was just too hot.  You couldn't even go on the porch, so you were forced to go outside and walk.  We didn't have a fan until I was probably eight years old, so we didn't wanna stay in the house.  Then air conditioning came along, so more and more people started to stay inside, and with in- integration, you could go out to other places, but I think that air conditioning led to the downfall of real neighborhoods and families.
Speaker 1: You might be right, you might be right.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 552045
Speaker 1: Now, what did you like to do?  What was your personality like as a little kid?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've always been big.  But I love sports, football and basketball.  And I played basketball and I tried my--I've always had to try to prove myself to people because of the weight issue, so I did everything any other person could do, but I was just big, and I can remember--even if it's, if it were academics or games like chess, I had to be the best, always trying to be the best--at whatever I touched, I had to be the best.  Table tennis--I played on the team at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], and when the Chinese first came to the United States I was, I was the sixth man, I wasn't the be- I wa- part of the regular team, I was kind of a swing person, but they needed someone to play 'cause someone got sick, so I had the opportunity to play against the Chinese when they were first allowed back into the United States.  Got my butt whipped (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was going to say--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were pretty good--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --they're pretty fast, I've seen the Chinese play.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I got my butt whipped, but, but I always wanted to be the best and strive to be the best.  And as a child, playing basketball was a way of acceptance.  Swimming, because of the Boys Club [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America] that, that was a great time in my past because of all, all the, all--the friendships, and even guys today, we talk about the old Boys Club days.  My junior year in high school I couldn't play, I was probably the best player my fre- out of my freshman class in high school at Holy Name [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska], and the coach--
Speaker 1: In what?
Speaker 2: Basketball.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the coach said, "You can't play."  And everybody said, "Why?  He's the best player."  And so my, my--all those years there was the Catholic youth league and there was the city league, so I led the city in, in scoring, this is our team we put together in, in the CYO league [Catholic Youth Organization], and then my junior year there's a new coach that came in and he said, "You gotta try out next year."  And so I got hurt during practice, I had a severe concussion and was gonna miss part of the season, so I wound up playing in just the minor leagues again in high school, but I scored seventy-four points in one game, which is hard to do.  And I can remember my senior year in the spring being offered scholarships even to Canada, to play ball and, and, and never played high school--for the high school, so that was, that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay, now why do you suppose they didn't want you to play?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was racism.
Speaker 1: Okay, so it was like--
Speaker 2: I was the only African American.  There was myself, and my cousin who was a freshman at Holy Name, and my senior year there, we were the only two African Americans, and there were two women at the time, and they were both juniors, I was a senior, and that was it in the high school.  And until the new coach came--.  My brother [Warren Brown, III] went there too, and he started, he started in both football basketball, and was a good track person.  But it was racism why I never played, and I, and I kind of wonder would have happened if I had the chance to actually excel my freshman year, because that sort of discouraged me until the new cage- coach came around.
Story_ID: 552046
Speaker 1: Where did you go to grade school?  Where did you start?
Speaker 2: St. Benedict's.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is your family Catholic?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So this is St. Benedict the Moor [St. Benedict the Moor School, Omaha, Nebraska] basically?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--now, did you like school initially?
Speaker 2: Oh, I met a lot of great friends.  Even, even to this day, I don't, I don't fellowship with them, but if I see them in high s- my high school friends, we're, we're--you know, we sit down and we chat, we're, we're still friends.  But I met a lot of great people in high school, but the racism was still there.  I can remember my senior prom, they said, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Brown], you gotta go, you gotta go to your senior prom."  And I didn't wanna ask a, a, a white girl out, didn't wanna do it because of the repercussions, you know.  Even then, although the guys were great, you know, we didn't think about racism back then and, and it was--there was, there was acceptance on both sides, my side and their side.  We would go to parties and--you know how people don't wanna drink out of the same can or bottle?  The guys would do that, and not think anything about it, I wouldn't think anything about them, they wouldn't think anything about me.  And we were just kids, and we hung out together, went to every, everyplace together.  Even though that some owners would frown, they wouldn't stop us.  And, and so there wasn't a problem, though I could feel the tension, but at the school, racism just wasn't a, it wasn't an issue.  And so at the senior prom I remember they said, "You have to ask--," this certain person out, and so I did.  And I know there was hesitation on the dad's part when I picked her up, and we had a double date, I--had a double date with another couple, and I could see the hesitation on the dad's face (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, now who, who said you had to ask her out?  This--
Speaker 2: Well, all my buddies in school said--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --"She's waiting on you to ask her out to the prom."
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is a white girl?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, St. Benedict's, was it all male, or--
Speaker 2: It was mixed.
Speaker 1: Mixed?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was coed.
Speaker 1: Yeah 'cause a lot of Catholic schools are not, you know, so I just--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that was the grade school, St. Benedict's.  Holy Name [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska] was the high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, what happened?  What did the father do?
Speaker 2: He, he was just very reluctant to--didn't take a picture with us.  Got out of his easy chair, said, "Hi, Frank, how you doing?"  Sat back down, and the mom was very nice and gracious, and so we went to the prom and dropped her back off after dinner and the dance, and went our separate ways.
Story_ID: 552047
Speaker 1: Now, were you on--in any clubs in high school [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska] or--?
Speaker 2: They would--when I, when I graduated from grade school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Omaha, Nebraska], I had all 1s, or A's, and when I talked to the counsellor, 'cause everyone had to talk to the counsellor before they en- you entered school.  She says, "You know what?  Your brother [Warren Brown, III] wasn't very good in math and English and all these other courses, so I told him he should become a mechanic, and you should, too."  And, and she put me in the lowest phase possible, which was--which--I think it was phase--my memory is starting to go now, but I think Phase 1 was the lowest.  So there I was with, with all the under- the underachievers, but I imagine they were probably told the same thing, too, by this, this counsellor.  And that just had a, a horrible--left a horrible taste in my mouth, and mentally and, and, and just said, you're not that good.  And I always wanted to be a reporter, and my friends--secretly, I would go over to their house and, and work on the yearbook and the newspaper, and most of the yearbook my senior year, I put together myself.  And, and so the--after I graduated from high school, I became the editor my freshman year of the school newspaper [Panther, Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] 'cause I had all this ability and no one else probably wanted to do it so, so--clubs?  No, no clubs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because of, because of the academic status.
Speaker 1: Now, the counsellor story you tell is one we've heard now probably a thousand times (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, I can imagine.
Speaker 1: The same--I don't know if it's the same counsellor or they, they go to training camp for this, or what, you know--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or have retreats where they just say, you know, industrial education only, or--
Speaker 2: Exactly, yeah.
Speaker 1: --that's what they, that's what they do.  I mean it happened to me and probably--I don't know how many other people, same thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's, it's, it's amazing.
Speaker 1: And this story I've heard it--if I've heard it once, I've heard it a thousand times, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And then it's so sad because it, it's just a stereotype, and you hear people who want to--who are supposedly godly, and this was a, a nun, and just as racist as she could be and, and it's just: "Your brother did this so you should do this."  Not even knowing me, ignored my grades in grade school, and it had hurt me academically to achieve because I was always in that lower rung of the ladder.
Speaker 1: Where the instruction's not as rigorous, the questions aren't as deep (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Teachers don't care, you sit there and you, you make paper airplanes and you throw 'em out the window instead of writing down what the teacher wants.  The teacher would sit there and--not really interested in teaching you because you're the lowest.
Story_ID: 552048
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that were mentors or, or took a special interest in you that you can remember from grade school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Omaha, Nebraska] or high school [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: High school, none.  They're all friendly, all nice, but a special interest where--especially the English teacher that wouldn't allow me to work on the yearbook, just, "No, you can't do it."  Work on the newspaper, "No, you can't do it."  "Well, why can't I?"  "Well, because you're in this class, you can't do it."  And then at North High School [Omaha North High School; Omaha North High Magnet School, Omaha, Nebraska] that--he's now at North High School, and--but he did teach me, he was one of my instructors for English and--but what he taught was just going through the movements and basics, and ignored my talents.  And when he invites me to the school to speak, it's like I was one of his best students.  So, you know, it's very ironic but, but yet it's--and I don't--I, I--you know, I could bust him out if I wanted to but, but why?  It--you know, you, you didn't accept me at all, and no, you didn't allow me to do these things but, but now you say I was one of your best students.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is a--we've heard these stories a lot, so.  So when you were on the verge of graduating from high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Oh, just go back for a minute on the, the yearbook.  You said you actually did that through another fr- a friend of yours, right, who was working on it?
Speaker 2: Jim Carlson [James Carlson], Mike Franks [Michael Franks].  Mike Franks was a photographer.  We'd go over his house, they taught me how to, to put the roll of film and develop it, put in the stop, you know, the mixtures and, and everything.  And that's where I, I learned photography from them, and how to line up the newspaper, prepare it, learned it all from them.  So, when I went to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], they, they wanted to really build up their newspaper [Panther] and so I said--I showed 'em what I could do, and they said, "Well, can you write and take pictures?"  I said, "Sure."
Story_ID: 552049
Speaker 1: Now, before we get you to Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia], how did you get to Virginia Union?  How did you--how did this come about?  Did you always--did your siblings go to college?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My brother [Warren Brown, III] went to Prairie View A and M [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical College of Texas; Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View, Texas], and my sisters went to North Carolina, I can't think of the name.
Speaker 1: A and T?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Benedict College, or?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, it--I could just see the name but I just can't--they--I can't remember the name of the school they went to--the college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I know which one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But it's one of the black colleges [HBCUs]--
Speaker 1: Yes, right.
Speaker 2: --we all attended black colleges.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my brother at Prairie View he, he later went on to the [U.S.] military and was in Vietnam, went to Vietnam, and then when he got out, he became a cop in Beverly Hills [California] and just retired last December.
Speaker 1: A cop in Beverly Hills?  Now that's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: Beverly Hills cop.
Speaker 2: Exactly (laughter).  My sisters, Sondra [Sondra Brown Young] and Marlene [Marlene Brown Gunn]--Sondra lives in Ohio, Oberlin--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and Marlene lives in Atlanta [Georgia], married and, and has one child, and Sondra had two but lost one.  My brother has none and I have none, I've never been married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm like my uncle [Frank Dee Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay, uh-oh (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) So.
Speaker 1: Okay, so le- so when you were thinking--now, how did you choose Virginia Union?  And with you--them putting you in the bottom tier, did it make it difficult to get into college, or?
Speaker 2: Because of my uncle's contacts and being a f- in a fraternity.  I had to take the SATs and, and I scored enough to get into any, any college or university.  And because of the tradition, my uncle said, "You will go to either Langston [Langston University, Langston, Oklahoma] here--or here," and I said, "No, I'm gonna go with my buddies from Holy Name [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska] to UNL in Lincoln, University of Nebraska in Lincoln [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska], or UNO [University of Nebraska-Omaha] here in Omaha [Nebraska]."  "You're not gonna do it."  I said, "Oh, yes I can, and I'm gonna do it."  And--but I was seventeen years old at the time, not emancipated yet, my birthday was in August.  So they put me on a plane, my parents [Lyda Montgomery Brown and Warren Brown, II] did--they wanted me out of the house 'cause I'm the last one, and so they said, "You're going on an airplane, you're gonna live with your uncle in D.C. [Washington, D.C.], and you're gonna stay there and come back during--at Christmastime."  Most miserable time in my entire life.  And went down to D.C.  He lived about a block from the [U.S.] Capitol, and every day I would just go out to the Capitol park, and just hang around there, and they said, "You can't go--don't go north of here because you start to go into the worst parts of D.C." And they said, "You'll get killed."  So, one day, you know, I ventured off and--it's amazing because everything's built up and it's so nice, and then you start walking in this direction and you can see the burned out buildings back then--this is '71 [1971]--and you see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right after the riots, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I better turn back around and go back to the Capitol.  And so I stayed there for a month.  August, I went, went to the campus, and I loved it, loved Virginia Union.
Speaker 1: That's the one in--
Speaker 2: Richmond [Virginia].
Speaker 1: Richmond, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 552050
Speaker 1: They had gangs during that time, it was amazing.  First introduction to that kind of crime, and I saw more, more racism in the sense of, you're from the North and South, from black people, than I'd ever saw in Omaha [Nebraska].
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they would actually put freshmen and some of the upperclassmen in different dormitories because of the North and South argument.  These are, these are African Americans, though, it was pretty amazing.  And, and going from an all-white school--grade school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Omaha, Nebraska] was African American, high school [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska] was all white, then I'm going to a Baptist college, it's all black.  And it was a great time.  A lot of people kind of adopted me, they'd say, "Where are you from?"  I'd say, "Nebraska."  They'd say, "What part of New York is that, that in?"  (Laughter) And you tell 'em that there's black people in Nebraska, they said, "No, there's not."  And that was the year that Nebraska [University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska] won the first national championship, and then they won a back to back national championship.
Speaker 2: Football champions, you're saying?
Speaker 1: In football.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Were there any black stars on the team?  Was it--
Speaker 1: At Nebraska--in Nebraska there was Johnny Rodgers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Johnny Rodgers, right.
Speaker 1: --at the time, and so everyone watched.  I remember sitting--
Story_ID: 552051
Speaker 1: Okay, Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] we're talking about now (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So, so, so you liked the camp- you visited the campus, you liked the campus and--
Speaker 2: Didn't have a choice, I had to stay there and--'cause I didn't have any money.  I had no way of coming back to Omaha [Nebraska] so I had to stay there and--but it was a great time, a great experience.  I was there for two years, and what forced me back to Omaha--I w- I--I wouldn't come ba- .  Everyone would leave campus for Thanksgiving and the holidays, and I had nowhere to go because it's Richmond [Virginia] and there's Omaha, so I stayed in, in the, the dorm for the holidays, and would come back Christmas and for the summer, and I can remember the second years being there and I'm in my dorm, somebody kicks in my door and says, "Why are you talking to the police?"  I didn't know what the hell they were talking about, put a gun to my face and, and there I am, the guy's talking about killing me.  Keep in mind, during that time, the gang warfare was horrible back then.
Speaker 1: In Richmond?
Speaker 2: In Richmond.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember a, a woman--an elderly lady was, was shot--shotgun at a bus stop, there were six guys who were graduating the year before, and they were in Battery Park [Richmond, Virginia] singing and drinking, and they said, "How do you like this song?"  And someone at the top said, "How do you like this?"  And they shot 'em all.  And the following year, I can remember having breakfast with one of the guys who couldn't graduate 'cause he got shot, so he had to come back and graduate during, during the fall, and he's sitting there eating breakfast and a pellet would fall out of his face--a lead pellet from a shotgun blast, because he couldn't remove 'em, they had to rise to the surface--fall on his plate and bounce around.  And, and so the, the gang violence was--first taste of gang warfare was in Virginia Union, football game halftime was wonderful and, and all of a sudden there's shots being fired and people running from the stadium and, and so it, it-- that was a real shocker of all the violence (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now this is 1972, seventy--
Speaker 2: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Seventy-one [1971], '72 [1972], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So I left after that.  That, that December, I came back to Omaha and didn't go back, and enrolled at UNO [University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska].
Story_ID: 552052
Speaker 1: But a lot of fond memories, met a lot of great people--a wonderful, wonderful experience going to an all-black college [HBCU].  I think it was great and I needed that.
Speaker 2: Now, were there any teachers and, or figures on campus that were--you know, that are, you know, worth talking about here?
Speaker 1: Several, I can't remember their names now, but, but coming from the environment in Holy Name [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska] and then going to an environment at Virginia Union [Virginia Union University, Richmond, Virginia] where professors cared and would actually talk to you, it was just a--the thirst for knowledge was energi- energized again and, and here I am wanting to learn everything, where I didn't in high school.  And psychology was great, I loved psychology and sociology, and the teacher was a--and I can't think of his name but he had his doctorate, and I would--I started getting A's again, or 1s, and, and he said, "You know you've got a brilliant career here in sociology or psych- whatever you wanna go into," he says, "you can do it."  And, and the, the grades were reflecting that.  And this was just so new to me that people--teachers cared, and so.  One teacher--he had his pilot's license, he said, "Why don't you come up in the airplane with me some weekend and we'll fly around Richmond [Virginia] since you're from Nebraska?"  He says, "I know it's, it's difficult coming from a state like that, or a city and here, and," he says, "so I'm gonna show you the city."  So--took me up in his little twin propeller plane and we flew around and, and we did that twice and it was just a great time.  People actually cared.  The Baptist religious experience was phenomenal, the singing and, and, and that kind of preaching.  You know, you go to a Catholic church, it's real sterile.  Baptist, very animated and, and it seemed to be more caring, so that changed my views about sticking with one religion.  And now I attend a lot of African American churches and it's rare that I go to a Catholic church, but it's just the change of views.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, now did you get a chance to take classes in radio and television at Virginia Union?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Not at all, not one.  My favorites were sociology and psychology.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You had to take the basics, you know--the electives, and--
Speaker 2: All right.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But coming back to UNO [University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], I did.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 552053
Speaker 1: So University of Nebraska at Omaha [University of Nebraska-Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--well, who were some of the teachers there that were of note (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I started--I--the, the experience of non-caring came back again.  And, you know, then you're--there you're just a number, shuffled you in and out of classes, do your homework, take your test, and that's it.  Larger, more sterile, the caring was, by the professors, not there and, and it was kind of funny that, that I just--there's a guy by the name of Core Tore [ph.], and we had an--I think it was a second year broadcasting class together, and the teacher just did not like us.  We put together spectacular presentations for grades, and she just didn't like us and, and failed us.  Well, I got a D, and he got a C, and right after that, I got hired by KFAB Radio [Omaha, Nebraska] and, and, and, and so here I am good enough, at that time, to become a broadcaster, and, but in the classroom I wasn't good enough at all.
Story_ID: 552054
Speaker 1: Tell us about getting hired by KFB [sic.].  What happened?  Did they hear a, a demo or something?  Or what did--
Speaker 2: During that time of the Ci- you know, the Civil Rights Movement had been long past, but still the effects were, were there, and a lot of places were trying to hire African Americans, and here in Omaha [Nebraska], KFAB [KFAB Radio], which was a fifty thousand watt radio station, and very prestigious at the time, nationally.  It, it was, it was a, a main figure in radio, number one ratings in the Midwest, and it was a powerful station as fifty thousand watts were, but I remember they had a talk show late at night back then, and this is going back to 1975, and people would call across--I mean from Chicago [Illinois]; all over, they would call into the station and talk about events.
Speaker 1: Who was, who was the host?
Speaker 2: Walt Kavanagh, and he also was the news director.  So, the priest at Holy Name [Holy Name Catholic Church, Omaha, Nebraska]--there was an African American who was there and left to go into ra- to television, left KFAB.  And, and they came to--Walt Kavanagh came to him, this priest at Holy Name, and said, "They're looking for a black person to work in radio, and they've heard about you," but he says, "Let me tell you this," and this priest is white, and he says, "they want a token."  And, and he says, "And everybody knows," he says, "you're not a token."  So he says, "Here's what I want you to do: apply, get the job, and prove to them that blacks can do the job.  African Americans--blacks can do the job and, and be the best there."  So I did, worked there for four years and got hired away into television at Channel 3 [KMTV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska] because I was very good at my trade.
Speaker 1: Now, now, KFB, that's 1975?
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-five [1975] to '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Seventy-five [1975] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) KFAB Radio.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is AM, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 552055
Speaker 1: Seventy-five [1975] to '79 [with KFAB Radio, Omaha, Nebraska].  Then in '79 [1979], you were hired by--
Speaker 2: Channel 3.  Several stations were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --wanted to hire me in '79 [1979], and so--
Speaker 1: Channel 3--what's--what are the call letters?
Speaker 2: KTV.
Speaker 1: K--KTV?
Speaker 2: K--KMTV [KMTV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 1: Oh, KMTV, okay.
Speaker 2: KMTV.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So--okay.  So, had you ever done any television before?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  So, back then it was film, it was film but, but the analog cameras were coming in, and so I was taught how to use a film camera.  Every reporter had a film camera back then, and I--they taught me how to use one and I had one, and they wanted me to do police reports.  And I would be--I was in investigative reports later on, and a talk show.  And so that's what I would do for, for Channel 3, the investigative reporter part was, was big for them because that was the advent of '60 Minutes,' and--had been on the air for a couple a years, and so everybody was getting into sort of investigative pieces.
Speaker 1: Now, that's pretty--now that's, well, that's an important position to have at a station.  I don't know if they realized it at Channel 3, but having that kind of--the power to do investigation.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know a lot of cities, they don't have any black reporters doing investigative--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --reporting, and it's hard to get in that door, you know?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So, so, did you realize what you had?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, sure.  And, and, and--but you couldn't abuse it.  I mean some reporters would abuse something like that, but I was taught--I, I guess--I don't know, because of my upbringing, it was like you don't abuse things like that kind of power.  You don't walk around with your chest out and you don't punish people just because they're, they're, they're, they're on hard times or, or it's an accident what they fell into, but you wanna go after the big and powerful and make sure that, that they're doing what's right, representing folks and, and doing the right thing.  And so that's who I'd go after, and the abuses.  Then it's--and it was easy, at that time, going into daycares, not your small ones, but your major ones, and that was really low on my totem pole but--for the abuse, you know, kids being shaken or things like that, that was, that was--those, those things would happen and there were the police reports, and so that was easy because you just follow a police report and--look at the police report and do the story.
Story_ID: 552056
Speaker 1: The institutions where people were being abused, one that comes to mind was Iowa School for the Deaf [Council Bluffs, Iowa].  They had, they had--they were abusing the kids, and also the millions of dollars that were being pumped through there, those dollars were being abused.  I remember driving to Des Moines [Iowa] at least once or twice a week talking with the state auditor and other people about the financials.  And so here I am, I'm trying to, trying to learn some accounting procedures to investigate them, and learning about bookkeeping, and, and eventually doing the story [for KMTV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska].  And, and talking to deaf people is a real challenge, you know, here I am hearing and, and them being deaf, and they didn't understand why I was doing the stories, and I would tell them about the sexual abuses that were wrong and being allowed at the school, kids having sex with each other.  It was, it was so traditional that they thought I was attacking their school, you know.  The feeling back then that if two kids wanted to love each other, being engaged in some sort of sexual activity, it's accepted.  And, and I, I really don't--didn't understand it then, don't understand it today, but--
Speaker 2: This is at the Iowa School for the Deaf?
Speaker 1: Iowa School for the Deaf.
Speaker 2: These are underage kids?
Speaker 1: Well, they're--yeah, they're under twenty-one and under eighteen, under eighteen.  So, I did the story and, and exposed all these things that were wrong, and wound up getting a lot of letters from deaf people condemning me for doing the story.  "Why are you hurting the school?"  "Why are you trying to shut down the school?"  And changes were made--good changes because of that that kept kids safe, but it really reversed on me with the population and the parents because it looked like I was attacking their school and their--.  And that's what I wasn't trying to do, but after that, at the same time, I started looking at Nebraska School for the Deaf [Omaha, Nebraska], and there were greater abuses, there were abuses by counsellors.  And, and here's, here's the, the, the--the wrong part, the sad part for me back in that day and being African American--so I work this story and it's major, and they're gonna--cops come in, they say, "Frank [HistoryMaker Frank Brown], because of what you did, we're gonna arrest a couple a people on the campus, you found some things."  So I told my, my editor, my news manager, what's going on.  I said, "Some arrests are gonna be made."  They pick up the phone and call NBC, and NBC does a major story, they fly crews out here and they get the arrest on tape.  They do all the stories--the anchors do all the stories locally, and I'm just a person who put it together for 'em.  Wasn't good enough to, to do the story at the time, so that kind of put a really bad taste in my mouth.
Story_ID: 552057
Speaker 1: So then Channel 7 comes along and says, "You wanna work for us?"  "Sure."  So I went over to Channel 7.
Speaker 2: Now what are the call letters for Channel 7 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) KETV [KETV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska].
Speaker 2: KETV?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  Now, now this is what year?  What year is this?
Speaker 1: This would be 19--about 1988, '89 [1989].
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Okay, so how did things go there?
Speaker 1: They were okay, but there was more of--more of the same.  It was during an era and period, and still today, where they wanna showcase their anchors, so you'd work on a major story, and then the anchors would get involved and you would do a secondary piece to the anchors.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you would do the real work and the anchor would do the--
Speaker 1: Would, would come in, do a little snippet or a story minute, and they're still setting it up and saying, "Live, here's [HistoryMaker] Frank Brown to do the story."  So it was more of that but I, I came to accept that, they just wanted to high- highlight their anchors, and they made the big bucks [dollars], but it just still left a bad taste in my mouth, how things were handled, and how the worker bees get shafted, and then the talent, who they call the talent, the anchors, they--they're showcased.  But that's why they get paid more.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did you ever try to move up to anchor, or was that--would that be considered a move up in that area, or did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I was so good at what I did they, they wanted to--.  I was the guy that, that handled--I was the garbage man.  Anything bad they put me on because I had the, the knack and talent to talk to people, move around and, and talk to the authorities and officials, and get the job done.  So if they needed the story right then and there, they would send me.  When the Sioux City plane crash occurred, you remember that one where they show the picture of the plane hitting the fence in, in Sioux City, Iowa?  They sent me there because they knew that I could go and get in, get all the information, go to the hospitals, and then they flew me back.  I went, went around and did that and flew me back that evening so I could make the news.  The, the, the accident happened about one o'clock in the afternoon.  And prior to that, when the walkway fell in Kansas City [Missouri] and those hundred people got killed, do you remember that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the hotel [Hyatt Regency Kansas City; Sheraton Kansas City Hotel at Crown Center, Kansas City, Missouri], yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: They sent me there that--
Speaker 2: That was one of the stranger stories.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: There was a party going on, as I remember and the--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --the structural--some structural feature of the ho- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Collapsed.
Speaker 2: It was a--what was it, a--kind of hotel?  You know (unclear)?
Speaker 1: You know, I can't remember, I can't remember.
Speaker 2: But that's--but, yeah, that hotel collapsed and, and killed--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --several people, and it was a big mess.
Speaker 1: A good friend of mine who I w- that was at Channel 3 [KMTV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska] because a good friend of mine who I worked with then was Chuck Roberts who's at CNN, and so Chuck and I went down to Kansas City, we met at a truck stop, he hopped in my news vehicle and we drove down to K.C. and covered the story.
Speaker 2: Now, what's the range of these stations here in Omaha [Nebraska]?  I, I guess they--so you broadcast to--not only Nebraska but Iowa and--
Speaker 1: Iowa.
Speaker 2: --and Missouri, too, or do you--
Speaker 1: Maybe just a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Maybe just a little bit.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you, you cover the part of Iowa--or western Iowa that's--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --adjacent.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 552058
Speaker 1: So anything bad I, I was there. I covered all the major fires, major traffic accidents.  Six kids were killed at, at, at--on the interstate [Interstate 480] over here from Creighton [Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska], and I remember beating the rescued squads there.  I had a knack of getting there first, and so they, they actually said, "Here, we want you to have a camera, too."  So they gave me my--they gave me a vehicle and a camera, and I'd bring back the pictures and the story of the worst tragedies that ever occurred in Omaha [Nebraska].  Worst homicides, all the bad news, all the--everything bad, I covered.
Speaker 2: Now that--how did that make you feel on a day to day basis?
Speaker 1: You know, you don't think about it at the time, you don't think about a mother walking into her kid--walking her kids into Carter Lake and drowning 'em all and then walking out, and the rescuers were there going in and bringing out bodies.  New Year's Eve, my last five years at Channel 7 [KETV-TV, Omaha, Nebraska], there's a house fire, six people were killed, and firefighter brings out an infant and he's trying to give it mouth to mouth and he's taking his fingers and trying to massage the baby's heart to get it going again and, and that one really hit me because then I knew that, that--I never thought about people being people, they were stories, but after seeing that, it was an extreme eye opener saying these are live--these, these people are--it's, it's, it--they're alive, I mean they're--they're not stories, they're people and they're alive.  Because then it was just a story, you would care about 'em, but you--not to the sense of they're, they're, they're dead, they'll never see their families, their families will never see them--
Speaker 2: So, you, you operated with a certain amount of detachment--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --for a long time, I guess.
Speaker 1: A long time.  Anything, anything imaginable, I was there.  I've even solved a couple a homicides for the police department because of my skills back then, and anything horrible, I was there.  And, and, and because of the relationship I eventually had with the authorities, they would allow me b- into the scene and not to take pictures, but explain to me what was going on and--I don't know if you remember John Joubert, the guy--the [U.S.] military guy that was killing the kids, and they electrocuted him, he was the first person they electrocuted when they opened it back up again in the State of Nebraska.
Speaker 2: He's the one--he went into a school or something, and--
Speaker 1: He was, he was kidnapping kids, abducting them from, from--after school, and killing 'em.  And I remember working on that case and, and eventually, I was able to talk to--the, the sheriff back then said, said, "Why don't you come in and talk to John?  He's here."  His name was John Joubert.  And so I just said, hi to him and he says, "I remember you, you're the news guy."  And so I just kept going and, and left, 'cause they were building a new jail in--jail at the time, and the sheriff was showing me.  Well, then I got named in the lawsuit, or a suit against--'cause anything imaginable, he was trying to use in order not to get the death penalty, and so that was part of it.  And, and--but he was sent down to Lincoln [Nebraska State Penitentiary, Lincoln, Nebraska] and, and a couple a weeks before he was electrocuted, I was allowed to do the only interview with him before he was electrocuted.  And that, that was, that was really kind of an end to a story that had gone on for a couple a years, and fifteen years later, he gets executed, and so it's, it's one a those things where you think about the families, and then you think about interviewing the guy.  Two weeks, you're not gonna be here.  Most people don't know where they're gonna die, but two weeks from now, you're dead.  And the, the denial in, in--for me, it's--it shows how--a person's mortality.  And that sort of played on my psyche back then and, and said, you know, there's gotta be something else in life than what you're doing right now.  Yeah, you help people, you do things, but it's--there's gotta be more to life.  And, and so that was probably one of my last major interviews before politics.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now this this is about what year?  Where are we now?
Speaker 1: Right now, we're about at 1997.
Story_ID: 552059
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-seven [1997].  Now, so, what, what drew you into politics?  I mean how did--were you involved in the local Democratic organizations or (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  This was before you weren't allowed to do--to get involved in anything but your work.  And I had quit work for a foundation, and was there for six months, until it became political, they got themselves involved in politics.
Speaker 1: And what foundation was this?
Speaker 2: It was called the Jimmy Wilson Foundation [Jimmy Wilson Jr. Foundation, Omaha, Nebraska].  In fact, I was only there for three months, and I was their director, and just said, I, I can't get involved in politics like this.  So, I ran for office and I won.
Speaker 1: Now, it's more to it than that, so (laughter).  Now, at city coun- in city council [Omaha City Council] at that time, was--Brenda Council was the--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the city council person?  Which is easy to remember since her name is Brenda Council (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --on city council.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.  And she left to run for mayor, and so that created a void, and Fred Con- Fred Conley, who had been on the council for ten years, ran.  And there were about ten people that ran, including Fred, who had the position before Brenda.  And so I'm a newcomer to the game, but having name recognition helped.  And a lot of people didn't know--people who I went to high school [Holy Name High School, Omaha, Nebraska] or grade school [St. Benedict the Moor School, Omaha, Nebraska] with, and the high school is partially in my district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska], and the neighborhood is partially--it's on the outer fringes of, of the council district.  So people there knew me, people who I went to grade school with and at the Boys Club [Boys Clubs of America; Boys and Girls Clubs of America], a lot of my buddies, a lot of guys knew me, but everybody says--they tried to say, well, I wasn't from Omaha [Nebraska] (laughter) and, and parents--those same people who raised me, walking through the neighborhoods, they knew me.  But people like Fred Conley and others are saying, "Here's a guy that was a reporter, not from this community."  (Laughter) And, and I was from here and had strong ties here.  So, after the primary, my numbers were so huge a lead, Fred wanted a debate on--and, and my people who were politically savvy said, "You don't have to do anything but keep going out and going door to door, and take your message to the people, but don't get involved in any debates, you don't need it, your lead's too, too, too wide."  So I didn't, and won, and won by a wide margin.
Speaker 1: So was it tough to put together a, a campaign committee, or--with all the people that you know in the ci- well you said--
Speaker 2: I just had one person who was raising money for me, and that was it, and I had a best friend who--he was like my older brother, and he has since passed away from cancer, but he helped me put up signs.  It was just me and another person going door to door and, and just putting up signs and handing out brochures.  Because of my, my television experience and writing experience, I knew how to make brochures and do some things and, and that helped.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was your platform?  What were your running on basically?
Speaker 2: Jobs, economic development, affordable housing.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Those are things a lot of black communities need.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Usually education is one of the things they talk about, too, but--
Speaker 2: We have a school board, those, those folks are elected by, by their constituents.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so I loved to. I loved to get involved in all that, but those people who were there, who they were elected to put in those office and work, they should, they should do that, and that's still my philosophy today.  I'll get involved, and because of my ability to solve problems, people come to me with those kinds of issues.  But I always say, "There's a matter of protocol, go to your elected officials first because I'm a city councilman, but I'm interested in the educational aspect, but you really should put the people in office to work for you, and they're the ones who should be solving the problems in that area, but I will, I will help.  Call 'em first, if they don't work for you, call for me--call to me and I'll, and I'll work on the issue."
Story_ID: 552060
Speaker 1: So, we were talking about the election here, and some of the--
Speaker 2: Platform issues (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, platform issues, things going on in Omaha [Nebraska] in those days.  Now, did Omaha have riots back in the--
Speaker 2: Sixties [1960s], yes.
Speaker 1: --the '60s [1960s]?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's why today we don't have a community--that and the freeway [North Omaha Freeway; U.S. Route 75].  The freeway came after the riots, the riots burned down a lot of businesses on 24th Street, and after that happened, then came a freeway that took out thousands of homes, and these people had to move elsewhere.
Speaker 1: Now this is interesting because this is the same--I've heard this in regards to many cities, my hometown of Dayton [Ohio] is one.  The freeway cut right through the whole heart of the black community--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the whole black business district.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tulsa, Oklahoma, the, the GAP, Greenwood [Avenue], Archer [Street] and Pine [Street], same thing; big expressway right over top of it--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --divided the streets up, messed up the business district.
Speaker 2: Yes it did.
Speaker 1: That--you know--so this is a story that often occurs, this is done--these things are done in the name of urban renewal--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --which they call Negro removal in some cities.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So, I mean so that's what happened here.  In the '70s [1970s], actually, they put a freeway over the--
Speaker 2: In the, in the--in through what started at the very beginning of the African American district at Cuming [Street], and now it goes clear up to--it winds around and goes clear up to 72nd.  So from about 26th [Street] and Cuming, cuts right through, and then after about maybe thirty blocks, it will go west and take a person to, to 72nd Street, even farther now.  And so you could avoid coming through the African American district if you had to go, let's say past, past which is Florence St- Florence area [Omaha, Nebraska], which is--it used to be all-white, you didn't have to hop on 30th Street or a main thoroughfare, you could get on that freeway and just go.  Senator Ernie Chambers, who's the, the black legislator representing the district I am [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska] who got district elections, and that's why I'm here, and a black was elected to city council [Omaha City Council], I'm the third person.  He predicted that this would happen and it would not only divide the community, but it would, it would diminish the availability of jobs and new businesses coming into the area.  And it all--it was a prediction and it happened.  And so I want, and still am, trying to repair that, and that was part of my platform, to try and bring back business and, and jobs, economic development.
Story_ID: 552061
Speaker 1: Now 24th [Street] is the main street through your, your district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: --right?  Was your father's bar [M&M, Omaha, Nebraska] affected by any of the, the changes that--
Speaker 2: My--probably more so by the riots.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When the riots hit, that burned a lot of businesses, and if you don't have a lot of attraction in an area, just one or two, then people will go else- elsewhere, businesses will move elsewhere, and they just didn't come back at all.  So, buildings kept being torn down, the freeway [North Omaha Freeway; U.S. Route 75], because of how it's positioned, there's a lot of collateral damages and the houses were taken out to, to--not--because they were so close to the freeway, you had to take more houses out, so a lot of people were removed from this district and moved elsewhere.  My district has grown since then, and now they're back in my district because some people could only move back up to six- up to about 50th Street, where African Americans were allowed to move past 30th [Street], they were displaced because of the Civil Rights Movement.  They were able to move up to 60th Street and, and even farther west.  And, and so my district has grown because the population has grown in Omaha [Nebraska], so now I go up to about 60th Street, where I used to go up to probably 42nd [Street] and 45th [Street].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it--did you have to really stay on the district mapping issue here?
Speaker 2: The last two elections.  I've been in office for ten years, so the beginning of my second term and the beginning of my third term we've, we've had to redistrict.
Speaker 1: And that's probably, as most black communities, must be an issue to stay on top of, I guess, to make sure that you--
Speaker 2: (Nods head) And even racism on the council.  There's a council member here who represents North Omaha [Omaha, Nebraska] and--farther north, and he wanted to take away the development area in my city where the Qwest Center [CenturyLink Center Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska]--the, the convention center is, consider--the convention center is--he wanted to take that away.
Speaker 1: Now, that's part of your district of North Omaha.
Speaker 2: Right, and he wanted to take that away and give it to another council member.  And if they would take away that section away from me, then what would have happened, I would have had no great economic development at all.  I mean I'm doing good things in, in the inner core, but to a major sense, that would have all gone away.  And what I've done in the past, and been very successful, I'll go to the businesses and say, "Please hire people--you're in my district, hire people from the district," and they've done that.  The Hilton hotel [Hilton Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], which the city owns and passed the bonds and we--the Hilton manages that property for us, it now has an African American director, manager of the whole facility, and if we could just do things like that, and keep going in that vein, there's gonna be a huge difference in, in the economic issues that, that face this district.  We are one of the poorest districts--African American--in the United States.
Speaker 1: Yeah (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's more black unemployment here, where I think we're second on the list.
Story_ID: 552062
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was reading that it's--the, the children here in your district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska] are the poorest in the nation, aren't they (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But if you look around--and, and there's a study going on by the chamber [Greater Omaha Chamber] that's trying to get a master plan for the economic development in my district.  And so they, they brought some guys in from Jersey [New Jersey] who are developers, and they drove around and they said, "We don't see the poverty in your district, your home, your housing stock, we go to places all around the United States, and the houses are this far together, they're dilapidated, they're row houses."  They said, "We're just not seeing that in your district, every--." They said, "You've got a very, very well put together district."  And I said, "You're seeing the job by the city inspectors, they do a very good job, and something tha- if a house needs to be torn down, they will."  They've slowed up in the last couple a years, but we don't let houses get to a point where--you see a lot of burnouts in other ci- other major cities in ghettos, and in areas that are, that are, that are underdeveloped.  But I said, "If you go inside the houses, you'll see the pain and suffering that people have."  We, we might look good on the outside, but there's this horrible economic cancer on the inside, and that's what we have to change, and that's what I've been working on.  And, and we look good.  If you drive through the district, you say, this is a poor district, yeah, and you compare it to other cities, it doesn't look that way but it is.
Speaker 1: So it's not--I mean the wealth of the people is measured in dollars, you know, I guess--that would be another way of putting it, not in their houses, necessarily, how they look on the outside.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So what--so if they don't have the income--.  So, you're saying they really don't have the income, and that the jobs aren't here and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There's a high rate of unemployment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and what government did, and probably annoyingly, but later on some, some elected officials did, they put--we have sixty-five units--sixty-five hundred units of housing, whether it's Section 8 vouchers or public housing, in the City of Omaha [Nebraska], and that translates into probably around maybe twenty-two thousand people.  My district is sixty--is, I'm sorry, it's about forty-seven thousand, and if you translate that into how much is in my district but not the city, it's almost two thirds.  When government built the projects--we call 'em public housing today, but when they built them, they put most of it in my district, and it was made for--it was meant for whites, and then African Americans transitioned into the houses.  So, the population became bigger and bigger, and when you look at the lack of transportation in my district, then taking out the families with the interstate [North Omaha Freeway; U.S. Route 75], and bringing in more social service, the jobs aren't coming in, businesses aren't coming in, that's how we got here.  We have a very poor district, and the only way to reverse that is to bring in better jobs and economic development and affordable housing.
Story_ID: 552063
Speaker 1: What are the prospects in terms of jobs?
Speaker 2: We're working on it.  We're like I--we're working on it.  It's a--
Speaker 1: I know you said in the beginning, I've heard other people here talk about the packinghouses being big at one time.  Are they still the major source of employment?
Speaker 2: Not anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not anymore.  And, and immigrants have taken a lot of jobs but, but those jobs were going away prior to the immigrants coming in.  And there's a tremendous lack of transportation, issue in my district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska].  The buses don't even go out, the public transit, buses don't go out to, past probably 130th Street, and you go to two hundred and something street now.  And so people can't get to the good jobs, and if you do, you're on the bus almost all day traveling.  We need to create jobs in this district and, and, and somehow or another get the private sector to come in, and when they come in, they've gotta hire African Americans.  Gallup [Gallup Organization] has their headquarters, you know, one in Atlanta [Georgia] and one here.  It's major here, and I remember them coming to me and I'm telling 'em, "You've gotta hire African Americans."  And to this day, they're not hiring African Americans.  They probably have eight to ten people there.  And there was a, a cleaning business called Cintas [Cintas Facility Services, Omaha, Nebraska], so we got--gave them tax credits if they would build in the district and, and it's great, they're employing more than around a hundred people, eighty to a hundred people, and they made a lot of promises.  And so, yeah, they, they, they hired people but they wouldn't put 'em in the front office; they worked the assembly lines but not the front office--African Americans.  And you've got Creighton University [Omaha, Nebraska] that's in the district, and they're, they're one of the worst violators; they're not taking the, the kids going to college, very few African Americans, but they cloud their numbers and it's a shell game, they say minorities.  There are a lot of Asians, islanders, even people from South Africa or Africans, and people who don't live here are not going there but they say, "Oh, we've got a lot of minorities," but they're--in reality, they're not Omaha [Nebraska] grown African Americans.  And they've got--their, their endowment, it's huge, they can make a difference in lives, but they won't do it.  They study us, we're poked and prodded and, and put in some research group for diabetes and, and, and, and heart disease, and they get grants for that, then they take the research and put it on a shelf and go after the next grant and don't employ us to work on those grants.  There's a lot of money in poverty, but it doesn't filter back or help--actually help the people who need it.
Speaker 1: The poor themselves.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so those are the major issues in the city.  What are your plans to--what--do you have anything on--anything big on the horizon for--I know you were talking about building another stadium, right?
Speaker 2: Another stadium, and hopefully we can bring that into my district.  The College World Series is played at Rosenblatt [Johnny Rosenblatt Stadium, Omaha, Nebraska], and it's a stadium that's--they've been playing there for more than fifty-six years and we need a new stadium, so it only makes sense to put it into an area that's growing, and that area to the south, it's the southern portion of my district, is growing.  It's got three, three major hotels coming in, there's a hotel there, the Qwest Center [CenturyLink Center Omaha, Omaha, Nebraska], convention center, is there, and if we can put that facility--build it here, we can bring in more jobs, which would help eliminate or alleviate a little bit of the poverty issue in my district.  And there's gonna be a lot of economic balance because there's gonna be retail and commercial coming and, and that should--that in--that should improve the job climate because people now can almost walk to work, where they couldn't get there in this day and age.  Working on some call centers that could, that could bring in a--create about a thousand jobs or more.  Just a couple things like that and, and, and I say a couple things as, if it's small, but it's doable, and it can happen.  If people will just think about helping others, it can get done.
Story_ID: 552064
Speaker 1: Now, did you have very much cooperation from the mayor of the city?  I mean--
Speaker 2: The first one [Hal Daub], no, but, but--my first four years it was a real learning experience.  He taught me how to fight this even when we're at odds.  He taught me, "You gotta read everything," I knew that going in, but he said--.  But we didn't get along at all, but it, it taught me how to, how to read, read--but read between the lines, he taught me how to read between the lines and made me a better politician and, and a--really a, a fighting politician, I was a fighter before, but there's--it's different in politics.  And you've gotta stand up and you've gotta really work your project and build allegiances.  That's, that's, that's huge and tremendous, and so I did that my first year.  When I got on, I knew that I was gonna have a problem because I knew--and there was this mistrust of me being a reporter--a former reporter.  So I got together with my colleagues and I said, "We all can be city pre- be council presidents and vice presidents."  And there was animosity, I knew, on the previous council [Omaha City Council], and five of the people were--got reelected, and there was myself and a new guy.  So I went to all of them and I said, "You three guys will not--," three of the five, "you will never become council president, never become a council vice president, it will always be these others."  But I found a way in the law that if we would just vote for each other and then resign after our first year, all of us could be council presidents, vice president--.  And that, that built a great relationship because we did that.  We got criticized for it because it's two years you have to serve, but we'd all resign after our first year and let someone else be council president and vice president, and it wasn't illegal.  So we did that, and so, if we had projects that we wanted to do in our district, the mayor would say no, but we had the votes to override.
Story_ID: 552065
Speaker 1: I was able to get money for the jazz complex [Love's Jazz and Art Center, Omaha, Nebraska], and the new mayor that came on, Mike Fahey, was wonderful and is still wonderful to work with.  He just says, "Yes, if we have the money to do it, we're gonna get it done."  So, the jazz complex at 24th [Street] and Lake [Street] is a renovated building, it was a liquor store and a bakery, and it's one of the premier jazz museums, cultural arts center, African American, in the United States.  That was, that was more than a million dollars that I was able to get to renovate the building.  When I ran, entertainment was a big issue, there's, there's just not a lot in the district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska], and kids wanted either a place where they can have a stage and theater, movie theater and a roller skating rink.  It took me five years to shop around the idea, and everywhere I went, no one wanted what they called the headache of a roller skating rink, and I had the money for a tur- turnkey operation.  So finally The Hope Center [The Hope Center for Kids, Omaha, Nebraska], which is about four blocks from 24th and Lake--.  They even resist- they said, "Well, we want the money for other stuff."  I said, "No, it's gotta be a roller skating rink."  They eventually did it, and we put, and put in $1.5 million there.  We built a lot of new houses, and probably more than three hundred new houses, four hundred new houses in the district, and we're building more constantly.  My, my organization that I'm a head of [Housing In Omaha, Inc., Omaha, Nebraska], there's a, a building that resembled, and people called New Jack City in my district, eighty-two apartments--seventy-two apartments.  We were able to purchase that from the federal government, and made that into an 8.5 redevelopment project, and it--the, the place has won awards for--in renovation and what it's turned into, and there's seventy-two families living there.  Parks, we've improved the parks and made them a lot nicer and put in, put in things that kids would enjoy.  The library that, that, that was built in the '60s [1960s] or '70s [1970s] in, in North Omaha [Omaha Public Library, Omaha, Nebraska], 'cause every district has at least one library.  There was--that sat on the books, the renovation was always there for eight years, but no one had pushed the idea of renovating the building.  So when I came in and got elected [to the Omaha City Council], I was looking at all the old issues that were on the books but never being implemented.  And we fixed up the library and it's, it's, it's in its premier, it's, it's a beautiful place, great place to learn.  And the list--I mean I could tell you all day, all the things that I've done in this district, but I do these things, and basically on--I've got a great staff here in this building, public works [City of Omaha Public Works Department], parks and rec [City of Omaha Parks, Recreation, and Public Property Department], to get things done, but I'm showing other politicians that an African American can make changes and do well, and make improvements.  And, and the people before me, and I'm not saying that they were bad people, they just couldn't get it done or didn't know how to get it done.  But because of my covering city hall as a reporter, and being involved, and knowing how to get things done, I've had a great career and great successes.  And so I'm showing people don't--if city hall tells you no, you can do it, you just have to work the system.  And, and this district today is growing, it's looking better, I think we're on the verge of bringing a lot of jobs here into the city, but it's, it's still gonna take a little time and it's gonna take a lot of people to get on the same page.
Story_ID: 552066
Speaker 1: Tell us about Housing In Omaha [Housing In Omaha, Inc., Omaha, Nebraska].  How you started--got involved with that. Now you're on the board of that, right, of Housing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm, I'm the director now.
Speaker 1: You're the director?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was on the--ten years ago, the Omaha Housing Authority was put into a troubled status, which meant that the local HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] office was removed from oversight, you were put--a judge said, "You will report to--," what's called the TARC, Troubled Action Recovery Center [sic. Troubled Agency Recovery Center]--whatever.  So they were running the agency because a slew of, of problems, bookkeeping and otherwise.  The mayor did not--at the time, did not get along with the director, the director left, and the director was doing a lot of great things for poor people.  He was trying to tear down some of public--the public housing, the brickyards, because they're just too clustered, and we're having a lot of shootings, murders and gang activity, so he tried to tear 'em down.  He tore down two, and a lawsuit was filed because those who were displaced didn't have anywhere to go, and it was called the Hawkins lawsuit.  And, but HUD had approved it and so they said, "We're gonna give you $27 million to bring in new development."  Because of the turnover, the turnover of the board, and the mayor constantly trying to--he wanted to put the housing authority into receivership, which would have been even more tra- tragic for, for the, the, the poor people here in the district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska] and throughout the City of Omaha [Nebraska].  The acting director asked me to come on board and become a board member.  As a council member [on the Omaha City Council], that's--it had never been done, but I'd found out in state law, that cities of a metropolitan class, a council member could serve.  So I got on the board, did that, and realized that the clock was ticking on this redevelopment funds, and if we didn't ask for an extension, we probably would have went into receivership, so.  And if you look at $10 million ten years later, or $27 million, it's not $27 million ten, ten years later, it's less than that, the value of the dollar shrinks, so we had a lot of money that actually couldn't build 230 replacement homes, and that's what we had to do with 27 million.  And we created a agency called Housing In Omaha, a nonprofit to get that done, and cities do it all across nine states--housing authorities.  So, that existed, but never--it wasn't building at all.  We're up against a deadline to build, or else we could have went into receivership.  So, two years ago we, we stepped up HIO, and we had no director for it.  And in the last year, they were having so many problems, a tremendous amount of problems, trying to build these houses.  We're up against a court ordered deadline, so they asked me to step off the board and run Housing in Omaha to get it done.  And I did that and we, we finished it right under the gun.  But there's so much paperwork, there's so much--so many issues that you have to, have to get done, and there's not one person over, over this Housing In Omaha, which is not part of the Omaha Housing Authority, but their task was to finish and build these homes.  So, I left the board and became the director, got it done, and now there's 232 units of brand new housing, and it's great for people.
Story_ID: 552067
Speaker 1: The biggest fight I had--you could--the government said--or the judge said you could only put so much in each council district; you've gotta spread it out.  We went into what's called the Keystone area [Omaha, Nebraska] at 87th [Street] and Boyd [Street].  And the Sisters of Mercy [Sisters of Mercy West Midwest Community, Omaha, Nebraska], they've got a developing arm and they were our developers at the time.  They went into this neighborhood and I told the board, "Don't do it."  Because I had covered stories, racial stories, in the area, in that Keystone area.  They have very few African Americans living in that district, you could probably--it's probably under ten families.  And I knew it was gonna be a fight to put public housing in that neighborhood.  They fought us for two years, the board was--the board--and this is what I was telling the board.  The board said, "You know, we're gonna--we've been sued, let's give up."  I said, "No, if we give up here in Omaha, Nebraska and can't put housing for minorities--."  'Cause that's what we were being accused of by, by the all-white neighborhood, they were saying that, "You're just gonna put black people in here."  And I was receiving letters saying that they were just gonna date my, my, my girlfriend--or my kids, rape 'em, there'll be shootings, there'll be murders, and it was just awful, it was just--.  It was extremely one of the--I thought that I'd been--gone back forty years in time, it was that bad.  Just the hatred.  And here we are, trying to put public housing right in the heart of the neighborhood.  First, it was sixty homes, but that was unrealistic because of the acreage, and I told 'em that, the, the Sisters of Mercy.  "You can't do that, it's just too condensed."  We finally narrowed it down to thirty-six homes, beautiful homes, and they still fought us, took us to court, and we won.  We beat 'em in court, it was against the law to discriminate--you know the housing law- fair housing laws.  And during the course of the lawsuit that the neighbors had filed against us, I had them run an economic study of the area, and an area of income.  Most of all the residents could qualify to move into public housing from that Keystone area; that's what it showed.  So they were two che- paychecks away from being in public housing most of 'em, but yet they didn't want that in their district.  There's even one lady who applied whose parents were against moving us in, their daughter wanted to move in--into Keystone, and it's just--the development now is beautiful.  They still watch us.  It's, it's a year old, but no problems at all.  Not one problem.  And then I was asked later--I was asked this past--a year ago, to become the director [of Housing In Omaha, Inc., Omaha, Nebraska].  The director left, and is now a state senator, and they, they asked me--the board asked me if I would run for--not run, but put my application, I did, now I'm waiting for a callback from HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] to see if they'll grant me waivers because you can't be an elected official and run a housing authority.  So, I'm in limbo there, but I'd love to do that just to help people.
Story_ID: 552068
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were talking off camera about the, the need to be able to understand and read legislation, and you were saying your training as a reporter has been useful in, in understanding what you're up against 'cause there aren't that many lawyers that seem to be elected to city council around the country from black communities.
Speaker 2: Right, so I've, I've had--it's been a (laughter) trial, trial by fire, and I, I've had to learn a bit of law, I've had to learn to be a bookkeeper, accountant, and you have to read.  If you are an elected official, or you're aspiring to be an elected official, know what you're getting into, read the legislation because it's like you were saying earlier, Larry [Larry Crowe], it, it--people get on these boards, these elected positions, and they don't know how to read it; they don't know about covenants, they don't know about, about restrictions in code.  You gotta read all these things.  I spent--the first couple of months after I got my rear end kicked when the first budget--first budget came in two months after I got elected, and I had a wish list of things that I wanted, and I got stomped by the mayor [Hal Daub].  But the next year, I got almost everything I wanted for that first year and even more, because I read, and I found that I--and 'til today, a lot of politicians will not read, and that's why there's the (unclear) and abuse that we have today.  I haven't read a book in twenty years--a novel--I mean--I'm sorry, in ten years, since I've been on the council [Omaha City Council], because the favorite things that I read right now it's all about legislation; it's about budgets, it's about housing authorities.  That's all I do.  I can't, I can't sit down, pick up a book, a bestseller, and read it because I just don't have time to do it because of--.  Everyone wants to prey upon the poor; they want money that's available to fix problems, they wanna move into their own areas and fix their problems, they don't wanna fix the core issues, the poverty issues that face poor people and minorities.  And, and, and what, what really got to me, [U.S.] Congress passed--the [U.S.] Senate passed legislation three years ago to pa- to, to give Creighton University [Omaha, Nebraska] a $5 million parking lot.  This is a private college that 99 percent of the people that are in my district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska], which this is in, will never use that parking garage.  But that's not--happened at the city council level; that happened back in D.C. [Washington, D.C.].  But it just goes to show you if you're--if you are handling the purse strings, if you know the right people, a parking garage can be built with federal dollars, and on this level, I try and stop some things and voted against it.  But it takes four votes and five votes to do everything and, and--but, but you have to read; you gotta read.
Story_ID: 552069
Speaker 1: What are some of your principal hopes and concerns for the black community of Omaha [Nebraska] today?
Speaker 2: Equal footing, being on the same page and given the same rights as everyone else.  In government, treating my district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska] like all the other parts of government or, or neighborhoods.  Private developers who have ignored to build and put commercial in my district, saying that we have the same dollars we did thirty years ago, we have even more today, and just take a chance and you'll make money and we'll be happy.  And we'll--if you can employ people, there's more dollars to spend, but take a chance on us.  That's slowly happening, but not fast enough.  I always want things yesterday and, and so you work with these developers, you work with the private sector and you, and you hope to make break- breakthroughs, no matter how small.
Story_ID: 552070
Speaker 1: When you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: Lose that first year [on the Omaha City Council] (laughter), be better prepared for that first year.  I lost, I lost a girlfriend because I read so much of city budgets and wouldn't go out and do anything because I wanted to be the best and show people I could get this done and make a difference because it wasn't happening with others that were put in this position or elected to this position.  There wasn't any movement.  And so I wanna be the template for everybody in the future to say--when I leave here, people are gonna say, "Well, [HistoryMaker] Frank Brown got it done, why can't you?"  That's the bar I wanna set.  I want the person that replaces me eventually to do better than what I've done, and I've shown people you can get it done, in spite of all the odds of your color, the economics being against you, you can get this done.  And so don't tell people you can't do it; it might be a long time coming, but anything's possible.  And I wanna teach the kids that.  There's a--all throughout the United States, kids need to see role models and they need to see that they can be achievers and get things done.  When I go into schools and talk to the kids, I tell 'em that I was the one that, that got the roller skate rink--roller skating rink [at The Hope Center for Kids, Omaha, Nebraska], and they're amazed, they're amazed.  They don't know that African Americans can achieve because the role models to that extent aren't out here, and the story's not being told by the news media.  They won't say that Frank Brown got this done, for whatever reason, but when you talk to 'em and you tell people this is what has happened, they think it's great and they appreciate me more, in spite of what they hear about me.  And that's all through the--all thorough city government, and people come up to me from other districts and say, "You know, Frank, I don't agree with you, but I like how you fight for, for your people," 'cause they always say, "Your people," whether it's white or poor--white or, or black, "Your people."  But my constituents--I fight for my constituents.  And they say, "I wish my council member would fight like you."  And some of 'em do but, but I really fight hard, I really do, and I put a lot of time in and I don't have a life at all, but I think it has to start somewhere, and if every politician would have the ethics and the drive that I have, I think gover- and I'm saying everywhere--government, I believe, would be better because you wouldn't have the pork that's going on, you know.  You see the stories on the national news about something that's just ridiculous being built when that money could have gone to a housing--to build more public housing, or gone to, to poor families, and it's, it's, it's just not being done.  What I regret probably most of all: crime, the gangs, the killings.  While you've, you've been here--your crew's been here, there was a six year old girl shot in the eye and killed.  I mean it's--the government has no answer; this is a cancer that has no treatment, no cure.  We spend a lot of time talking about the ills, the problems of the world, helping third world countries, but we're not solving one of the biggest problems that we have in the African American areas of the United States, and that's the killings.
Story_ID: 552071
Speaker 1: Is urban violence in--rising in Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] statistics show that it, that it, that it was higher last year, and above the, the national average in 2006, of all the cities in the United States, and so--and we're not solving it.  Got a black police chief [Thomas H. Warren, Sr.] here who--not solving it.  A high number of unsolved murders--
Speaker 1: Is there--
Speaker 2: --unsolved shootings.
Speaker 1: Yeah, is there, is there--have they adopted a form of community policing or any--
Speaker 2: Which does--it's only--name only.
Speaker 1: --organizing going on?
Speaker 2: Only in name only.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No neighborhood organizing on the part of the residents themselves, or anything?
Speaker 2: Window dressing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They put out weed and seed dollars, they'll, they'll build a garden, do some other things like that, but it's not going--it's not going after and treating the core issues.  We've gotta trace--we've gotta treat these core issues.  People always ask, "Let's have a town hall meeting on violence."  People are sick and tired of just having meetings and no solutions.  All we do--we hear the horror stories that we're familiar with and we all walk away at the end of that meeting with no solution.  This is an epidemic and has been, and we're not solving it, and people are dying, they're being put in wheelchairs, and government is not solving this.
Speaker 1: So, is, is your district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska] basically the--are, you know, are the residents there serving as middlemen for drug traffic and that sort of thing?  Is that, is that the economy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, drugs has a lot to do with it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It has a lot to do with it.  And, and I'm not saying that people are justified, but when you don't have the private sector building or bringing in jobs, when you don't have the government solving transportation out--issues to get you to the jobs, when you, and justifiably so, bring a lot of police officers to handle crime issues because it's a high crime area, some parts--some parts, not all parts; there are probably eight that I can name where we have issues.  When those officers aren't busy because of the high concentration of officers, they're writing marginal tickets, they stop kids they shouldn't stop because they're under a quota system.  So they put more people into the system, where if you get a record, I don't care how small it is, you can't get a job, and there's a lotta that going on in Omaha, Nebraska with African American youth.  Records are expunged, supposedly, but when you fill out that application and say you haven't been arrested, it's not taken off the book at the police headquarters and it says yeah, you were arrested, but it doesn't say for what.  And our youth can't get jobs.  I, I tried to help get our youth jobs constantly, but it is a struggle.  The drugs, as you said.  Marijuana is a huge issue for unemployment.  Because of whatever reason, you have people smoking marijuana, but it affects us the most.
Speaker 1: Even more so than crack [crack cocaine] or something like that, or?
Speaker 2: Because it's more of a recreational drug, but when they take the test and they have surprise drug tests, a lot, a lot of poor people and African Americans get weeded out, so to speak; they get, they get kicked out of the system.  And, and so when I tell people, "You know, you just can't do this.  If, if it's just a recreational thing, don't do it.  You're gonna get fired or you won't get hired."  And, and I don't want people to get the idea that we have a lot of African Americans that are, that are, that are, that are smoking marijuana, but it's one of those small things like that that a few people do, and they can't get jobs, and so they become effective and ineffective in, in life; they, they can't--they're not giving back to the system, they can't, they can't make a good family for their kids--a better family for their kids, and their kids see that.  We have generational--we have people who are at least three generations removed in public housing.  We're seeing the population become younger and younger in Omaha, Nebraska in public housing.  Single family moms.  We have mothers who are fourteen years old, but by law they can't become--unless there's some sort of special disposition, they can't live in public housing 'til they're nineteen, twenty, so they'll come to us, and they've got a six year old already and you're twenty years old.  And so that six year old sees that you don't have to work, or "I can't work, so I'll live in public housing."  We're seeing more and more of that, we're seeing younger people move in.  Government's got to stop that.
Story_ID: 552072
Speaker 1: What would you consider today, when you look back at all the things you've done, to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Fighting.  Fighting for poor people, the battle, a constant battle; me against all odds and, and winning a lot of time.  Fighting against racism in building houses in Keystone [Omaha, Nebraska], trying to bring in some sort of re- recreation, renovating the library [Omaha Public Library, Omaha, Nebraska], renovating a, a drug infested building and making that into award winning apartment complexes--complex.  And just changing the dynamics, giving people hope where there's hopeless--hopelessness and, and, you know, me there by myself sometimes fighting and saying, "Yeah, one person can make a difference."
Story_ID: 552073
Speaker 1: You don't have any children, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--no children to talk about, but who would you consider your family right now, as such, in Omaha [Nebraska]?
Speaker 2: The district [District 2, Omaha, Nebraska]; they are my family right now and, and I care about all of them.  I say educational wise, I will try and help you if you have a problem.  I'll even go to--if your--if that elected official won't go with you, I will go to school with you and see what happens, and that keeps me busy constantly.  I, I get probably forty emails and, and, and probably thirty phone calls a day where people need my help; most of the emails are junk, but in there people need help.  People need help when you represent a, a district full of poverty.  People need help when they don't know who to go to; the lawyers won't take their ca- and I'm not a lawyer and don't practice law, but I've gotta help them with those issues.  I've got friends who are lawyers, and African American lawyers will not take pro bono in the district; it's very, very few times they'll do that, and so I talk to them about, "You've gotta change what you're doing and take some of these cases.  We've gotta start trying to expan- expunge the records of people who have served their time so they can, they can become a greater part in society again because they can't get jobs because of their records."  We have to, we have to do more and we have to show people that these things can get done, but you got to fight for it.
Story_ID: 552074
Speaker 1: Is there anything I have not asked you that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: (Shakes head) You've covered every bit of it.  I think you know more about [HistoryMaker] Frank Brown than anybody else cares to (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, last question is similar to the--to, to legacy, but a little different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a template for change and success.
