Story_ID: 49867
Speaker 1: My name is Samuel Adams with the HistoryMakers.  Behind me is our videographer, Mr. Scott Stearns.  Can I have your name and the spelling of it?
Speaker 2: My name is Fredi Brown, F-R-E-D-I, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Can I have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born December 4, 1923.
Speaker 1: And can I have our address and location?
Speaker 2: Well we're at Manatee Community College, Family Heritage House at Manatee Community College, 5840 26th Street West in Bradenton, Florida.
Speaker 1: Can I have today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date April 23, 2002.  Is it 23rd?
Speaker 1: 24th
Speaker 2: 24th 2002
Speaker 1: And could I have your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well I'm actually supposed to be retired but I operate The Family Heritage House Museum.
Story_ID: 49868
Speaker 1: We begin each interview by having five questions, just short answers to get us into the flow of having an interview.  What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food, probably strawberries.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Purple
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Autumn
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation or destination spot?
Speaker 2: It is San Francisco, probably.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: An ongoing search for truth.
Story_ID: 49869
Speaker 1: Ms. Brown I would like to begin by asking you your mother and father's names and their spellings and then the spellings of your siblings' names, your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: My mother is Mary Etta Hines that was her maiden name, M-A-R-Y, E-T-T-A, H-I-N-E-S.  My father is Oscar, O-S-C-A-R Columbus, C-O-L-U-M-B-U-S Sears, S-E-A-R-S, Sr.
Speaker 1: And your brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: My brother OC was named for my father, Oscar Columbus Sears, Jr. and Harry, H-A-R-R-Y, L-E-E Sears.
Speaker 1: Ms. Brown I'd to ask you, do you know anything about your mother's parents?  Any stories you've heard, her sharing those with you?
Speaker 2: I knew my grandmother, my mother's mother, Rebecca Moore.  She was out of Putnam County and she had two brothers, Harry and Oscar.  Those two names seem to be a part of both sides of my family and she was married to a minister and she lived next door to us in Bradenton.  She would take me with her when she went on trips.  When she and her minister husband went on trips throughout Florida and I would spend nights with her sometimes.  She was--actually she would more or less see after us children while my mother was at work.  You know there wasn't a time when we were so aware of getting information about our past.  I think a whole lot of that came as a result of 'Roots' but we didn't talk too much about her past or what her experiences had been but we would go visit her sister.  She had a sister named Mary who lived in Florida and they lived on a farm and they would sit around sometimes and talk about their childhood.  But I just didn't pay a whole lot of attention to it.
Speaker 1: And her husband is a minister, your grandfather?
Speaker 2: He was not my grandfather.  This was her husband who was--I guess you would say a step grandfather, Reverend Jackson.  Yes but I didn't know my mother's father.
Speaker 1: What type of man is your step grandfather, the minister?
Speaker 2: What type of man was he?  Well he was just a country preacher, you know and was a tall, handsome, dark man who was more or less, I guess an itinerant preacher because he would travel around to different churches and as I said, she would usually take me with her to St. Petersburg or Cross City or whatever they were going.  But he was just a preacher.  You know one of the traditional, black, itinerant preachers.
Story_ID: 49870
Speaker 1: Your father's parents, did you know-have you heard anything about them or do you know anything about them from what you've heard from others?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My mother said that my father had a sister who lived in New Jersey and at some time I had thought of trying to trace his family and I had asked one of my nephews to do it.  But somehow none of us has ever done anything to try to trace it.  My father left his home as a youngster and he never went back, he never went back.
Speaker 1: Do you know why he went?
Speaker 2: No I don't, probably looking for employment, for work because he came to Parrish, Florida and that's where they had turpentine mills and he found employment there.  That's where he and my mother met.  Her family had moved to Parrish and she was only-a very young teenager. He was about fourteen years older than she was.  In fact, he was superintendent of Sunday school and deacon in the church when he married.
Speaker 1: So how did that courting process go, him being so much older?
Speaker 2: Well I really don't know.  It was all based around the church activities, the ice cream socials and Sunday school conventions and that sort of thing and I guess he persuaded her in some way.
Story_ID: 49871
Speaker 1: So what kind of man was your father?
Speaker 2: My father he was a very small man who looked Asian, actually and that kind of coloring.  He ran the church, he was founder of our church home here in Bradenton, St. Mary Missionary Baptist Church and at that time, we didn't have a lot of parishioners, a lot of members in the church and he would sweep the floors and ring the bell and play the piano and do whatever had to be done.  He and my mother were separated but I would go with him out to the church to do all these chores.  He was a very outgoing person.  He had nicknames for everybody, he called people hey you old hypocrite or rooster or whatever name that he thought fit the person.  People took it well and they knew that he didn't mean any harm by it.  But he was a very outgoing person.
Speaker 1: What did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Eventually he worked at what was at that time the country's largest trailer park, the Kiwanis Trailer Park here in Bradenton and he was a handy man out there.  But before that as I said, he had worked in turpentine out in Parish and he also delivered groceries for a local store.  He had just some odds and ends kind of jobs but his main occupation was there as a handyman at the Kiwanis Trailer Park.
Story_ID: 49872
Speaker 1: What type of woman was your mom?
Speaker 2: Oh my mother not was but still is because she is 98 years old and was and still is a very active person. She has served as treasurer for several organizations.  The lodges, she was in Harems of Jericho and the Eastern Star and the Lilywhites; she has had membership in all of them and offices in all of them.  She is still living alone at age 98, still hanging her clothes on the line when she washes even though she has a dryer but she doesn't use it and rather bossy.  I suppose you have to be to live that long but she is a remarkable woman. I call her a miracle because she doesn't use a cane or anything, just an incredible woman and still reads her Bible every morning and would run your life for you if you let her.
Speaker 1: Now what did she do?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not she helped to educate three children by doing laundry.  Heating her irons on a coal pot, kind of like a little hibachi with the charcoal in it and taking laundry in what we call taking in laundry when we were growing up, she did all her laundry at home.  But then after we were older she started going to work for families and doing laundry and housekeeping and that sort of thing.  That was the way she earned her living.
Story_ID: 49873
Speaker 1: Now you were the only girl in the house.  Explain to me how the household worked, what were the responsibilities for each of you and how that was delved out and how you made the household work?
Speaker 2: Well when I was nine years old, I started going to work with a neighbor.  That young lady there on the wall, Pauline Gary who worked at the only real hospital that there was in Bradenton. It was a privately owned hospital, Bradenton General and it was for whites only, of course.  Pauline took care of all the babies there at this hospital and she also was in charge of food. Taking the food in the trays in and all and when I was nine years old, I started going to work with her.  So I wasn't at home a lot after school and, of course, they put me on payroll for a dollar a week and I would set up trays and do that sort of thing.  But at home the most I did was pump the water.  We had to pump water for my mother to do the laundry.  We had to carry water from the pump to the tubs and buckets.  To help on laundry days, I would do that kind of thing.  But for the most part I didn't have a lot of chores at home because I was out working and the boys did most of the things around the house until I was probably in my early teens and then I would sometimes have to do some cooking.  But I never had to wash the floors or scrub the floors or do that sort of thing.  I did some ironing, my brothers were at home, they did most of the household chores.
Speaker 1: So where did that dollar a week go that you brought home?
Speaker 2: The dollar a week didn't last a whole long time.  I used most of it on myself to buy shoes and all that sort of thing.  But after a couple of years I told the owner of the hospital, Mrs. Larrabee that my mother said I was worth more than a dollar a week home with her so I would have to quit.  So then she upped my salary to five dollars a week and I was able to do much more with that but most of it went on me.  My mother would let me use it to buy my own wardrobe.
Story_ID: 49874
Speaker 1: Now your community, your growing up, you're in your house, what was your neighborhood like, the people in it and individuals in that neighborhood once you grew up?
Speaker 2: Well I was born on a street that was called Lovers Lane, 8th Street West and now don't ask me why it was called Lovers Lane. I've never been able to find out but it was a very close knit neighborhood. We knew everybody, of course, on our street and one family had a telephone and a piano, another family had an automobile.  Everybody had something to contribute.  We were the only family with a radio for a long time but there was a midwife in the block who delivered me and other babies that were born during that period and her daughter would help the kids with their homework.  If you had some poem that you had to memorize and she would help you with that.  It didn't matter if your family was not educated; there was always somebody around who had a certain degree of education and who would help.  So everybody on the block--everybody performed well at school and it was a very close knit group.  Because, like I said, we had the only radio and when we had like when Joe Louis would be fighting or something, everybody would gather on our front porch to listen to the fight.  Students who took music lessons would go to Ms. Gertrude's house to practice their piano lessons and it was just like everything was for the common good.
Story_ID: 49875
Speaker 1: Now was there anyone in the neighborhood that you looked up to or that you--really influenced you when you were a child that you saw and said I like what he or she does?
Speaker 2: Well not as far as occupation is concerned because everybody was minimally employed.  But there was one person, the same young woman that I went to--followed to work, Pauline Gary that I admired and who would correct my grammar and who would see that I learned my lines for plays and all this sort of thing and she was almost like a second mother to me as a youngster.  But I never-I can't recall any particular role models, as such, nobody that where I said I wanted to do what they were doing.  When I worked at the hospital, growing up there at the hospital in the kitchen with the cook, of course, she was kind of lazy so she would let me do a whole lot of things that I would have normally never been able to do.  She taught me how to cook and would let me do it and the director of the hospital said that she wanted me to go to school to be a dietician and come back there and work for her.  So that's what I had in mind although my father wanted me to study nursing but I never wanted to be a nurse.  I thought I did want to be a dietician.
Story_ID: 49876
Speaker 1: You said a few times your father, one of the founding members of the church and your mother even to this day still wakes in the morning and reads her bible, still goes to church, speak to the role that church played when you were a child, in your life and going there and the things that were going on?
Speaker 2: Oh it was a very important part of my life.  As I said, I would go with my father to take care of chores at church but I also was secretary of the Sunday school and sang in the choir and most of my social life, as such, I guess was based around church and school.  So church has always been a very real part of my life and I guess I was baptized when I was about thirteen years old and it was--.
Story_ID: 49877
Speaker 1: What is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory.  Gee, I don't know.  I guess one of things that stands out very strongly in my memory is going to school and what we call--we called it the ABCs, people called it kindergarten but we called it ABCs because I was only four years old and I can recall the poems and activities that we had to learn at that time.  I think that those are probably my most vivid memories from early childhood.  Before four years old, I can't remember very much except maybe when that hurricane was, when my mother was sewing, making clothes, my brothers shirts and things all during the time that--that might have been a little later, I'm not sure.
Story_ID: 49878
Speaker 1: You spoke about school, what elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Well, we only had one school in Manatee County.  No matter where black children lived in Manatee County, they came to Lincoln, well Lincoln High School, I guess there were some elementary schools in other parts of the county.  But I went to Lincoln in Bradenton, of course, most people think that Lincoln originated in Palmetto but Lincoln was in Bradenton before it was Palmetto.  You went from kindergarten thru twelfth grade on the same campus, everything was right there.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers or--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Marvelous teachers, we had incredible teachers.  One that I'm still in contact with who lives in Tallahassee, she was my English teacher, Willie B. Estras[ph] she is now, she was Willie B. Turner then and Mr. Estras her husband was--he taught French and Science every chemistry and physics and French.  We had an incredible math teacher, Howard Harris.  Most of our teacher came out of Tampa.  They were, I don't know, I guess the opportunity to--they probably had more teachers--more people who were trained as teachers over there than they had jobs for them or something.  But we had exceptional teachers and they would--we had plays and family kinds of gatherings.  So and you'd see your teachers walking down the street or in the store or at church even sometimes.  So it was a different environment that I grew up in than the one that the children are experiencing now because they don't have these same teachers living in their neighborhoods and people that they can be kind of intimidated by and say  well, I have to behave myself because Ms. Turner might see me, she might be passing while I'm doing this naughty thing.
Story_ID: 49879
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know.  I hate to say it but everybody thought I was brilliant (laugh).  I never quite understood why but even to this day I get that from a lot of people.  Oh you were so smart but I was valedictorian of my class.
Speaker 1: So who was--which teachers were nurturing you and saw that potential in you and really started encouraging you?
Speaker 2: All of my teachers, all of them.  Mr. Harris, Mr. Estras, Ms. Turner just all the teachers treated you as though you were important to them and your future was important to them and they kept encouraging you to excel and made it possible for you to do so.
Speaker 1: Now what interests or--while you're going through this period of time in school and doing very well academically are you seeing yourself going--having any specific interests that would come further along and you'd say oh I had that interest back then when I was younger?
Speaker 2: Not really, I used to do a lot of writing and I thought I wanted to be a journalist, that's how I ended up in Kansas City because I spent a summer after graduation in Hartford, Connecticut at a summer camp and I met this man who said that there was a paper in Kansas City, and I decided that's where I was going, I was going to Kansas City, Missouri.  Didn't know a soul there but I went there to try my wings as a journalist because when I was at FAMU [Florida A& M University, Tallahassee, Florida]. I wrote a column for the school newspaper and the man who was over the printing department, Mr. Holland said that-he always said that my column was the best thing in the paper.  So I had no journalism training or anything but I thought I was a writer so I went to Kansas City to launch my career and ended up in the advertising department writing display advertising.
Story_ID: 49880
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you what--now you're going back to the childhood now, what sights, sounds or smells remind you of the town you grew up in as growing up in Bradenton, Florida?
Speaker 2: Well the taste really that seemed so important as a part of my memory--two fruits, grapes and peaches.  If I taste a certain grape it really takes me back to times when my father would come past the house and bring me fruit because as I said, he and my mother were divorced and on the weekends he would come by the house and bring me certain little goodies, you know.  It's more a matter of taste, I think, than smells or anything else that I can relate to.
Story_ID: 49881
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you about your awareness of the segregation in Bradenton.  Were you aware of the outside world or the other communities that existed and have you ever experienced coming in contact with that?
Speaker 2: Well I was a part of the outside world because as I said from the time I was nine years old, I worked at this hospital that was an all-white hospital, the nurses and everybody.  So my experience probably was a little different from the average child growing up in Bradenton.  But I did know that there were boundaries, like I said I couldn't go to the library and didn't even know where it was, as a matter of fact.  The only books that I had access to were the ones in the school library, such as we had which was not too much except for the things that my mother would bring home from these white families where she worked.  Magazines and things or I would buy a lot of paperbacks from the drug store, these westerns and what not.  I was a great western fan.  But I didn't come in contact with any particularly vicious kinds of things but my life, of course, in the neighborhood was completely separate from the white community.  All my neighbors were black and at church, school, everyplace.  The only time that I came in contact with people from another race was when I was at work at the hospital. The climate was fairly comfortable.  The people that my mother and step father worked for were awfully good people.  Well she was anyway, Mrs. Hariland [ph] who had moved here from Pennsylvania and was a very congenial person.  I don't know, I really can't say that I experienced any real harmful effects from segregation.  As I look back on it, I think that we were probably fortunate to have the support system that we had of teachers and musicians and all these people who had to live together because they had no choice.
Speaker 1: What do you think of the advantages of that were for you?
Speaker 2: Oh I think it was a tremendous support system for children growing up when all the businesses and the schools and the professional people were in close contact and could feed off each other.  I'm not saying that we need to return to that but I think that we've lost a lot when we lost that kind of support system that we had when I was growing up.  Of course, to supply artificially for children now is not quite the same thing as a natural process of sharing and living together.
Story_ID: 49882
Speaker 1: How did you learn--even though you didn't have negative--any negative or really adverse experiences how did you learn the rules of you being black when you're around white people, what to do and what not to do?  Who taught you the rules?
Speaker 2: Well, I can't say that I knew that there were any rules except when you went to the stores downtown like in the dime stores and all.  The signs taught you most of the rules, I mean that you don't sit here or you can't drink here and that sort of thing.  But the way the clerks might treat you in some places because I suppose I never really felt that I was any different from anybody.  I don't know, maybe I just had this sense of independence and knowing that I was a person, you know.  But when I would go to the dime store sometimes the clerks would wait on everybody else from the other race before they would wait on you.  But then sometimes I would speak up about that too.  I got me and another girl in trouble once about that sort of thing.  In fact, some people around here call me the Rosa Parks of Bradenton because I just--I would always speak up.
Speaker 1: Now please tell us the story where you spoke up in one of these situations.
Speaker 2: Well I don't remember it too well as some other people around here but this girl and I were in the dime store and the gal just kept waiting on everybody else instead of us and I told her that we had been there--we were just kids.  We weren't adults because I left here when I was sixteen years old to go to college and never really came back except summers until 1974.  But she was insulted by my talking to her and she called the manager who called the police.  So I had to go down to the police station to be interviewed about my--whatever they were saying I was doing.
Speaker 1: What were you told by these police officers?
Speaker 2: Oh nothing much, they just--I think they were just carrying out a function to make the people there happy at this store because they didn't keep us there long, sent us home.  They didn't even call my parents or anything.  But that's the only instance I can really recall that it led--it got that far out of hand.  But I was never really intimidated by people.
Speaker 1: Now where did that feistiness and that not feeling intimidated come from?
Speaker 2: I guess from my mother because as I said she is still fairly independent and living alone.
Story_ID: 49883
Speaker 1: Now you stated before one of the best students, not one of the best, the best student in your class.
Speaker 2: Well I said I was the valedictorian of my class.
Speaker 1: That's the top student and you were also a very voracious reader, where did this come from?  Who encouraged this in you?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know.  Not by any language or anything but just by living in an environment where people read.  I mean like I said, this neighbor who would find poems and articles and things and share them with me.  I don't know, I think so many things like that just come from inside, don't they.  I don't know whether or not you need an external stimulus to make you who you are.  I think it's something that is an internal thing.
Story_ID: 49884
Speaker 1: Now you graduated from Lincoln High School and why did you choose Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University [Florida A&M University]?
Speaker 2: I don't know my brother wanted me to go to Hampton [University].  I had never been away from Florida at that point and, of course, we were very limited as far as money was concerned and there was no such thing as scholarships that I knew anything about.  I wanted to be a dietician and so I read the catalog at Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University] and it appeared that they had a program for people who wanted to become dieticians.  So since it was in the state of Florida and the tuition was not all that great, I thought that we would be able to manage it and my family thought they would be able to manage it so I decided to go to Florida A&M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University].  When I got there, I discovered that there was no such thing as a program in diet--as a dietician and that you had to go through home economics to get to it and I hated sewing with a passion. So I cried for two weeks when I got to FAMU [Florida A&M University] because I didn't know what to do.  We did have counselors in those days and I didn't know what to do.  So I cried and stayed in home economics.
Speaker 1: So what changed your mind about home ec?  What made you give in to I will do this?
Speaker 2: Well because I didn't know what else to do.  As I said, there were no counselors.  I didn't know what my skills were, what I would be best suited for.  It wasn't until I was a junior in college that I decided I should have been an English major because my primary English teacher had me correcting papers and doing a lot of her work and eventually I moved in with her for my junior year and that's when I realized that I could have been an English teacher.  But I never wanted to be a teacher and that was probably part of the thing.  I figured that the only jobs available to black people in Manatee County [Florida] were as a teacher or selling insurance and I didn't want to do either one of those things.  So I suppose that's why I stayed in the program hoping--but eventually it would lead to a degree in food and nutrition but that was the fifth year and I would have to be an intern someplace.  As a matter of fact, that's one reason why I went on to Kansas City because I call myself on my way to Ames, Iowa to do an internship in dietetics and become a dietician but I never got to Ames.
Story_ID: 49885
Speaker 1: Now who is this--what's the name of the English professor that encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Mary Bertha Johnson, yeah she was quite a woman at Florida A&M [University]and she had a speech defect and had overcome it.  She spoke very deliberately and was just an outstanding teacher.  She was not a young woman but she was a great teacher and I sat in the back of the room and she said she kept wondering who was that in the back of the room who kept sending in all these great papers. And I would be helping people all around me.  So I got into trouble that way and she found out who I was.
Speaker 1: So is she--were there other teachers or other professors at FAMU that had influence upon you over there besides Ms. Johnson?
Speaker 2: The chemistry teacher; can't think of his name right now but he had a great influence on me and not only in chemistry but also on the outside because every Easter we would have this pageant and he directed this pageant, this Easter pageant. I was always Mary and I liked that and Mr.--I miscalled his name but he had a big influence on me.  Let's see, anybody else?  I never knew that history could be such a fascinating subject because history for me in high school and in college was just so boring.  I would be sleepy, actually sleepy during the lectures and during the class and it wasn't until after I left college that I realized that history is fascinating and I think my husband introduced me to that concept because he had spectacular history instructors. He had Negro History in schools in Kansas City in the late '20s [1920s] and early '30s [1930s] and we have a lot of the outlines that his professor used for those Negro History classes and he had really introduced me to the excitement that there is in history.
Story_ID: 49886
Speaker 1: Now what is FAMU [Florida A&M University] like at that time for you, those four years--that four year period?  What is the institution itself like and what's going on there and how does it help you to grow?
Speaker 2: FAMU [Florida A&M University], well of course it was FAMC [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical College for Negroes]  then and it was still under Dr. [John Robert Edward] Lee who was one of the longest serving presidents and who well loved by so many people.  It was a small school, under a thousand students and it was a marvelous experience for me.  Of course coming from Bradenton and coming in contact with people from Connecticut and Pennsylvania and every place.  We were confined to the campus.  We had what we called Line of March on Sunday twice a week, I think, Sunday and Wednesday.  We had to put on these dark suits and white blouses and black shoes and march into chapel and have speakers, we had great speakers come to the campus and it was a marvelous experience.
Speaker 1: Any of these speakers like stand out in your mind that came to Chapel that you heard?
Speaker 2: Well Howard Thurman, of course, and Reverend [William Holmes] Borders from Atlanta who helped us to know that all blood is red and that Jesus loved us all, you, you and you and he would point you out, you know.  We had the entertainers, concerts singers like Dorothy-what's Dorothy's name-Dorothy-(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: Dandridge?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, this was a concert singer out of New York but Etta Moten came to FAM [Florida A&M University]. In those days, oh you just had all the important performers and lecturers that were on the college circuit and it was a very rich experience.
Story_ID: 49887
Speaker 1: So at the time you're about to graduate what are your thoughts on what you'll do next?
Speaker 2: I thought I could anything, I really did.  I mean it's incredible when I look back and think.  I thought I could do anything I wanted to do and I didn't even come home with my mother from graduation.  My mother and my aunt came up and they brought a little girl with them.  But I had already made arrangements to go to Hartford, Connecticut to work at a club--I mean at a camp--a summer camp and a girl whose home was Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] was going also but we were going to her home first.  Actually she was from Wilmerding [Pennsylvania] just outside of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and I recall very vividly the train ride from Tallahassee [Florida] to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] because she kept watching me to see what my reaction was going to be to being in a integrated coach because she knew that before we had always had to ride in the back coaches where all the smoke and the soot and everything was.  So she just kept watching and I finally asked her why was she watching me so and she said, well I just wanted to know how you were going to react and I didn't even know what she was talking about, react you know.  But anyway we went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and then on to Hartford, Connecticut and got there and discovered that the camp was not going to open--this was in May and the camp was not going to open until June.  So we had to find some way to survive until the camp--until we had some money coming in.  We went to G. Fox's a department store and they trained us to be inspector wrappers, to be on the desk to wrap packages but they didn't want to do that if we were not going to be there for a long period of time.  So we had to say that we were going to--that we would stay in order for them to train us for the job.  But as soon as the camp opened, of course, we left and I still was thinking in terms of journalism that I wanted to work on a newspaper.  Although I was dietician there at summer camp for that summer but that was not what I wanted to do.  So we hopped a train and went to Kansas City after camp closed.  As a matter of fact, that year that we were there in Hartford [Connecticut] was the year that Ringling Circus had that big fire there in Hartford, Connecticut.  It was a terrible time for awhile there that summer. There was one little girl that they never really identified, I don't think they ever did, who was killed in that fire.
Story_ID: 49888
Speaker 1: You said there was someone at the camp while you were there that kind of pushed you toward journalism.
Speaker 2: Well, who told me that there was a newspaper in Kansas City [Missouri], he was the cook there that summer.  A man from--I think he was from Emporia, Kansas and he said that there was a black newspaper in Kansas City [Missouri]. So we decided to go to Kansas City [Missouri].
Speaker 1: So now did you have any idea of where you were going to live, what you were going to do?
Speaker 2: Nothing, nothing that's why I said I thought I could do anything.  Life had been very good to me and people were kind and in Hartford [Connecticut] we were able to get housing and people seemed to respect us although we were just kids.  I was nineteen years old and the girl with me was only a few months older.  So I didn't know anything--any fears, I didn't have any fears about whether I could find employment or anything.  So--and we got there on Labor Day which was a terrible time to get into Detroit because--I mean into Kansas City [Missouri] because it was a jazz town and all these bands would come in for Labor Day weekend and the hotels were filled up and it was a terrible time to find someplace to stay when you didn't know anybody.  But we stayed at this little hotel overnight and the next day we went to the Urban League and they were able to help us to find housing.  They would find a lady who took us in as roomers.
Story_ID: 49889
Speaker 1: So how did you get in contact with the newspaper?
Speaker 2: Through the Urban League, also because my friend wanted to--she wanted to be a dietician.  She wanted to continue her internship as a dietician.  So they sent us from the Urban League to the black hospital and to the black newspaper which was the Kansas City Call.  Well, she got hired at the hospital and I was hired at the [Kansas City] Call not to write but to write copy for display advertising and that was a wonderful experience.  Eventually, I became the essay contest editor for the NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association].  They had these essay contests all over the country with the black newspapers.  So I was able to continue my interest in writing through that but also through the copywriting, I mean for advertising.
Speaker 1: Now what was it like and what were your experiences like at a black newspaper in the '40s [1940s] when they were still very thriving for the black community, it was the voice for the black community, what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, it was exciting for me because so much was going on.  Everything went on right there in that building.  Mr. Franklin, Chester Franklin, who was the publisher of the paper and his wife even lived upstairs over the paper and it was printed right there and everything happened there in this building and, of course, my husband, as I said was working up in the newsroom, and I would pass him on the steps when I was going up to take my copy upstairs. He would say "Hello Florida", that's what he would--and I would giggle.  So it was a good time for me, I hadn't had too much experience in the real world, as I said because I turned twenty there that December in Kansas City.  I had to sell advertising which means that I learned the town rather quickly and the businesses and the people. So I was able to get out there and hit the sidewalks and sell advertising and come back and draw up the ads.  Had a marvelous boss. I'm still friendly with his wife, he died quite early but he was an artist by training but he was also a great teacher as far as advertising was concerned. And we had a staff of mostly women who worked together and helped each other.  We had opportunities to meet the business people because we would be going in to talk with them about their advertising.  The lawyers, the doctors, it was a very broadening experience.
Story_ID: 49890
Speaker 1: Now while you're at the Kansas City Call, you meet a very special individual.  Tell us about how you met him?
Speaker 2: Initially just on the stairway, he would be coming down the stairs and I'd be going upstairs to the press room and he would speak and I didn't say much, I'd just giggle.  But he left soon after I got there and went with the Red Cross during World War II to New Guinea and when he came back to Detroit [sic, Kansas City, Missouri], I was having a birthday party, my 22nd birthday and invited him to my birthday party and that's when we got to know each other a little bit better.  We dated for awhile and after a few months he left and went to Detroit [Michigan] because he had a good friend who had moved to Detroit; a guy that he had worked--been with at--in New Guinea and told him about opportunities there.  So he went to Detroit and we corresponded and he asked me to marry him through the mail and wrote my mother a letter and asked for my hand in marriage and all that.  So I packed up my little things and followed him to Detroit.
Story_ID: 49891
Speaker 1: What was Detroit [Michigan] like?  It's 1946--.
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: What's it like when you go there?
Speaker 2: I went by train, had to borrow some luggage to do that.  Detroit [Michigan], where I went was near Woodward Avenue which is the main thoroughfare north and south.  I was on John R. [Road] which was a very, very old, respectful neighborhood.  These were former wealthy people who had lived in these big houses and this family had cut this big house up into rooms.  So actually we were rooming there because we were married in Detroit, after I got to Detroit and then we were living there in this house where there several other families.  So it was like we were all one, big family.  And my husband at first was working for Chevrolet Gear and Axle and he was working the midnight shift, I think or something.  But anyway we were--there was a movie theater nearby and we had streetcars still and transportation was rather inexpensive.  So for me, Detroit was--I guess, with me everything was just a good learning experience. I never really felt overwhelmed by anything and we would go to the movies and were able to save money--more money then, I think with him working at Chevrolet Gear and Axle because of the shift that he was working on; you didn't get a chance to spend a whole lot of money.
Story_ID: 49892
Speaker 1: Were you working at this time?
Speaker 2: No I was not working at first but then I did get a job with Bond Bread as a demonstrator.  So I would go into these stores and accost customers, people who are in there shopping and try to get them to buy Bond Bread.  Of course, at that time Bond Bread had a whole lot of holes in it.  I was trying to cover up the holes as I sold the Bond bread to people.  But he didn't--he wasn't at Chevrolet Gear and Axle long, he finally got a job with the Urban League.  Through a woman who actually, according to Paul Robeson's son in the book that he wrote about his father that this woman was really the first love of Paul Robeson's life, Geraldine Bledsoe and she's the one who helped my husband to get a job with the Urban League.  Then I start having a family, we started having a family so I gave up the job with Bond Bread and I did not go back to work right away.
Story_ID: 49893
Speaker 1: Now during this thirty year period there's a great deal--thirty year period that you're in Detroit has a great deal of social upheaval. The Civil Rights Movement is going to begin to start and Detroit [Michigan] becomes a center of a lot of activity, Reverend [Clarence LaVaughn, C.L.] Franklin's there and things like that.  Speak of just the black community and how they're beginning to take a stand during your time there while you're in Detroit.
Speaker 2: Well, with my husband working with the Urban League, we were very much involved in the life of Detroit and we were both life members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] so we were involved with that and he was involved with the Christian Jews, almost everything you can imagine that had to do with the social action of the community.  So it was a rich life for us.  He served on the Civil Service Commission and helped to change things there as far as the number of people who could be interviewed.  I mean, you know, there were a whole lot of problems about black people never getting to the interview stage because of the system that they had and he helped change all that.  He was an innovator and an initiator of lot of things in Detroit that you probably would never hear about.  A part of the president's-President [Lyndon B.]Johnson's, what do you call it--when he was starting the war on poverty and they had this White House conference.  He initiated a lot of programs for students for the black students to have summer jobs at these big businesses and all.  So there was a lot going on that was kind of undergirding the people trying to strengthen them so that they could survive the upheaval and the all other things going on.  As a matter of fact, at one time we lived near 12th Street where the riots started.  We weren't living over there then, we were living on the east side near Pingree Park but even helicopters were landing in the park during that '67 [1967] riot and all and the tanks running up and down the streets.  So that was a pretty scary time but except for that our lives in Detroit were just completely--just incredibly rewarding.  I worked at--in the Detroit Experimental English Program at one time and also taught English at the Detroit Institute of Commerce which was a business school that was owned and operated by black people.  We were just a part of everything that went on in the community.  It was a very rich experience; I wouldn't trade it for anything.
Story_ID: 49894
Speaker 1: Now I want you to make a comparison.  Compare Detroit, the first city--urban center you've lived, compare that to the area you grew up in Bradenton.  What were the differences that you noticed and specifically in the black community?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know as I lived through it, I don't think I thought of comparisons.  As I look back I suppose that the amount of exposure that the people had had in Detroit [Michigan] was certainly greater.  You came in contact with more people who had travelled and who had different experiences.  But I've always felt that I adapted to wherever I was and that I never really thought in terms of whether one was different than the other.  It just was what it was and I became a part of whatever it was.  So I never really thought too much about it but--of course, you'd have to know that there were so many more opportunities for cultural things.  We took our children to plays and at the library even, they would even bring in the Prince Street Players for example from New York to put on live theater for children.  Just so many opportunities that our children had that I certainly did not have when I was growing up, as a matter of fact, one of our sons went to Philips Exeter Academy in New Hampshire as a high school student and our other two who were in high school there went to the best high school in Detroit, Cass Tech.  Our oldest son was the Boy's Day Mayor of the City of Detroit.  It was the first time a black student had won that and it was by vote from the other students who were involved and he had some rich experiences as a result of that, acting as mayor of the City of Detroit.  There were just so many wonderful things that our family experienced that I feel very blessed and I still say that Detroit had some great cultural institutions.  The Detroit library system was just unmatched because you had community libraries--neighborhood libraries that were like reading rooms.  You had--they were not formal and frightening, they were so inviting and everything was within walking distance.  You could walk to the Y [YMCA] and to the banks and the libraries.  You just had a sense--and you had homes, not a lot of apartment buildings.  The neighborhoods were houses so you had a lot of neighborhoods.  It was an extraordinarily rich experience.
Story_ID: 49895
Speaker 1: I have to ask what--you grew up with these great teachers who influenced you so much and even in college Ms. Johnson, Professor Johnson.  What takes you into the field of education when you were in Detroit to be a teacher?
Speaker 2: Well, I suppose that it was mostly because of the nature of the programs that I was involved in.  I never really went into a long term contract classroom sort of thing.  I did this with the, as I said they call it the Detroit Experimental English Program that was a special kind of thing where I could do some of the work at home, grading papers and meeting with teachers on a limited basis or students on a limited basis.  Because my family was always first as long as my children were growing up, I tried to spend as much time with Boy Scouts and all this kind of thing.  I even managed some of the baseball teams.  I spent a lot of time with my children and their activities.  So I was looking for employment that I could kind of meld with that and the same thing with the Detroit Institute of Commerce when I was teaching English there it was with special populations like the Manpower Development and Training that predated CEDA [Community and Economic Development Association] and you had these women prisoners and other people who were trying to get some skills.
Speaker 1: What was it like dealing with them?
Speaker 2: Oh I loved it.  I worked at Salvation Army as a matter of fact, at one time teaching the kids there helping them to get their GED.  I guess I've always worked with special populations and those kids were about as great con artists as anybody has ever seen.  But I loved it, we had great times and they respected me and even though they didn't always work as hard as I wanted them to work but they were good kids and just had some problems that's all.  But I've always enjoyed working with people who needed people.  So I enjoyed it.
Story_ID: 49896
Speaker 1: Now about this time we touched on earlier, the first--well a few riots but--the Detroit riots--one of the Detroit riots occurred, tell me what's going on, how it gets to this and how it affects you?
Speaker 2: We were--my children and I were at a church picnic that Sunday because we were members of Detroit Unity Church, that's where they grew up in Detroit Unity and we were having a family--a church picnic that Sunday, what was it, July 27th, I think anyway my husband, of course, was on the golf course where he usually was on a Sunday.  But that's when we got the word that there was some problem in Detroit and that there had been some burning and rioting and what not and for everybody to get home as fast as they could and of course, we did.  Everybody piled into their individual automobiles and left the park to go home and from that point on things just got worst.  It was really quite frightening.  You didn't leave your home except for very necessary trips and as I said, the tanks were rolling up and down the streets and even a helicopter landed across the street from us in the park.  There was smoke in the--it was just all over even though we were on the east side and all of this was happening mostly on the west side but then some of it migrated to the Gratiot area, not too far from where we were.  So it was a very sad time and, of course, my husband was in the thick of all of it too and eventually they established what they call the new Detroit that was supposed to help restore the community and he served on that, a new Detroit committee as a representative from the Michigan Consolidated Gas Company because by that time he was no longer with the Urban League.  He was working for Michigan Consolidated Gas.  I don't know, I don't know, Detroit never really fully recovered from that time.  They never did really restore 12th Street to its original state and the places where the unions and the people said that they were going to establish parks and what not and upgrade--none of those things ever happened.  They just cleaned up the debris and did a little--.
Story_ID: 49897
Speaker 1: Now that's the summer of '67 [1967]?  Now some more activity occurs on April 4, 1968 when Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was assassinated.  Can you explain where you were when you heard the news and the events of that day?
Speaker 2: We were in a car, still had to do with golf.  We had gone up to this place where my husband going to get some golf stuff and they had some kind of place in there where you could hit the ball and it would bounce back to you or something and that's where we were when we heard about Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.].  I can't recall too much activity around that in Detroit because I guess it was kind of isolated from us.  It was way over on the West side just in one particular neighborhood more or less around--what's the guy's name where they had all these murals and everything with the black Madonna.  It was just mostly around in that area.  So I wasn't as much involved with that as I was with the '67 [1967] riots.
Story_ID: 49898
Speaker 1: In the '67 [1967] riots what were your feelings about who's fault this was and why was this happening?
Speaker 2: Well I don't know if I tried to label it as far as whose fault it was.  I did--we did--the conversation in my circle was that it was an overreaction by the police.  This was a blind pig, people had been selling moonshine or--it was nothing new and really we felt that it didn't have to happen.  You know, that they just overreacted and it just escalated into something that really never should have been.  But I don't know as far as fault is concerned, it was something that just kind of developed out of a situation and when you talk about fault, you have to go to roots of things.  There was a whole lot of poverty over there but I just don't think that's an excuse for things.  I mean poverty, people have been poor, a lot of people have been poor and you don't have to go around and destroy but there was a lot of anger, a lot of hostility and it just all came out, I guess at that time.
Speaker 1: Did you know anyone who was personally affected by it, did you know anyone personally?
Speaker 2: Gee, I don't know.  I felt rather personal about it because it was so close to a place where we had lived at one time.  Because we lived on Gladstone near 12th Street and I knew the neighborhood and I knew how wonderful the people were on the streets where we lived--you know the people we knew were there and I wondered how things had deteriorated so much from the time that we lived there and the people that we knew.  I mean, who were these people, where did they come from?  I didn't know but any individual, I can't think of any individual that I knew who was a part of that.
Story_ID: 49899
Speaker 1: Now I want to get you back to Bradenton [Florida].  What were the events that bring you back to your hometown?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband was talking about retiring.  He was in his late fifties and we had been coming to Florida about every two years during our marriage because of my mother here and he would come down and play golf.  Of course, he had played golf all of his life in Kansas City caddying and everything and in Detroit and every time they went.  He has golf cards--score cards from all over the country and we're going to use some of those in his exhibition.  My daughter was interested in New College in Sarasota because I had talked about it, how I wish there had been a New College when I graduated from high school because of the concept, the philosophy of the school.  So she decided she wanted to go to New College and he wanted to retire.  So we said, well we'll just all move to Florida.  Our oldest son was at University of Michigan then in school and our youngest son --I mean our second son was--I guess he was at Carleton College in Minnesota at the time.  So at home there was just my youngest son, Peter and Beverly and my husband and myself.  So we decided that we would move to Florida.  Although he didn't retire--he stayed there--we came down so she could start school in August and he did not come until the end of the year.
Story_ID: 49900
Speaker 1: But Coleman [Young] did a lot for Detroit [Michigan].  That's why they have the Tuskegee Airman Museum in Detroit and the African American Museum that is probably the largest on in the country.  But and he had great political skills.  He could get people to work with him but he turned a lot of people away too.  He had a personality that could be quite abrasive.
Story_ID: 49901
Speaker 1: Now tell me about the founding of the place where we're sitting right now.  How this came into--?
Speaker 2: Well I had worked down here at Manatee Community College for about fifteen years.  Both as an instructor and as a equal opportunity coordinator and I was getting ready to retire and started packing up my collection of stuff that I had used from my husband's work experience and from my own and some things that my daughter had done because she had studied public policy at New College [of Florida] and she had gathered a whole lot of stuff that she let me use.  And I thought well this is too much to take home and store in the garage so I'll try to find a place where I can set up a library, a non circulating library so that people can come in and explore some of the documents and books and what not and I'd have a place where I could hide out and read and enjoy my retirement.  So I started sending out letters to see if I could find somebody who would offer some space and didn't get any responses for months. And finally I had a call from Sarah Green who was at that time head of the Head Start Program in Manatee County and she said she had a trailer that she was going to have available and that if I was still interested that she would make it--that we could make use of that trailer for our library.  Of course I jumped at the opportunity and that's how we got started.  We moved in there and started bringing things from home that were--had been a part of our lives that were not necessarily printed material and eventually it grew into what the state named a museum and put us on the Black Heritage Trail.
Story_ID: 49902
Speaker 1: We stayed over there for about ten years in that trailer and it was not until Dr. Korchek who was at that time president of Manatee Community College, decided that he would like to bring us to campus.  He thought that it was a very educational thing that we were doing--involved with and they would be--this was where it should be.  This was the ideal place for it.  And of course, one of the administrators here at the college was also on our board and we got started through a--Dr. Korchek organized a group of movers and shakers from the community to try and raise money to build a building on campus.  Well, of course, they could not use state money for this purpose and the people on the committee started going in different directions.  One member died and then another one left town and another one retired and things seemed to be breaking down.  But eventually we did raise enough money not to build a separate building but to build a wing on the existing library.  Then Dr. Korchek retired and we had a new president come on aboard.  Things began to slow down a little bit again but eventually in September of 2000 we moved into this present structure.
Story_ID: 49903
Speaker 1: At what point in your life between that '76 [1976] period and now did you realize or it came to your mind that we need to do something to maintain or make sure that this black history is saved, when did you come to that understanding?
Speaker 2: I wish I could honestly say that I had that in mind but I cannot say that I did.  I was just looking for a way to share what our way of life had been with the community.  I knew that we had just a rich store of information not all related to Florida or to Manatee County but are related to being black and I just don't see why we have to limit our boundaries to this particular community although I know it's important to save the local history but so many of the people who have been a part of the local community have gone to other parts of the world and we could follow them there. Our history is all over so we were not willing to just try to do Manatee County because that wasn't what we had--that wasn't the core of our collection although it had a lot of Manatee County history.  Of course, since it is my birth home and my mother had some things that she shared with us, some pictures and some of the history.  But I never really started out, I didn't have that vision that I'm going to preserve the history, I was just out to share.
Story_ID: 49904
Speaker 1: Now you said when you were younger that you didn't have the Negro history background like your husband had--he'd received and now you are--you run a museum that is for black history and it is very well put together.  What are your thoughts of the importance of maintaining and the value of black history?
Speaker 2: Well, my husband and I always say that we're not about black history but about blacks in American history and you'll notice that we don't do much about Africa here.  That is not our thrust although we admire and appreciate those who do have that thrust in their work.  But we are trying to--we're interested in the gaps that the parts of American history that have been omitted from the textbooks and the part that black people--I mean you know this whole country was built on our shoulders, you know that don't you.  These slaves--people don't talk about them in a very favorable way but they're the people on whose shoulders and backs the economy of the United States was built, you know.  I mean even in the north their economy was based a lot on what the slaves did in the south because of the cotton and the fabrics and the shipping and all of these things were related.  So it isn't just the southerners who benefitted from the slave labor, I mean the whole country did.  So we just think that it's important to put these things into perspective and to as I said, fill in the gaps where people have not included Charles Drew in the history books.  Or a--who else would I like to think of as--people who have made major contributions as far as open heart surgery and blood transfusions and things that have nothing to do with color but about people.  And so that is my passion.
Story_ID: 49905
Speaker 1: So what purpose do you think The Heritage House serves on this campus of Manatee County Community College?  What purpose do you think it serves in the educational?
Speaker 2: Well, we haven't been here very long, just since September 2000.  So we are very new on the campus and just trying to kind of insinuate ourselves into the culture of the campus.  So I can't really identify any major goals that we've achieved since we've been here but we're getting to be better known on campus and people are beginning to stop in other than the classes that come.  So our presence here has been a benefit both to the college and to The Family Heritage House because it is unique and the college has received recognition for its vision in hosting us here because I don't know of any other community college that has a black history museum on its campus.  I know there are some universities that do but I don't know about any other community college.  And we hope that our relationship with the faculty and the students on campus will continue to grow and fill that need that I'm talking about; the need for some clarification of the role that people of color have played in this whole thing of the United States of America.
Story_ID: 49906
Speaker 1: How did you come up with the name The Family Heritage House?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I played with a lot of names.  I'm a great Howard Thurman fan and so is my husband.  We just have incredible respect for Howard Thurman and he used the term the growing edge a lot in his writings and I had written a grant--I submitted a grant at one time that I called Gems, the Growing Edge of Maturity and Success and I thought that that was what I would--since that grant was not funded that I would name this project Gems, the Growing Edge of Maturity and Success and then I thought well no that doesn't seem to work very well for this kind of operation.  But we've always been so involved with family, not just our family but trying to strengthen other families and it was the word itself that had great meaning for us so then we decided that whatever name we gave it that family would have to be involved.  And I don't know--in the background of our thinking, might have had something to do with a place in Detroit where our youngest son took art classes and he was a student at Your Heritage House that Josephine Love has in Detroit and that place was very important to Peter.  I don't know I wasn't aware of using any of that in naming the place but it just might have had something to do with the heritage part--Family Heritage House.
Speaker 1: Now you've been here for ten years, The Heritage House has existed for --?
Speaker 2: For twelve years.
Speaker 1: Twelve years.
Story_ID: 49907
Speaker 1: How do you balance the responsibility as it continues to grow and grow?  How do you negotiate that?
Speaker 2: It is rough; it is very, very difficult because we have never had any paid staff in all these twelve years.  It's just been my husband and myself and with whatever volunteer help that we could get.  Since we have been on the campus, we've had some really great volunteer people not from the campus but from other sources.  There are--people--professional people who are in the business who have provided some volunteer service for us.  Our main goal now and has been for the last few years is to try to find a source of funding so that we can hire some paid help.  That is a must and in as much as we lost half of our staff the end of December when my husband passed because there was just the two of us, it's even more necessary now because I can't even get away to go take care of business.  Take my mother to the doctor and all these things that--some things that have to be done.  It's becoming very, very difficult.
Speaker 1: Now you've been daughter, you've been mother, you've been journalist, valedictorian, educator, how do you wear the hat of historian?
Speaker 2: I don't (laugh)--I don't consider myself a historian.  I've been learning--I've really been learning all the way here with this and there is just so much to know--there is just so much to know about our history that it's just an ongoing process for me.  I tell people I'm not a historian, I'm not a curator, I don't know. I'm not any of these--have any of these professional titles that you might need for the kind of operation that I'm involved in but I have a passion for it and it has worked so far for me for these twelve years.  So I think that I bring something to it and we can always hire a professional who has these other skills.
Story_ID: 49908
Speaker 1: What do you believe the role of African American historian have when it comes to preserving the history--or teaching the history of African Americans to our community?
Speaker 2: Well, of course, I respect the historians; the Carter G. Woodsons and the John Henrik Clarkes and the people--J.A. [Joel Augustus] Rogers for example who has always written our history.  We have a lot of it in writing.  We have-but we just haven't talked about it, we haven't read it, we haven't shared it.  So the history is there.  If you could see these outlines that my husband's teacher used, Mr. Howell used in Kansas City back in the '20s [1920s] when he was teaching Negro history and just had gobs of material available to him.  But we didn't use it, we didn't know about it and I think that for the most part we are the ones who need to write our history and who need to tell it because our interpretation of it is often so different from people from a different culture.  I just wish that, for example, I could share this book - we have a book on the underground railroad that was published in 1872 and written by William Steele with the actual letters and documents of people who were travelling on the underground railroad.  I was watching a television show, a documentary some time ago about the Underground Railroad and most of the scenes that were dramatized in that documentary are from this book on the Underground Railroad and it was written by a black man.  But we just don't know what's out there already.  I mean we talk about what should be done, a lot of the stuff that people do now in my view it's more commercial.  But there is a whole--we have a book out there on people from 3,000 BC to 1946 AD by J.A.[Joel Augustus] Rogers about people of color.  There is a lot available to us already but we just haven't gotten around to it somehow.
Story_ID: 49909
Speaker 1: What are your hopes and concerns for the black community?
Speaker 2: For the black community?  I'm afraid for the next generation or so.  I know that there are a lot of great kids who are growing up and that there will be some people around to keep the stability but I just see so much lost, so many neighborhoods where the people are walking the streets, all hours of the night.  Children are not getting the kind of direction that they need.  There are children with all this language that-I really have a great feeling of almost despair when I see what's happening with our people.  I hope I'm not just being negative, I don't feel negative about it.  I just feel helpless, I'd like for us to find a way to reach these young people and to help them to have a--I'd say hope.  I mean, maybe they don't need hope, maybe that's not what they need, I don't know.  But there is something--there is some ingredient, as far as I'm concerned that is terribly missing and people seem to be more concerned about whether or not they have a whole lot of rubber bands in their hair, whether their pants are falling off and all that kind of thing.  I mean adults--these are the things that we seem to be bothered by rather than the profound things about the young people that we need to be concerned about.
Story_ID: 49910
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess Family Heritage House is my legacy and my children.  They are all spectacular people.  Our oldest son is a Ph.D. in psychology and works with troubled people.  I think that our children are our legacy.  In fact, I think I wrote that once, our children are our legacy for a community project.
Story_ID: 49911
Speaker 1: What would you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Oh for compassion, my compassion for people.  I don't know, for my search for truth, for not limiting my world.  Just don't remember me, just benefit from the things that I have tried to help promote.
Story_ID: 49912
Speaker 1: That's a picture that was taken at the groundbreaking and that's the president of Manatee Community College, the president of the board of trustees and a woman who is councilwoman, in fact the first black councilwoman in Manatee County and my husband Ernest and a student.  We are all cutting the ribbon for the--well I guess that's not the groundbreaking, actually it is an actual ribbon cutting for Family Heritage House.
Speaker 2: So that would have been in the year 2000?
Speaker 1: Yes.  This photograph is also at the ribbon cutting ceremony in September 2000.  The young man is now the sheriff--the chief of police in Palmetto.
Speaker 2: That is a picture of my mother.  It was taken when she was a teenager living in Parrish, Florida about 1919.
Speaker 1: Can you spell Parrish for us?
Speaker 2: P-A-R-R-I-S-H and she came into Palmetto by train to have that picture taken.
Speaker 1: Next photo please.
Speaker 2: The woman standing in the photograph is my grandmother, Rebecca and the seated one is my Aunt Laura.  They were living in Parrish at the time and came in on a train with my mother and they all had their pictures taken at the same time.
Story_ID: 49913
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my husband Ernest and our daughter Beverly and it is taken here in the museum, September 2000.
Speaker 2: Very good, next photo please.
Speaker 1: Okay this is similar to one we've already done with the councilwoman and the president of the college, my husband and a student at the grand opening in September 2000.
Speaker 2: This is my husband and me celebrating our fifty fifth wedding anniversary in a restaurant in Bradenton and that would have been 2001, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's my husband and me celebrating our fiftieth wedding anniversary in a chapel in the Unity church in Seattle, Washington.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: In 1996.
Speaker 2: This is my mother in law, Clara Frances Ross Brown and it was probably about 1922 or '23 [1923] in Kansas City, Missouri.
