Story_ID: 670143
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe, I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] Doris Bunte, spelled D-O-R-I-S, B as in Boston, U-N-T-E.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now is Bunte a French name?
Speaker 2: It is, I'm not.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (laughter).  Is there a story about your family being in Canada or Louisiana or any place like that?
Speaker 2: I'm not certain.  I know that there is a Bunte in Canada but the--my husband [Hugh U. Bunte], from whom I received the name, who's passed away now, he got it from his father [Hugh Bunte] who lived in New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now what was your maiden name?
Speaker 2: Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  There we go.
Speaker 2: I still answer to it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: It's July 2, 1933, and I was born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: (Cough) I am an administrator.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you are retired at this point, right?
Speaker 2: I'm retired.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you were the head of Boston public housing--
Speaker 2: The Boston Housing Authority (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) housing authority.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  And state representative too?
Speaker 2: State representative, as well.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: What is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 19, 2016.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in my apartment in Boston, Massachusetts in the section called Roxbury.
Story_ID: 670144
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five questions we ask. They're kind of a warm up.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is it?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) It's fried chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what is that?
Speaker 2: It's orange.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: You want a short answer, it's spring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Cruise.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last one is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, being poor is not the result of a flaw in character.
Story_ID: 670145
Speaker 1: Now I'm going to ask about your family history.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family first, and then your father's [Herbert Brown] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But we'll start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name is Evelyn Johnson, Evelyn Johnson Brown, spelled E-V-E-L-Y-N, J-O-H-N-S-O-N, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: And what was your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born on January 29, 1899 in St. Augustine, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what are the significant personalities on that side?
Speaker 2: I can trace my mom's side of the family back to her grandmother, and I've heard stories about her grandmother.  I never knew her, but her mother, who was my grandmother, her name was Ella Murray [Ella Murray Johnson], and I refer to her as Mama.  She was diabetic and had both legs amputated, and I spent weekends with her when I was a young teenager.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: In Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: In Brooklyn, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, you said you heard stories about your great-grandmother.  What were some of the stories?
Speaker 2: Oh, stories about how intelligent she was, and I heard them because I heard the same thing about my mother.  They were both, as I understand it, scholastically really bright people.  And my mother, I'm told, when she was in college used to get gold and silver medals as a result of her scholastic capabilities.
Story_ID: 670146
Speaker 1: Now where did your mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] go to college?
Speaker 2: My mother went to school in Georgia for a period of time and in Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember the name of the colleges?
Speaker 2: I want to say that she went to Mary McCloud Bethune school [Daytona Literary and Industrial Training School for Negro Girls; Bethune-Cookman University, Daytona Beach, Florida] and that she want to--I want to, I don't know the name of the school in Georgia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that she graduated from.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay.  It wouldn't be Georgia State [Georgia School of Technology Evening School of Commerce; Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia], right?  Or, you know, Georgia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I--could be.
Speaker 1: --not Georgia State but--
Speaker 2: Could be.  She graduated with--
Speaker 1: --Atlanta--was it in the Atlanta University complex [Atlanta University Center; Atlanta University Center Consortium, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: --from a nursing--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: She was a nurse.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, okay.  Did your mother talk about, you know, how she came to want to be a nurse or what inspired her?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't.  My mom was, she was a brilliant woman.  She was, she worked a full-time job and she cleaned the dentist's office and the doctor's office on weekends.  I can remember she had cardboard in her shoes because of the holes in her shoes, so her feet wouldn't get wet.  She had six of us.  My dad [Herbert Brown] died at sea, and my mom raised us.  When I was two years old, we had a fire and we lost everything except what we had on and with it, all of our photograph albums and everything, so I never was able to see my dad at all.  But my mother was this incredible woman.  She was a part of the New Deal Democratic Club in New York City [New York, New York].  She was a part of President Roosevelt's [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] programs.  She also worked with Vito Marcantonio, who was the city councilor in our district at that time.  And she was a part of a program with Hulan E. Jack [Hulan Jack], when he was the borough president of Manhattan [New York].  She was a political person, and I can remember people coming up to ask her opinion on various things.  We would all have to go in the other part of the house while the grownups talked, but she was the first African American female ever to be in charge of a voting district in the City of New York.  And, so from the time I was four years old, there was a voting machine election time in my house.  And she was offered the, she was the first African American female offered probation officer position in New York City, which she refused (laughter) because she was afraid one of my brothers might get in trouble and be brought before her.  So I thought she was a phenomenal woman.  She managed to keep us fed and happy and she did it by herself, all six of us.
Story_ID: 670147
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's name was Herbert Brown.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of--well, spelled in the usual way you spell Herbert Brown?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Spelled in the usual way we spell Hubert--Herbert Brown?
Speaker 2: Yes, Herbert Brown, H-E-R-B-E-R-T, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: And what was his date of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't know his date of birth.
Speaker 1: Was he older than your mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] by much or--
Speaker 2: I was told by a couple of years.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he may have been born in 1898 or '97 [1897]--
Speaker 2: I'm assuming.
Speaker 1: And do you know where he was born?
Speaker 2: I believe that he was born in Florida [sic. Alabama].  That's what I was told.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: I was told someone in his family, I think it was his, either his great-grandmother or his great-great-grandmother was from Spain, but I never say that because I'm already a two-fer and I'm not interested in being a three-fer.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay (laughter).  Can you explain that to us (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it means that I'm already African American and female, and now I don't want to be Latino too.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, okay.  So your father, he was a, was a member of the [U.S.] Merchant Marine or the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Yes, Merchant Marine, he was a Merchant Marines.  I have, since I've been grown, written to the Merchant Marines trying to get any information that they might have on record, but they have indicated that they didn't keep records that far back because he was, he passed two days--excuse me--two months before I was born, which makes me a posthumous child and that was 1933, and they did not keep records that far back.
Story_ID: 670148
Speaker 1: Over the years though, what have people said about him?  What do you gather was--his character was like, and what did he look like based on what people said?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm of the impression that he looked somewhat like me.  Two of my siblings look very much like me and two don't.  So I have no idea what that actually means but I was told that I look like my father [Herbert Brown].  I was told that he was a good man, he was not in port that often apparently.  So I don't know a great deal about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mom [Evelyn Johnson Brown] did not talk a lot about him.
Speaker 1: Did--were you in touch with any of his relatives?
Speaker 2: None at all.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So considering what you know about him, what little you know about him and what you know about your mother, when you consider their personalities or temperament, their sense of humor, the way they look like, how they walk, talk, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I think I look like my father and I like to hope that I have the rest of, the rest from my mom.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I would like to think that I'm like her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She was an admirable person and a political person (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She was.
Story_ID: 670149
Speaker 1: Now you have siblings, right?  You've--so could you name everybody, all the children from--
Speaker 2: I have to tell you that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) in order.
Speaker 2: I had five siblings, all of who have passed away, mostly from lung cancer.  When I was a young girl, it was right after World War II [WWII].  You know, you'd go across the street to the candy store to get cigarettes, two for a penny for your mom or for a lady in the building and while you were there, you'd get a couple for yourself, and all of us smoked.
Speaker 1: Yeah, those were the days for it, yeah, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I've lost all of my siblings pretty much to lung cancer.
Speaker 1: Now you had a problem--
Speaker 2: All but one.
Speaker 1: --yourself too at one point.
Speaker 2: I have lung cancer, as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's--yeah, that's--those are the days when every- seemed like everybody on television--well, in the movies, in those days and--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --everywhere smoked?
Speaker 2: My mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] once told me that--I said to her, "When I grow up, I won't drink, but I simply must smoke," (laughter).  "Because ladies look so nice smoking."
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's what the pitch was, wasn't it?  That--
Speaker 2: Yep, and they did.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). I mean to me, I had a different perspective coming up but I understand that was supposed to be glamorous in those days to smoke.
Speaker 2: It was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And all of us, all my friends, all my siblings, you know, we all smoked.  Not together but, you know, at different times.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do you--okay.  So can you name them from the oldest to the youngest?
Speaker 2: Yes, Theodore [Theodore Brown], Ted, T-H-E-O-D-O-R-E, we called him Ted.  Joseph [Joseph Brown], whom we call Joe, my sister, Gloria [Gloria Brown Shepard], G-L-O-R-I-A, my brother, Herbert [Herbert R. Brown], H-E-R-B-E-R-T, Herb and my sister, Jackie [Jacqueline Brown Thompson], who became Muslim and changed her name to Ahada [Ahada Rashid], A-H-A-D-A.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where do you fit?  Are you the youngest?
Speaker 2: No, that's five, I hope.
Speaker 1: Five, okay.  Oh, did--well, did you mention yourself in this, in the, in the--making the list (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, I didn't include me.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Where, so where do you fit in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm next to the youngest.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  There we go.
Story_ID: 670150
Speaker 1: Do you have a first childhood memory, an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Yeah, so I had polio, which they called infantile paralysis back then.  That was before they came up with the name polio, and I was crippled so I didn't walk until I was four and, so I was always in the house with my mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] and her friends.  And, so my, one of my earliest memories is having my mother say to her friends, "She's really starting to walk.  Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Bunte], go over to Beatrice [ph.]," and then I would try to walk across the floor, take that few steps.  I guess that's some of my earliest memories.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So by the time you were four, you were walking (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I started to walk when I was four.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wore braces on both legs up to the thigh and I went, you know, to summer camp for crippled children and wore high top shoes and these braces--
Speaker 1: Now that--once again this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) until I was about eleven or twelve.
Speaker 1: Now this once again is--this was a big part of life in the '30s [1930s] or '40s [1940s] and '50s [1950s] even.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Polio, it was--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --great crippler of people and it was so common to see--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --somebody with it.  Yeah, and it's almost amazing now that nobody has it, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: They're crippled in other ways, but they don't have that so--
Speaker 2: It's true.
Speaker 1: Yeah, even FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] had--didn't he have polio, too (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He had polio as well.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, right.
Story_ID: 670151
Speaker 1: Did you grow up in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, I grew up in New York City in Manhattan [New York] and on 100 Street [100th Street].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On Lexington Avenue.
Speaker 1: So that would be what side, what would they call their clientele?
Speaker 2: They called it the East Side [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The people on 125th Street called it the lower East Side but the people down in the bar, who were in the Lower East Side just called it the East Side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was a matter of perspective?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you describe the place that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were tenement houses.  They were never a place where the owner or the person to whom you paid rent, would live.  It was just the poor people in the neighborhood.  I grew up in--on 100 Street, where on one side of Lexington Avenue, we were all black.  And across the street, they were all white.  So we were all African American, and they were all Irish, with the exception of the stores which were owned by Jewish people.  So we obviously knew the people across the street from school but that's all.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't play together.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you go to the same--what were you, you knew them from school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went to the same school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we didn't play together.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were socially segregated?
Speaker 2: Well, in school we weren't segregated, but we didn't know each other either.
Speaker 1: So it would have been like an unwritten rule in--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --that you just, you know, you socialize with different people (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I mean, everyone in the school that was an authority in any way was white.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: P.S. 86 [ph.].
Speaker 1: So how were you treated at school?
Speaker 2: Fine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the favorite, my favorite teachers of my life was in that school.  She was my sixth grade teacher, Mrs. Siegel [ph.].
Speaker 1: All right.  Why was she your favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: She seemed to take an interest in me and my future.  You know, she would talk to me, you know, about my plans and, you know, what I hoped to do and be and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: So were you a good student?
Speaker 2: I was.  I loved school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, when I was reading the outline, it seemed like it was pretty clear that you loved school and loved learning, but you had a hard time in the beginning, I guess, with circumstances in high school [Food Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) but I don't want to get that far yet necessarily but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay.
Story_ID: 670152
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Well, what a great question.  The sights--there were two periods of my life.  One is when I considered myself a young girl, and the other was when I was an older--as a teenager because I left New York [New York] when I was nineteen.  So as a young girl, life was good.  Lots of friends.  We were a popular family.  We used to sing on Friday nights.  My mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] sang alto, my, one of my brothers was a bass, one was a baritone, my sister and I were like--what's the other one that's left?
Speaker 1: Soprano?
Speaker 2: Soprano.  Yeah, and we sang as a group and we sang spirituals on Friday nights and, so over a period of years people would come up to the house on Friday nights and listen to us, and there was that.  Again when I was younger it was different.  It was just life was good, lot of friends, popular.  I spent weekends, as I indicated, with my grandmother [Ella Murray Johnson], who had both legs amputated.  Somebody had to take care of her and, so I would go and she had one of the early televisions.  And so, I would watch Nat King Cole for fifteen minutes.  He had a fifteen minute show and then I'd watch Jackie Robinson play with the Brooklyn Dodgers [Los Angeles Dodgers].  She watched that every week and then the 'Grand Ole Opry' and that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And, so--
Speaker 1: --about how old then?
Speaker 2: So I'm about thirteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it was 1946 or so?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm about thirteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, so that's when TV starts to--so she had one of the first TVs, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she did, she had a--
Speaker 1: That's when they first started-
Speaker 2: --a Grundig--I forget the rest of the name.  Majestic Grundig [sic.] was the make, um-hm.
Speaker 1: How large was the screen?
Speaker 2: Pardon me?
Speaker 1: How large was the television screen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the screen wasn't very large (laughter).  Although it was a decent size, not that large.  Maybe that large (gesture), but of course it wasn't in color or anything.
Speaker 1: About the size of a--
Speaker 2: And it wasn't a (gesture), it was in a unit, you know, a floor unit.
Speaker 1: Was it round?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Square screen?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) About the size of a, of a fan, a church fan or something or a screen?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Larger than that?
Speaker 2: It was, no, it was like this only smaller (gesture).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: It was fairly large all things considered.
Speaker 1: All right.  So, now she lived in Brooklyn [New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had a house in Brooklyn and she was a noted caterer, my aunt [Beatrice Johnson], my mother's sister and, so we would cook on Friday nights.  You know, I'd help and then she'd go do the job on Saturday, and I would stay with my grandmother and then Sunday I would go home.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: On the subway.
Story_ID: 670153
Speaker 1: Now considering the events of later life, was there any public housing in New York [New York] in those days--
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you knew of.
Speaker 2: Public housing started--and I did go to a couple of places, to a couple of friends' houses.  They were around 103rd [Street] around 105th Street, they--those were some of the earlier ones, and of course, there were others up in the, closer to the Bronx [New York], but I didn't know a lot about public housing or anything like that.  I--there came a point in my life in New York as I got older, where the scene was very, very different.  It was a neighborhood that had drugs at an epidemic level, what we consider an epidemic level here [Boston, Massachusetts].  Back then there and, so I didn't, I didn't like my life particularly.  I mean, I di- I didn't--it wasn't enjoyable.
Speaker 1: It was a rough neighborhood when you were (mumbles)?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Big time.  But I mean, if you live there, it's not rough.  It's just what is.  You know, I think the people on the outside think, oh, wow, that's a rough neighborhood, but if you live in it, then you're just accustomed to it and, so you don't see it in the same, with the same lens, if you will.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard people say that and I've observed some of that, that if, even if you're in a rough neighborhood, if you're not involved with the drug trade or you're not involved with vice or crime, you--it probably will pass you by, you know.
Speaker 2: To be honest, my grandson didn't want me to move here because of the T station next door and a lot of young people, and there's a fair amount of crime in the, in the T station, but I'm not in the T station.  And as I said to him, "I'll try and stay indoors if they're shooting, so not to worry," (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  But the fact of the matter is--and back then you have to understand that when the police came, if any of the young men had drugs, they threw them over to where the females were 'cause they didn't search females back then.  So you could end up hauling drugs for somebody even though it wasn't your intention.  So it was, it was--had become quite different.  I want to skip over some of my earlier life and get to a part a little later.
Story_ID: 670154
Speaker 1: What high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: I went to high school in New York City [New York, New York] at Food Trades [Food Trades Vocational High School].  Remember, my aunt [Beatrice Johnson] was a caterer, and I chose to follow in her footsteps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they actually have a Food Trades high school in New York City (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my sister went later, as well.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, okay, so-- It was on 13th Street.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, downtown.  And, so Food Trades high school. Now, so your intention was to--
Speaker 1: Become a caterer.
Speaker 2: --carry on the business of your--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --aunt, okay.  As a caterer and that's something that you knew about, and did you ever help them do the catering?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, at night.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: On Fridays, every evening.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So what was, what was high school like?
Speaker 1: I loved high school.  I was learning a lot of things that were important to me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now at this juncture of your life--now you say you started high school, what, at fourteen--thirteen, fourteen?
Speaker 1: Fourteen.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So was--
Speaker 1: Fourteen or fifteen--I'll tell you in a minute.  I think sixteen to eighteen is high school.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this is 19--this is in the late '40s [1940s], I guess, mid to late '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: This is, is this after World War II [WWII] or just at the close of it?
Speaker 1: This is nineteen fi- no, okay.  This is 1949.
Speaker 2: Forty-nine [1949], okay.  So war's been about four years and--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, and all the veterans are return- have returned, and, yeah the cou- the country is in another mode--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --I guess.
Story_ID: 670155
Speaker 1: So what was the popular music in those days?
Speaker 2: What was the popular?
Speaker 1: Music in those days?  What did you like (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, my goodness.  The Dorseys [The Dorsey Brothers], Jimmy Dorsey, Harry James, all the big bands.
Speaker 1: Now were you--I mean, those of us weren't raised in New York [New York], we always hear a lot about Harlem [New York, New York] being a place where everybody goes for entertainment.  I mean, as a teenager, is that, is that where you all would go?
Speaker 2: I didn't get to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, yes, I knew about them.  The Cotton Club [New York, New York] and the--oh, my goodness.  Yeah, there were a lot of clubs and things.  I can't think of all of them at the moment but I was definitely too young.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did they have like dances at school and that sort of thing (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, my brothers--well, my brother, who had been in the [U.S. military] service--both of my brothers were in the service and they--two of them anyway--and when they came home on leave, you know, there were young ladies at the house and others, you know, soldiers, and they would play the radio and dance to the music or a jukebox in the stores, you know.  So there was always a lot of music or big bands.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.  So, now--
Speaker 2: Small's Paradise [New York, New York] is what I was trying to think of.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, Small's--that's right.  That's the big, yeah one of the popular places, and I guess in those days, Joe Louis and Jackie Robinson were heroes.
Speaker 2: When Joe Louis would win, we would all go in the street.  In my neighborhood, everybody was in the street.  Every black family was out there celebrating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was amazing.  It was like a holiday.  Even the next day was like a holiday.
Story_ID: 670156
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] know Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. then?
Speaker 2: I believe she did.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it would sound like she would if she was working with Hulan (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yep, I believe she did.
Speaker 1: --Hulan Jack and the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: She knew all those people.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And she'd be out there with us when Joe Louis won too.
Speaker 1: Now there was a--if I ever get my history correct here, I think there was a lot of agitation in the black neighborhoods in New York [New York], especially in Harlem over black, having black clerks in the stores.  A lot of the stores had no black clerks and they (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They didn't have anyone when I was a girl.  None.
Speaker 1: Right, so you couldn't work in the store--
Speaker 2: That came later.
Speaker 1: --but, you know, they would sell to you but you couldn't work there?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was the issue that was cut by, Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. and others (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: He wasn't the only one but--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And he, even he came, you know, a few years later.
Story_ID: 670157
Speaker 1: I didn't ask you about church life either.  Now did--were you all, you, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went to Ebenezer Baptist Church [ph.]--was right next to us, two doors down.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we went to Sunday school there.  We went to, we went to everything there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember who the pastor was?
Speaker 2: I knew you were going to ask me that.  It was a woman.
Speaker 1: Really?  Now, this is significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a woman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now anybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, you know what?  Now that you ask me that, I'm not certain whether she was the pastor or she was just the head of the children's things.
Speaker 1: But she was a significant presence in, you know--
Speaker 2: She was.  You know, it's moments like this where I can't call a sibling--that bothers me, but anyway, all right.  So I don't know the pastor's name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's fine.  But there was a woman who was in a significant role--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --there at Ebenezer?
Speaker 2: Miss Anderson [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so she couldn't be pastor.  She was Miss Anderson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your family like sing in the church the way you did at home?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, I sang in the church, you know, with the rest of the children but that's it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The children's choir.
Speaker 1: So the Friday night session at home was just basically the family (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was as I got a little older.
Story_ID: 670158
Speaker 1: So I take it that you were doing well in school.  That you were a good student and--
Speaker 2: I like to think so.
Speaker 1: Yes, because you certainly have demonstrated throughout your life that you were scholarly and, you know, someone who is well spoken and all that sort of thing.  So I don't, I--so something happened socially--
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: --my mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown]--I once told my mother in a conversation that I was going to serve a purpose, and she asked me what the purpose was, and I told her I didn't know but I knew that I was going to serve a purpose, and she asked me how I would know when I had done it, and I had no clue.  (Laughter) But it was a conversation with my siblings present, and I don't know what else we talked about that day.  But I do know that my siblings were annoyed with me, they would say, "Oh, yeah, there goes Miss Purpose."  And, so they had a problem with that, not a huge problem but, you know, whenever they might get annoyed or something, they had a problem with that for years.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a thinking--for a juvenile to think that there's something larger than themselves that they can fit into is remarkable.  So because we, I think we try to educate youth to think beyond themselves that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, you know--
Speaker 1: --that's part of maturity.
Speaker 2: I think that and I don't know why I always thought that.  I just did.  What maybe was unusual about it is that I said so, because I believed it.
Speaker 1: Now were you told this in school at all?  Did--were you singled out as someone who, you know--
Speaker 2: Not to my knowledge.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --so I mentioned that because one of these days I'm going to write this book, and when I do, it's going to be called 'On Purpose.'
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, because 'Miss Purpose' sounds too fresh, and I'm a relatively deliberate person.  So 'On Purpose' works.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: So just in case you ever see the book--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  I'm looking forward to it.  A lot of people use these interviews to fuel a book, you know, 'cause you can play this back.  You get a copy of this, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So you'll be able to re- to play it back and--
Speaker 2: That's great.
Speaker 1: --it might help you write that 'cause something you re- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It would.
Speaker 1: --you remember today, you might not remember another day.
Speaker 2: Another day.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: Or vice versa, you know.
Story_ID: 670159
Speaker 1: So in high school [Food Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York], we do know, and you said you'd talk about this in detail later but you had three children by the time you were nineteen, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you started having--the first one was in high school, I'm sure.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So I dropped out in my senior year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, how did your mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] feel about it?
Speaker 2: She wasn't thrilled for sure but she took care of me.
Speaker 1: So they didn't reject you?  They treated you with some dignity and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Good.  So we'll fast forward on this like you suggested.  We'll go back to it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But by the time you were nineteen, you've got three, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 670160
Speaker 1: When you look back on high school [Food Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York] though, what were your--your aspiration was to become a caterer?  And had--did it, had it--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --did it change at all?  'Cause when you say you had this (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't change then.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But you said you had a pur- you were created with a, for a purpose?
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: And it seems like that purpose is something greater than catering?
Speaker 2: It wasn't catering.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what happened at age nineteen?
Speaker 2: I made up my mind that whatever my purpose was wasn't going to happen in New York [New York].  All that was going to happen in New York is more children and that I needed to go get out of New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of the young, one of my young friends in New York had an aunt visit her the previous summer, and she had been from Boston [Massachusetts].  First time I ever heard of anybody who didn't live in Boston and, so when I did leave, I decided to come to Boston for that reason and I got her to give me her aunt's phone number.  It'll all be in the book, but I came here with eighty-seven cents and I called that woman from (laughter), from the station and I went to, I asked her if I could come and stay with her until I could get a job and I got a job the next day at the Judy Ellen blouse factory [Judy Ellen Originals] on Kneeland Street in Boston.  And the rest is a lot of history we'll get to.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But, so this is a--were your children with you when you--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Two were in boarding, and one was at home.  My--this is way too much detail.  My aunt had both legs amputated, and she lived around the corner from us.  We lived on 100 Street [100th Street] and she lived on 101st Street.  So my mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] would get us ready for the night and then she would go spend the night at my aunt's house.  And, so I had a job and I worked and I saved my money and I bought a cardboard suitcase and put it in the locker at Grand Central station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York] and then one morning when I had enough money, I wrote my mom a note and left her some money to take care of Yvette [ph.].  And the boys were in boarding, which is now a foster home.  And I packed a couple of things in a shopping bag and went down to Grand Central station in the ladies room, got--well, first I got my cardboard suitcase out of the locker and I packed my bag, bought a ticket, had ninety-seven cents left and I bought a Hershey bar and I had--that left me eighty-seven cents and I came to Boston.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that took a lot of courage, I think, to do that or--
Speaker 2: When I was on the train and the train passed 125th Street, I had to hold on to the seat so I wouldn't get off.
Story_ID: 670161
Speaker 1: So Boston [Massachusetts], this is 1953 you'd say, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.  In Boston, Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower] is the new president, and I don't know the--Boston is pretty much an Irish political town and--
Speaker 2: I loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The minute I got here, I loved it.  Men tipped their hats at the bus stop.  I never saw anything like it.  Small town, that's what Boston is.  It thinks it's New York [New York], but it's a small town.  Men tip their hats and women spoke to you.  These are the coldest people in the world.  They didn't make friends with you.  They just spoke to you at the bus stop.  Took a year to make a friend (laughter), but eventually I did.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you're working at a blouse factory [Judy Ellen Originals]?
Speaker 2: I'm working at this blouse factory.  It turns out the lady is having an emergency operation, so she's going to be out six weeks.  So it's a six week job.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So the proprietor had to have the operation and closed it down for six weeks?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: The proprietor of the place closed it down for six weeks?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She's going to come back to work.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And, so I have to give up her job in six weeks.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see.  You took someone's place who--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She had emergency surgery.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: That's why her job was available, but only while she was out.
Speaker 1: So what happened when she came back, did you--
Speaker 2: I got a job sewing, I mean folding towels and then I had a job hand painting buttons on spindles and then I had a job packing meat in cans for the soldiers, but they'd only let you work twenty-nine days because if you work thirty, then you'd be eligible for the union [International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union].  So you had to leave--get fired on the twenty-ninth day.  You actually had to leave.  They couldn't fire you.  You had to quit.
Speaker 1: Resign.
Speaker 2: But then you can come back on the thirty-first day.  So we can do that until the--and that was good money--until they finished that particular contract.  Then I went to work at Anna's Employment Agency [ph.] in Brookline [Massachusetts] (laughter) and I was cleaning this woman's house.  I was on my knees in the bathroom cleaning her floor, and she was not nice.  And I started to think about some of the things my mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] taught me and I decided right then and there my mother had to do this, I don't have to do this.  I got up off my knees, collected my sweater and left.  And I went to the library and I got a book on office work.  I took out a picture of the typewriter and I drew the keys and I came home and I did A, F, A, space, S, W, S, space, D, E, D, space and I practiced the typewriter until I knew how to type.
Speaker 1: Without a typewriter?
Speaker 2: Without a typewriter and then I went to look for a job in an office, and the first thing they said is, "Do you know how to type?"  And I said, "Yes."  And then she said, "This is one of those new typewriters.  One of those new electric typewriters," and I said, "Unh-uh, then I probably don't know how to type on it."  She said, "Oh, you'll learn."  And she showed me, and I passed the test and I went to work in the office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now who were you working for then?
Speaker 2: I worked for the Barcolene Company, makers of household products.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there many other black folks there working?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, but they worked in the, they worked in the plant, in the factory, and I worked in the office.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So were you the only one in the office?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jewish family and me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, all right.  So this is like '54 [1954], '55 [1955]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we're up there.  What is this?  Something like that, um-hm (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 670162
Speaker 1: Now are your children with you by now or they--
Speaker 2: No, my daugh- my daughter came in six months.  I had my mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] come and bring her, and if she didn't think I was doing a good job, she could take her back and she left her.  And then it took a couple of years before I got my sons.  One of whom passed a few years ago and the other whose wife died today.
Speaker 1: Sorry to hear that.
Speaker 2: My daughter-in-law, she had ALS [amyotrophic lateral sclerosis].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was being in the foster home tough on them, you know, during that period?
Speaker 2: It was on one son, the one who's alive, Harold [ph.].  He's sixty-five now and, of course, he's been angry with me over the years from time to time, whenever he thinks somebody needs to be blamed for some decision that he's made.  But I talk to him, and he knows that I think that he has to be responsible for every decision he made, and I only have to be responsible for the ones that I made.
Speaker 1: It seems fair.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: So anyways, so you--they're--the family eventually gets reunited and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --as you're working doing office work now?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, now did you, where were you living at this point?  Where--
Speaker 2: I was living on Alaska Street in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] when they came home.  I had a meeting with my daughter's friend's parents and I told them I had two sons that they had not met who were coming home and that I had this little meeting in case they had any questions, 'cause I would be the better one to answer them, not my daughter.  So that went well.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was the thing to do, and it went well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now--
Speaker 2: You know, I've lived eighty-three years, so there's a lot of stuff.  Go ahead (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: I'm joking.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: I was just lightening the mood.
Story_ID: 670163
Speaker 1: Orchard Park public housing [Boston, Massachusetts].  Now when did you move to Orchard Park?
Speaker 2: I moved there, I want to say--I'm going to screw this up but I'm going to--because my forgetory is better than my memory, but I'm going to say that I moved there in nineteen sixty something, '66 [1966].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right, all right.  So this is, so you were in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] on Alaska Street and then did you live in Roxbury (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --until you moved to Orchard Park?
Speaker 2: Yeah, then I lived on--at the corner of Blue Hill Avenue in Roxbury.  Yeah, I lived three places in Roxbury before I moved to Orchard Park.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now for those who are a little younger than you, the whole idea of projects has a stigma.  People hear projects they think of, you know, a lot of crime and unkempt places and that sort of thing but in those days--
Speaker 2: No, not at that time.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, in order to get there you had to go to (laughter), to the office of--their local head of the Catholic church.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  The archdiocese of--
Speaker 2: I can't think of the title at the moment, but we said it before (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was it Catholic Charities or something or what?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, we mentioned it before.
Speaker 1: Oh the cardinal's--
Speaker 2: To the cardinal's office (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now that's something.  How did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And he had a person, sort of a girl Friday, who handled everything.  I mean, she was the person who was recognized as who could get you into public housing or not.  And, so I went and applied, and she offered me a place in a development that I did not want to go to, and the timing was bad because of one of my children's schools or something and, so I said, no.  And she told me she would see to it I never got into public housing, and it took two years after that to get in.  (Laughter) So--
Speaker 1: But you did get in?  Is there--
Speaker 2: I did get in.
Speaker 1: Was there a--
Speaker 2: I got into Orchard Park, and Orchard Park, which was at the corner of Harrison Avenue and Eustis Street, was mostly white on the side that I went into on Harrison Ave and mostly black in the back.
Speaker 1: So segregated, though public (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, so it was just getting desegregated, and it's interesting 'cause I lived in one building, and in the building behind me, another woman named Doris, who had a son my son's age and then in the third building there was a third Doris, so they used to call those three buildings the Doris buildings 'cause we all had children the same ages, and we all lived in those buildings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was back in a period of time when you cleaned the building.  You took care of it, you know, and you met with other people in the building and you put up curtains and you waxed the floors and you--in the hallway and you, you know, you took care of from the above floor down to your floor and your floor.  That's how it was assigned and that's what we did, and we just, and we put flowers in the windows, flower boxes in the windows and we had a really good looking building and we were pretty proud of it for years.
Story_ID: 670164
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in local politics at this point at all?
Speaker 2: My mom [Evelyn Johnson Brown], back to my mom.  My mom lives here at the time--lived here with me.  She had come to Boston [Massachusetts], you know, to see about us and she stayed.  And she (laughter) had volunteered at the Cooper Community Center [Hattie B. Cooper Community Center, Boston, Massachusetts].  And she had worked with some of the programs there and ended up being chairperson of the senior organization at the Cooper Community Center and as such, she was fairly well known.  I started to work over at the Cooper center with her.  We did the food pantry.  I did the food pantry and I assisted a teenage girls organization there and I did one other thing there.  So I did volunteer work there.  I was political to that degree.
Story_ID: 670165
Speaker 1: So when you moved into the Boston [Massachusetts] public housing, are you--what was the name of it, the--
Speaker 2: Orchard Park.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Orchard Park.  Now were you working for, still working for the same organization--business?
Speaker 2: Where was I working?  I believe I was still working for the Barcolene Company.
Speaker 1: Barcolene, okay?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  And, so, all right.  So we--you were describing public housing, it wasn't as bad as people, you know, it didn't have the stigma attached to it.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: In fact, it was a step up out of like--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Out of a rougher existence in--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --tenement housing and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Although, I had lived in pretty nice places.  Again the--things were not so bad here at that time.  It's still early.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So as--
Speaker 2: So I'm in public housing, and I'm fine, I work at the Barcolene Company, I volunteer sometime at Cooper center [Hattie B. Cooper Community Center, Boston, Massachusetts], and all's well with the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  So at some point though, you become a community leader, an outspoken kind of advocate (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Here's what happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A gentleman who was before his time, his name was Ellis Ash, A-S-H.  Ellis was an interim head of the Boston Housing Authority.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The federal government was giving some money through HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] to various housing authorities to do some upgrading physical upgrading, and Ellis, who believed that residents ought to have a say in their lives, he took it as an opportunity to do something that was spectacular.  He called his managers together and he said, "I want tenant involvement.  If you can't deal with that, leave now."
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And, so this is what he did.  He held a meeting at every development, staggered these meetings and he sent information in the mail for every apartment and said, "Each apartment should be represented at this meeting at that development and that they should come prepared to discuss what kind of physical upgrading they wanted."  When we got there, what he had for us was the following, he asked every one of us--and he asked that each apartment be represented.  He said that he wanted every apart- the person from each apartment, to sign up for one of four committees.  One to deal with the lease and the extent to which the lease is not fair, one to deal with management and maintenance, one to deal with the actual physical upgrading, which we thought we came for and one to deal with one other thing.  I don't remember what it was.  But he had everybody, he talked about all the stuff he was willing to do in your development, how much each development was going to get and that there would be a developer to do the work and that that developer would work with the, with the residents of the complex, and he had people sign up for these committees and they did.  And a friend of mine, who's past away now, he and I and the superintendent, who also has passed away from that complex, made a suggestion that two of us ask each other development to send two and let's have a citywide group, and it became the first citywide public housing tenant organization in the nation.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was it called?
Speaker 2: It was called the Boston Public Housing Tenants Policy Council.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So this is in nineteen sixty--
Speaker 2: Something.
Speaker 1: --seven [1967]?  Was it shortly after you moved in over there or--
Speaker 2: It wasn't too long after.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  So it was '67 [1967], '68 [1968] maybe?
Speaker 2: I'm going to say that.  And then he invited us to come to the Boston Housing Authority meetings.  We didn't even know those people met and we didn't know they were public meetings.  We didn't know anything like that, but he wanted our involvement.  He thought that we ought to have a say in our lives.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is Ellis Ash, right?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A-S-H, no E.
Speaker 1: Okay, A-S-H.
Story_ID: 670166
Speaker 1: Now at the same time from what I understand, around the same time, you were, you decided to go get your GED [General Educational Development], right?  Your--and graduate from high school because you had left high school [Food Trades Vocational High School, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So my daughter was about to get her high school diploma, and we had had some conversations, and she wasn't sure she wanted to stay in school and, so I told her she should, and she told me I didn't.  And, so she got hers, and I went back to school, and we got our high school diplomas the same year.  Mine was bittersweet because I received it the night that Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is April 4, 1968?
Speaker 2: Yep, and it was handed to me by--oh, my goodness, an important man.
Speaker 1: Bostonian?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's passed too.  He went onto become the general counsel of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] national--Tom Atkins [Thomas I. Atkins].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Brilliant, brilliant man, Tom Atkins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, all right.  So this happens at the same time and--
Speaker 2: It, you know, so it's sort of humbling to get your diploma that night from Tom Atkins on the night that Dr. King is killed.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet Dr. King at all when he was alive?  Did he, when he came to Boston [Massachusetts] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I met him once at the church, at Twelfth Baptist [Twelfth Baptist Church, Boston, Massachusetts], yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So he spoke to the congregation then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 670167
Speaker 1: Now were you following the Civil Rights Movement very closely?
Speaker 2: No, because I had these children and this stuff I was doing, no.  I mean, I followed it obviously but I didn't go to any of the--I didn't leave town and go to the marches like at Selma [Alabama] or any place.
Speaker 1: Now the--'68 [1968] or thereabouts--'66 [1966], '67 [1967], '68 [1968]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we had some--I think it even began at '65 [1965], we had like a wave of urban rebellion.  Some people called them riots in Los Angeles [California] and Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 2: Um-hm and here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  In Boston [Massachusetts] as well (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so, and the focus of Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] in his last few years was the urban involvement--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --not the rural country--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --voting and, you know, or the southern cities.  It was northern urban development so, and he's assassinated.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did the City of Boston take it?  How did the black community take it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The City of Boston was like every place else.  I mean, we rioted, you know, in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] 'cause we always riot where we are.
Speaker 1: So how did--I mean, someone asked like why would the black community have a riot after Dr. King was killed, but how did people feel?
Speaker 2: People felt, you know, people felt as though we--first of all, when he was killed, we felt as though we lost a leader.  So that's the big issue and then, you know, the period following, people didn't feel as though enough had been done to figure out who did it, how it was done or any of that stuff.  But losing him was a very big deal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And during this time period, late '60s [1960s], who was, who constituted the black leadership in Boston?
Speaker 2: I'm going to say Mel.
Speaker 1: So this is Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King], all right, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: And, you know, yeah I'm going to say Mel and I'm going to say (pause)--god, I can't think of his name.  He was a former city councilor.
Speaker 1: Oh, Royal Bolling [Royal Bolling, Sr.] or, not him (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Let's see who--
Speaker 2: No, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --certainly the Bollings, and he was a recent city councilor and he was put off the council [Boston City Council].  The beard--I don't know if you know him.
Speaker 1: Probably not.  I'm thinking, thinking but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He's another, another good leader.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah and, you know, there was a typical group.  It constituted of this guy whose name I can't think of and Mel King and Ruth Batson and what's her name, [HistoryMaker] Elma Lewis and Jean McGuire and me and--like that.  There's that group, and there was--oh, and [HistoryMaker] Sarah-Ann Shaw.  There was always that group.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, all right.  And, so it's--now when did you, I guess, what you just, when would you consider yourself involved in like a tenement movement, you know, in--
Speaker 2: So when I signed up for one of the committees, I signed up for management maintenance.  And I became chairperson of that, of our development and then as such, I was selected to go to the citywide group, which we had come up with.  So I'm now on the citywide group and, so, now I'm sort of interacting with Ellis Ash and his assistant, Elaine Werby.  And I'm working with them straight up.  I've--that's as much access as I'm going to get unless I get on the board.  There's never been a tenant on the board.  In fact, there's a law that prohibits it because the board of directors had never been a group who in any way sought out the needs or desires of residents, so why did they need a resident on the board?
Story_ID: 670168
Speaker 1: Now history changes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --when Kevin White's the mayor and he--
Speaker 2: And, so Kevin White appoints me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were you surprised?
Speaker 2: No, because I'm working with Ellis Ash and the first tenant who was put on the board, which is John Connolly from South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts], and he's put on by the governor who has one seat.  The mayor has the other four seats.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So was Connolly African American or was he--
Speaker 2: No, he's, no, he's Irish.
Speaker 1: So he, but he made history by being the first tenant--
Speaker 2: So he--the first tenant.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the governor put him on.  And, so when there was a vacancy, Ellis Ash and Julie Bernstein [Julius Bernstein], who was already on the board, and Julie was the head of the Boston Jewish Labor Committee [New England Jewish Labor Committee].  So they went to the governor and had John put on and then when the next vacancy came, they went to the mayor to have me put on and, so the mayor put me on.
Story_ID: 670169
Speaker 1: So here you are, this is a tremendous opportunity.  What did you start to do in that position (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So, so, so this is an important part of my life.  So this is what happened.  I was put on the board.  So Julie Bernstein [Julius Bernstein], who already availed himself of tenants' needs and desires is on the board and John Connolly, the first tenant is on the board and, so I make a majority of interested parties who are interested in the needs and desires of the residents.  So finally our dream has come true, we have a tenant oriented majority.  And, so we churn out these different policies, and nothing changes.  And we churn out more policies, and nothing changes.  And, so (laughter) I'm dealing with the tenants at night when I go home who are saying, "What the heck are you guys doing?  We thought now that we had you--," and of course, don't let me understate the fact that we are dealing with six unions as board members, but we're still the majority of the board.  So we finally--when I, when I was elec- when I was appointed to the board, the mayor [Kevin White] said--well, he didn't say but what he told the group was that he'd like us to hire this man as our executive director.  His name was Dan Finn.  And, so our first action when I went on the board was the hiring of Dan Finn, so when we kept coming up with these policies and we didn't see any changes, we call in Dan Finn and we say, "Dan, what the heck is going on?  We don't see any wonderful changes in things at the public housing level."  And this goes back and forth.  We fight off and on with Dan for close to a year.  And then we called the mayor and tell the mayor we're going to fire Dan Finn.  Well, we didn't say it that way.  We said we needed him to do something about Dan Finn.  He called Julie Bernstein into his office and he said to Julie, I recognize this is hearsay today, "If it's too hot, get out the kitchen."  But he didn't call John Connolly in because John is a gubernatorial appointee, not a mayoralty appointee, so he calls me in, and this is what he said, among other things, he said, "People think I'm not political enough because I don't take twelve blacks out on the corner and flog them each day."
Speaker 1: That's his actual--
Speaker 2: No, those were his words, honest to God.  Those were his words.  And then he said, "Look kid, do me a favor.  Help me out on this, fight me or resign."  And that meant keep Dan Finn even though he wasn't changing the policies.  Well, that wasn't going to happen.  And, so the next day, we had a scheduled board meeting with the media present to talk about spending the money.  And instead I fired Dan Finn forthwith on television.
Story_ID: 670170
Speaker 1: So the next day, I woke up to the telephone, and it was the Boston Herald, and they said, "What do you," (laughter), "what do you have to say about the charges?"  And I said, "Charges?  What charges?"  And they said, "The mayor has proferred five charges of misconduct in office against you."  And, so I said, "I don't have anything to say because I haven't seen them."  And of course, then I went down to the housing authority [Boston Housing Authority], and all my close folks were at the housing authority, and we talked about it, and I got an attorney, a civil rights attorney, whose name is Ed Barshak [Edward J. Barshak].  One of the finest attorneys around, and Ed represented me in a citywide public hearing where the mayor was, according to the statute, the mayor was the judge.  And we enjoined the city council [Boston City Council], who became the jury and for thirteen days of nonstop testimony, we had this hearing.  And every--it was a spectacle.  It was in city hall [Boston City Hall, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: The news covered all this?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was the top story in the paper.  It was the front page of the paper, the top story on the news every night, and the tenants came every day with flowers from all over the city.  The place was jammed.  Nobody got any work done in the city, and the mayor found me guilty of misconduct in office and removed me.
Speaker 2: Now the allegation from what I understand, and you can correct me if I'm wrong, the allegation is that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) Yeah, one said I went to Washington [D.C.] too often to work with senator--what's his name (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Brooke or--
Speaker 1: Senator Brooke.
Speaker 2: Okay.  [HistoryMaker] Edward Brooke, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because he had done the Brooke Amendment which allowed public housing residents to pay only 25 percent of their income and then we were working on a baby Brooke Amendment, which we later passed here in Massachusetts to bring the state aided developments down to the same le- but, so what--that was one.  One is that they couldn't find my application for housing.  It had disappeared from the manager's office.  Another one was that I took the pay that went with the job of sitting there.  I can't remember what all of them were.  But anyway he found me guilty of misconduct in office.
Speaker 2: I think a chief allegation that I read was that they said that since you're being paid for the position, you were disqualified to live in public housing because you got paid too much--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --or something.  Now that was the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It would make me overpaid.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, over the--
Speaker 2: Over the--yeah.
Speaker 1: --amount that you could have and live in public hou- which meant that no tenant could do it because if you took the pay, then you couldn't stay there.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  So you couldn't even--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --you couldn't serve in that role--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --if you took the pay?
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: So, and they conveniently (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Unless if you did it for nothing while everybody sitting beside you got paid.
Speaker 2: --and they conveniently lost the--your original contract with the wording--
Speaker 1: And you're already low income--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or you wouldn't have been eligible to begin with.
Speaker 2: Well, I think with the whole case would depend on some legal definitions that are in the contract originally, right, that they--
Speaker 1: So what happened is they found me guilty and, you know, I had to leave and then my lawyer took it to court and the state--it was the municipal, not the municipal court, the state court.  What is it?
Speaker 2: I know the state supreme court finally overturned it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, no, not that one yet.
Speaker 2: But not yet but, okay, all right.  So it was the appeals court, the--
Speaker 1: The what?
Speaker 2: Appeals court?
Speaker 1: No.  It was the--hm--the state court is not called the state supreme court.  It's a court that is a state level.  In any event, they found me not guilty and then the city appealed it to the state supreme court and then they upheld the superior court.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause then they upheld the superior court and ordered my reinstatement and, so I got reinstated so--
Speaker 2: So this is a political smack for Kevin White, right?
Speaker 1: Well, that was Kevin White, yeah.
Story_ID: 670171
Speaker 1: What do you think--how did, how did his heart become twisted on this matter?
Speaker 2: You know, sometime after that, Mel and I went down to his office.  We were just aggravated (background noise).
Speaker 1: Let's pause, I guess.
Speaker 2: (TAPE INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And speed.
Speaker 2: All right.  So you and Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King] go down to see Kevin White?
Speaker 1: Yeah, we go to see Kevin White, and when we go, they tell us he's not in, and we say, "We'll wait," and then they say, "Well, he has another appointment after that," and we say, "We'll wait."  You know, we do one of those.  And, so we wait a whole bunch of time.  And then we see him and we sit and talk to him about conditions in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts] in general and jobs and whatever else we talk, we went about.  And whenever I say something, he looks at Mel and answers the question and, so Mel said, "Aren't you going to look at her when you talk to her?  What, are you going to act like she's not here even though you're talk- answering her question?"  And all he said was, "She's my biggest political mistake."  And with that, he went on with his conversation and he just never looked at me to talk to me.
Speaker 2: So he remained agitated, I guess, the rest of his--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he had to resubmit--based on what the court said, he had to resubmit my name to the clerk, and they had to resubmit it to the city council [Boston City Council], and the city council was ordered to approve it.  And the city clerk, who was hired by the mayor, was ordered to swear me in.  They all did it reluctantly.  I had to threaten to go back on contempt of court charges, but they eventually all did it.  The only time the mayor ever spoke to me after that is, there was a meeting in his office, and it was the day before I was to end my term 'cause I was there for a five year term and a couple of years had been used up in all this legal stuff.  But, now it was my turn to leave, and he didn't say it out loud.  He just sort of mouthed it.  "Goodbye, Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Bunte]."
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: And that was the only thing he ever said to me again.
Story_ID: 670172
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you leave the BHA [Boston Housing Authority] board in--was it 1973 or '73 [1973], I guess.  Around that time?
Speaker 2: The--yeah, I--yeah, because I ran for state rep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now you're, '73 [1973] you're like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So after all this stuff with the mayor [Kevin White], there's this little group of people who were saying, "Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Bunte], you should run for state rep."  And I'm saying, "No, I don't want to do that 'cause we have two black gentlemen sharing a district now."  And they're saying, "You should run now 'cause really not a lot is happening, and the people need a change and, you know"--
Speaker 1: And you were--I mean, this whole mess with the mayor made you more popular, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  So now I'm running for state rep.  If I ring a bell, you know, how--we're already at the point where people don't let anybody in.  All the doors are locked.  People are saying, "Girl, come up here and let me see what you look like.  You fought city hall and won?  Girl, come up here.  We want to see you."  I--it was amazing.  It was amazing, the reception I received, and I had a great campaign manager, Kay Gibbs, and she had me wear out a couple of pairs of shoes 'cause I went to every primary voter's house.  In fact, I won the seat.  I beat one of the gentleman two to one and I beat the other one three to one.  And, so I ended up taking one of those seats.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So you're elected.  Your age--you're forty years old--
Speaker 2: I'm forty years old.
Speaker 1: --in 1973?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: You're the first black woman elected to the--
Speaker 2: To the Massachusetts state legislature [Massachusetts Legislature]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --in history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, so--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I'm amazed myself.
Speaker 1: And what's the district that you represent?  What's it called?
Speaker 2: Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts], part of the South End [Boston, Massachusetts] and part of Dorchester [Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So what was that like?
Speaker 2: It--first of all, it was a large house.  It was a house with 240 representatives and later got reduced by the League of Women Voters.  They worked and they got it, put it on the ballot and got it reduced to 180.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So then it became a single person's district but initially it was a two person district so it was a bigger district.  Being one of 240 doesn't mean a lot.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, unless you're part of the leadership (background noise) or the small team.
Story_ID: 670173
Speaker 1: Now you succeeded Royal Bolling, Sr., right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: No, I served with him.
Speaker 1: You served with him, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was Frank Holgate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I have here that some other names who entered the House [Massachusetts House of Representatives] at the same time that you did here in the state were Ed Markey--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: --William Delahunt [Bill Delahunt], Br--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --Brian Donnelly [Brian J. Donnelly] and Barney Frank.
Speaker 2: Yep, yep, we had a heck of a freshman class.  There were seventy of us, if I'm not mistaken.  We were the tremendously large class, and the speaker's son of--who's the, who was the speaker of the house?
Speaker 1: Oh, you're talking about--
Speaker 2: The popular one.
Speaker 1: Oh, I know you're, who you're talking about, the--yeah.  God, what is his--oh.  Skip, yeah--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  O'Neill (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) O'Neill, O'Neill.  Tip O'Neill.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Tip O'Neill's son [Thomas P. O'Neill III].
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 2: He was in the freshman class.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So, yeah that's quite a group.  So--well, one of the things that you did, was you were in the founding class of the congressional, one of the, the black legislative caucus [Massachusetts Legislative Black Caucus; Massachusetts Black and Latino Legislative Caucus], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We knew that being one of 240 was not going to mean much 'cause that's what you were, one of 240, but we knew that if we came together, and there were five of us, if we could agree on certain issues and have a position, that when we spoke, we could be speaking with five votes in our pocket, and it had to be helpful.  Kay Gibbs, the woman I told you was my campaign manager, she became our administrative assistant and a young woman who's in Washington [D.C.] now who's become an expert on international taxation, Diane Renfroe.  They were the two who were our assistants.  Diane was our legislative assistant, and Kay was our administrative assistant, and they worked magic.
Story_ID: 670174
Speaker 1: So, yeah, we, we were able to do some wonderful things that year.  Not only did we come up with a seat--(laughter) so I have to say this, Boston's [Boston, Massachusetts] black community at the time had been gerrymanded into five districts.  So it was impossible to elect a black person because there weren't enough black voters in anyone of those five districts.  Now that in itself is insidious.  But when you consider that it also means that you can't elect anyone to the Democratic state committee because that's done out of the senatorial district or to the Republican state committee 'cause that, too, is done out of the senatorial district.  Black people are so divided into these five districts that we couldn't get a seat on any one of those three places.  So no representation in the state senate [Massachusetts Senate], no representation on the Democratic state committee, no representation on the Republican state committee, all because we're gerrymanded.  Well, so we had to deal with that and, so when a seat became available in the senate, we fought.
Speaker 2: First of all, we got--oh, my goodness, what is his name?  South Africa reparations, what's his name?
Speaker 1: Nelson Mandela.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Nelson Mandela?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: Bishop Tutu [Desmond Tutu].
Speaker 2: No, from here.
Speaker 1: South--oh, from here, oh--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Young bright guy.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know who you're talking about.
Speaker 2: Well, he was then.
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Randall Robinson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Randall.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We got Randall, who was the--a student at Harvard [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and another student from Harvard with him, and the two of them we got to come up with the district from which we would have a senate seat.  So we did this work and we got it through the leg- 'cause it, we got it through the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature], through the House [Massachusetts House of Representatives].  The speaker was out of town, and it went through.  Speaker came back that night and withdrew it the next day and then we had to fight for it.  We went to everybody and of course, we worked already with Barney [Barney Frank] and other people, you know, from both sides of the aisle actually and we went to the governor [Francis Sargent], who was a Republican governor, named--I'll think of it in a minute.  And we said to him, "If this, if we can't stop this from going through, will you veto it?  Veto every, every scenario that they bring you until there's one where we can elect--there's enough people of color that we can elect some representation."  And he said he would and that's what he did.  They kept sending in things that--where we couldn't elect somebody and that governor kept vetoing it until they did it right.  And that's how we got the first black senate seat.  Well, what we called the black senate seat for a seat of color, for the--which gave us representation in the state senate and on the, and elected people onto the Democratic state committee and the Republican state committee.
Speaker 1: Now this is incredible to me that--
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: --it takes this long for this to happen.
Story_ID: 670175
Speaker 1: The rest of the country--now I've said this in a lot of the interviews about Massachusetts, that the rest of the black folks in the country have like--a lot of the grandmothers that have Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the Kennedy brothers on their wall.  They see Massachusetts as the home of white liberal ideology and friend of the Negro and all that sort of thing but, yet it takes 'til 1975 to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You know, it's really interesting because we have a lot of would be do gooder people, but (laughter) they support what they think we ought to have, not what we need or ask for and that drives me nuts today.
Speaker 1: So they're out of their comfort zone when they, when you ask for something rather than they give it to you out of largesse.
Speaker 2: I mean, there's going to be a question on the ballot on November 8th about adding new charter schools.  Some of those white areas where the people care about us, but they think they're helping us by saying, "Do more charter schools."  We can't get our kids into the charters schools.  That doesn't help us.  Gee, but, and, so we finally did, and the governor's [Francis Sargent] name was governor (makes noise)--I'll think of it.
Speaker 1: But he was a Republican and we just--now was he like a Boston [Massachusetts]--I mean, the Boston Republicans tend to be different way, going way back--
Speaker 2: This--
Speaker 1: --where the Boston Republican politicians like Lodge [Henry Cabot Lodge] and all those guys, they were more moderate or something than--
Speaker 2: He was not moderate.
Speaker 1: He was not, okay.
Speaker 2: Generally speaking, he wasn't moderate.  The Republicans that were in charge back then, I have to say, were people that you could talk to.  You might not get them because I, you know, I consider myself quite the lobbyist, because when you lobby you have to go to everybody.  I mean, you have to start with the people you think you have (laughter).  'Cause if you don't ask them, you may not have them either and then you have to go to the people you think you can get the easiest and then the, and then you go to the ones that you think you can't ever get last 'cause you don't want to spend all your time if you're not going to get them but you go to everyone.  'Cause just 'cause you're not with me on this doesn't mean you won't be with me on that.  I'm not prepared to say anybody's all one way.  There isn't anybody all good, and there isn't anybody all bad.  Well, maybe there are, I just don't know them, but my view is that you don't make assumptions that if a person isn't--can't be with you on this vote that they won't be with you on another vote, so I don't give up that way.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: So I've made a lot of friends in the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature].  I have to tell you that my involvement in the state legislature, my work there, you know, has had a lot to do with who I am and how I think.  And I think it's a good thing.
Story_ID: 670176
Speaker 1: I didn't mention before but, now, so your, your mother [Evelyn Johnson Brown] is living with you during this period of time with you, isn't she?  Is she?
Speaker 2: My mother is not living with me.  She actually didn't live with me then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was here (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But in the, in Boston [Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: --for the first ten years, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I guess what I'm getting at is that your mother had so much experience in New York [New York], I guess, she was, was she a valuable mentor to have around or somebody to talk to about politics?
Speaker 2: I have to tell you, I never made the connection about my mother's politics and my being involved in politics until I was already there and then, of course, of course--but I didn't see it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Do you know what I--I--it's hard for me to believe as well, but I didn't make the connection.  I was already elected when I figured out, of course, this makes so much sense, my mother did this.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I--
Speaker 2: You know, it--
Speaker 1: I can imagine, she was--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It didn't happen, but, yeah I could talk to her before she, you know, got sick but--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is, this is the kind of political story that a lot of American politicians lie about, but you actually came from a position where you come to Boston with ninety-seven [sic. eighty-seven] cents and then now you're in the state legisla- (laughter) so I mean, did you ever pinch yourself (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It's unbelievable, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and say, "Well, how did"--
Speaker 2: When I was elected, you know, I had a meeting with myself.  You know, who said, who said you could represent other people.  I mean, I took that seriously.  I, you know, I just thought it was a wonderful thing that people would actually go to the polls and push the button and--for your name, to say you could represent them.  What an honor.  Oh, my goodness, yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the, that's the attitude one would hope (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) It was amazing.
Speaker 1: --that politicians would have, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 670177
Speaker 1: Early '70s [1970s] is also a time of the busing crisis.  So in what ways were you involved in that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you couldn't be--unless you're under a rock, you had to be involved in one way or another.  I would go to the buses to see the buses off, to see the people who went out to pick up the children--
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: --you know, and meet them when they came back.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That first night--
Speaker 1: Well, for the sake of history though, let's just set it up.  What was the crisis about?  I mean, in the basic terms, what--
Speaker 2: Oh, well, first of all, I don't generally--
Speaker 1: 'Cause somebody's going to be watching this fifty years from now.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I don't--well, then--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --let me be specific.  I don't generally talk about it on the basis of discussing busing.  The buses were a mode of transportation.  This is desegregation of public schools in Boston [Massachusetts].  That's what this is about.  And it's about the fact that there has been overt racism and that the whole rationale for the judge [W. Arthur Garrity, Jr.] to come to the conclusion that he did had to do with the fact that the schools, the equipment, everything in the schools for children of color--worth less than those available to white students.  And, so that's what desegregation was for, to change that.  Since he wasn't able to get the school committee [Boston School Committee] to equally apply the resources or divide the resources, then the other way was to divide the children in a way that all of them had some of everything.  And that's what it was.  The first night after our children had been stoned and they had held up signs calling them nigger and throwing stuff at them and the--our children were crying and (laughter)--there was a bid meeting at the, at one of the community centers, and the parents came.  All the angry black parents came.  And the woman who was supposed to be doing it, Ellen Jackson [Ellen Swepson Jackson], said she had an emergency and she had to leave and that I had to (laughter), and that I had to talk to the parents.  And, so I did, and it was quite a meeting.  I took a lesson from Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King].  (Laughter) What I did first is, I said I wanted to make a list of the issues that we wanted to discuss with the mayor because the mayor was coming, which we knew he was coming.  And, so I made this list, and of course, the parents were angry and the mayor came, Kevin White.  I'll never forget it.  He shook.  He visibly shook standing up there on that stage, and the same gentleman whose name I couldn't think of earlier to tell you is the one of the icons who came out when there were things in the community with Mel and me and that bunch of people.  Same person.  I asked him to take him out, and he took him out to his car.  You know, after he had talked a little bit 'cause there--what could he say?
Speaker 1: So he was afraid?  Or was he upset and, or all of this (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was afraid those women were going to kill him.  But, you know, I know that there are those who don't agree with the whole desegregation.  I believe in desegregation because if you can't, if you can't get your share any other way, then that's the way you get it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this--the Boston struggle (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Now what we really need--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --is an elected school committee.  Who the heck ever heard--I won't swear again.  Who the heck ever heard of the mayor being responsible for the school system?  That doesn't make any sense to me.  So he's either do- doing trash collection or molding the minds of children.  It's one of his duties?  I don't want anybody where it's one of their duties.  I want somebody where it's their A, only duty and B, they're answerable to parents, not to the mayor.  And I happen to like this mayor [Marty Walsh].  But I don't want a school, I don't want the school people to be answerable to the mayor.  I want them to be answerable to the people.
Story_ID: 670178
Speaker 1: This crisis has made national news.  It's on NBC News every (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of course.  And rightfully.
Speaker 1: --every night.  Yeah, you see these--
Speaker 2: Rightfully.
Speaker 1: --angry faces of--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] white parents and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, and our children get over there and then there are all these people yelling at them and swearing at them and throwing things at them.  I mean, how horrible for a child.
Speaker 1: What did they imagine would happen if black children were, you know, what did they think black children were going to do to their offspring?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  Maybe they thought color was going to rub off or something.  I don't know.  I have no clue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now did you ever have any dialogue with any of them about what their concerns were?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've been in meetings where they all are, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did any of it make any sense or--
Speaker 2: I wouldn't call it dialogue.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did they have a leader?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, unfortunately elected officials.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Louise Day Hicks, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what was the outcome of this?  I mean, how long did it last and what was the outcome?
Speaker 2: It lasted way too long and then eventually, you know, there were adequate security for the children.  So that was that.
Speaker 1: Now did the white families flee the public school system [Boston Public Schools] at this point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, yep.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They all went to the Catholic schools.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seem to be the scenario all over the country.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they went to Catholic schools.
Speaker 1: So did they--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They came out of the public school system but, now they want to come back but in the form of charter schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Where you can kind of have your cake and eat it too, yeah.
Story_ID: 670179
Speaker 1: So all this has been, this drama that's going on--in '75 [1975], you were one of the founders of the Caucus of Women Legislators [Massachusetts Caucus of Women Legislators], right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it took a little longer to have the women's caucus than it did the black caucus [Massachusetts Legislative Black Caucus; Massachusetts Black and Latino Legislative Caucus].  People of co- of color--I mean, the ties that bind people of color are different than the ties that bind women.  And, so it was not a question for the black caucus to become the black caucus.  But with the women--and we tried to do it the same year we did the black caucus or our first year there.  But with the women, there's this business about class and (laughter)--I don't know, all kinds of things.  I mean, people have to look at one another and then they have to decide, you know, is this person of a class that I would want to be--I mean, women find such crazy ways to look at one another, far less now than they used to.  Back then, it was a very big deal and, so we've--and then there were some issues where even people of color can't come together or black people.  I mean, there may be some issue.  I don't know what it would be, but there may be some issue where we don't agree.  I don't, I don't--can't tell you one, but with women, there are definitely issues where you just can't agree and, so you'll use that as a reason not to come together as a group.  One such issue could be, for example, the death penalty.  Another such issue might be abortions.  So I mean, there are things that divide women, and I can't think to tell you the truth of an issue that might divide the bl- members of the black caucus.  There may be an issue we don't agree on, but I can't think of an issue that might divide us.  But with women, it's different and, so it took a while.  We had to find enough issues we could work together on so that, you know, we would have an opportunity to work together on things that were positive and we did.
Story_ID: 670180
Speaker 1: So what were some of the issues that women agreed on that you remember?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as, as I said, some of the things that tended to divide us were things like abortion or the death penalty or things that people had deep seated religious notions that kept them from being willing to work on something.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now '76 [1976] you were selected as a Loeb Fellow at Harvard University School of Design [Harvard Graduate School of Design, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Now what's that about?
Speaker 2: That is a program that is very much like, you know, an opportunity to do a year offline so that you get to study or take classes or involve yourself in discussions or you can do pretty much what you want to do.  You can sign up for all sorts of things at Harvard for that year, and being a Loeb Fellow was, it was good for me and not good for me.  And when I say that, I thought it was a wonderful opportunity.  I wasn't quite able to take advantage of the opportunity.  I didn't have the time to put in it.  I didn't have the mind available to do it at that particular time but that's when it was offered and that's when I did it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That (unclear) very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I think it's a magnificent opportunity.  It's just that it didn't--I wasn't able to take full advantage of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I had responsibilities and I couldn't pretend I was loose and single and free and available and--all the time.
Story_ID: 670181
Speaker 1: Now you're still single though during this period of time, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, I'm, I'm single.  I have had a gentleman friend who I had for close to fifty years who passed away two weeks ago today.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry to hear that, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm having a rough month (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear), yeah.
Speaker 2: But he was a wonderful, wonderful man named Samuel Johnson, and we didn't marry, and I've been thinking about that a lot, but he was definitely my, I guess, my, my kids called it a lot of different things two weeks ago.  (Laughter) I don't know what they would (laughter) call it tonight but my, probably my soul mate but he--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: --he's passed, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Story_ID: 670182
Speaker 1: Tell us about the James W. Hennigan Magnet School case.  I mean, you--
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: James Hen- W. Hennigan Magnet School [James W. Hennigan Magnet Elementary School; James W. Hennigan K-8 School, Boston, Massachusetts], I think you wrote the--a letter to a judge [W. Arthur Garrity, Jr.] in support of keeping the school open.  They were going to close it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did when they were looking to close it.  I don't remember all the details, but it was one of the things I did do.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's not that significant?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So (unclear) on the list.
Speaker 2: And I'm not an education person (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh, okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, I had to do a lot on education but, you know, Mel's [HistoryMaker Melvin King] been my go to education person.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You entered this--public service in housing, right?  You know, right?
Speaker 2: In when?
Speaker 1: You entered public service because of your housing activism.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm the housing person.
Story_ID: 670183
Speaker 1: At some point now during this period of time, late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s], you decided to go to Harvard [Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and get a master's degree, right, is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they had all these wonderful people in my life.  There was a man who was a professor at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], who was on loan to the Roxbury Community College [Roxbury Crossing, Massachusetts] as president, and when you ask me his name, I'm not going to know it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just because we're doing an interview.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: So I had a friend, whose name is not, not important, and he was a friend of mine for many years, and over the years every time I did not know something, he would say, "That's such and such 101."  He always told me, "Go back to school, Doris [HistoryMaker Doris Bunte], 'cause that's so-and-so 101."  So when I--one day when he said that to me, I decided I'm going back to school.  So I go to Roxbury Community College, and I'm in line to register, when along comes this guy who's the president whom I know 'cause I work with him, I'm in the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature], and I work with him.  And he says, "What are you doing here"?  And I said, "I'm registering."  And he said, "For what"?  And I said, "For college," and he said, "Doris, go home and come back tomorrow and meet me in my office."  So I go home and I come back the next day and I meet with him, and he has this Harvard application and he says, "I want you to take this and fill it out.  Tell me who you are."  And I took the application and I went home and I filled it out and then he told me to take it over to Harvard, and I took it to Harvard.  And they looked at it and they said, and this is what he knew that I did not know.  Because I was in the legislature when it was time to do the budget and I didn't understand about budgets, I went over to Metropolitan College, which is BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts], and took a course in zero budgeting.  And then when we worked on the union stuff, I didn't know the union stuff.  So I went over to the college over by the state house [Massachusetts State House, Boston, Massachusetts] and took a course on union management and then I had taken all these courses all these places so that I can be an informed voter in the legislature.  And he knew that I had done that because I knew him but he didn't know I didn't have a college degree or anything.  So I went and I filled it out, and they said, "We need you to go get all of your scores from all these colleges that you have been to, where you've taken courses."  And I did, and they said, "If you can take the Millers Analogy Test [sic. Miller Analogies Test] and pass with a eighty whatever it was, we will consider letting you go to Harvard."  And, so I went and I got all my scores and all my information and I gave it to them.  And they took it and they said, "We'll be in touch," and they got in touch and they said, "If you're willing to take one course in English, we will let you in the two year master's program with a--no undergrad degree."  And I did, and they did, and I got my master's degree from Harvard.
Speaker 1: Now was the--David Evans [David L. Evans] in admissions then or was it--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Was it David Evans in admissions at Harvard in those days?  Or who was the person (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I have no idea.  I didn't know anybody there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't remember who you dealt with in--
Speaker 2: I didn't deal with anyone.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I mean, somebody told you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I mean, I didn't deal with anybody in particular.  I didn't know anybody--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --at all.
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So this is--well, this is great.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so by 1982, you have a master's degree in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A master's degree and a, and the environmental degree.
Speaker 1: This is--so, okay.  So here you are, the ninety-seven cents and you turn it into (laughter) all of this.  And, so, well who--
Speaker 2: But we--I had to take, go take all the courses, of course--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) for the Harvard degree.
Story_ID: 670184
Speaker 1: What was your master's thesis about?
Speaker 2: My master's [degree]?  It was education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, your master's thesis, what did you write about?
Speaker 2: Oh, what did I write about?  No, I didn't have a thesis.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: No, no, no, that would have been for my doctorate.
Speaker 1: No, there's a thesis for a master's (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) The thesis is for my doctorate.  The master's wasn't a thesis, but it was on public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The paper that I had to write--
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: --that enormous paper.  But they didn't call it a thesis.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  That's what they normally do (unclear).
Speaker 2: The thesis--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: The committee--because I had a committee for my, for my doctorate, which I didn't get, but I had a committee for it, and my thesis was also going to have to do with housing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what aspect of housing were you looking at?
Speaker 2: I had done this paper called 'NIMBY,' not in my back- it was really about not in my backyard.  So, you know, it was about people who say that oh, we welcome you all anytime, but not near where I live.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, all right.  So, now, and you went on to enroll in the doctoral program at UMass, right, Boston?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: UMass Boston [University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: And that--I took the job at the housing authority [Boston Housing Authority], and my time ran out and, so when I wrote to the president which was Billy Bulger [William Bulger], they told me that my time had expired, and I would have to take the courses again--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --which I didn't want to do.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had taken all my courses.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: And it was only my thesis that I had left.
Story_ID: 670185
Speaker 1: All this time, you're in the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature], and in '85 [1985] though at age fifty-two, you were selected to become the Boston Housing Authority director, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods head).
Speaker 1: So, and this was--were you appointed by the mayor at that time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I wasn't hired--yeah, I was hired by the mayor.  But the committee that appointed me was made up of state, Judge Garrity [W. Arthur Garrity, Jr.], not federal and his committee, which included people from Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and all over the place.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I had not been interviewed for work in about twenty years so that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did you have a feeling that after you were interviewed that you had the job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because when John Connolly who was--remember the first tenant--who was now working for the mayor, Ray Flynn [Raymond Flynn], came and said, "I want to talk to you about something," and I said, "What?"  And he said, "Becoming the head of the housing authority."  I said, "Wait a minute until I get up off the floor laughing."  But he said, "No, I'm really serious."  A number of people have taken credit for recommending me.  All of them may have, three friends but--
Speaker 1: But John Connolly is the one that you--
Speaker 2: John Connolly was the one who approached me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: On behalf of the mayor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, so then I went to be interviewed and then I got the job.
Story_ID: 670186
Speaker 1: So what were some of your biggest challenges to start off with?  What things did you want to change or do (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, so let me tell you this.  Day one, I leave the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature] and I go take a part day and I go over to the housing authority [Boston Housing Authority], and they show me my office and my desk, which is like that (gesture)--has no front.  And I figure a guy had this office.  My predecessor was a man and, so I'm going to have to have a desk.  So the head of the office is showing--the person who is in charge of all of the offices is showing me around, and I said in passing, "Unh-uh, I'm going to have a desk with a front."  And, so she goes and she shows me the rest of the eleventh floor, where I'm going to sit and then I go back the next day for a part of the day, and there's a young girl crying.  And I said to her, "What's wrong?"  And the office manager, that's who I meant, says, "Oh, don't worry.  She's okay.  She's okay."  So I say, "Oh, my goodness," 'cause she's really crying hard, and I said, "What's wrong?"  And she says, "They took my desk," and I go and I look in my office, and her desk is in my office.  So, now I know what power is.  I mean, I'm, you know, just in case I didn't know before.  What, I said that in passing and they took that woman's desk?  I said, "Give that woman her desk back."  And, so this position at this particular point in time is the combination of the full board of directors and the administrator, all rolled into one because it had been under the jurisdiction of the court.  And, so I'm now everything.  True, I'm answerable to the mayor and true, there are those six unions, but other than that, I'm in charge.  It's not like being one of 180 to decide the state budget. I decide this budget, okay.
Speaker 1: So at this time, you had been in the state legislature for twelve years when you took this position and left the state legislature so--
Speaker 2: But it's the most powerful position--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I could possibly be in.  And, so I have to make a difference.
Story_ID: 670187
Speaker 1: So what was your number one goal?
Speaker 2: Maintenance.  Maintenance, maintenance, maintenance.
Speaker 1: And why was that so important?
Speaker 2: Because public housing at that time in Boston [Massachusetts] was 29 percent in compliance with the state sanitary code.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that seems like a failing (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Twenty-nine percent, and we had the largest reserve of any housing authority.
Speaker 1: Of money to deal with it but no, but--
Speaker 2: The largest reserve and 29 percent in compliance.  I didn't want to hear built, new.  I didn't want to hear anything, but this is what we got.  And use the money in the reserve to do--and, so there was a point in my life at the BHA [Boston Housing Authority] when until the phone rang, I was 100 percent in compliance with the state sanitary code, which is even better than the federal code.  Until the phone rings, and then of course (laughter), because it's constant (gesture) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But then what happens--uh-huh.  Oh, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So once the phone rings, you're not in 100 percent compliance any more.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, and I had spent down the reserve, which was not attractive by HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development]--in HUD's eyes, but it was in mine.  Because the residents had their places, their stuff fixed.  Oh, my goodness.
Speaker 1: What were some of--did you have like--what were some (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So public housing to me was about a couple of quick things.  Maintaining what you offer people.  I mean, that was an obligation on my part and resident empowerment and, so I had a set of policies that included residents at every level of the housing authority operation.  I didn't do anything where there could not be a tenant present.  I--it was the best in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And I could not be more proud of that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, I have a note that you had a waiting list of nine thousand people, and they had like two thousand plus empty units just because they needed maintenance, right?
Speaker 2: At one point, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.  So you were, you pledged to do something about that and--
Speaker 2: And what, and, and you got, you got to fix up where the people are living before you can do anything else.
Story_ID: 670188
Speaker 1: At some point you said that you love the job but you didn't enjoy being the biggest slumlord in the commonwealth.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so you weren't going to let all these problems linger?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But how did it--now I've often thought just by observing the news that CHA [Chicago Housing Authority] in Chicago [Illinois], BHA, all the different Has [housing authorities] around the country seemed to be a quagmire for people that go in to make change.  Did you find that to be the case here or--
Speaker 2: You know, my--the Boston Housing Authority job, it--I mean, it--I was, it was like every place else.  So at one point, I had a piece of property on Townsend Street, and one morning, the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] went there and Margaret Burnham--you know who she is?  She is the woman--yeah, okay.  I can't think of anybody's name so I won't do it.  Anyway Margaret Burnham is one of the people who is a noted attorney.  She was my attorney, and nothing ever came of the FBI thing, but they did have these FBI people go to my house, and they did all their stuff, and it was all in the papers and, you know--
Speaker 1: What did they do?  I mean, what--
Speaker 2: They looked to see whether or not I had purchased some furnaces through the BHA, but I had made a bank loan and the bank, the bank (laughter) had its records, so it didn't work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you bought some furnaces otherwise?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With a bank loan and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --they were trying to investigate to see (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I didn't buy the furnaces.  What I did is, I switched them from oil to gas.  I had reconverted them is what it was called.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So nothing every came of that.  So there were a couple of things that I was, there was another thing.  What was it?  Can't believe I can't remember.  Anyway so nothing came of those and then one--and I was always in the paper for something and I was always referred to as the beleaguered (laughter) person.  And, so one day when I was doing a piece on Bromley-Heath [Mildred C. Hailey Apartments, Boston, Massachusetts], I was at Bromley-Heath, and the media covered the story, and I looked in the paper and, so, now it's like seven years later, and it said something about [HistoryMaker] Doris Bunte the beleaguered--and I--it was just more than I could handle, so I called The Globe [The Boston Globe] and I asked for the editor and I said, "I have a question."  And he said, "What's the question?"  And I said, "I want to know how long you're going to call me beleaguered.  I want to know if the rest of my--I need to know today if in twenty years if somebody writes a story about me from The Globe, is it going to say beleaguered, or will you stop it in two days?  Or is there somewhere in between like fifteen years or ten years or twelve."  I was so angry, I didn't know what to do.  And, so he said, "I'm sorry," and, so they never did it again (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah.
Speaker 2: But that's all it took, a phone call.  He said he didn't realize that it still said that.
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: But, so one day when I was not in the paper for thirty days in a row, I resigned because I wanted to resign during a period where I wasn't in the paper for anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What were--now this is a powerful position.  Was this the most powerful position you ever had, you think--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in politics?  What was the best part of it and what was the worst part?
Speaker 2: I loved the job.  It's the best job I've ever had, and what was wonderful is, I could make a difference in people's actual lives.  You can't beat that.  You can't beat that.  If you can be helpful, if you can help change somebody's life or the way they see their lives, it's a wonderful thing.  The worst part about it, if you're black and you have that kind of position, you're in it every day.  I mean, every week there's something new that--everybody's after you.  You can't keep that kind of job any period of time without people after you looking for something.  I mean, it's just, it's--no one ever found that I did anything wrong, but it gets to be not worth it.
Story_ID: 670189
Speaker 1: At a certain point, I have here that two black residents sued B--yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Liz Clinkscale [Elizabeth Clinkscales] and--what's the other one's name?
Speaker 1: There's a, there's a--
Speaker 2: Can't think of her name.
Speaker 1: --Tonia Bowman [ph.]?  Is that, is that--
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Tonia Bowman?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Not--okay.  Annie Hailey (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Ann- no, that's Mildred Hailey [Mildred C. Hailey].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  They got these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And Anna Mae Cole.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They had them mixed up, I guess.  Okay, but--
Speaker 2: Mildred Hailey and Anna Mae Cole are the two women from Bromley-Heath [Mildred C. Hailey Apartments, Boston, Massachusetts] who worked in Bromley-Heath for forty years of their lives, fifty years of their lives.  The complex is named after one of them, Mildred Hailey.  And the community room is named after the other one, Anna Cole.  Anna is still alive.  I talked to her today.
Speaker 1: And Mildred Hailey, and they were con- were they concerned about integrating white public housing or something?  Is that the suit?  Are we talking about the same one?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Those are wrong names.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So the names that you're looking for, I was right first, is Liz Clinkscale, and I can't think of the other one.  And they are the two women who were willing when I was going to desegregate public housing--that moved into South Boston [Boston, Massachusetts] at my request.  Well, they were the two next on the list, so the question is, would they go.  And, so I should tell you that when I first went to the housing authority [Boston Housing Authority] as the administrator, first thing I did is, I went to Barney Frank's committee in Washington [D.C.] asking for money to desegregate public housing in Boston [Massachusetts].  So it was on record that I had been there to ask for the money.  The Republican Party didn't like Ray Flynn [Raymond Flynn], the Republican Party in Massachusetts and, so a week before the mayor's reelection, they preferred charges in court.  They went to court and got subpoenas to subpoena the mayor and me as the head of the housing authority for running segregated housing.  Now we couldn't deny we had segregated housing 'cause I had already been there to ask for money to desegregate it (laughter).  But of course, the mayor was really ticked off and, so there was this big to do and, so we got sued.  The NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] joined in.  The NAACP--now Boston has been deseg- has been segregated in public housing for, what, a hundred years, but at that particular time--'cause the NAACP head people didn't like the mayor either.  So they joined in.  They didn't give me any notice.  They didn't say, "Hey, sister, heads up."  Nothing.  I found out when I got served and, so I got sued.  So, of course, we were segregated and, so we were found guilty, and people were paid.  But surprisingly enough, black people didn't get the money.  The people that--the money were the Asian people because it turns out that the Asian people had applied for the units in South Boston, in Charlestown [Boston, Massachusetts], which were segregated.  And the managers, who were then determining who gets in, didn't pick them.  They went over them.  And, so they're the ones who got the money.  The black people had not asked for South Boston and Charlestown because they were segregated, so they didn't ask for them.  So they weren't, they didn't go over them, so they didn't--weren't entitled to any money.  The only people of color who got any money is--because the court said to me, "When people applied for housing on an emergency basis, that was your big opportunity to put them in a development where they were in the minority."  So just 'cause you were down on your luck and you were emergency, I was supposed to put you in a development where you were either the only black person or the only white person when I didn't have any security money to protect you.  And I didn't do it.  And, so all those people who asked for emergency housing, black and white, who I put in a development of their choice, all got paid because I didn't put them in a development where they were in the minority.  How stupid is that?
Story_ID: 670190
Speaker 1: You left the Boston Housing Authority in 1992 and, so, now what did you do between 1992 and--well, what did you do afterwards?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Well, you know, it's really interesting.  It was very difficult to find work and it was difficult because people said that they thought of me as being difficult to have work under them.  And that's because, you know, I was so upfront at the BHA.  I've never been one for media.  I'm sort of media shy, but people took my leaving the BHA to mean that I had left under some circumstance, and I didn't.  I would, in fact, I waited until there were no circumstances to offer my resignation, but it wasn't--people didn't see it that way.  They thought, well, she's always been in the papers, so she must have done something type thing.  And, so they were reluctant to hire me.  I had a hard time finding work.  I then reached out and I did some work for the housing authority in San Francisco [San Francisco Housing Authority] for a minute.  You know, just a couple of training sessions.  I did a few training sessions different places and I hated it.  I didn't like working as a, as a contractor.
Speaker 1: Consultant.
Speaker 2: Consultant 'cause when I went into the office, and the people were sitting in the office sipping their coffee and talking on the phone, and they were getting--that was paid time, I wanted that back.  I didn't, I didn't like consultant work at all but I did it and then I--one of the community agencies I served on for eighteen years--I served with the president of Northeastern University [Boston, Massachusetts] and I told him I was looking for a job, and he said they were, they had a freeze going on but that there was one department, even though the department didn't have much money, I could go talk to that guy and maybe he could something to help me.  And I did, and it was a Richard Lapchick and, of course, he's a prominent sports person.  He's considered the conscience of sport these days.  And Richard said that he would have me come and work for him 'cause he didn't think that his organization, sport in society [Center for the Study of Sport in Society] at Northeastern, was well enough known in the community.  Unfortunately he didn't have any money so he could only take me on for one day a week at this time and, so I went to work for one day a week.  And then eventually it was two and then it was three.  And it was never more than four.
Speaker 1: Now--
Speaker 2: But I was there for ten years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I have a note here that you raised over $3 million.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That--is it true that you raised over $3 million when you were there?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did.  I did it through the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what kind of programs did that money support.
Speaker 2: It supported a, it supported a couple of programs that I thought were really important.  One that was called--I'm good unless you ask me a question, then I never know the answer for some reason or other.  One of the programs was called Project Teamwork and that's where a group of sports people, athletes, went out and--to the various schools and worked with kids on the theme of teamwork, and they were like, you know, no racism, no sexism, no all those isms and things.  So that was one of the programs.  And I can't think the name of the other one.  And it's about, it's about ensuring that athletes don't hit women.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: I can't think of the language I'm looking for at this moment, but it--they were two excellent programs.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there--now that's a reoccurring--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --theme amongst athletes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And they--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --they're still operating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, they're still going strong.
Speaker 1: And then, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --lots of national press (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I just can't think of the name of it.
Speaker 1: --about the professional athletes--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --hitting their girlfriends or their wives.
Speaker 2: And they, and they work with professional athletes and soldiers and they do everyone.
Speaker 1: Police officers and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Story_ID: 670191
Speaker 1: What (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Then I worked at BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I worked on a grant from--I worked on a federal grant that worked with residents in public housing.  I take the position that public housing residents are the last people to get any information about anything of importance.  The last people.  I mean, even a place like Dana-Farber [Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts], you know, who treats cancer victims like myself.  For years, they didn't advertise in the black community that they have services available, but lots of black people have cancer.  But if you don't know about it (laughter), you don't get to go there.  It's that kind of thing, whether it's marketing from a food store to a hospital, I maintain that public housing residents are the last to get information and, so this was a program where health information was given to public housing residents.  I'm still with public housing residents.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is this the Knowledge is Power program or is--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was through that same program that I worked at Boston University.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's the Committee for Health Promotion [Community Committee for Health Promotion].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now you retired from public life in 2010.  Is that true?  'Cause I don't know--
Speaker 2: Has it been six years?  Yeah, I didn't retire from public work, I just stopped getting paid.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now if--yeah.
Speaker 2: 'Cause that's what happens, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's what's--that could--we were talking on our way over here that you, that you were still busy.  The office is saying you're--
Speaker 2: I'm always busy (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) that you're always busy doing something anyway.
Speaker 2: I know.  It's amazing.
Speaker 1: Even though you may not be getting paid for it, you're still--
Speaker 2: I don't get paid for it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so at any rate--so--
Speaker 2: 'Cause nobody hires anybody who's eighty-three to do anything.  If you're eighty-three, people assume that you--it's a friend (laughter) or you--they, or they think someone younger must have that same information but that's not necessarily true.
Story_ID: 670192
Speaker 1: When you look today at the community today, especially in regards to public housing, what are some of your hopes and concerns?
Speaker 2: (Pause) My hopes are that something would happen where residents would be empowered--become knowledgeable because only if they do that, is it going to get better.  My concerns are--one that I've always had, which is that [U.S.] Congress really, really has never wanted to and doesn't now want to fund public housing and that's why it's never had a line item in the budget of its own and that's why it keeps getting less and less money.  I'm a very large President Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama] fan, and I hear people say all the time, "If he's so good, how come he doesn't do something for public housing?"  The fact of the matter is none of the people who are up close to him are public housing advocates and it--with no advocates to bring to his attention that it's needed, he has a way bigger job of things to think about than what's going on in public housing.  It is unfortunate that the head of HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development], however he [Julian Castro] got appointed, is not an advocate because right now public housing gets a smaller amount of money every year and, so they--all housing authorities right now are in the unfortunate position of having to look at every other pro- housing program that comes out of HUD and try it to see if it'll give them any more money than the regular operating subsidy because as it stands now, unless something changes, if it goes on like it is, there isn't going to be public housing.
Speaker 1: What do you think about the implosion of public housing beginning with way back with Pruitt Igoe [St. Louis, Missouri] going down and then all the Stateway Gardens [Chicago, Illinois], Robert Taylor Homes [Chicago, Illinois], Cabrini-Green [Cabrini-Green Homes, Chicago, Illinois], and I'm sure in this area similar--destruction of the high rise units to make way for a scattered site public housing with the Section 8 vouchers and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, it's like, it's like anything else.  It's about motivation.  As I said earlier, it's about motivation and intent.  If it was intended for it to survive, it would be adequately funded.  That's not the motivation.  The motivation is to get rid of it.  And, so in all the various ways that you let it rot or that you let it die or that you make it die or that you do whatever, it's all about what is it you want to happen to it?  And Congress has never wanted to fund public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, so--
Speaker 2: Not enough of their relatives have to live in it.
Story_ID: 670193
Speaker 1: Now you told me before we started the interview that public housing--the money for public housing, is attached to a NASA [National Aeronautics and Space Administration] appropriations bill.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the NASA line item in the budget has a write in, has a little amendment, and we're that little amendment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're not a line item.  We're a little amendment to a line item.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's inserted in there to protect public housing, you think or to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no, that's how we're funded.  It's funded through there, through NASA.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the, and the way it's written is, it goes to public, it goes to HUD [U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development] for public housing.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but do you, what do you think the reason for that is, that it's not--it doesn't have its own--
Speaker 2: It wasn't significant.  It wasn't of adequate significance.  Back then, and I'm going back a while now, it was an annoyance.  It was (laughter), it was not something that was meant to be.  I mean, it was considered a manageable enough small thing that it didn't need a line item so it was just tacked on there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But again I don't, I don't care what you build, I don't care what you make, if you don't put adequate funding in it to maintain it, then it can't stay.  The notion that people who are poor--I hate that term.  People who have inadequate resources are thought so little of that we don't care that they don't have a decent place to live.  Something's the matter with that.
Story_ID: 670194
Speaker 1: Now when you look back on all of your activities in public housing, what today would you consider to be your legacy in public housing?
Speaker 2: Resident empowerment.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And do you think that's--with so much of it scattered now--I mean, where does that leave the residents?
Speaker 2: Well, you know what that means?  The further you scatter it, the less likely it'll come together.  People don't want tenants to get together and be empowered.  So you scatter them all over the place.
Speaker 1: Now over the years, have you been like, have you worked in partnership with the community organizing groups?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Like, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there was a day, there was a time when residents were somewhat empowered, at least in Boston [Massachusetts].  I'll talk about Bos- no, not just Boston, everywhere, where you could hear about--what's her name?  Bertha Gilkey here and this one there and that one, the other one 'cause things were happening.  You know, everybody was talking the same talk and walking the same walk, and people were coming together and demanding that things be kept in some condition.  And it was happening.  People were listening.  The John Kennedys [John Fitzgerald Kennedy], all those people were here and, now people are all so scattered.  Nobody's coming together, nobody's demanding anything, and there's no one advocating.  You got to have an advocate talking to the president.  Of the people that advocate to the president, one of them has to be for public housing, and none of them are.  Public housing has become popular and important for its redevelopment possibilities, as opposed to ongoing regular public housing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Redevelopment for middle income and other people (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, that's where the money is.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's where the deals get done.
Speaker 1: --across the street from one in Chicago [Illinois] on Oakwood Boulevard just Sunday night, you know, and we were commenting about that used to be the projects and, now it's--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --a high rent district--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --so--
Speaker 2: And the whole notion that going from public housing to a situation where there's 10 percent low income, 20 percent moderate income and 70 percent market rate means no affordable housing net.  There's no net affordable housing.  The net is in the market rate.  So I know there are people who feel as though, oh, well, you know, if you mix low income people with other people, then their habits--I don't, I don't know whether they think it's the color or the habits or what's going to rub off, but none of that is going to happen.
Story_ID: 670195
Speaker 1: Now when you look back at everything you've done again, is there anything that you would do differently, if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: (Pause) What would I change?  I, you know, I don't know so much I would change things as I would, I would be more persistent in insisting that people get to understand what's going on and the role they play in it.  I mean, I'm, you know, I'm astounded by where we are.  I am just astounded.  It's not where we should be.  I, you know, I'm sitting in the middle of a place that's being gentrified.  I--it's hard for me to believe.
Speaker 1: Yeah, and the question is, where are the poor people going?
Speaker 2: They're going to the next place up.  I know where they're going.  They all (laughter), they have no choice.  You know what bothers me?  What trou- what really troubles me is this and, you know, when I die it's the one question I have for God.  Were they right or were we right?  'Cause I don't understand how you could feel as strongly as I do about the things that I do, and there's another group of people who feel equally as strong in the other direction.  One of us must be right.  I mean, this whole notion of how we're viewed like pawns.  If the people with money decide they want to live where we live, they just come buy it out, and we're pushed out.  And then after a period of time if they're tired and their kids have grown up and they want to come back where the action is, they take their money and they come and buy it back and push us out again.  What the hell are we?  I mean, are we the pawns?  Is that who we are?  Don't we count?  I don't understand how [U.S.] Congress sees it and I shouldn't say that because, you know, when I was in the legislature [Massachusetts Legislature], one of the wonderful things that it taught me is that I could go there with one set of knowledge, and people from someplace else could come with a different set of knowledge.  And they never have experienced what I have, and I never have experienced what they have.  And it's what I liked about the legislature because before television, before we had television in the chamber, we talked.  We went to the rostrum and we made our case.  We talked about the problems that the people had in our communities.  We talked about those things, and they talked, came and talked about what they have.  And they learned from us.  They told us they did.  That they had no, no knowledge that this was the case or that was the case.  They told us they learned from us.  That conversation passed when they brought in the television cameras.  Now people tell the people in their districts, "Watch at three o'clock 'cause I'm going to be talking about such and such."  And it's a different, it's a different thing than it was.  The relationships that you made, the people that you met, the people who actually listened because you know what, back then you went with an open mind.  You didn't know what you were going to hear, you had no clue.  Now everybody looks everything up on the Internet, so everybody thinks they know what's going on before they go there, so they don't go open.  So they don't hear, they don't exchange ideas.  People like me don't learn from the people who did different things, and the people who did different things don't learn from the people like me.  It's very different.  And I think it's sad in a lot of ways where we are today.
Speaker 1: Now the last question we have--well, before I ask that, is there anything I haven't asked you about that we need to discuss before I ask you that question.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, the last question is almost like legacy, a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As fair.  Not popular, but fair.
Story_ID: 670196
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) This is a photograph that--with Jackie--
Speaker 2: Joyner--
Speaker 1: --Joyner-Kersee [Jackie Joyner-Kersee]--that we received together actually, and it was presented to us by the national association of state representatives [National Black Caucus of State Legislators].
Speaker 2: Okay.  About what year is that, do you think?  Is it in the '90s [1990s], do you think, early '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 1: Is it on the back by any chance?
Speaker 2: No, it is not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Then I don't know.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  O-one [2001] I think.  I think it says, '01 [2001].
Speaker 1: This is one of my favorite photos.  I'm going to do left to right.  Senator Bill Owens and behind him, Representative Mel King [HistoryMaker Melvin King], and the--you want to do this?  The next gentlemen's name, I can't recall.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The congressman in the center was brought here as an inspiration.  He's quite a, quite an up and coming congressman.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Of course, beside him is my friend, Barney Frank and behind him is State Representative Byron Rushing [HistoryMaker Byron Rushing] and then, of course, I'm honored to be with them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is not one of my favorite photographs, but it is some of my favorite people.  This is me and my, three of my nine great-grandchildren.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  So would you care to name them?
Speaker 1: Yes, to the left is Jasmine [ph.], in the back is B.J. [ph.] and to the right of the photo is Nia [ph.].
Speaker 2: In the center with her tongue out is my daughter, Yvette [ph.], when she was a baby, to the left is my mother-in-law, Jacqueline Bunte [Jacqueline Nevius Bunte]--oh, magnificent woman, and I.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is one of the few pictures that I know of my aunt, my mother's sister, Beatrice Watson [Beatrice Johnson], who was a noted kosher caterer in Brooklyn, New York.
Speaker 1: Now in the front is my--well, these are four actually of my great grandchildren.  To the right is a young man, my great-grandson, whose--my grandson actually whose name is Britt Allen [ph.] who is currently six foot seven inches tall and to the left are my two nieces and a nephew.  So it's B.J., Latoya [ph.] and Ja- not Jasmine.  Can't think of her name.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is a picture of me on a windy Sunday, Mother's Day, to be specific.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a favorite photo.  This is a picture of my sister, who--well, two of my sisters, actually.  And my sister in the white, her name is Ahada [Ahada Rashid].  She passed away.  She was my sister and my best friend.  In the black top is my other sister, Gloria [Gloria Brown Shepard], who also passed away and her daughter, Jeanne [Jeanne Manley].
Speaker 2: This is a family gathering, and I am not going to name all of the names.
Speaker 1: Okay.  About what year is this, you think?
Speaker 2: Oh, wow, this is my sexy photo, if there is such a thing.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my son, Allen [ph.], and this was taken in 2007.  He passed away in two thou- well, this is in 2006.  He passed away in 2007.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: My treasure, my mom, Evelyn Brown [Evelyn Johnson Brown].  Great lady.
Speaker 1: This is the last one.
Speaker 2: On the right is a picture of my daughter, Yvette, and me and on the left is a picture of--to the left, my sister, Ahada, my favorite best friend, my sister, Gloria, whom I also loved obviously and my brother, Herby [Herbert R. Brown].  They've all passed away.  And me.
