Story_ID: 28030
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm the interviewer today with the HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Matthew Hickey. Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Okay. My name is Joanne Eileen Berger-Sweeney. Berger-Sweeney is hyphenated. Joanne is J-O-A-N-N-E, Eileen, E-I-L-E-E-N. My last name, hyphenated, Berger-Sweeney is, B-E-R-G-E-R, hyphen, S-W-E-E-N-E-Y. My maiden name is Sweeney.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. So it's reversed from what most people with their maiden names.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Is there a story behind this?
Speaker 2: Sometimes I say to people, "Would you want to be a Sweeney-Berger." And so my husband's name is Berger, and he's from Switzerland, and actually, in Switzerland, they usually have the husband's name hyphenated, the wife's name. So it's more traditional Swiss.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's a good question. "Would you want to be a Sweeney-Berger?"
Speaker 2: (Laughs). Yeah. But the combination of the two.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My date of birth is September 21, 1958, and I was born in Los Angeles, California, and I'm the only one of my siblings who was actually born in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: So currently, I'm dean of the School of Arts and Sciences at Tufts University. I'm also a professor of biology; an adjunct professor of psychology; and professor, secondary, in public and--public health and community medicine. All at Tufts University.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April 23, I think, 2013.
Story_ID: 28031
Speaker 1: So, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight questions we ask as kind of a warm-up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only require a short answer. The first one is: Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Do I have a favorite food? I like a lot of food, but probably my favorite food is fish. I love fish in every form.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Salmon. I love sushi. I love swordfish. I just love fish.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue. I'm wearing blue. Blue is my favorite color as is the color of the office--of my office here that was painted.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year here in New England is fall. I love the trees turning, the cool weather, the position of the sun. I think fall is just beautiful.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I think my favorite vacation was one that we took to Istanbul, and what I particularly liked about Istanbul was the fact that it was so important in different times in history. It was the Byzantium that was very important. And so in early--very early Christendom, Byzantium, it was important also, and, you know, for Muslims. And so I just loved Istanbul. I would say my second favorite was, last summer we went to the Galapagos Islands. And, of course, most people know the Galapagos because of Charles Darwin. And as a biologist, the Galapagos are a kind a Mecca.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. And the last question is: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I can't think of a favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Sorry. Nothing in particular comes to mind.
Story_ID: 28032
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Arminta Odessa Parks-Sweeney. So her maiden name was Parks and Sweeney was her married name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: Arminta, A-R-M-I-N-T-A, Odessa, O-D-E-S-S-A, Parks, P-A-R-K-S, and Sweeney, S-W-E-E-N-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Now, is that--is there a story behind your mother's name, Arminta Odessa?
Speaker 2: Yes. I don't know much about the Odessa part, but Arminta was--she was named after a favorite aunt, Aunt Ari. And--but most people called her Mint. So that was a family name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.
Speaker 2: I don't know about the Odessa, and then Parks was her parents' name.
Speaker 1: And what is your mother's date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born in Atlanta, Georgia. She was born June 26, 1929.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, how far back can you trace your mother's side of the family, and what were the stories about on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Right. So, I do know a few stories about my mother's side of the family. First of all, my mother and father--so my parents went to Clark Atlanta College. And both of their parents went to Clark Atlanta--both of my mother's parents went to Clark Atlanta, and they told me that the grandparents went to Clark Atlanta when it was just a two-year college. So a tradition of college education. College education was very important for her family.
Speaker 1: So this goes all the way back to the late nineteenth century, at least, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. Exactly. So I heard, you know, post-slavery, they became educated. My mother's father originally taught English, and during the Depression, you know, they were laying lots of teachers, and worked in the Post Office, and so ended up being the head of the Post Office of his local area. And his wife, my grandmother, was a housewife. I also heard stories of my mother's aunt, and her name was Clara, and her husband's name was Eugene, and they lived in Opelika, Alabama. They moved from Atlanta to Opelika. And Eugene was a physician, and also apparently owned a drugstore, a pharmacy store, there in Opelika. And Aunt Clara, I have pictures or I've seen pictures of her in a very grand, brick faced house with large columns, so they were considered quite wealthy in their era with a very large house, but they never had any children. And so my mother and her sister, whose name was Clara Jean, after Clara, Aunt Clara and Uncle Eugene, you know, eventually inherited all of the things from their aunt because they didn't have children.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, what was your--what was the last name of your uncle and aunt?
Speaker 2: You know, I can't remember. I can't remember Clara and Eugene's last name. My aunt would be very embarrassed that I don't remember their last name, but I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And what where their last--what were the full names of your grandmother and grandfather?
Speaker 2: So, my grandfather was Edward Parks. I don't know his middle name. And my mother--my grandmother was Lillian Parks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I don't remember her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Okay. Opelika, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Opelika.
Speaker 1: That's not too far from Tuskegee.
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I've never been there.
Speaker 1: We were there a couple of years ago. It's not too far. I know it's on the route.
Speaker 2: And my cousin--my first cousin, so my mother's sister, Clara Jean, had three children, and her youngest child is Darryl Pinkney (sp.), and he is a writer and a bit the family historian. So he knows much more about my mother's side and the family history than I do. But he has a book that was written by one of my grandmother's relatives, who was a preacher, and it was a book of kind of voodoo medicine. So he was a physician, and writer, and preacher. Also, I know that my cousin--my grandmother's first cousin was Sterling Brown, the famous poet, African-American poet, is my grandmother's first cousin.
Speaker 1: This is Lillian Parks' first cousin?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Lillian Park's first cousin.
Speaker 1: The great Sterling Brown, right?
Speaker 2: Yes. The great Sterling Brown. So I did grow up with, you know, Sterling Brown poems realizing the rich history and the importance of education in my mother's side of the family. And as I said, you know, I was always told there were three generations of college educated, you know, people in our family.
Story_ID: 28033
Speaker 1: It sounds like a really rich family in terms of education.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: We heard a lot stories about Sterling Brown at Howard [University], you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Exactly. And also, my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] grew up in Atlanta, Georgia, and at the time of Martin Luther King. And she said she went to middle school, junior high school with Martin Luther King, and she remembered him in junior high school. I think she said the name of the School of Laboratory Junior High School, but she was in Atlanta, Georgia, and she was a schoolmate, and she remembered stories of Martin Luther King. So she was clearly in a class with him. And apparently, she told a story of--my mother told a story of one day the teacher was called out of the room during a test, and, you know, well, all the junior high school children were taking a test. And he came back into the room after having been called out and said, "Okay. Everybody, you know, throw away your exams. You know, I've been out of the room. I couldn't monitor what you're doing." And she said, young Martin Luther King stood up and said, "I didn't cheat on this exam. It should not be thrown out." So already he was starting to, you know, protest things that he didn't think were fair. So that was a story my mother told me, you know, while growing up in Atlanta. And she also said that she and her sister, Clara Jean, used to sit on the front steps of their house in Atlanta, Georgia, and W.E.B Du Bois would walk by every morning, tip his hat and say, "Good morning, girls. Good morning, ladies." So she grew up in the Atlanta of, you know, the history books, and was always very, very proud to be from Atlanta, to be from the South, and to be a part of, you know, obviously what W.E.B Du Bois would call the "talented tenth;" unquestionably part of the educated elite of Atlanta. She would also tell stories that my grandfather Edward Parks was darker, skin color, than my grandmother Lillian Parks, and that some of Lillian's family members were disappointed that she was marrying a dark-skinned man, because her sister, Clara, had married a physician and Uncle Eugene, who was lighter-skinned. So there was definitely also in that era, you know, a time of segregation amongst blacks between the lighter-skinned and the darker-skinned. But she married, you know, Edward anyway, and, you know, they lived happily and raised two girls in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So those are kind of the--those are the stories I remember from my mother.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother went to Clark, and--
Speaker 2: Exactly. Clark Atlanta [University] for an undergraduate degree as did my father. And my father had come from--had grown up in New York City in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Now, let's go--well, if it's time to go to him, we'll--
Speaker 2: No. We'll stay on my mother. After she finished her bachelor's at Clark Atlanta, she did a master's at Atlanta University; a master's in sociology.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my parents were married in 1949 in, I believe it was June of 1949. And my mother had graduated from college at the age of 19 and was married a couple of weeks after she finished college.
Speaker 1: After she finished her B.A. or what?
Speaker 2: After she finished her B.A.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And then she went on immediately and got a one-year master's at Atlanta University.
Speaker 1: Was it pretty common in those days, I guess, to skip students ahead, because I know Dr. King [Martin Luther King Jr.] attended Morehouse [College] at age 16.
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: So if you were bright, you--
Speaker 2: So I guess if you were bright, you moved through the system faster. And my mother graduated younger than my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think he graduated the year later, so, which is why she stayed and did her master's in Atlanta University. And by 1950, my first brother was born; in December of 1950.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he was born in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 28034
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: So, my father's full name is Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born June 21st, 1921. He was born in Cincinnati, Ohio, and they didn't--but they didn't live in Cincinnati for that long.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, I'll tell you a little bit about--what I know about his side of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The first thing I will tell you is that I have heard that our name, Sweeney, was, in fact, not the name of a slave owner, but, in fact, the name of an abolitionist lawyer, who came from Ireland and married a slave. And that that's where the name Sweeney came from. So it actually--apparently, you know, we had an ancestor who came over from Ireland and married a slave, and that was the name of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Now, was this marriage in Cincinnati [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I don't know. I'm not sure where it was, but that's kind of one of those old tales from my great aunt. The other thing I know about my father's side is his father was Samuel Albert Sweeney. He was a preacher. He went to Oberlin. Apparently, Oberlin College in Ohio had a seminary attached to it, and he graduated from seminary there. He was half-white, so he was, you know, very fair skinned. And I am not remembering my grandmother's name. I hope it comes to me during this interview. But I heard she had Native American roots and long hair that she could sit on. And she was not college educated, but Samuel was. So apparently, my grandfather, Reverent Sweeney, was a member or preached at the largest black Methodist Church in Chicago [Illinois], and was pulled from there to become the minister of the largest black church in New York and that was in Harlem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: This is a regular Methodist--this is not the AME [African Methodist Episcopal] or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly. Not AME, but what is now United Methodist.
Speaker 1: Oka.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--my goodness. I'm just forgetting.
Speaker 1: Now, he was an important clergyman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He was--exactly.
Speaker 1: The largest church.
Speaker 2: A very important clergyman. Now, interesting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Because you're assigned those churches in the Methodist Church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right. Exactly. Exactly.
Speaker 1: --because they're trying to put their best person at the biggest churches.
Speaker 2: Exactly. And I was told that my grandmother, Alberta was her name, I'm almost positive it was Alberta Sweeney, was his second wife. And because he had been divorced, that he was unlikely to ever be a bishop in the Methodist Church. So he was assigned the largest black church in New York City, but he would never become a bishop, because he had been divorced. And I do not believe that that marriage led to any children. He had four children with my grandmother, and my father was the third of four children, and he was the youngest boy. The oldest boy was Samuel, and Samuel went to World War II and, apparently, he was the smartest and most handsome of the four boys. He went to World War II and came back with, I guess what would be called now, Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and was, you know, never able to hold a job.
Speaker 1: That's what they used to call shell shocked.
Speaker 2: Shell shocked. Exactly. He came back shell shocked and was unable, you know, really to hold a job. The second son, John Albert Sweeney, after the war, went to Germany and got a Ph.D. in organ music from the University of Heidelberg; was a quite well-known organist, and went and sent his career at Morgan State University in Baltimore, Maryland. So he was a professor his entire life. And he told me he had offers when he came back from Germany at some of the white, more prestigious colleges. But, actually, the black colleges, like, Morgan State, paid more money to their professors than these white institutions would. So he went and spent his entire career at Morgan State University as their chief organist.
Story_ID: 28035
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father [Paul Wesley Sweeney] was the third of the three, and he went to--he grew up for the most part in Harlem [New York] at his father's church; and was a basketball player known--apparently, very, very good basketball player--I've seen pictures of him in his public high school at--in New York City, and from there went to Clark Atlanta and became (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So, do you know what high school he went to?
Speaker 2: I don't.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know it was one of the public schools. And I--you know, it's unfortunate. I'm sure my brother can tell you which public high school it was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was one of the public schools in New York City, and he went down and played for Clark Atlanta [University], and was known as the "Yankee Flash." So he played varsity basketball at Clark Atlanta, and that's where my parents met. The youngest sister, her name was Elizabeth. And Elizabeth--let's see. Elizabeth ended up marrying Julian Wilkins. And so my first cousin is David Wilkins, who's a professor at Harvard Law School, and his mother Elizabeth, I believe, went to Hunter College as an undergraduate, and then got a master's in music at Smith. So, I mean, to be honest, we're a very, very educated family. Now, my father, after--I know my father went to the war. I don't know how long, and I believe he was in the Navy. So he actually graduated a year after my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks]. So they got married after my mother finished college, but my father was still in college. And he completed Clark Atlanta, and then went to Howard [University] Law School, and that would have been about 1950; and studied under the same professor as Thurgood Marshall.
Speaker 1: It's Charles Hamilton Houston, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So he was part of the group that studied under Charles Hamilton Houston (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes, he was.
Speaker 1: --the famous civil--well, a lot of them became the famous Civil Rights (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Civil Rights attorneys.
Speaker 1: --cohorts (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly. And my grand--and my father--let's see, graduated as salutatorian of his law school at Howard. So he was a lawyer. And, apparently, the day after he graduated law school, he said, "We're moving--we're migrating to California." And he got in his car and drove to Los Angeles. And his first job was with the Urban League in Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 28036
Speaker 1: Now, do you know why your father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.] decided to move to Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: I'm not positive why, but it's really interesting. Right now I'm reading the book, "The Warmth of Other Sons," by Isabel Wilkerson, and she is talking about the great number of blacks that are migrating from the South between the 1920s and the 1970s. And I'm now seeing my father's desire to leave Washington, D.C., and move west as probably part of this migration to leave the South, to leave the prejudice, the Jim Crow system, and to move to land of opportunity, which many of them considered the North and also the West. So my second brother--my first brother was born in Atlanta in 1950; my second brother was born in Washington, D.C., while my father was in law school. And then they moved to California, and I was born in California; the only of the three children in 1958.
Story_ID: 28037
Speaker 1: The one other thing that I know is--so, after leaving Clark Atlanta [University], I said both of my parents moved to Washington, D.C., where my father [Paul Wesley Sweeney] was in law school. And my mother's [Arminta Odessa Parks] sister, Clara Jean, was also in Washington, D.C., at the time, because her husband, Orillius Dewey Pinkney, Jr. (ph.), had gone. My aunt Clara Jean went to Spelman [College], and her husband A.D. Pinkney, went to Morehouse [College]. And they moved to Washington, D.C., because A.D. Pinkney went to dental school at Howard [University]. So the two husbands of the two sisters were at Howard University getting their graduate degrees. And I believe that the families were living in very close proximity to each other so that the young children, the cousins, were able to play together--this was all before I was born--in Washington, D.C. And then my aunt and her husband migrated to Indianapolis, Indiana, and he started a dental practice there. And then my father--and he apparently drove out independently, and my mother and the two children took the train later out to Los Angeles where they settled. And that would have probably been around 1953. Somewhere between '53 [1953] and '54 [1954]. And so my father's first job, apparently, was with the Urban League. But he decided relatively soon, I don't know after how many years, to set up private practice.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And he was a, you know, independent lawyer in private practice in Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 28038
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --their sense of humor, the way they walk, talk--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --the way they look--
Speaker 2: Yep. Yep.
Speaker 1: --their height, everything--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I honest believe that I am a blend of my parents. I'm shorter than my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks], but my build is probably similar to my mother's. If you look at pictures of my mother, and I think my husband will be able to bring in some of those pictures, there's no doubt that I am her daughter; I look quite a bit like my mother. But I also have--I look like my father [Paul Wesley Sweeney] also. So I think I look like a blend of the two. In terms of personalities, I think of my father as being an adventurer. I mean, he went from New York to Atlanta [Georgia]; from Atlanta to Washington, D.C.; decided to become a lawyer, when I heard that he was slated to go work in my uncle's drugstore in Opelika, Alabama. Apparently, I read one of the notices from their wedding, and they said, "And after he graduates, they're going to move to Opelika and take over, you know, the drugstore from my uncle. But he clearly had something else in mind; decided he was going to become a lawyer, and he was absolutely fearless. And I think the fearless part of my personality unquestionably comes from my father. He was--everyone said, "as smart as a whip." He ended up number two in his class at Howard University. I think of my parents were very, very intelligent. My father was an adventurer, and I took a bit after his adventurous spirit. My mother was the calm, steady person who--I tell people about my mother. She would wake her three children up everyone morning and say, "You can be anything you want to be." Each and every one of us, she told us, "You can be anything you want to be. You have absolutely no restrictions in your life." And so, each of us grew up convinced that we could do whatever we want to do in life. And I think that the success--any success that I've had , and the success that my brothers have had is based on the fact that we grew up every single day believing that we could do anything that we wanted to do. So, you know, I had great parents. My parents divorced when I was probably around 13 years old, but they remained having very amicable relations. He always had a key to our house. You know, he was around and about, but they went their separate ways when I was in high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my mother was the steady person, always there. And my father says that all of us, you know, worshipped the ground that she walked on. But she was really a pretty amazing person. I don't think she ever expected to work in her life. She came from an Atlantist [of Atlanta] society in which her mother was a housewife, and those were her expectations. But it turns out to, you know, help support her family to create a better life for her children, she actually started working. And she worked for the Angeles Girl Scout Council in Los Angeles [California] and worked her way up to become executive director of Angeles Girl Scout Council. And at that time, in the early- to mid-1970s, she was the only African-American executive director of a major metropolitan area Girl Scout council. They had invited her to come back to central headquarters in New York, but she chose not to do that, but just stay in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay. So she put her degree to use.
Speaker 2: Exactly. So, you know, she did quite well with her degree.
Story_ID: 28039
Speaker 1: Now, can you go back, and I know you named your brothers and sisters before, I guess--
Speaker 2: My brother.
Speaker 1: --but, so you're the youngest, right?
Speaker 2: I am the youngest of three. And I have two older brothers.
Speaker 1: Brothers. Okay.
Speaker 2: So my oldest brother is Paul Wesley Sweeney, Jr., and he was born in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1950; December 11, 1950. He has an undergraduate degree from University of Southern California, and then he has a law degree from Columbia University. So he's an attorney and he's currently managing attorney for a law practice in Los Angeles [California], a corporate law firm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My middle brother, or the middle of the three children, is John Edward Sweeney, and he also went to USC. He played junior varsity basketball there, the real athlete of the family; tried out, unsuccessfully, though for the Los Angeles Dodgers, and then he also went to law school in Southern California and is a practicing attorney, private practice. And he studied with--he worked for a number of years with Johnnie Cochran, and then went out on his own and does both personal injury and criminal law. So both of my brothers still live or live in Los Angeles, California, even though one was in New York and then Washington, D.C., before moving back to Los Angeles. So I'm the only of the three who doesn't live permanently in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28040
Speaker 1: Now, where did your family live in Los Angeles [California]? Did you live in the same place basically the whole time?
Speaker 2: No. We moved around. We lived, initially, in the flatlands of Los Angeles on a street called Palm Grove off of Adams.
Speaker 1: The flatlands, now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I call them the flatlands. Then we moved to an area called, Baldwin Hills, and that's where most of the black doctors and lawyers lived in the 1960s in Los Angeles. And we lived there for a number of years. That's when I was in elementary school, and I guess when my brothers were in junior high school and high school. They're seven and eight years older than I am, so we were kind of different generations of middle school and high school. And then when I was in junior high school, we moved to Inglewood, California, which is close to the airport. And we moved there for the school system. Apparently, the quality of the school system was very, very good in Inglewood. But I lived in Inglewood or--and went to high school between 1971and 1975. I went to a high school called Morningside High School. And during that four-year period, Morningside high school changed from a predominantly white school that within four years was about 98 percent black and 2 percent Hispanic. So a complete changeover in the four years in the four years I was there. So while we moved there for the quality of the schools, by the time I left, it was all black, and the initiation of the some of the gangs like the Crips and the Bloods started, and Morningside High School was one of those high schools that was the initiators of the gang warfare; and hence, by the time I left high school, there were people who had been killed by gun warfare. That's part of my high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Inglewood has been, I guess, covered in a number of movies in terms of gangs (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: I know there's one movie about the neighborhood over there--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and a guy goes to a basketball game at the Forum--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm. Exactly.
Speaker 1: --and his car won't start, and they--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --he's surrounded by--
Speaker 2: Exactly. Exactly.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Whereas, that was--that's the Inglewood of now. And it was starting to, you know, go down certainly while I was in high school. But the Inglewood that I grew up in, and the Inglewood that we moved to, was a very different place. In fact, when we first moved into the neighborhood, it was--my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] told me the story. It was the first or second weekend that we were in Inglewood, and someone knocked on the door and was passing out flyers, and the person gave my mother kind of a shocked look, my mother said, and then kind of handed her the brochure anyway and walked away. And the brochure said, "Keep our neighborhood white." So that was the Inglewood that we moved into. But nine years later, as I as leaving high school, no one would have recognized that Inglewood.
Story_ID: 28041
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory was sitting on my mother's [Arminta Odessa Parks] Falcon [car] in the driveway of our house and falling off of it, and losing my two front teeth, and being bucktooth for the next, you know, couple of years until my permanent teeth grew in. I mean, those were obvious--those were my childhood teeth. But--
Speaker 1: This is a lawn ornament or something, a falcon?
Speaker 2: Oh, the Falcon is the car.
Speaker 1: Oh, the car.
Speaker 2: She had a white Falcon, and I was sitting on the top of her white Falcon car--
Speaker 1: A Ford Falcon.
Speaker 2: Ford Falcon. And I fell over and lost my two front teeth. And my brothers teased me about not having front teeth for, you know, the next, you know, year, or year and a half; I can't remember how long. But, you know, I had to have been less than, you know, four or five at the time. And that's kind of my earliest real memory. I think the other memories that I have are--you know, they may have been implanted memories that you hear stories that your brothers tell so often that you think they're your memories. But our family, my father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.] used to love to go camping. And we had a camper, and we used to all go up to Mount Baldy outside of Los Angeles [California] and go camping. And I remember, you know, our camping trips when I was there, you know. All three of us out in the woods. So we were kind of, you know, outdoor adventurers. I remember that as a relatively memory. And then I remember, it must have been in 1963 or '64 [1964], my father drove me and the three kids from Los Angeles cross-country to New York in his black Cadillac that had a sun--not a sunroof; those were convertibles in those days--and we drove cross-country to visit his parents, who still lived in New York City. And my mother needed to work, so she stayed behind. And that was the summer of the L.A. Watts Riots. So whatever year that was, was the year that the rest of us were trekking across country, and my mother was in Los Angeles working, and it was the summer of the riots.
Speaker 1: I believe this is 1965.
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]?
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: Was it that late?
Speaker 1: Sixty-five [1965] or '66 [1966], yeah.
Speaker 2: It wasn't '66 [1966]. I don't think I was that old. But maybe it was '65 [1965], so that I would have been--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --probably six years old that year, and that was the year that my father drove us across country, and that--
Speaker 1: Yeah. It would have been '65 [1965]. Summer of '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Sixty-five [1965]. Summer of '65 [1965].
Speaker 1: I remember I was in the hospital with a broken knee in '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Okay. So summer of '65 [1965]. You know, so I also remember I would have been a six-year-old. That would have been the summer before I turned seven, I think. Yes.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Early 1958. And so we drove cross-country and visited our first cousins in Chicago [Illinois], and that was my cousin--Carolyn, David, Steven and Timothy Wilkins. And they lived in Chicago. And then we went to Indianapolis [Indiana] to visit my aunt Clara and Uncle Eugene and their three children; Patricia, Donna and Darryl Pinkney. And those--that was the first time that I'd met my first cousins, because we were living out in Los Angeles, and in the early- to mid-1960s, you know. It's not like now where people hope on a plane and fly back and forth across the country. People just didn't do that. So that was my first trip to the East Coast, and the first time I had an opportunity to meet those cousins. And I hadn't realized it, but they thought the fact that we were growing up in Los Angeles where Hollywood was, that we were the glamorous cousins (laughs), and they were, you know, the mid-West cousins; and we were the glamorous cousins, so.
Speaker 1: That's right. Los Angeles has that aura (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It had that aura. It still does. Right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: It doesn't snow, you know.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Disneyland is there.
Speaker 2: Disneyland. Yep.
Speaker 1: Kids were focused on that.
Speaker 2: Yep. So, and, you know, I remember I had many pictures of Disneyland. It felt like we went almost every year while I was growing up, to Disneyland.
Story_ID: 28042
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of what?
Speaker 1: Sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: Of growing up. Sights of palm trees and sunshine, you know, are sprinkled through my early memories. I remember being a good skateboarder and enjoying skateboarding. I remember the sights of church. We went to Holman Methodist Church, so, you know, the fact that probably my father was the son of a preacher, I grew up going to church pretty much every week of my life. I remember very few weekends not going to church. But it was almost always with my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks]. I mean, she was really--we would go to Holman Methodist Church, which was the largest black Methodist Church at the time. And it was an incredible, incredible place to grow up. So it was being kind of the largest black Methodist Church in Los Angeles [California]. I remember seeing Dr. Martin Luther King came to our church to preach. Jessie Jackson certainly came multiple times to our church to preach. The minister that I grew up with--actually, most--the first was Reverend L.L. White in my, probably, elementary school years. And then my middle school and high school years it was Reverend Jim Lawson. And James Lawson went to seminary at Boston University with Martin Luther King and was very much a Civil Rights activist. So I grew up absolutely in the Civil Rights Era and hearing from the pulpit every week about Civil Rights. I thought that's what everybody heard when they went to church. I mean, Civil Rights and activism was what I heard every week growing up from the ministers of Holman Methodist Church. So I felt as though I grew up very much in the Civil Rights Era. My mother was very proud of being a Southerner from Atlanta [Georgia]; would very often talk about prejudice and having grown up in that era, and how the difference between overt and subtle prejudices. And I remember one time we were driving in California, and there was some sign in--not in Los Angeles proper, but as we were maybe driving towards Las Vegas [Nevada], you know, "Whites Only," water fountain, and you know, "Colored" water fountain, and she was taking pride of standing, and we had to take a picture of her, you know, drinking out of the "White" water fountain there in--you know, on the outskirts of either California--I think we were probably either heading towards Mount Baldy or, you know, one of those places, or Las Vegas. We would drive those. So, you know, some of the memories I have are growing up in the Civil Rights Era and sunshine. California was beautiful, everybody had their own houses. I feel like I remember growing up with parents who were open-minded, Civil Rights activists; cared a lot about education. I never even imagined that I wouldn't go to college or get a secondary degree. I just--I couldn't even imagine, because that was the Los Angeles that I grew up in. I grew up in a very tight-knit church family. Even though we didn't live within walking distance of the church, it was kind of one of those places of where all the well-educated black people came and would wear hats on Sundays and, you know, listened to Civil Rights activism. And I remember every week what was traditional in our church was to sing Negro spirituals and to sing high hymns. So it wasn't a church in which there was gospel music. I didn't learn about gospel music really until I was more of a teenager. But I grew up on Negro spirituals, and I grew up on traditional Methodist hymns. So, you know, sights and sounds and smells, the ocean. I mean, growing up in Los Angeles, my mother loved the ocean. And so, you know, the ocean is a part of my blood, and I feel wherever I live, I need to be close to an ocean, because I just remember the sights and smells, being able to bike from where I lived down to the ocean.
Speaker 1: Was there a particular beach you would (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: We would go to, kind of Playa del Rey, Marina del Rey, which was straight down from--I lived off of Century Boulevard in Inglewood [California], and when I was in high school, you know, during the summer my friends and I would bike down to Playa del Rey and be able to bike along the bike path there. So, those are some of the sights and sounds and smells of my--you know, outdoor camping, I was a Girl Scout because my mother was involved in the Girl Scouts, so I went camping every summer and, you know. Those are--I just remember being outdoors and at the beach, and it just felt like I was outdoors all the time. It was sunny in Southern California; grew up running around and just being outside and playing.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you mentioned Reverend James Lawson.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was organizer of the Freedom Rides in Nashville [Tennessee]. Really a hero.
Speaker 2: That's where I--that is how and where I grew up. And I believe James Lawson also married James Earl Ray much later, you know, the killer of Martin Luther King. So he remained tightly involved in the Civil Rights Movement his entire life; and still, he's still alive. So that's the Los Angeles that I grew up in.
Story_ID: 28043
Speaker 1: Where did you start school? What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Virginia Rhode Elementary School. As I said, in the flatlands.
Speaker 1: Elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yep. And then I went to--
Speaker 1: Well, let's just start with--let's start there (laughs).
Speaker 2: Do I remember?
Speaker 1: And then--so you went there for kindergarten or--
Speaker 2: I went there--no. Kindergarten through all of elementary school, I was at Virginia Rhode.
Speaker 1: Oh. Okay. Alright. Now, do you remember your first, I guess, experience with science? Did it happen in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I do not remember science in elementary school. No. I don't remember that much about my elementary school. I skipped two half grades in elementary school. And I think it was a mistake on a report card where I came home from school, and it said that I was supposed to go to--I think classes went--you went 4B and then 4A. I don't know why they were reversed, but I think they were reversed. And I looked on my report card and it said I was supposed to be going from, I want to say, you know, 3B to 4A. It might have been 4A, you know, to--or from 4B to 5B. And I brought it home to my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks], and I said, "I'm not supposed to be, you know, going to that grade. I'm supposed to be going to a different grade." And my mother went into school and they said, "You know, she's smart. Maybe we should just skip her the whole year." And I got skipped a year in elementary school. So I kind of remember being skipped. I remember I started wearing glasses in elementary school. So my brothers would call me "four eyed." I remember, you know, being short, and so I was never the first one picked for the sports teams. And I remember liking to read. But I don't remember elementary school and science in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay. What were you interested in, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember. I just--I kind of remember liking to read, but that's about it.
Speaker 1: Okay. Did you have a favorite subject matter to read or just (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: I don't--I just--for some reason, I just don't have strong memories from elementary school. My stronger memories start in middle school. I know that I--in elementary school, I did play piano. And I remember one of my piano teachers was Mrs. Wade, and I would--she lived in a house or maybe it wasn't her house--but we would have our recitals in--on a Grand piano in someone's house. And I was always, you know, quite good and quite bright. And I, you know, everyone would say to my mother, "Oh, you have such a sweet little girl." And she said, "Oh, you know, she's sweet to all of you, but get her home screaming with her brothers and, you know, she's a different person." So.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28044
Speaker 1: Now, you said the family went to Disneyland a lot.
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And one of the features that I remember growing up, Walt Disney Productions in Disneyland was an emphasis on the future and on nature; they had, like, a nature program--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --on, you know, on periodically and had a part of Disneyland devoted to science and technology.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Did you remember--
Speaker 2: I don't remember that. I do know when Disneyland first opened, blacks weren't allowed to go in. And I--you know, so having grown up in the Civil Rights Era, my family certainly recognized that, so that in our early years, we weren't able to go to Disneyland. We--and we heard Walt Disney was prejudice, you know, probably because he set, you know, those kinds of rules for the park. But, clearly by the time I was eight years old or so, blacks must have been allowed into Disneyland because I have memories of being relatively young and seeing pictures of all us, you know, at Disneyland, at least by the time I was, I should say, nine or ten.
Speaker 1: This is interesting to hear this institution, this national sort of institution or enterprise in Los Angeles [California], is a--can get away with--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --barring black people.
Speaker 2: Right. At the very beginning.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we should look up the history because I remember, you know, hearing that. And I also remember growing up never eating grapes, because my Mother [Arminta Odessa Parks]--because Cesar Chavez, you know, "stand with us grape pickers," and I probably never had a grape until, you know, I was in junior high school, or something, or whenever he called off the ban. But as long as there was a ban, my mother was standing with, you know, the migrant farm workers and not eating and buying grapes.
Speaker 1: Yeah. The United Farm Workers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --Cesar Chavez.
Speaker 2: Yep. Exactly.
Speaker 1: Yeah. He's a hero for the farm workers.
Speaker 2: Yep. Exactly.
Story_ID: 28045
Speaker 1: Were your parents involved in--well, I know your father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.] joined--well, he worked for them.
Speaker 2: Worked for the Urban League very early.
Speaker 1: Were they a member of, you know, Civil Rights organizations locally and nationally when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Definitely a part of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]. But I always considered our primary Civil Rights activity our church [Holman Methodist Church]. So I don't remember going to a whole lot of other kinds of organizing meetings, because our church was such a Civil Rights active church that I just don't remember other kinds of meetings, because they were going on and all of that--all of those discussions were happening within the church.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, as the Civil Rights Movement was unfolding--now, you were a little girl--'
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: --I guess, when all of this was going on, right?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: So your ministers would discuss, and other people would speak at church about these (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Absolutely. As I said, virtually every week. I just thought that's what church was about. You know, you go and you hear about God and you hear about Civil Rights. I mean, they were so intertwined that I have, you know, as an adult, I continued to live, to look, and belong to churches that stand up for some kind of rights, because to me, that's just the demonstration of Christ teachings, are actually, you know, what you do and how you treat people in this society you live in now.
Story_ID: 28046
Speaker 1: Well, where did you go to middle school?
Speaker 2: I went to middle school--by that time, we had moved to Inglewood [California], and I went to Monroe Junior High School. It was a two-year junior high school. That was the system in Inglewood at the time. And when I moved to Inglewood, and the fact that I was so--that I was younger than the average student there, when we moved to Inglewood, they wanted to hold me back a year. And my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] said, "You must be kidding." So she went and she met with the counselors and they said, "Oh, she's going to have so much trouble, you know, coming from the L.A. School District to Inglewood. That's such a strong school district and she's a young--a year younger." And she said, "Put her in this class. She will not be held back for a year." My mother was--she told me--a relatively mild-mannered person until she had children, until she had to go stand up for her children. And she--it felt like she was in school, you know, almost weekly, kind of telling them, you know, what we needed. She was very, very much an activist, you know, parent. So, they let me in to seventh grade, and I remember, you know, doing well. I was a "B" to, you know, "A, B" student. And it's in middle school that I remember liking science, starting to take science classes and enjoying it. That's when I remember science, around middle school. And I remember people saying, "Oh, you're smart. You're going to be a doctor." You know, in the black neighborhoods that I was growing up in, the smartest people became doctors.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And so, if I was smart, and if I had any kind of talent or ability in math--and I remember kind of enjoying math--everyone just told me from my earliest days, "Oh, obviously, you're going to be a doctor," even though I came from a family of lawyers, and there were many more lawyers in our family; but they just said from the earliest time, "You're going to be a doctor." And I also remember in--at some point in junior high school, I was a part of Drill Team, and Monroe Junior High School is very well known for having very good, you know, Drill Team. And also Inglewood is now known for having very good basketball players. So, you know, some people refer to the fact that in Inglewood you were doing one or two things: balling or banging. So, by the time I was in high school, you were either a member of a gang or probably playing basketball. And back to junior school, I remember, my last name was S, Sweeney, and I sat next to Reggie Theus, who ended up being a Chicago Bull, if I'm not mistaken.
Speaker 1: Yes, he did. I used to watch him every week.
Speaker 2: Yes. And Reggie Theus was very handsome and tall, and I remember sitting next to him in science class, and he would look over at my paper because I was the smart one in the class, and he knew I'd have the right answers. And can you imagine telling Reggie Theus he couldn't look at your paper? I remember I was not willing to do that, and I, you know. So that was--sitting next to me, to my right, alphabetically in junior high school, was Reggie Theus.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Reggie Theus. He played many years for the Bulls.
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: I think he's an assistant coach out in Sacramento [California].
Speaker 2: Oh, maybe. And he was like a male model. I mean, he was gorgeous. And he was, you know, he probably doesn't remember me, but I remember him because he became quite famous. And so I remember very specifically being good at science, and people would want to look at, you know, my papers, because I was--I enjoyed it. I was good at it. I thought it was fun.
Story_ID: 28047
Speaker 1: Can you remember what you were first--most interested in in science in terms of--
Speaker 2: Biology. I remember dissections, you know. I remember so many people would be grossed out by doing these things, and I just thought it was the most fascinating thing in the world. Also, my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] would often talk about how she thought the mind and your psychological state controlled the body. And so I was always fascinated by how a mind might actually be able to control a physical body. I just remember having conversations with her about this as I was growing up. So just very early-or at least I remember by middle school, those seeds of science were planted somewhere, and if people asked me, I know, even in middle school, what do I want to be. I said, "One, I want to be anything but a lawyer," because my father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.] was a lawyer. It was very clear that my two brothers wanted to be lawyers. So I wanted to be anything but a lawyer, but I also assumed, and everyone assumed, I would become a doctor, a physician.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, were any particular teachers or mentors, otherwise, you know, in any of your other activities (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yet, you know it's funny, I remember my mother being the strongest influence. You know, I'm sure I had good teachers, but it was my mother talking about science and the mind-body connection that was really what interested me and fascinated me.
Speaker 1: Now, what did your--can you remember what you and your mother talked about in terms of the mind and how it works?
Speaker 2: You know, it was just--she was just a very, very wise woman, and we would always sit down for dinner every--you know, we were the kind of family that would sit down and have real conversations at dinner. And so, it would just, you know, come up, talking about, well--you know, kind of what she thought about, what she thought was interesting, what she might have read, what was in the newspaper, and, you know, those were just the topics of our conversations. And I remember they were, lot of times, about psychology, what she's thought about things. Maybe it was her training as a sociologist. She was a very keen observer of life and of people; how people interact, what made them tick, behaviors; just all of those things I just remember being normal parts of our conversations, and she would just kind of pontificate on life. And so, you know, that and Civil Rights are just what I remember as the major topics of conversation.
Speaker 1: Okay. I know it's just in, you know, the last hundred years, I guess, that so many people really started thinking about the mind as being--I mean, the brain itself as being--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --a, you know, source for--well, you know, everybody it's a source of behavior, but the brain chemistry and neurobiology and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The thing of the past would be, you know, religion would determine--I mean, you were either--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --good or bad and--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --whether you pray enough or the devil influenced you. That what determines--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --what you do. And people stating think in terms of conditions, you know, shaping--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --the consciousness and that sort of thing, and tried to, you know, sit people down and talk to them--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --if they had problems. But people were just--I heard this in the last, maybe, 30, 40 years--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --that people started thinking about brain chemistry.
Speaker 2: Exactly. She was a woman before her time; a very, very intelligent person, and a keen observer. So I just--I remember those conversations and I remember, you know, we would--it seems as though there was some point--maybe it was when I was in middle school, since my brothers were seven and eight years older, they were already off in college doing something else, and my mother and I would go to church every Sunday and come back, and we would often stop and visit people on our way back, but we would just have conversations about stuff. And, you know, these were certainly parts of some of those conversations.
Speaker 1: It sounds like you were very lucky to have a mother that way, to spend that time with to discuss.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Even though she was--she worked full time, you know, outside of the home, so, you know, but still made it very clear to us that we were number one and most important, and kind of stimulated our intellect in a way that I think, you know, I still know now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Notice now.
Story_ID: 28048
Speaker 1: Now, you started high school of what year?
Speaker 2: Since I graduated in 1975, I must have started in 1971.
Speaker 1: Okay. This is at Inglewood High School?
Speaker 2: Morningside High School--
Speaker 1: Morningside. That's right.
Speaker 2: --in Inglewood.
Speaker 1: Morningside. Okay. Now, is that the major high school in Inglewood [California]?
Speaker 2: The two. Morningside and Inglewood High School--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --are rival high schools in Inglewood.
Speaker 1: Okay. In 1971.
Speaker 2: Nineteen seventy-one [1971].
Speaker 1: Now this when the whole country knew Inglewood as being the home of the Great Western Forum.
Speaker 2: Yes. Exactly.
Speaker 1: Basketball (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly. And we lived, more or less around the corner from the Forum. And actually, our backyard abutted Hollywood Park, and there would be racetrack horses there, and, you know, right across our backyard.
Speaker 1: So this brought a lot of different people in the neighborhood, I guess, for sporting events (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly. And I came from a sports family. I loved sports. My father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.] would take us to Chavez Ravine, the home of the Dodgers; and our family saying was "Cut me and I'd bleed Dodger blue." I loved the Dodgers. Hated the Yankees. Even then I saw Sandy Koufax pitch, Don Drysdale. We went up to San Francisco [California], I saw Willie Mays. So was in the era of the great ones. And we saw much more, even though we lived closer to the Forum, for some reason baseball is what I remember much more in my--my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] didn't like to go to the baseball games, but my father would take us, all three kids, and out to Chavez Ravine on a pretty regular basis.
Speaker 1: Did he--there seems to be a nationwide affinity by black people to the Dodgers because of Jackie Robinson.
Speaker 2: Jackie Robinson.
Speaker 1: Right. From that era anyway. I think the younger black people don't understand it, but--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --in those days, so many black folks were Dodger fans.
Speaker 2: Exactly. So we were out there all the time, and I mean, just--you know, another one of those sights and sounds from my growing up as Dodgers--you know, watching the Dodgers and seeing all the great ones, and knowing who they were (laughs), you know. It made a difference.
Speaker 1: They had great teams in those days, too.
Speaker 2: They sure did.
Speaker 1: They won the World Series a lot.
Speaker 2: They sure did.
Story_ID: 28049
Speaker 1: So, Morningside High School. Now--so, you took, I guess--did you take a heavy science curriculum?
Speaker 2: Yes. I took the, you know, math/science curriculum, because that's what I was most interested in. But certainly, as I as there at Morningside High School, it was clear that the high school was deteriorating. It was still--it still had the vestiges of being a very good school, but the turnover was really quite rapid. My mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] very much wanted me to leave Morningside High School and go to the Catholic School in Inglewood [California], but, you know, I was on Student Council; I was cheerleading; my best friend, Regina Petty, was there; and, you know, I was having a good time. So I really didn't want to leave. And finally, she just decided, "Okay," you know. "I hope she's safe and I hope she can get out of, you know, here in one piece." Probably one of the best things that happened to me in high school was, I became affiliated with American Field Service, AFS. And that's a program in which students are allowed to go overseas. And I was selected as the number two person in my high school for AFS. And Andreas Acosta was number one, and he got to go to Italy. I was number two, and I end up going--after I finished high school, to Malaysia.
Speaker 1: This is after you finished high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but--
Speaker 1: Oh. Okay.
Speaker 2: --I went through the process in high school, and then the--I didn't actually walk across the stage and graduate from high school, because I went to AFS in Malaysia.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it started--so it was while I was a high school student, a senior, I went through the process. And I think I had to wait 'til my senior year, because I was young, you know, I was on the younger side. And I think you had to be at least 16 to go.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that was one of the best things, you know, from high school.
Speaker 1: Tell us about that. Now, you had been--had you been out of the United States before at this point?
Speaker 2: No. Oh, you know, we would drive down to Tijuana, Mexico. But besides Tijuana, excuse me, I had never been out of the country at that point, and here I was. You know, once again, I think it was that adventurous spirit, you know. If my father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.] could pick up and move to California, you know, my mother thought, "What a wonderful and amazing experience for my daughter." So I signed up for AFS, and when you signed up and became part of the program, you didn't know where you were going to end up. So I didn't know where I was going to be able to go, but both of my parents encouraged me to, you know, participate in AFS, and then it ended up that I had the opportunity and fortune to go to Malaysia. And that would have been the summer of 1975. And I lived with a family there in Malaysia, and the father--my father of the family was the number two person and head of religion in a state in Malaysia--within Malaysia called Seremban, which was about forty miles southwest of Kuala-Lumpur. So I lived with a Muslim family there in Malaysia and had to learn just how different another country could be from the United States, where the rules of decor were different; the religion was different; the customs were different; everything about Malaysia was different.
Speaker 1: Did you have to change the way you dressed?
Speaker 2: Well, I did go to school, because even though it was summer for the United States, I was in school in Malaysia. So I remember most of the time wearing uniforms. And on Fridays, all of the Muslims would wear the long dresses. But during the rest of the week, they could wear--I remember I had a short, blue, kind of turquoise blue skirt and a white blouse that I wore and everyone wore. And since I was not Muslim, I didn't have to follow that on Friday. So I mostly remember, you know, wearing pants and then wearing, you know, the uniform during school. The other thing that was very interesting about Malaysia is, there're three primary populations: the native Malays, who were a bit like Indonesians; and then there're the Indiana, you know, Southeast Asian Indians; and Chinese. Those are the three major populations with Malay being largest--or Malay and Chinese being about equal in size, and then the Indian being a smaller population. So it was very interesting when I was in Malaysia, everyone would look at me and wonder what I was. So the Malays knew I didn't look Malays, so they thought I was probably Indian. The Indians knew I didn't look Indian, so thought I was probably Malay, and, you know, the Chinese didn't think I look Chinese. But when I said I was American, they said, "No. That's not what Americans look like." In 1975, the only Americans that were traveling outside of the United States were white Americans. So they just couldn't reconcile the fact that I was American. I kind of talked like an American, and I dressed, I guess, like an American, but that wasn't what most people thought Americans were.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. Now, what was the science curriculum like there? Did you--
Speaker 2: You know, I was only there, actually, you know, three months over a summer. So I can't say that I remember that much about the science curriculum there.
Speaker 1: But it didn't set you back or anything?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause I was just doing it over the summer. I had already finished high school, and I actually had already been accepted to go to Wellesley College as an undergraduate. So this was the summer in between.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28050
Speaker 1: Back in high school, is there any particular teacher or mentor in high school at all?
Speaker 2: I don't remember the teachers or mentors in high school either. I remember taking the courses. I remember enjoying biology the most. And the way curricula were designed then, you took biology first, and then you took chemistry and physics. And so biology was what I loved. And I--you know, I kind of have a visual on my biology teacher, but I don't remember her name because I just grew up with my family being much more important than even the school teachers for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the learning that I did at home, you know, I was constantly reading. I was--by that time, I remember pretty distinctly my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] putting classics and a lot of the classic black literature in front of me, African-American literature.
Speaker 1: So what were you reading?
Speaker 2: I remember reading "Jane Eyre." I remember reading "Withering Heights." But I also remember reading, you know, by that time, I was also reading "Life and Times of Frederick Douglass," which I found--I mean, I just found these books inspiring. I was certainly reading "Native Son," "Black Boy" [Richard Wright] at those times. So, you know, maybe I didn't understand everything, but I was certainly reading, you know, classic black literature at that time. It was probably not until college that I was really reading James Baldwin. But in high school, I was certainly reading "W.E.B. Du Bois," you know, because it was guided--that was kind of mandatory literature in my house.
Speaker 1: W.E.B. Du Bois is a little tougher than Baldwin, I think, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughs).
Speaker 1: But you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But, you know, but at the time it was, you know, kind of was, you know, kind of Civil Rights and Activism, and just a part of, you know, what I would do. So I wasn't a big athlete, you know, in high school. I did--I just remember liking quiet time and liking reading, and reading at home.
Story_ID: 28051
Speaker 1: What did you learn, you know, from being in Malaysia for that three months?
Speaker 2: I'm sure I learned more lessons than I can recount here. But in particular, I remember learning and understanding more about what the Muslim religion, you know, what Islam was about because the people that I lived with practiced it on a daily basis. And, you know, when you're growing up you can hear these words and it sounds so foreign and so different, and you really try and understand what's underneath it. So I remember coming back with an appreciation of a different religion and a different religions tradition, and how good the people were that I lived with. So, you know, but you really couldn't classify people, "Oh, this religion is good, this is religion is bad." And that's something that I carried throughout my life. And I would say--(coughs) excuse me--I also just learned what it was like to live in a different culture and to be considered the foreigner, for all the sights and sounds and smells to be different, and to be uncomfortable, to learn to rely on yourself because you really need to have a bit of self-reliance if you're someplace else. And then I think every time I have gone away, and I have lived in several different countries, I'm just so grateful to come back to America. That, despite its difficulties and problems, it's the culture I grew up in and the culture that I love.
Story_ID: 28052
Speaker 1: Now, as a senior in high school, what kind of counseling did you have about college?
Speaker 2: It's interesting. Once again, my largest influences were those that came from my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks]. So she had a list of colleges she thought would be very good for me and another list that she thought probably wasn't. I remember I got into--I'm sure I'm not going to remember them all--but the ones I remember getting into were, I got into Stanford [University]; I got into Wellesley College, Bryn Mawr [College], and I got into UC--or University of Santa Clara [sic, Santa Clara University]. I think it was UC Santa Clara at the time. And my college counselor was telling me to go to Santa Clara. And my mother said, "You must be kidding. You know, she gets into Stanford, Wellesley and Bryn Mawr, and you're going to tell her to go to Santa Clara?" But he said, "Oh, you know, those others may be too hard for her and too challenging for her." So, I paid him absolutely no mind. And when it came to thinking about where to go, my mother thought that the Seven Sisters, the women's colleges were just, you know, the ultimate in education for women. And she wanted me to go to one of the women's colleges. Interest--you know, she said, "Enough generations have gone to Clark Atlanta [University]. You don't need to go there anymore." And Stanford, she was a little concerned about Stanford at the time because she heard that all of the blacks lived in the dorm, and so you were either in the circle or not in the circle. And she just thought that--she didn't want--she was a bit more of an integrationist than that and did not want me to go to a college where I would feel pressure to either be in the dorm with all the black people, or feel like an outsider if I wasn't. So she actually, you now, didn't particularly want me to go to Stanford. So I had a choice between Wellesley and Bryn Mawr. And I think ultimately, I went to Wellesley because I liked Boston [Massachusetts]. I liked the Boston Celtics better than I liked the Philadelphia '76ers. I thought Boston sounded like a more intriguing experience, and also when I interviewed with alums, I saw pictures of Wellesley and I thought it was just the most beautiful campus I'd ever seen. And that's where I ended up.
Story_ID: 28053
Speaker 1: Had you decided on a major before you went to Wellesley [College]?
Speaker 2: Yes. I decided I was going to be a biology major. That was what I walked in the door thinking I would be. And I ended up as a psychobiology major, because there was this burgeoning field at the time, which is now called neuroscience, but at the time, was pretty much a combination of biology of psychology. And that was one of the first set of psychobiology majors at Wellesley College. And it kind of goes back to some of those conversations I had with my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks] about the influence of the mind on the physical body, and I thought that psychobiology must be the subject that would capture that particular field of study. Now, during my first year in college my mother died of an aneurysm at the age of 46. So the roots and influence that she had were during those first 17 years of my life and certainly have carried me through the rest of these years. But she actually, you know, died when I was a freshman.
Speaker 1: I can imagine it disrupted your education. You had to go back--
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was definitely disruptive. I remember she died in November, and I went home for, maybe, a week or two. But then I came back, and Wellesley, you know, surrounded me like a family. And all of my teachers said, you know, "Whatever extra time you need, you know, to get through the semester, obviously, you can do it." And it turns out that I had a first cousin, David Wilkins, was an undergraduate at Harvard [University] while I was an undergraduate at Wellesley, and even though we didn't grow up together, it was family. And he came and took me to the airport, picked me up from the airport, let me stay in his dorm for a couple of, you know, days when I got back just to settle into things. So, all of that was absolutely critical and kind of keeping me afloat. Now, I can't say that I did the best academically, you know, during that freshman year. And it was a very tough transition, but I made it through, and I did graduate in four years.
Story_ID: 28054
Speaker 1: So while you were there--well, can you talk about your undergraduate research in Wellesley [College]?
Speaker 2: So I--Wellesley College being a small liberal arts college, the classes always had laboratories associated with them and affiliated with them. So I took an introductory neurobiology course and did a lot of experimentation as a part of that course. So I didn't--and I remember working with Doug Bush, who taught neuroscience the first--either he became my--maybe my second year at Wellesley, and then my senior year, another professor, Howard Eichenbaum (ph.) arrived, who was a neuroscientist. And turns out that, what, 15 years later when I came back to Wellesley College as an assistant professor, I took over the position that Howard Eichenbaum had. So I kind of--he trained me, I left and did a number of other things, and then eventually came back and took his position. Another influential professor at the time was Elisa Koff, who was a professor in psychology. And the two of them, Howard Eichenbaum and Elisa Koff, were my major advisors in the psychobiology program.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you spell Eliza's last name?
Speaker 2: K-O-F-F.
Speaker 1: Okay. Koff. Okay.
Speaker 2: Koff.
Speaker 1: Alright. Okay. Alright. So, well, what was Wellesley like otherwise? Did you get involved in campus activities?
Speaker 2: I did. I enjoyed--I mean, Wellesley is just a lovely place to go to college. It's wonderful because of its traditions; the support of women and women's education. It's okay to be a smart woman at Wellesley, and I think for the first time I didn't feel different because I was a smart woman. So I was, you know, involved in just the normal activities. I don't remember being particularly act--you know, I was active in some of the more Civil Rights oriented activities on campus. I remember at that time we were protesting divestment from South Africa, and I was definitely involved in those activities. I was very involved in the Black Student Organization, because I'd come from all-black high schools, you know, to drop into this very foreign, primarily white environment, and so that was certainly an anchor, the black organizations while I was there. I was--Wellesley, there was a lot of sense of community and culture around your dormitory. So the individual dormitories have their own personas and lives, and so, you know, I was very much an active citizen in the dormitories I lived in. I lived in Pomeroy the first year; the second two years I lived in some place called Severance, and I became what's the equivalent of an RA. They're called--they were called at the time "Vill Juniors (ph.)." And those were juniors that helped freshmen and sophomores adjust to the campus. And I found that between my studies, you know, social life, and being involved in those communities, it was a full-time job. And academically, I was not as well prepared. I was coming from a very mediocre to poor high school, all-black high school, and I had a lot of catch-up to do, you know, when I was at Wellesley. So I had to spend a lot of time focusing on my studies. And I loved science, so doing science takes more time than most majors. I find a lot of people drop out of science because science is just so time-consuming that most people just don't feel as though they want to put in that much time into their work. But I loved it, so I did it.
Story_ID: 28055
Speaker 1: So four years of Wellesley [College], then you went right on to UC [University of California] Berkeley?
Speaker 2: Correct. I went immediately into a master's at UC Berkeley. And it turns out that one of my good friends from college, Heidi Hamilton, who was at Wellesley, was also moving to UC Berkeley to go to law school there, and we decided to be roommates at the--when we first moved to Berkeley. So we both found out we got in. And we had known each other before going to Wellesley because our parents, our mothers, had worked together at the Angeles' Girl Scout Council in Los Angeles. Then her mother--her parents moved to New York, and I did not see her, probably, between the age of ten and when we went to college. And I arrived at college and there she was, you know, the only person that I knew on the entire campus and someone from Los Angeles [California], and you know, someone that knew my mother [Arminta Odessa Parks], and it turned out we both went to Berkeley and we were roommates in our first year there. But my first semester at UC Berkeley was quite difficult. I was used to this very small, cloistered environment of Wellesley where people would sit down at dinner tables and just talk about intellectual things. We'd have discussions, and arguments, and debates; and it was just stimulating, and exciting, and intellectual. And I went to UC Berkeley and I just thought, "Oh, this is just weird." It didn't feel like the same kind of intellectual intensity. People from California, they like being outside, what had happened? And so the first semester, I had a lot of difficulty. It was, you know, Heidi Hamilton was in law school, and they had a circle of friends. But as a graduate student, you're much more isolated than the professional students who are more of a cohort. When you're in graduate school, there may be, you know, especially when you talk about minority students, there may be two, three, in an entire class, as opposed to, generally, a law school would have, you know, 30 to 40 other minority students that you felt as though you were part of a cohort of some kind. So, you know, I was feeling isolation. And so I decided to start a Black Graduate Student Organization at UC Berkeley. And in that manner, I met all of the minorities from all of the difficult graduate schools. And, you know, there were just a few of us here and a few of us there, but as a group there were quite a few of us doing graduate work at UC Berkeley. And then I started to get to know people, then I started to reach out and have friends, you know, in various circles. And then I just had a great time. And I just couldn't believe how much I enjoyed Berkeley, and I continued to live there in the Berkeley-Oakland area for three years after I completed my master's. And by this time, I was really solidly a scientist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I was studying science by this time.
Speaker 1: That's great. You took the initiative to form this organization--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --which seems, I would imaging, to help the other students too.
Speaker 2: Exactly. And it became a very, very popular activity. We invited even some of the black faculty to, you know, join us and get to know us a little bit better. But it was I needed to feel comfortable. And it turns out it's what a whole lot of other people wanted also.
Story_ID: 28056
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your research at UC [University of California] Berkeley. What were you researching?
Speaker 2: Right. So, I was doing a professional master's. So at that time, it wasn't as much research-oriented as it was taking a lot of classes related to environmental health sciences. So, my specialty when I was at Berkeley was wastewater management and what kinds of toxins you found in drinking water, and how they affected people. That was my specialty there.
Speaker 1: This is a master's of public health?
Speaker 2: Yes. It was a master's of public health.
Speaker 1: Oka.
Speaker 2: And so, you know, environmental health scientist. Particularly, water management was my specialty.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright. Now, what are some of the issues in terms of water management in public health?
Speaker 2: Well, it was really quite interesting. One was one issue that was very, very popular at UC Berkeley was, how do you treat wastewater to make it cleaner. And there were a lot of people who worked on using algae in huge ponds to actually purify water. And I became particularly interested in organic chemicals that can be left over as residues in drinking water; either it can seep in through, you know, the soil and the ground, or pesticides, chemicals. So I became particularly interested in water, and water purification, and clean drinking water at that time. And I did a master's project on that, even through for the kind of professional master's that I had, I didn't have to do a thesis. But I was always kind of just adding requirements that I thought were important. So I actually wrote a thesis on organics and drinking water as part of my--you know, to complete my work even through, as I said, a thesis is not required of a professional master's like a master's in public health.
Story_ID: 28057
Speaker 1: Now, why did you decide to--it seems like you're, like, shifting gears from neurobiology--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --to--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --pubic health (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: To public health. And so, you know, there is a little bit of a route that I haven't talked about yet. So I came into Wellesley College believing I was going to be pre-med. And it was about my sophomore year that I said to myself, "You know, actually I don't particularly like treating sick people. That's not my passion." It dawned on me my passion with the science. I loved the discovery, I loved the innovation. It was the science that was really what was driving me, not the desire to help individual sick people. And so I thought public health was a way to have an impact on people's health, but not in an individual level, and it seemed to be a bit more of a science to me. So I went and did--and so I said, "Okay. I'm not going to apply to medical school. I think I'm going to try this public health thing because it sounds like it's really interesting." So I never applied to medical school, but I said, "Public health is--would be a very good background if I do want to go to medical school." So I completed the master's in public health, and I did really well. And I thought, "You know, now I have great grades. I've done research. If I want to go to medical school, I think I can probably get into a very good medical school now." So I had to do some soul searching and say, "Do you want to be a physician?" And every time I asked myself the question, the answer was no. I didn't want to do--I didn't want to treat people kind of one-on-one in medicine. Now, my father [Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr.], I think, was disappointed that I didn't want to become a physician. But it just wasn't what really excited me. And what I found when I was in graduate school in public health was, there was a way to combine this new fascination that I had in this area called Toxicology, which is the study of poisons in water, and the background that I had as an undergraduate in psychobiology, and there was this emerging field called "neurotoxicology," the study of poisons that affect the brain. And eventually I decided to go back and do graduate work in that area, because it combined this, kind of, public health-related interest with the neuroscience that I had been learning as an undergraduate. And it felt like the perfect merging of the two of those.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. And before we leave UC Berkeley, who was your advisor there?
Speaker 2: Bob Cook. Robert Cook. I think his last name was Cook. I know it was Bob. I can see his face. And as a professional master's student, you don't have a mentor in the same way that you do when you're writing a thesis. But he ended up--it was Bob Cooper--being my kind of informal advisor and reading this thesis that I decided personally I wanted to write, because I thought, "You can't get a master's without a thesis." And he was a specialist in wastewater management.
Story_ID: 28058
Speaker 1: So you stayed on for three years in Berkeley [California], you said, after you achieved your master's there.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What were you doing?
Speaker 2: So, one of those years I was working for the California State Health Department. That was kind of a short-term job in which I was looking for abandoned hazardous waste sites. It was a time when people were starting to understand that if you had a leftover metallic plant, that it might be leaking into the groundwater into the soil. So they hired a bunch of graduate students that would go out with our binoculars and cars and kind of look at a registry of property that could possibly have had containments of some kind. And we would just go do a physical inspection. You know, and I mean most of the time it wasn't getting on the ground, but looking around to see if anything still looked hazardous. And that was a short-term project. And then I worked for Environmental Science Associates in Berkeley. And I was an Environmental Health Consultant. Environmental Science Consultant. Maybe that was my title there. And I had an absolutely, fascinating project there. That was really the first time I participated fully in a research project. But this consulting firm had been hired by Monterey County to look at the effects of using reclaimed wastewater to water crops. And so we were actually using reclaimed wastewater and had a field of artichokes and other vegetables. And we would use the wastewater and then look for metals and organic contaminants in the vegetables to see if they had absorbed something from the wastewater. We'd look at the groundwater, we looked at the soil. And that was really a scientific project that this group had been working on. So I would go down to, usually about once a month, to the fields that we had down in Monterey County, and I even try--you know, I'd put the artichoke harvester on my back, and I was out there chopping artichokes. But the--really, there were--they would hire some of the migrant workers to actually collect the samples. But that's when I got a sense of what migrant labor-working, you know, what it was like working the fields. So I actually went and collected samples down at this MERSA Project, this Monterey Wastewater Reclamation Project.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what I did. And then I actually spent--this company was part of Parson's (ph.), a very large consulting firm. And when some of the work got slow in Berkeley, I went and lived with my brother in Los Angeles [California], my brother and sister-in-law, for a couple of months and worked at Parson's in Pasadena, where I worked on, you know, environmental impact studies for, actually Alaskan oil pipe lines project. And then after that, I decided that it was time to do a Ph.D. When I left my master's, I said, "I'm going to work for a couple of years, and then I'm going to get a Ph.D." And my advisor said, "You're not going to, you know, stop after you start working. You're not going to go back and do a Ph.D." And I said, "Watch me." And whenever he was interviewed, he said that, when I was asked what I wanted to do after I finished he said that I said I wanted to be the president of the United States. And I said, "No. I think what I said was I wanted to be the Secretary of Health and Human Services." So I guess I had ambitions even back then (laughs).
Story_ID: 28059
Speaker 1: Now, how did you choose Johns Hopkins [University]?
Speaker 2: As I mentioned, it was this emerging field of neurotoxicology, and there were three universities in the country that I knew that had strength in this area. It was UC [University of California] Berkeley, it was University of Michigan, and Johns Hopkins [University]. And as I was reading, I thought that Johns Hopkins had the best of the three programs; the strongest, you know, the best neuroscience associated with neurotoxicology. And I thought it was important to go to a really strong program. So even though I, you know, would never have thought Baltimore [Maryland] was where I was going to be, I went to Johns Hopkins. I thought it was the best school for neurotoxicology.
Story_ID: 28060
Speaker 1: So, your Ph.D. was in neurotoxicology--
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: --and--now, what was--tell us about your project and, you know, did it--did you start--did you know immediately--had you defined what your dissertation was going to be from the beginning or--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went into the program not being sure exactly what I was going to work on. Probably if I was asked, I said I was going to work on lead and lead poisoning in children. That was a very big issue for neurotoxicology in the 1980s. Once I got to Johns Hopkins, in essence, I took the first year of medical school. Toxicology training was basically all of your core science courses in medicine in the first year. And then I took a course or two related to toxicology and pharmacology. And, in essence, that's the study of chemicals and the way they distribute in your body, and how they're eliminated from your body. But in between, what did they do?  How do they have their desired affect? I was particularly interested in neurochemicals and neuropharmacology. So I started taking courses also related to neuroscience. I did one rotation with someone in the school of public health who did neurotoxicology, and I just--I didn't like the individual that much, I didn't like the project that much. It just didn't suit me and wasn't that interested. I then did the majority of my coursework, and after the--or during the summer of my first year, I did my second rotation. So it was mandatory that we did rotations in three laboratories. And I said to myself, "If I don't like this second laboratory and what I'm doing, maybe this just isn't for me," because I hadn't really enjoyed that first rotation very much. The second rotation was fabulous. I was working on a particular chemical that affected learning and memory in the brain. And I was trying to figure out using drugs, the affect that this chemical, called a neurotransmitter, has on the brain. And I worked with Gary Wenk who's a neurochemist. He's now at Ohio State University. Wenk, W-E-N-K. And he was in the laboratory of David Olton, O-L-T-O-N, and I'm not sure I realized it at the time, but David Olton and his laboratory within the psychology department at Johns Hopkins University, was one of the most well-known scientists studying the neurobiology of learning and memory. And he was a great individual. I mean, great scientist, great individual. And I thought, "This is what I have been living to do." I just--I enjoyed--I mean, the project was kind of tedious. You had--I had to come in everyday of the week--oh, excuse me--all summer. But it was finally something that I really thought I was enjoying and I cared about.
Story_ID: 28061
Speaker 1: I was living--and the School of Public Health was down at the medical school, and this laboratory was up at the main campus of Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University], the Homewood Campus. So I decided that, as much as I was enjoying the lab, I did like being down on the medical campus and that maybe I would look for a laboratory back down on the medical campus. And someone mentioned to me a laboratory of a professor and doctor named Joe Coyle, and so I wrote him a note and asked if it might be possible for me to do a rotation, my third rotation, in his laboratory. And that turned out to be the best decision that I have made in my life. It was an exciting, vibrant laboratory. There were researchers from all over the world, because Joe Coyle was the head of Child Psychology, and he had appointments in five different departments; in Neuroscience, Neurotoxicology, Child Psychology, Psychology; I think I'm missing one of his--maybe it was neurology was his last appointment. So he was very well-known. He had an extremely vibrant laboratory with postdoctoral Fellows from around the world; really smart graduate students. I think there were one or two undergraduates. And I just thought this was the place that I needed to be. And just the atmosphere. He had weekly journal clubs and lab meetings where I learned not just about the small project that I was working on, but everything else that was going on in the laboratory. And we were particularly interested, not just in basic science, but the fact that Joe Coyle was a psychiatrist meant there was always kind of a human component and/or disease that we were working on, and I found that brought in my kind of public health background and desire to do that. It was working on disease without being a physician, and it was just the perfect atmosphere. The people in the lab were friendly and nice and exciting. And it was just--it felt like home. And I am still in contact and friends with most of the people that I worked with at that time in Joe Coyle's lab.
Story_ID: 28062
Speaker 1: Joe Coyle was known at Johns Hopkins [University] as one of those laboratories that women could go to and get their Ph.D. I mean, we were told about a couple of people that, if you went into their laboratories as a woman, you were very unlikely to come out in a reasonable amount of time with a Ph.D. So we knew he was supportive of women. And I hadn't realized that he was also very supportive of minorities in the laboratory. So will never forget one time--Johns Hopkins had a pathology center on the ground level of the building that we were working in where you could have samp...--where you could have samples cut and taken pictures of, you know, kind of some typical pathology work. And so I had some samples that I wanted processed, and I took them downstairs to be processed, and I left them there and maybe I hadn't left all the information that they needed and they called back up to the laboratory and said, "You know, some black--some little black girl was down here dropping off samples." The secretary, Joe Coyle's secretary let him know that. He hit the roof. He walked down and said, "If you ever call Dr. Berger-Sween...--I was then Dr. Sweeney. I wasn't even a doctor yet, but I was one of his Ph.D. students, and he thought I needed to be treated with respect. He shot off a letter immediately to the head of the pathology department and said, "If you ever treat anyone from my laboratory this way again, you will hear from me." And he was quite a powerful person in the university at the time. So it meant a lot. And I'm not even sure it had affected me that much. I was disappointed in what I heard, but he was going to have absolutely none of that. And I realized at that time, maybe I'd been in his laboratory then two years that I really in the lab of someone who cared about me and was going to watch out for me, whatever happened. And Joe Coyle continues to be my strongest mentor to this day. I would not take a new job without asking him. I would not make a move professional without consulting with him, because he has watched and supported me at every single stage and step. When it was time to recommend me for a job, he was always the first to write the letter. When it was time to recommend me, actually most recently to AAAS, so I'm now a Fellow in the American Association for the Advancement of Science, which is one of the highest tier leagues of scientists in the United States, and it was Joe Coyle who recommended me for Fellowship in that esteemed organization. So he has continued to be my mentor since 1985; probably when I met him.
Story_ID: 28063
Speaker 1: Now, let's talk about your dissertation. It concerned choline and how it affects the basal forebrain--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and the indication between neurons.
Speaker 2: Yes. So, there is a--the signals in your brain are carried by chemicals, often called neurotransmitters. And acetylcholine is one of the transmitters that caries these chemicals. In the early 1980s, acetylcholine was associated with a number of conditions, including Alzheimer's disease. Acetylcholine is the chemical that has the most significant decrease in the brains of Alzheimer's patients. So there was an entire group of work going on in Joe Coyle's lab about this region of the brain called the basal forebrain that contained primarily this chemical, acetylcholine and the influence that might have throughout the brain in cognitive processes that decay in diseases like Alzheimer's disease. So I studied--if you want to think about the correlated human conditions: Alzheimer's disease, Down syndrome, autism spectrum disorders; a number of these have alterations in the cholinergic cell in the basal forebrain. So I was studying this group of cells in animal models or in mice. And we would basically make very small focal damage to the basal forebrain to try and create an animal model of Alzheimer's disease. And then we were using different kinds to try and ameliorate the conditions that you produced by creating this small focal damage. So I was fortunate enough in my, maybe, second year in Joe Coyle's lab to have a collaboration with a scientist, Bonnie Davis, who had a drug that she thought might be helpful in treating Alzheimer's disease. And I was a graduate student and did some of this initial proof of concept work to see if that drug would actually improve the performance of my animals in this animal model that had the same kind of damage that you have in Alzheimer's disease. And we found that it was effective in our mouse model, and then Bonnie Davis went on to develop that drug that's now the second leading Alzheimer's drug in the country.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's the kind of work that I was fortunate enough to do as a graduate student. So it had a basic science component, and we were trying to understand how this chem--neurochemical acetylcholine effects processes like learning and memory, but it also had very practical applications in which we could try and improve cholinergic transmission and see the effects that that had on, eventually, diseases like Alzheimer's disease.
Story_ID: 28064
Speaker 1: What were your findings? I mean, can you kind of summarize your findings?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So the summary of the findings is that I was able to create this mouse model that modeled Alzheimer's disease by making a small focal lesion in the brain of the mice that was similar to the kind of damage that you see in Alzheimer's disease. Then I was able to use a particular drug called galantamine and reversed the deficits, or improved the performance of these mice. And eventually, much later, a drug company developed that drug, and it's actually used in humans that have Alzheimer's disease. But the findings that I had was that I could create this similar kind of damage to the brains of the mice, and have them perform behavior tasks so that I understood the kind of deficit that they had, and then use a drug to basically treat the condition and make them perform cognitive tasks better. So they got--in a very simple way, they got smarter; their memory got better--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with the drugs that I was using. And so I was testing that drug, seeing how long it stays in the body, its distribution in the brain versus other parts of the body, and that's called looking kind of at the pharmacology of the drug. So I did all of that work as a graduate student.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Does that make sense?
Speaker 1: Yeah. It makes sense.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It does make sense. I suppose that the mice had been trained to do certain (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: A behavior task, mazes, exactly. And then you make the lesion and they can't--
Speaker 1: It makes them dumber.
Speaker 2: --the task, it makes them dumber. And then you give the drug and you add--and you, you know, return the performance, if not completely to normal, to significantly better.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So basically, I was working on a drug that improved the learning and memory and attention of mice that have this little--this brain damage that's somewhat similar to Alzheimer's disease.
Speaker 1: So this drug this--
Speaker 2: It's, you know--
Speaker 1: --yeah, that Bonnie Davis came up with makes--improves, you know, the memory of people with Alzheimer's disease..
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: But, now, I haven't heard much about it in popular culture, so is it--what are the drawbacks of it? Is there a reason why it's not, you know, seen as a cure for Alzheimer's?
Speaker 2: Oh, treating the symptoms is different from curing the disease. So this is the second most popular to cure the symptoms, but it does not cure the basic fundamental disease. And so you continue to have brain damage and progression that the drug can help improve performance for a period of time. People can remain a bit more lucid for a bit of time, but it does not cure the disease.
Speaker 1: So eventually the disease wins out?
Speaker 2: Eventually, the disease wins out.
Speaker 1: And are there side effects of the drug?
Speaker 2: Every drug has some, you know side effects, but you're able to modulate it such that the side effects are relatively few. It's just that the disease continues to progress, and eventually, you know, unfortunately, people then lose their memory a number of other higher cognitive processes associated with Alzheimer's. But what issue to think about it as is, if someone is starting to have a cognitive decline associated with Alzheimer's, how many people would like a few more months of lucidity to be able to get some of their affairs in order before the disease takes over. And that's what this drug is able to do. It's able to give them a bit more time and a bit more lucidity, often to get a number of things in order. But eventually, since we don't have the cure for Alzheimer's, it does not stay off the symptoms forever.
Story_ID: 28065
Speaker 1: In 1990 you did postdoctoral research at the National Institute for Health and Medical Research, INSERM, in France, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly. So, interestingly, while I was in Joe Coyle's lab at Johns Hopkins [University], one of the postdoctoral Fellows in his laboratory was named (Lor or d'laborle?), which I will write out for you with the full accents, and she had come from a laboratory in Paris [France]. And I met her while I was in Joe Coyle's lab, and she said, "You know, you really should do a postdoctoral Fellowship in Paris." And I said, "Why?" And she said, "Why not? Don't you want to live in Paris?" And I said, "Well--well, yes, I do." "And don't--wouldn't you think it would be interesting?" And I think having been an AFS [American Field Service] student to Malaysia, having done a bit of traveling, I just, you know, the idea of going to another country, living in another culture was exciting, and to be able to do that with--there was a researcher in Paris at one of these National Institute of Health Laboratories. His names was (Yvon la More?), and he studied the basal forebrain in rates. And so I was able to go, continue to study that region of the brain that particularly fascinated me after being Joe Coyle's lab. I had the opportunity to live in Paris for two years. I was fortunate enough that I was able to write a couple of grants, and I was able to take my own Fellowship money to Paris, which means, you know, I basically said, "I am free labor. I can pay my own salary. Can I come work in your lab?" And every lab that I went to said, "bien sur," "but, of course." So I had my choice of laboratories to go to in Paris. I had my own Fellowship money. One had come from the International Brain Research Organization, the other from NATO; North Atlantic Treaty Alliance [Organization], and both of them covered one year of a postdoctoral fellowship while I lived in Paris.
Story_ID: 28066
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, you focused on the Rett Syndrome, from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And tell us, now, what is Rett syndrome, and how is it different from Alzheimer's?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, Rett syndrome is a developmental disorder. So it is a disorder in which has its origins in the way that the brain and body develop, to some degree, prenatally, and then in the early postnatal period. So Down syndrome, schizophrenia, now is understood to be a developmental disorder. And it's the idea that there are some abnormalities in the way that the original circuitry of the brain is laid down, that later leads to all kinds of behavioral abnormalities that you call a syndrome later on. So Down syndrome, autism, is a developmental syndrome. When you think about Alzheimer's disease that you're starting with a relatively normal brain, and then something starts to decay. A certain part of the brain starts to degenerate. And those are called neurodegenerative diseases. So you have a normal adult brain, and then something degenerates, very often for reasons that we don't understand. So it's kind of a broad classification of a developmental disorder in which something goes early really wrong, and a neurodegenerative disorder in which you have a fully formed adult brain in which parts start to degenerate. So Alzheimer's is neurodegenerative. You have a normal adulthood, and then something goes wrong. Rett syndrome, Down syndrome, autism spectrum disorders, autism, even schizophrenia; it's clear that something goes on in development, and so the brain doesn't develop normally, and those are called developmental disorders. Even through the same region and the same chemicals can be affected, it's kind of a little bit of a timeline and a process of what happens when, and how taking away a chemical early in development sets it along a different course in a way that's different from having the chemical all the time growing up and then taking it away in adulthood. So if you want to think--very often I think about this: cholinergic system. When you take it away in adulthood, you get some of the symptoms of an Alzheimer's disease. If you take it away early in development, you have something that looks more like Rett syndrome or autism.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, I think--I mean, I was wondering how bipolar disorder fits into this. And in schizophrenia, too, because--well, my assumption, just a general, just as a guy out there looking at this, is that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder manifest themselves in early adulthood after the brain has already formed. Am I right so far? Is that pretty much--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No. Okay. Well, that--
Speaker 2: (laughs). So I know more about schizophrenia than I do about bipolar disorder. People thought that schizophrenia was a disease that arrived in the teenage years. But if you look at the brains of individuals who have schizophrenia, you can see abnormalities in the development of particular regions, and the development of those regions occur prenatally and in the early postnatal period. So it's something where something goes wrong in circuitry early in life, but it doesn't manifest itself until later in development. So I would say 30 years ago everyone assumed that schizophrenia was an adult or an early adult disorder. Then more and more studies started to show that, if you ask school teachers of kids when they were elementary school, retrospectively, they said, "Well, actually, so-and-so acted a little--little oddly as an elementary school kid." And that made people start to think, "Well, maybe--there's something--there's something going on in elementary school. And then, there were other studies showing a great proportion of individuals who have schizophrenia had mothers who delivered in winter, making you think there's something going on early in that developmental period that may be a number of things developed normally, but there's something abnormal going on, such that when they reach adulthood with a number of environmental pressures that you can actually manifest this thing that's called schizophrenia. But schizophrenia, a number of psychiatrists return to as the "Holy Grail." Just--if when we understand what causes schizophrenia, it will be a huge and major breakthrough. It is an extremely misunderstood elusive disorder.
Story_ID: 28067
Speaker 1: Okay. So, all this is cutting edge, I suppose, now. Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, you know, certainly in the 1980s and the '90s [1990s] when I was completing my degree and starting my early work in the laboratory, it was becoming more and clear how chemicals and chemicals during development are influencing the brain, how it develops, and a number of different diseases. What we need to move more towards is understanding them well enough to cure them.
Speaker 1: Now, I don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's still more elusive.
Speaker 1: --finish your description of what Retts was (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh. Right. So Rett syndrome. Rett syndrome is a syndrome that affects about one in ten thousand live births. Generally, girls are born and the parents think that they are developing normally. Between six and eighteen months, you start to see a regression of symptoms. If the girls have to speak, they lose the language. If they have started to reach purposefully for objects, that purposeful movement is replaced by this stereotypic hand movement sometimes called hand flapping, handwringing, or sterotypy. Usually there is a reduced sized, a reduced head growth, and very often and most often, mental retardation associated with the syndrome. They have abnormalities in breathing and probably, eventually die because of some of the abnormalities in breathing that are called apneas or breath-holding incidents that they have. So, it is a--considered on the autism spectrum because, generally, the girls can be very disturbed by social interactions or have abnormalities in social interactions. But in addition to the social interactions, there's the stereo-typed hand movement, there's the regression of symptoms after they've started to achieve some milestones, and then there are the respiratory difficulties that we now know is a part of the syndrome. Generally, the girls don't live a full life. Generally, they cannot walk on their own and they cannot speak. But, at birth, most people thought they were normal. In the--it must have been the mid-nineties, we discovered the gene that is mutated that's associated with Rett syndrome. So we know the genetic mutation that causes Rett syndrome. But even when you know the genetic mutation, you know the protein that that gene encodes, it doesn't mean that a cure is immediately around the corner. So Rett syndrome, caused by a genetic mutation. Girls seem to develop normally between six and eighteen months, then they start to regress and have more autism-like symptoms; reduced head growth, handwringing motions, respiratory difficulties. They also have motoric difficulties, abnormalities in gaits, scoliosis. Rarely are they able to walk, talk, care on conversations, but seem to have intense glare and eye moment to signal things.
Speaker 1: Okay. So--
Speaker 2: So it's a--the one other thing that I didn't mention is the abnormal gene is found on the X-chromada--chromosome. So it's a condition that you generally find in girls, because boys that have the mutation generally can't survive; whereas, girls, you know, you have two X chromosomes, so you have one normal and one abnormal chromosome, which at least gives you some chance to survive.
Story_ID: 28068
Speaker 1: There's still not a cure.
Speaker 2: --in sight. What avenue do you think the cure is gonna come down? I mean in terms of--?
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting. I work in a mouse model of Rett syndrome, and other people that have worked in mouse models of Rett syndrome are able to see the reversal of some of the symptoms related to Rett. One group showed a reversal of symptoms by turning on the gene that's mutated. So even in adulthood, they were able to turn on the gene and a number of their mice were able to survive and look healthy.
Speaker 2: That's through some sort of, like--
Speaker 1: Gene therapy.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: However, this gene is very tightly regulated, and probably having too much of the gene is as bad as not having enough of it. So I think genetic cures are unlikely in the short term for this disease. However, we're trying a series of drugs and pharmacological agents to try and reverse the symptoms. And I think if we understand when some of the damage occurs and are able to intervene with a particular drug at different critical times during development, I think we have a chance of reversing a lot of these symptoms.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So, you know, that's my bias and where I think the cure is going to come.
Story_ID: 28069
Speaker 1: Alright. Now, in 1991--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you joined the faculty at Wellesley--
Speaker 2: At Wellesley College.
Speaker 1: --where you got your bachelor's of science (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Correct. Bachelor of Arts. All of the bachelors at Wellesley are bachelor of arts.
Speaker 1: Okay. Alright.
Speaker 2: So they don't have bachelor of sciences. They figure everyone needs broad liberal arts training for life.
Speaker 1: Now, how do you feel about that?
Speaker 2: I completely agree. I am such a strong proponent of liberal arts education. It's not just about getting your first job. It's about a lifetime and the breadth that a liberal arts education brings, there's just nothing like it; nothing comparable.
Speaker 1: Okay. Okay. So, Wellesley (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So Wellesley College--
Speaker 1: --faculty. Who's the president (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Exactly. Currently it's Kim Bottomly, is the president. She came from Yale University. She's a immunobiologist-immunologist. Before that was Diana Chapman-Walsh, who was a sociologist, had come from Harvard [University] School of Public Health, and before that was Nan [Nannerl Overholser] Keohane, and Nan Keohane is actually the president that hired me. She had been at Stanford University, and after she left Wellesley College, she became the president of Duke University and retired from that position. But Nan Keohane actually called me when I was in Paris [France], so I had come and I'd had an interview, and Wellesley decided that I was their top candidate and I was--I went back to Paris, which is where I was living and doing my post-doc, and the president of Wellesley College called me in Paris and said, "Joanne, I think you would love coming to Wellesley College. I would like to encourage you in any way to come." And, you know, to get the president to the college to call you when you're, you know, kind of a postdoctoral fellow looking for your first job, was pretty exciting. So, thank you, Nan Keohane. (laughs). It was a terrific move. I would have never guessed that I would go back to my undergraduate institution. But I do remember one day when I was riding on an elevator at Johns Hopkins University, and I had worked with someone, a physician, the day before. He'd been on our floor asking questions, and he got on the elevator the next day as if he didn't know me, he'd never seen me before; and I thought, "I don't want to spend my career in a place like this. I want to be someplace where the people know me, I know the people." That as much as I love science, I thought I would probably be happiest in a broader liberal arts setting where I'd have friends in the French department, and the philosophy department, and not just sciences. And while I was at Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University], as much as I enjoyed being there, all of my friends were scientists and science-related. And I didn't want my life to be that way. So I think while I was in graduate school, I said to myself, I think my choice is to go back to a liberal arts institution and not necessarily--as much as I love science, I chose to do my science in a broader college/university setting.
Story_ID: 28070
Speaker 1: In '94 [1994], I think you did get the Young Investigator Award from the NSF [National Science Foundation]?
Speaker 2: Correct. So I was a National. I was a National Science Foundation Young Investigator. So that was my first really major scientific honor. That made me feel as though I'm on the right track, and that my work, even though I was at a small liberal arts college, was really comparable to that of the people who were at research universities. So for the most part, those awards go to people who are at research universities; not very many go to people at liberal arts colleges. But what it signaled to me is that, the quality of my research was, indeed, comparable to what a number of people were doing at research universities.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28071
Speaker 1: In terms of the atmosphere, Wellesley [College]--I take it most of your time was spent teaching and not doing your research or how is it split? How was your time split?
Speaker 2: I would say that it was probably my life was about 45 percent teaching, about 40 percent research, and the rest of the time doing service activities for the university. So a significant portion of my time was spent doing research; both in the summer in which I did research almost full time, and then I would usually try and maintain some level of research during the academic year. So the wonderful thing about Wellesley is it wasn't primarily teaching. I really felt it was an institution that valued both teaching as well as research. I did both.
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of your research--can you just kind of give us a list of the kind of research you were going on some of your publications? Now, you published quite a bit (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah. So, I continued to work on this region of the brain, the basal forebrain, and continued to be interested in the cholinergic system and the role that it plays in learning and memory, and other higher cognitive processes. In particular, one of the things that I did was develop a tool in which you could selectively create damage to the cholinergic cells of the basal forebrain. So we really were able to isolate the role that these neurons play in processes by having a very specific tool called an immunotoxin, to be able to target them. So I was working in collaboration with Doug Lapy (ph.), who was the chemist that actually designed these immunotoxins. But what I did was used those tools to understand how this particular neurochemical system plays a role in a lot of processes that go on every day. Attention, where you're focusing your attention, you really need this cholinergic system to be able to help you to do that. So by developing this tool, I was able to really launch an entire field to help them--to help isolate how this particular chemical is involved in a lot of cognitive processes. That was one branch of my research. Then for the last ten years, I've been working in animal models where we know--I said that in Rett syndrome we know the genetic mutation. You can actually create that genetic mutation in a mouse, and one of the first things that I did was took animals that Rudolf Yannish (ph.) from MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology] created, that had the same mutation to say, "Do the symptoms in the mice look like the symptoms that you see in humans?" So I spent a good number of time characterizing that mouse model so that we'd understand how it parallels the human condition, because you can do a lot more treatments, and try them, and test them in animal models than you could ever in humans. So it's the fastest way to a cure is to have an excellent animal model for your disease in which you can systematically test therapies. And that's what I do.
Story_ID: 28072
Speaker 1: In 2001, you were like in a Fellow with International Behavioral Neurosciences Society.
Speaker 2: Society. Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, is that an important--
Speaker 2: Yes. It was--it was very important to me, because generally, people become Fellows in organizations when they are full professor. And it means that you have reached a particular stature amongst your peers. And the awards, I admit, that mean the most to me are those in which my peers have said, "We think that your research has achieved a particular level." And so that was the first organization. It's not a huge organization. But the International Brain--the International Behavioral Neuroscience Society is a group of behavioral neuroscientists that thought my work was worthy of Fellowship status.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, from--in 1995 you started directing the Society for Neurosciences Minority (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Minority Neuroscience Fellowship Program. Exactly. So, I was an associate professor at Wellesley College. So I had achieved tenure, and I knew I had a job for life. I had a job for life that I enjoyed very much. And it was clear to me that it was time to start giving back. And it was Joe Coyle, my dissertation advisor, who had been president of the Society for Neuroscience, who said, when they were thinking about writing a grant to the National Institutes of Health, NIH, for a minority Neuroscience Fellowship for renewing the grants, and they were saying, "Who can we get to take over the program? We're looking for someone, you know, with energy, and who's got a good, you know, reputation and research program." Joe Coyle had been president of the Society for Neuroscience, and said, "I have just the person for you." And he was the one that recommended me to become the program director. And I was, you know, relatively junior, you know, because for the most part, the people that were doing it were full professors who had been in their careers for quite a long period of time. But he thought I would be just the right person to do this Fellowship program. So that's how I became the director. And then, the Society for Neuroscience--I just want to take a bit of a side note and mention that it's a membership organization with 35,000 neuroscientists; almost 40,000 now. So it is a huge organization. It's not some little tiny organization. So when I was able to direct the Minority Fellowship Program there, we wrote a grant to NIH, and I think, eventually, it ended up being a multimillion dollar grant that we received over a number of years. And I was able to use that money to support underrepresented minority students who were in graduate programs all over the country and a few postdoctoral Fellowships, Fellowships for people who were in different parts of the world, but who felt as though they needed a bit of additional support than what they were getting from their individual mentor in their--in the university in which they were doing their Ph.D. So we had this supplemental program in which the Fellow students would come to the Society for Neuroscience meeting, meet with secondary mentors who making sure that they were keeping track and moving through their doctoral programs and postdoctoral training. So I'm extremely proud of the work that I was able to do in my--it was probably seven years--that I was the director of that program. And that also let me into the inner circle of the Society for Neuroscience, and I became first, a counselor of the Society, which are, well, you know, probably 20 people who are elected by members of the Society to represent them. And I was the first African-American who was elected, and the first person, to my knowledge, elected from a liberal arts college to be a counsel--a counselor for the Society. And since--since I have stepped--you know, since I have rotated off that position, there still has not been another underrepresented minority that has been voted on to counsel. And from counsel, I became one of the officers, so I was treasurer for the Society for Neuroscience also, an elected position. And once again, none of the officers had ever been underrepresented minorities--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --until that time or since. And I hope that's not true forever.
Speaker 1: Oh. In 2006, you won the Lifetime Mentoring Achievement Award from this Society.
Speaker 2: The Society. Yes. Exactly. Once again, whenever I am recognized by my peers, that's really something special.
Story_ID: 28073
Speaker 1: Now, by 2004, you're Associate Dean of Wellesley College.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about that. Now this has to kind of curtail your research activities a little bit, being Associate Dean and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is this, you know, the expression of your sense of how a university should, I mean, operate in terms, you know, of the broad scope of things?
Speaker 2: Right. So, I decided to move into academic administration. You know, I'd gone from assistant to associate to full professor, and I said, "Okay. What's next? What do I want to do?" When I went into the Dean's office at Wellesley College, I actually made a deal that I would be 80 percent administration, 20 percent in the laboratory. So I actually was able to maintain my research by being in the laboratory once a week, and I also asked Wellesley to support a research technician for me in the laboratory or a postdoctoral Fellow. But, basically, someone who could in the laboratory full time every day. And that allowed me to maintain a presence in the laboratory, because in 2004, I was not willing or ready to give up my research career. And even here at Tufts University, I continue to have a research laboratory, and I have someone, Laura Chavitz, who supports the laboratory. So I still continue to do research, still continue to publish papers. It's a passion, and one doesn't readily give up a passion.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, tell us how you made the move here to Tufts. This is--you come here in 2010, right?
Speaker 2: Mm-mm.
Speaker 1: And so, what happened?
Speaker 2: Alright. So I had been at Wellesley College for 19 years. I'd been an Associate Dean for six years, and I enjoyed academic administration, but I wasn't sure if I enjoyed academic administration in general, or if I enjoyed academic administration at Wellesley College. So I decided that six years was enough in the position that I had at Wellesley, and it was time to either go back to the research laboratory and teaching, or to look for another administrative position where I could move up. So I applied for some jobs, and I wasn't completely decided if I was going to go back to the laboratory and teaching full time, or I was going to take an administrative position. But when I interviewed for the position here at Tufts, I realized that I wanted to, at least, try academic administration. And I loved the job here. It's very complex. A lot of things and a lot of people and a lot of divisions. Everything in this school reports to me, but I love academic administration because that's my way to--it's one of the ways that I help and support other people. Sometimes I say that, students, when they're leaving college, can--everyone can tell you their favorite professor. How many can tell you their favorite administrator? It's just not something that--so you're not doing it because you're really out there and noticed, and because you have a following of students. But, what I'm able to do--the way that I'm able to empower and support other people as an administrator is something that goes beyond the reach that I had in my individual laboratory. And that's kind of exciting.
Story_ID: 28074
Speaker 1: What are your responsibilities as Dean of Tufts University?
Speaker 2: Okay. So, I'm Dean of the School of Arts and Sciences, and as the Dean, I'm the Chief Executive and Operating Officer for the School of Arts and Sciences. And what that means is all of the financial personnel, physical resources of the school, eventually, I have to deplore in service of the school's mission. And the kinds of people that report to me as the Dean are academic deans, and executive and administrative deans responsible for the facilities and finance; a Graduate School Dean; a Director of Communications; also, Director of Fund-Raising specifically related to the school reports to me; the Dean of Undergraduate Admissions; the Dean of Undergraduate and Graduate Students. So all of those divisions of the school report to me. And I have to deplore appropriately the personnel and resources to accomplish our mission.
Speaker 1: Okay. What are some of your priorities and goals for the future of Tufts?
Speaker 2: Right. So, particularly within the School of Arts of Sciences, we want to as always maintain an appropriate balance of teaching and research, and an emphasis for our students on learning and having transformational experiences. I am particularly interested in diversifying the faculty and the curriculum, because I think it's absolutely essential for all of the students that we train, all of the research that we do, have in mind that we live in a very diverse and a complex society. I want to make sure that the students that come out of Tufts have sharp analytical skills, and oral and communications skills when they leave; and I want to make sure that the quality of research that we're doing continues to be innovative and at the very highest of quality.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, I would say one thing in particular that is a goal for us across the university is to make sure that we have sufficient resources and financial aid to make sure that a diverse group of students is able to continue to come to elite universities like Tufts University.
Story_ID: 28075
Speaker 1: Okay. Now is it--you were describing, you know, how you spend your time. Is it difficult to balance research and administrative duties?
Speaker 2: Absolutely. You know, it's like most of the things that I'm trying to balance. It's really not so much like a balance like this (motioning with hands). It's like a seesaw (motioning with hands). You're doing thing or you're doing the other. And the issue is knowing when it's time to switch from one to the other. But it's not that in any given I say, "I am spending 20 percent of my time on research," or sometimes this. Sometimes my research takes a whole day or all of my attention and energy. Most of the days I spend addressing administrative issues, trying to make sure that the organization is moving forward at a good and fast pace, and servicing the mission that we have to our students and to society as a whole, to create new and innovative research.
Speaker 1: As a neuroscientist, now, this has always intrigued me: the concept of multitasking. Now, people try to do the same thing at once.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what you were describing is that you, basically, concentrate on one thing or the other. And, you know, some people maintain you can just do all these things at the same time.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I know there's been some research conducted--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --about this, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Right. On multitasking.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: Some people are better than others. In, general, women are better multi-taskers than men are. But I think all of us need some intense time to focus on complex issues or you get distracted. And then, there's obviously time in which you're doing things in which other things have to enter, and you do get, you know, involved in multiple things at the same time. But I think multitasking is really just being able to switch your attention relatively quickly between and amongst things.
Speaker 1: Okay. It's not like you're really doing two things well at the same time.
Speaker 2: Exactly. Not that often.
Story_ID: 28076
Speaker 1: One of your projects here at Tufts [University] has been the "Center on Race and Democracy," which is the brainchild of Dr. Peniel Joseph.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: History professor here.
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: That center is just launching. So we approved that center last year, and Dr. Joseph has been on sabbatical this year doing some planning and thinking and it will launch in full in the fall. And it will do a number of activities; it will be a place that's a think tank for issues related to race and democracy. It will be a place that houses archives for people who've had a particular role in this area of race and democracy, and it will be a place where our undergraduate students can actually connect the intellectual work that they're doing on Tufts' campus with the community outside Tufts. So we're--it will have multiple, simultaneous purposes, you know, some related to creating new research; some to disseminating that research, and some to making sure that our students use the research that they have gain and take it out into the community. All of those will be a part of this new center.
Speaker 1: Right. I think the goal of the center is to actually--though it's being, you know, started--kicked off by the university, it's to become independent almost at some point, really.
Speaker 2: It would be wonderful if it has a degree of financial independence.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But it will always, I hope, you know, be a part of Tufts University and the School of Arts and Sciences. We're very proud of being able to do that as well as a number of other things that we've been able to do related to diversity and inclusion here on campus. We've taken a multi-prong approach being able to create scholarly activities as an important, but it's also making sure that diversity inclusion are integrated fully and thoroughly in our curriculum. It also means making sure that we have faculty and staff that are representing different ideas in diversity, you know, within our divisions. So we have really put together a multi-pronged effort on this.
Story_ID: 28077
Speaker 1: Is most of your research still around Rett syndrome?
Speaker 2: Yes. Most of the research I'm doing continues to be around Rett syndrome and autism. I mean, they're growing numbers of individuals with autism, and we really need to understand it better and to search for cures for autism. So, most of my work is related to Rett syndrome and a little bit more broadly autism. And some continues to be related to schizophrenia, that Holy Grail for anyone that studies psychiatric disorders.
Speaker 1: Okay. And once again, I know you--but schizophrenia is considered the Holy Grail because--
Speaker 2: Because we really don't understand so many disorders of the brain. We understand a bit about the chemicals, the regions of the brain involved, and what it kind of looks like in the brain. Schizophrenia is one of those diseases where we can see some small changes, but it overlaps with a number of other disorders. And so we don't understand the physical basis of it, we don't completely understand the chemical basis of it, and it is extremely difficult to treat well with the drugs and pharmacological interventions that we have. So I consider it still to be the Holy Grail of psychiatric disorders.
Speaker 1: Okay. And in terms of administration, do you have aspirations to one day become the president of the university?
Speaker 2: Might not be a bad thing. Maybe one day, if I'm fortunate, I will be able to be a president of a college or university.
Story_ID: 28078
Speaker 1: Now, in 2012 you were elected a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Now, speak to the importance of that.
Speaker 2: Right. So, I consider being invited to be a Fellow and elected as a Fellow of AAAS, probably one of the four or five most important recognitions for a scientist. The vast majority of people are not fortunate enough to reach that level of achievement. There're obviously very few minorities, very few minority women who actually achieve that level of--who reach that level of achievement. It is significant because "Science Magazine" and AAAS is considered the premier scientific organization in the country; the premier science journal in the country. And so, I have always considered it to be a standard bearer for the sciences. And people can only be elected by other members who are--and voted on by people who are already in . So I can't tell you how many Fellows there are, but it is one of the three major achievements that is tracked by most universities. They track their Nobel Prize winners, their members of the National Academies of Science, and their AAAS Fellows. So it's kind of not in the same league. I'm not going to say it's in the same league as a Nobel Prize, but it is one of those three or four Fellowships that were--Fellow Statuses that virtually every university or college in the country tracks and notes to their trustees, and to the other members of the community. So that one was really quite significant to me.
Story_ID: 28079
Speaker 1: I know in 2010 you participated in one our ScienceMakers Programs (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: That's right. Exactly.
Speaker 1: Do you speak on a regular basis with--or periodically with groups of young people?
Speaker 2: Yes, I do. I think in every town or region in which I've lived, I've made sure that I've gone out to speak to students at different levels; high school. Obviously, I did so when my children were in elementary and middle school. I can't do it in their high schools anymore because they would not want to be affiliated with anything that their mother is doing. But I make a point to go out and make sure to stimulate and encourage young people to think about a career in science, because it's certainly been very, very good to me.
Story_ID: 28080
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: Right. My concerns are significant. When I look at the number of African-Americans who are capable of getting into elite universities like Tufts University, I will admit, it breaks my heart. We are not able to have education from kindergarten all the way through twelfth grade that supports the number of African-American students that we need to be prepared to come to a university of this type. There's so--it's such a complex issue, and it's such a complex problem. I'm not going to suggest that there's any one thing. I think there are a number of societal issues. There are federal issues with relation to socioeconomic disparities. There are issues related to the new "Jim Crow" and how many African-Americans are incarcerated versus the number that are probably perpetrating crimes. There are breakdowns in the families very often in the African-American community. Not any one of these things, but in combination, it has been devastating to the education of the general population. There is always a population of African-American elites who will be--who will be educated in the best institutions in the United States. It's for generations. I've described members of my family who've had the opportunities to be educated at excellent institutions, even when very few blacks were able to. There's always been a "cream of the crop." There's always been an "elite." What we have to be concerned about is making sure that a broader array of African-Americans have the opportunity to attend good, safe elementary schools, middle schools and high schools; and eventually, the most elite of our universities and colleges. So my hope is that we will take charge as a group in the way that I think our ancestors took charge of overthrowing "Jim Crow" laws in the South, and that we will use some of that energy, some of our vitality, some of our intelligence to make a better life for a broader array of blacks, and not just a few elite, to get through the system. I think that is going to become more and more important as our country becomes more and more diverse. There're large number of people who are not going to be in the highest socioeconomic group. How are we insuring a high rate of education and learning throughout the United States? That is our biggest challenge, not making sure that a few elite continue to maintain their level of wealth, their level of education. If we cannot figure out a way to reduce the income gap and to spread education more broadly, we really don't have a great hope as a society.
Story_ID: 28081
Speaker 1: In terms of women in science--I know, earlier you were saying that when you left high school, you were glad to get Wellesley [College] where it was good to be smart.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Where then, you know, do you think that's something that is a (burden?) that black people or just women have to with and are things getting any better?
Speaker 2: Are things getting better? I would have to say, yes, things are getting better; and they're getting better for some people. But my husband was just quoting a statistic for me that in this century there are more girls who have been terminated either prenatally or in infanticide in society. And there have been men who have been killed in wars. So we're still living in an age where people prefer to give birth to males, so much so that in China, you know, the population is--it is not normally balanced in males and females. And someone has to stop and realize this is not--this doesn't make sense for the long-term health of a society. So as long as we're still living in a world in which there's infanticide of girls and women, we know that we're not educating our population well enough, and we know that it's still a danger to be a female in this and in many societies. All you have to do is look at some of the recent incidents in India and the rapes that occurred there. People have to stand up and realize that this is not a healthy and productive way to move forward in society. And that's contrasted in elite institutions, such as Tufts University, where more than 50 percent, generally, now it's moving more towards 60 percent, of the people accepted are women. So it's really quite interesting to figure out how we're, you know, what's happening to males, what's happening in particular to black males in our society, and then, is this increased education of the women going to change this society in the future. There are lots of question, a lot more questions than there are answers.
Story_ID: 28082
Speaker 1: When you look back over what you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you would do different?
Speaker 2: You know, I don't spend most of my time thinking about what I would have or could have done differently. For the most part, I'm very happy with who I am and where I am, the friends and family I interact with. And so I don't spend most of my time focusing so much on what I could have done differently. What I do believe is that, one, I'm standing on the shoulders of giants, and that I'm where I am because of generations before me that provided support, made a little more progress, such that I can be where I am. So I think I'm incredibly fortunate to live in the time that I live; to be able to actually live in a time and see a black president when 30 years ago no one would have ever imagined that can be true. So I feel as though I'm standing on the shoulders of giants. And the second, is that I think I'm incredibly lucky to have been born at the time that I was born and live in the times in which I live. There's so much--there's so many possibilities; there's so many great things that I have been able to do that would not have been possible a generation earlier. So that's how I feel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 28083
Speaker 1: Likewise, when you look over everything you've accomplished to this point, what, today, would you consider to be your professional legacy?
Speaker 2: My professional legacy. I would hope that most people feel as though, as a professional, I spent a significant amount of my time supporting and empowering others to achieve; not just looking at my personal achievements and where I could get to in my career, but sowing the seeds such that other people could thrive. I think it might have something to do with my choice of going to a liberal arts college rather than a research university. I thought of the number of women and girls that I could empower to do science would greater that I'd have more of a personal rapport in relationships. So I would hope that my legacy is a legacy of empowerment and in empowering others to achieve the best that they can.
Story_ID: 28084
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your children and--
Speaker 2: Yeah. Alright. So I have two children; Clara is a 16 year old, and she is a sophomore in high school. I have a second son who is Tommy, and Tommy is 13 and is in seventh grade at the moment. Let's see, my daughter is a natural daughter between my husband and myself, and my son is adopted. So I have one of each. I have one girl, one boy. One natural, one adopted. One lighter skinned, one darker skinned. They're very different people, and together we have a wonderful and beautiful family. Clara, my daughter, is bright and a hard worker. She's on the quiet side. She loves to play piano and soccer. Tommy loves to play video games. He is incredibly perceptive. They are both really fine human beings. Sweet children that care about other people a lot. And I'm very proud to be their parents.
Story_ID: 28085
Speaker 1: Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered--I would like to be remembered as a scientist and someone who achieved as a scientist. I think that leaving behind my legacy as a scientist is one of the most important legacies that I can leave behind. There're not a lot of African-American women who are scientist. There're not a lot of people who put in the time to pursue science at the level that I have pursued science. And we spoke about some of my more recent achievements as a AAAS Fellow, actually being a part of the HistoryMakers Series, I think that that is a legacy that I'm leaving behind that is unique and different. There probably are going to be--there are other academic administrators, there're other people who have had families, but there really aren't a lot of African-American women who have pursue science and achieved at the level that I have. And I have to admit, I'm particularly of that. I'm proud of a lot of things. I'm proud of my family, I'm proud of the work that I have done in my church; but I will admit I am particularly proud that I stuck it out in science, and that I've been able to achieve the career in science that I've had.
Story_ID: 28086
Speaker 1: I think this must have been my first Easter. So this is my mother holding me, my brother Wesley on the left, my brother John on the right; and I assume my father is taking the picture. It appears to be in front of house on Palm Grove, and you can see the palm trees in the background.
Speaker 2: And this one.
Speaker 1: This is a picture--this is my college graduation picture, and it's around Paramecium Pond at Wellesley College.
Speaker 2: --(unclear).
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my mother. It looks as though it's probably from her days in either middle school or high school in Atlanta, Georgia. This is a picture of--starting on the left, my brother Wesley, my mother, myself, and my brother John. This is in our den in Inglewood, California. This is a picture of my mother on the left, Arminta Odessa Parks-Sweeney, and my aunt Clara Jean Parks-Pinkney on the right; and we're in front of "A Small World," at Disneyland, and they are, not me.
Speaker 2: It's a small world after all.
Speaker 1: Yes. Now, this is a picture of my father, and I don't know exactly where this is, but he's looking all do'd up and handsome. And my guess is it's probably sometime during his college days at Clark Atlanta. This is a picture of my children. Clara is on the left, and Tommy is on the right. It looks like Tommy is about three and Clara's about six at that time. This is a picture of Clara when she was about two years old and me in my gown from Johns Hopkins University. But this is on a lawn at Wellesley College.
Speaker 2: And describe this.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of family members. I'm on the left, Keyo (ph.) is giving a victory sign, and Keyo was a member of Joe Coil's laboratory. It's got my brothers, my nephew--or my sister-in-law, my father, and my sister-in-law with my two nephews. This is a picture of the Joe Coil Lab in one of our heydays in Baltimore, Maryland. Joe Coil is the guy in the center with the red tie. This is a picture of me and some family friends, including d'Lerian Norwood (ph.), who's got the beige and the glasses and standing up on a stoop; and Mrs. Harris, Golden Harris on the right in blue. Those were my mother's two best friends, and my sister-in-law Cheryl on the left. This is a picture of Aunt Clara and Uncle Eugene. My guess is this is Opelika, Alabama, sometime in the 1940s. This is a picture of Lillian and Edward, my grandmother and grandfather, in their house in Atlanta, Georgia. This one is a picture of my husband's family. His mother and his father are in the center, Arthur and Emma, and his brothers are around, including my brother and me and my husband. This is a picture of my brother Wesley in the foreground. In the background is my father with kind of the sunglasses/shades on, so that's Paul Sweeney, Sr., and Paul Sweeney, Jr., as well as on the left it's Wayne Withers, my cousin Pat's husband. That was at my graduation from Johns Hopkins University. This is another picture of my graduation from Johns Hopkins University where I'm being hooded and robed. This would have been 1989. This is a picture of the girls in the family. Mrs. Norwood in the center, my daughter Clara on the left; we've got Breekin (ph.), Cheryl and Joanne in addition. Oops.
Speaker 2: A tough one came. That one slipped.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know. There we go. Here's is a picture of my mom and me. My guess is this is our backyard in Los Angeles, California, so this is circa 1959. This is a picture of my dad and me, Paul Wesley Sweeney, Sr., and I'm on the stump. My guess is this is Mount Baldy or someplace where we used go outside and go camping. This is a picture of my mother Arminta and me as a baby, probably circa 1959, and probably also Mount Baldy, California. This is a picture of me and Aunt Clara Jean, and looks as though we might be in Nassau, Bahama (sic). I think we might have gone on a trip there together. Another picture of my mom and me. My guess is I'm dressed up for Easter there, circa 1959. This is a picture of me. This is my formal high school portrait from Morningside High School. This is a picture of my parents in the center on their wedding day. This would have been June 1949. There's Aunt Clara and Uncle Eugene on the left; there's my grandfather in between. I've heard that's the Reverend on the right, to the right of my mother; and my grandmother Lillian to the right of that. I think that's in front of their house where they got married. This is one of those funky booth pictures. It's my mother and me on the right, and my three brothers, and we were all part of the frown club. We're looking a little darker than usual here, which I think is a function of the photo booth, which has people looking tanned, but us looking a bit dark.
Speaker 2: Thank you very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
