Story_ID: 228207
Speaker 1: We're going to get started by slating that my name is Jodi Merriday and I'm the interviewer.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Scott Stearns is the videographer, and there are no observers.  Ma'am, could you please state and spell you name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Well, my name originally was MarVynee Elizabeth Betsch.  But, as I am an environmental activist with [President] Ronald [Wilson] Reagan in power and he made this smart remark, "When you've seen one redwood, you've seen them all," I took the R out.  So, it's now pronounced MaVynee, which I like very much because of the vines.  The middle name Elizabeth I changed because unfortunately Elizabeth I [of England] was one of the financiers for the slave trade.  So, my middle name is now Oshun, the goddess of love and the arts.  My last name is Betsch, spelled B-E-T-S-C-H.  My enemy takes the E out.  But anyway, I was born the year of the dog, so I don't mind it too much in Chinese astrology.  And, I was born in 1935, the same years they got American Beach [Florida], Florida's only African American beach community.
Speaker 1: Could you spell your name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's M-A capital V-Y-N-E-E, Oshun, O-S-H-U-N, the last name is Betsch, B-E-T-S-C-H.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us the actual date of your birth and the place--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: That you were born?
Speaker 2: January 30--13th, 1935, and I was born in Jacksonville, Florida.
Story_ID: 228208
Speaker 1: Could you tell us your date of birth and the location of your birth again, please?
Speaker 2: Of course, January 13th, 1935 in Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 1: And, today's date?
Speaker 2: Is this the 15th?  No.  The 20th.
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness my mother's [Mary Lewis Betsch] birth date.  She was born the 20th of October.  September 20, 2004.
Speaker 1: And, the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: 476 Auburn Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us what your occupation is?
Speaker 2: Well, right now I'm a retired opera singer, and I give historic tours for our historic African American beach in [American Beach] Florida, which is forty miles north of Jacksonville [Florida].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm also an environmentalist.  'Cause since my great-grandfather, A.L. Lewis [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] was Florida's first black millionaire, I inherited quite a bit of money, and I am a free spirit.  I'm the last of the hippies, I guess.  So, what am I gonna do with all this money?  And, since my great-grandfather was so much into natural living--his home in Jacksonville was wild and beautiful--I decided to dedicate it for butterflies.  So, that's my occupation now.  To save as much of the wild natural areas left in the world.  They aren't too many.  And, so, I guess I'm an environmentalist.  I'm an opera singer, retired.  And, I'm a historian for our beach.  I wear three hats (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 228209
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: Hm. My favorite food.  Of course, I'm strict vegetarian.  That's when my hair started to grow; it's been twenty years.  My favorite; I guess, raisin bread with lots of garlic and, I love olives.  I just love olives.  And, I think that's my, one of my favorite, believe it or not.  It sounds kinda weird.  But, it is--with mayonnaise; of course, no eggs in it.  I'm strict vegetarian.  I read [HistoryMaker] Dick Gregory's book ['Dick Gregory's Natural Diet for Folks Who Eat: Cookin' With Mother Nature!'] many years ago and it sounded so neat.  And, so, that's my favorite.
Speaker 1: And, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Oh, don't make me choose.  Oh, gosh, I guess, autumn because of the butterflies right now.  That's the one thing--oh, I can't believe it.  I was staying with my niece; I didn't see one butterfly.  How can you live in a city and not have butterflies?  This is the time of year when they're migrating.  They're so beautiful, so harmless.  I wanna be one in the next life.  I believe in reincarnation.  Trust me: butterflies have a fabulous life.  All they do is fly around, sip nectar, make love; what else you want?  Look at humans.  All these problems, child please.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color; orange, orange.  My lipstick, the hair, the butterflies--there's a flower and the--for butterflies and the color is orange.  So, I usually wear orange lipstick and as you can see this is orange.  It's an African slacks, and my shoes are orange.  So, that's my favorite color.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Gosh, what would that be?  You know, I like the desert.  I'm going, I hope, maybe next year, to see what my money's saved.  As I told you, I helped protect so many of the wild areas out west and in Africa.  So, I think I'd like to go out in the desert when the wild flowers are blooming, and watch the butterflies.  That would be my favorite.
Speaker 1: And, what is your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, so many, good gracious.  I guess, "Live simply so that others may simply live," [Mahatma Gandhi].  I think that's a good one.  My great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] was very much into that philosophy.
Story_ID: 228210
Speaker 1: Next we'll be exploring your family background.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Could you please tell me about your mother?  What was her name?  Where was she born?
Speaker 2: Um-hm. My mother was Mary Frances Lewis Betsch.  She was, of course, granddaughter of A.L. Lewis [Abraham Lincoln Lewis].  She was born in Jacksonville [Florida].  And, she attended Wilberforce University [Wilberforce, Ohio].  And, at the time of her death, she was vice president of the Afro-American Life Insurance Company [Jacksonville, Florida].  The insurance company my great-grandfather helped to found in Jacksonville.
Speaker 1: So, did she grow up her entire childhood--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm. In Jacksonville, right there.
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) adolescent, in Jacksonville, Florida?  What do you know about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was apparently very happy.  There were only two children.  I have--had an uncle.  He was Florida's first corporate black lawyer.  And, my mother married my dad, John Betsch, who at the time was working up here in Atlanta [Georgia] at Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia].  'Cause don't forget, now--oh, child please, you talking about insurance companies, I mean they were the economic base for the entire black community in United States.  There was an Afro in Florida, Afro Life Insurance Company; Atlanta Life in Georgia; North Carolina Mutual [Life Insurance Company, Durham, North Carolina].  They use to call themselves the golden triangle, okay.  It was [Alonzo] Herndon in Atlanta, [Charles Clinton] Spaulding in South Carolina [sic. North Carolina], my great-grandfather in Florida.  There was Supreme Life [Insurance Company of America] in Chicago [Illinois], Golden Gate [sic. Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company] in [Los Angeles] California.  Child, please; we did it all.  You couldn't walk into a white bank and get money, are you crazy?  We talking about the 1900s, okay.  So, mother and daddy were part of that whole community support system, economically for the whole South.  And, I grew up with that, and mother was very happy as from what I hear for her childhood.  And, she was a musician.  She played the organ at the church, oh child.  Gorgeous woman, oh, wait 'til you see the pictures; she was gorgeous.  She had, you know, most women have the, the sort of like the, what would call it, like a V shape of the hips, mother had the double hip, like the guitar or the violin, oh child please; gorgeous, gorgeous (laughter).
Speaker 1: How would you describe her personality?  Who she was?
Speaker 2: She was kind of reserved, like my sister.  We make such a study of contrast.  My sister by the way is Dr. Johnnetta [B.] Cole, former president of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia], now president of Bennett [College, Greensboro, North Carolina].  Johnnetta is very sophisticated.  I'm more of the free spirit type and she--I mean, look at this.  I mean, who else would walk around looking like this but somebody who's, who's independent in thought and in the way I live?  I'm like my dad.  Dad was like that.  He was kind of fun, fun.  I guess that's why I never married.  Because I thought, now you know, I don't need somebody with problems and boring me to tears.  Daddy was so much fun.  Mother was very cool, very sophisticated, okay.  So, she--we have the study of contrast.
Speaker 1: Did she share any stories with you related to her growing up?
Speaker 2: Only in the sense of what it was like.  Don't forget now, we're talking about--she was born in 1906.  This is the height of really bad segregated times in Florida.  And, there was always the fear of the [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK].  Jacksonville was, as you know, right there on the border with Georgia.  So, everyone always thinks Florida as being a liberal state.  But, we--I guess, because of our proximity to Georgia, we had a lot of the more conservative--and it still is--elements.  So, but, where we lived was called Sugar Hill [Jacksonville, Florida].  My grandfather--great-grandfather gave that house, his house, to my mother.  And, it was the section to live in Jacksonville, where the, quote, upper class blacks lived.  Don't forget now, in black society, it was the undertaker, the preacher, the insurance man, the hairdresser, and the teacher.  We were the economic base for the whole South.  I mean, these were people you knew had good jobs.  These are the people who helped others.  So, our house was always like Grand Central Station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York], oh, child please.  I mean, children coming in.  I mean, daddy, the insurance company, all the men coming in from the different branches staying at our house.  There were always parties.  My great-grandfather's house had twenty-two rooms.  It was the showplace.  We now know--unfortunately, tore it down.  But, it would have--it was financed by blacks.  Built by blacks.  It would have been probably the oldest of that type in the State of Florida; gorgeous.
Story_ID: 228211
Speaker 1: Where was your father [John Lewis] born?
Speaker 2: North Carolina.  Henderson, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: And, where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: Right there.  He grew up in Henderson.  He went to--I think it's Knoxville [College, Knoxville, Tennessee].  It's a black college in Tennessee.  And, my grandmother [Bertha Lewis] had a gorgeous house with gardeners.  I remember going there in the summer.  One side you had the garden area.  The other side was the area for food.  And, he finally went to Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia].  That's where he was working and came to Florida and met my mom [Mary Lewis Betsch].
Speaker 1: What do you know about his background and his growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, he came from a--interracial situation.  I'm not sure.  My sister [Dr. Johnnetta B. Cole] is doing a lot of research on that side.  We know more about the maternal side because that's--the great-grandfather was Kings--rememb--I think I--no, I haven't told you.  This is the woman where the man married the slave.  That's on the maternal side.  On my father's side, all I know--the Betsch, that's the German.  So, I assume that the--his great-grandfather was German and--the usual black woman situation.  But, that's all I know.  But, he had a happy childhood.  I mean, he have to have had one, he was such, such fun.  I can't believe it.
Speaker 1: Did he share any stories with you about his growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, he was--no, not too much.  He would only tell us about the times after, when he was out of college and the things he'd have to do.  My daddy had a lot of ingenuity; smart, God.  He had, not one, five jobs.  I mean, we lived, baby.  We lived.  He was vice president in charge of, what do you call it; the agency director of the insurance company.  He had--he was an architect.  He would go buy, go around and buy old cars.  I remember he had this friend called Louie [ph.].  He had a big old fat wife.  My god, that woman was fat.  He would take the cars in, have 'em fixed up, and daddy would sell the cars.  He would do people's income taxes.  He helped build the motel at the [American] Beach [Florida].  He had a hairdresser salon.  He had a--what else?  A poolroom; the poolroom.  Because the main street in Jacksonville [Florida]--I guess it would be like Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia]--it was Aster Street in Jacksonville.  And, he would brag about the fact; my daddy was the only black man who could talk down the street with a diamond ring on, and nobody would even bother him.  He was so well liked.  And, just, just, oh God, just, just fun.  That was daddy.
Story_ID: 228212
Speaker 1: How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: Well, on my maternal side, I can go all the way back to Africa.  This is the Kingsley family.  It's a national park [Kingsley Plantation, Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve, Jacksonville, Florida].  Zephaniah Kingsley in 1806 went to Cuba, and he bought Anna Kingsley.  She was thirteen years old.  She came from a royal family in Senegal.  And, unfortunately, these rival kingdoms were fighting.  And, the slave trade people took advantage of that and captured her.  She was brought to Cuba, and at thirteen he bought her, brought her to Florida and five years later he married her.  Can you believe this?  This is the only one we, so far, we know of, of the man actually marrying.  You have the case of the mistress and things of this sort.  He actually married Anna.  And, they had four children.  I come directly through Mary [Kingsley], the second daughter.  So, that their great-granddaughter was my great-grandmother who was A. L. Lewis' [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] first wife [Mary Frances Sammis].  And, this plantation is in the National Park [Service] system.  You can see the slave cabins.  And, so, I'm a direct descendent.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories, legends or songs that have been passed down through your maternal family?
Speaker 2: Stories.  Mainly about what happened at the plantation.  Don't forget, this is Florida now.  Florida is completely different from the other southern states.  The slaves on--at Kingsley Plantation only worked until two.  Imagine.  They had their own gardens.  They could--you could even buy your way out of slavery.  See, this is not South Carolina, Mississippi, Alabama, all those horror stories you've heard about; Florida's different.  This is Catholic Florida, okay.  In sixteen--something, I think its '80 [1680; sic. November 7, 1693], the king of Spain [Charles II] said, "If you cross the border, you're free."  Not that they, the Spanish, cared about us, but they used the slaves against the British.  So, you had a completely different system here in Florida.  You had the slave owner, the slave, and then you had the freed slaves--a third class, of freed slaves.  Isn't that wonderful?  Florida, absolutely.  And, this Zephaniah Kingsley, this man who married Anna, was--well, it's still slavery.  But, he was at least more humane towards the slaves.  So, then there were stories of all the ways they would try to get out--escape.  See, we never get this.  For us, it was always, "Well, the slaves were happy little slave--." Yeah, I guess so, if you've been beaten and tortured so much, you wo--I guess you would stay there.  But, the stories of how they would escape.  You know what they would do?  Oh, I love this.  The quilts!  My grandmother [Bertha Lewis] had quilts, and she would tell us stories about--you know the designs?  Each one of those designs had a message.  Now, think about it.  Masters' watching your every move.  How you gonna be able to get this code through there?  The quilts.  Because this is something all the women did.  And, one of the quilts had bears' claw.  That was one of the signs--one of the designs on the quilt.  Well, think about it.  Now this is when they were going north.  If you're going north, you've gotta go up through the Appalachian Mountains.  So, you'd follow the bears' trail to get to Ohio, so you'd be free.  And, of course, master's seeing all this the whole time.  But, what difference did it make?  The quilt would be put across the fence.  And, he's thinking, "Oh, look at my little happy slaves.  They're out there with such ingenuity, cleaning and fixing up their quilts."  That was a signal to get out of there.  Isn't that wonderful?  On the back of the quilts were little knots.  Supposed you wanted to tell them that at twenty-five miles there would be a place where you could hide.  Well, the fifth know would be a different color.  Black people had a system, baby!  See, what he forgot, my sister [Dr. Johnnetta B. Cole] and I is from politician.  What he forgot: Africans love secrecy, see.  So, that words like in African language, I could say the same word to you, if I say it up here and if I say it down here, it has a whole different meaning, okay.  So, they could talk to--right in front of him and say things and the slaves knew what the word meant; what the message meant.  There was a blacksmith, get the picture now, he hitting the anvil--you know, they took the drum, they took our religion, they took the language.  But sound; that drum, he could beat out; the blacksmith.  Oh, child please--I get chills thinking about it.  Oh, yeah, that's how they would do it.
Story_ID: 228213
Speaker 1: And, on the paternal side of your family--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How far back you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Only to that German.  And, I looked--someone went on the Internet and apparently Betsch is very rare, that name.  They're only about a hundred of them in the United States with Betsch.  They made prayer stools, 1300s in Germany.  And, it's really ironic because when I was singing opera, I lived in Germany for twenty years--for twenty, for ten years I was singing in Germany.
Story_ID: 228214
Speaker 1: So, you knew your grandparents on your mother's [Mary Lewis Betsch] side?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, you've talked about your grandmother [sic. great-grandmother, Mary Sammis Lewis] and your grandfather's [sic. great-grandfather, Abraham Lincoln Lewis] house.  What else can you tell us about them?  Are there any other memories or stories or anything about them?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis]; well, of course, my grandmother came to Washington [D.C.].  She, unfortunately--my dad [John Betsch] was so upset about the school system [in Jacksonville, Florida] so she sold that, and we moved to Washington.  So, for four years I lived in Washington; went to [Benjamin] Banneker Junior High School [Benjamin Banneker Academic High School; Washington, D.C.].  On my maternal side, my great-grandfather, oh, Jodi [Merriday], what can I say?  This man was, as far as I'm concerned, a saint.  Easter to Labor Day, we always went to the beach [American Beach, Florida].  Twenty-two Sundays.  And, it was this ritual.  We ate dinner with him.  I can still remember, olive oil.  Oh, that's one of my favorite foods, I forgot to mention that, olive oil.  He--his wife [Elzona Nobileo] cooked everything in olive oil.  Oh, God, I was--
Speaker 1: What kind of things would she cook?
Speaker 2: Fried chicken, you know the usual.
Speaker 1: Fried chicken in olive oil?
Speaker 2: Olive oil.  You hav--darling, that is the ultimate.  That is the ultimate (laughter).  But, for twenty-two Sundays we went to the beach.  And, Mount Olive A.M.E. Church [Jacksonville, Florida] was his church.  He-mother played the organ as I said.  And, of course, my great-grandfather was the person in the church.  And, I remember just as sure as if it was yesterday, he'd--around two o'clock he'd start looking at his watch, you know, because the preacher was very long winded.  He's going on, "Oh, you're damned to hell--" dat dat dat, my great-grandfather's looking at this watch.  "Oh, I don't think so."  (Laughter) "I don't think so."  And, so, he'd give a signal to my mom, and she'd get on that organ and push that loud button, dundun, dundun, dundun. 'Nearer, My God, To Thee.'  It's time to go to the beach (laughter).  So, sure enough at two o'clock, (laughter) we'd go to the beach (laughter).
Story_ID: 228215
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Growing up, going to the beach [American Beach, Florida].  Oh, God. Oh, child, you can't believe--I mean, black people at their own beach?  Child, we thought we were somebody (laughter).  Well, I went to the grade--the usual grade school.  As I was say, we went four years in [Washington] D.C.  But, then we came back to Jacksonville [Florida] and I went to a girl's high school (excuse me).  It was called Boylan-Haven [School, Jacksonville, Florida].  We called it bore-less heaven.  This was a private school for girls, black girls.  I don't there's another one.  Did you all have one here in Georgia?  I don't think so.  We had one in Florida, run by missionaries.  And, of course, they were gonna determined to make us out into little Europeanized girls.  I was a rascal as you probably can imagine.  And, so, that--we did all kinds of fun things.  But, I was--I graduated there in 1951 from this all girl high school.  And, from there I went to Oberlin [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].  I was gonna go to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], but Todd Duncan, a very famous African American baritone came to Jacksonville and he said, "No."  He talked to my mom [Mary Lewis Betsch].  He said, "No, let her go straight to Oberlin Conservatory of Music."  So, I gonna be a pianist.  I auditioned, not--I didn't have all these nails and everything.  And, after my sophomore year, I studied singing.  And, sure enough, I was in the choir.  I opened [Oberlin] College Choir.  We sang in town hall.  I was the soloist and all that kind of good stuff.  And, I graduated 1955, the top of my class.  From there I went to Europe.
Story_ID: 228216
Speaker 1: Can you describe what your family life was like--
Speaker 2: Oh, baby.
Speaker 1: As you were growing up; holidays, or special events?
Speaker 2: Fun.  Fun, fun, fun.  When I hear all these horror stories about some of these children, that childhood--I just cringe.  As I said, our house was like Grand Central Station [Grand Central Terminal, New York, New York].  There were always people around.  Mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] and daddy [John Betsch] was such social persons in a responsible way to the community.  Mother as I said was the organist [at Mount Olive A.M.E. Church, Jacksonville, Florida].  Daddy did all these things, income tax for people.  Don't forget, this is a time when food was rationed.  You probably don't remember this, but food was rationed.  Daddy would go around and give the coupons for gas and sugar.  What else was rationed?  Something else.  So, it was always a fun time.  We never got spankings.  We never got yellings.  We never got cursings.  Because my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] was--had such a--what can I say, he always had a mesmerizing effect on the whole family.  He spoke very soft, very softly.  He--I can remember at some of the family reunions, he'd walk in and everything would stop.  If everyone were arguing, it stopped when he walked in.  He was just that--he had that kind of charisma, that kind of charisma.  He was born in 1865.  The same year, of course, the end of the Civil War.  He came from Madison, Florida.  In fact, five is gonna be big next year.  Wait 'til I tell you all the things that happened in five. Eighteen sixty-five [1865], my great-grandfather born.  Nine--Seventeen sixty-five [1765], [Zephaniah] Kingsley, the same man, was born.  Selma [to Montgomery] Marches were in '65 [1965].  Fifty-five [1955] is--the school segregation thing [sic. Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] in the--I mean, it's so many fives.  Malcolm X was something with five [born 1925, assassinated 1965]; Million Man March is 1995.  Ebony got its first magazine printed, 1945.  All these fives, and of course, American Beach, Florida, 1935.  It's like the ancestors said, "Hang on baby, five is your year."  So, we're gonna have a renaissance, trust me.  It's gonna be awesome.
Story_ID: 228217
Speaker 1: Could you please give your siblings' names in birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born as I said in 1935.  In 1936, my sister [Dr.] Johnnetta [B.] Cole was born.  And, then I have a brother.  Ten years later, little Johnny [John Betsch, Jr.] came and he's a jazz musician; lives in Paris [France].  And, mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] always likes to relate this story because as children, of course, we would tease him.  Just terribly so.  And, my dad [John Betsch] would say, "You can't hit the girls.  You can't hit the girls."  So, you know what my little brother would do, he would go to his room, put up a big sign, "Do not disturb," and beat the drum.  I'm sure he was saying, "Well, I'll get those sisters, I'll beat--" and now he's a professional jazz musician.  So, I--when I speak to children, I tell them how you can turn anger into something positive.  And, I always love that story.  And, of course, my sister coming one year later was such, such a contrast.  I mean, she was always crying and I'm the show off, you know, the first born and I'm prancing around.  And, I remember when we'd have guests, I'd wait until everybody was there, just to show off, you know.  And, if I did something wrong, mother would send me to my room, which is exactly what I wanted, because I always had this vivid imagination.  I guess that's why it was easy for me to be an opera singer.  There were always these imaginary friends: animals and people.  So, I'd go to my room, happy that she'd sent me there.  And, on the dresser I would pretend like that was a stage, and I would pretend, you know, that the little animals were talking to me and things of this sort.  So, mother could never figure this out.  There was never--they had company, this is when I showed off (laughter).  Plus the fact, whenever it was time to wash dishes, this is also when I wanted to play the piano.  My sister said, "Now, wait a minute, something's funny.  How come you only get inspired to play the piano and practice just when it's time to wash the dishes?"  So, it was a fun time, absolutely.
Story_ID: 228218
Speaker 1: What street did you live on?
Speaker 2: Jacksonville [Florida], oh God, we lived at [West] 8th [Street] and [North] Jefferson [Street], which as I said was called Sugar Hill [Jacksonville, Florida]; the place.  It's now, God forbid, I don't know if you know this, with most black communities it's usually the I-95 [Interstate 95] that goes through it or something.  Well, for our community it was I-95 and a hospital [University Hospital; University of Florida Health Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida].  We had to sell that gorgeous house.  God, I'll never shall forget it.  As I told you, it was twenty-two rooms.  Daddy [John Betsch] fixed the upstairs like a poolroom so he could watch the boys when we [HistoryMaker MaVynee "Beach Lady" Betsch and Dr. Johnnetta B. Cole] were in high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida], when we were getting to have little boyfriends.  And, that was the playroom for us.  And, but, we had to sell that.  And, it took that bulldozer three days before it even fell.  It was so well built.  Now?  These houses they built now?  Condominiums, million dollars, child please; presswood, they were up in a month.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: They built back in those days, darling; they built.
Story_ID: 228219
Speaker 1: Oh, I forgot to tell you, my sister [Dr. Johnnetta B. Cole] played the violin.  And, that's--she was taking the violin when we were up in Washington [D.C.].  And, she had this violin teacher at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  And, I never shall forget, whenever you called him, he said, "Oh, hello, are you there?"  I thought this was so neat.  What do think?  Of course, I'm here (laughter).  That's the way he spoke.  He was African American, but he had this very British accent; "Oh, are you there."
Story_ID: 228220
Speaker 1: Can you describe your block, your neighborhood block?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was a triangle, believe it or not.  My great-gra--we were at one corner, my uncle's house was at the other corner.  And, my great-grandfather's [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] house was at the apex.  And, the hospital where I was born was right across the street.  In fact, that hospital is historic.  It was called [George A.] Brewster Hospital [and School of Nurse Training; UF Health Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida].  It's where the, I--if I'm not mistaken, the first black nursing school of the State of Florida was there.  So, it's historic too.  I was born at a historic hospital; I like that.  The neighborhood was fun.  Again, the children were all part of our little community to be around.  And, I remember there was the (unclear) Louisiana, which I, which I like the fact, because I'm very much into studying African religions and the Voodoo Queen, the most famous Voodoo Queen in the whole world was in Louisiana.  Her name was Madam [Marie Catherine] Laveau.  And, guess what her occupation was?  Hairdresser (laughter).  So, everyone thinks, "Watch, the Beach Lady's [HistoryMaker MaVynee "Beach Lady" Betsch] got all this [hair]," (laughter).  But, anyway, it was fun.  Very quiet.  We lived crossed from a park.  On the other side was where the white neighborhood was.  I mean, Jodi [Merriday], we could go for days and never see a white person.  It's so strange the way the culture was.  But, that was it.  Of course, coming from a wealthy family, we were taken to school.  Much of the segregated lifestyle we missed.  Like, we didn't ride the bus to school.  We were taken to school in a car.  What can I say?  So, what the average black experienced, we didn't.  After all we've got our own insurance company [Afro-American Life Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida].  We didn't have to go to a bank and be humiliated, tell them you're not gonna do this, or whatever.  So, it was a whole different world for the wealth black in the South.  Which, I think you'll find interesting that you're interviewing me; I don't know how many other people come, but most of the blacks come from more poor backgrounds.  But, I was born into money.  So, I never experienced what that was like.  Can you understand?  It's different.
Speaker 1: I can.
Speaker 2: Completely different.
Speaker 1: Are there any neighbors or people who were in your community that you remember or any particular situations or circumstances?
Speaker 2: In the neighborhood.  Johnnetta's [Dr. Johnnetta B. Cole] godmother, I remember her mamma, Alice [ph.], lived at the opposite corner.  She was so neat.  She lived in West Palm Beach [Florida].  We used to like to go visit her because she had these collection of orchids.  I love flowers, oh yeah.  She's an African American woman married to a very wealthy black doctor.  And, she had this, sort of like a greenhouse in her house with orchids.  I remember that.  And, of course, the school friends, since we went to this private girls school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida]--it was also a boarding school.  So, I didn't have too many of them around my neighborhood because they lived in the school as a boarding school.  But, oh, that was neat, absolutely.
Story_ID: 228221
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells, remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, that olive oil frying, that's number one.  God, I--sights, believe it or not, it was going to the [Memorial] Cemetery [Jacksonville, Florida] 'cause it was so beautiful.  My great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] had a mausoleum [Lewis Mausoleum].  By the way, it's the only black mausoleum on the national registry [National Register of Historic Places].  There're six--it's all marble.  You know what a mausoleum is?  You're not, you're not in the ground.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You're in these--okay.  He's in the middle between his first wife [Mary Frances Sammis], the [Anna Kingsley and Zephaniah] Kingsley connection; then, the second wife [Elzona Nobileo] is on top.  Even there, he's humanitarian.  He's not on top.  And, this was a ritual.  We ate dinner with my great-grandfather every Sunday, those twenty-two Sundays [between Easter and Labor Day] when we--you went to the cemetery.  He would sit there and meditate.  And as children, we'd run around; all the wild flowers, it was beautiful.  And, then we'd go to, to [Mount Olive A.M.E.] Church [Jacksonville, Florida] and from there to the [American] Beach [Florida].  That was the ritual.  And, it was that quiet at the cemeteries.  And, as a child, people would say, "But, aren't you afraid?" you know.  We never had that fear about the world between the living and the death.  Because for my great-grandfather, it was such a reality for him.  He went to Africa in the '20s [1920s], and he would tell us about how the black kings and Nubian kings went north in Egypt in the twenty-fifth dynasty and conquered.  And, our little eyes would go "What?  We didn't have his in school."
Speaker 1: Where did he go in Africa?
Speaker 2: He sailed down the Nile [River].  He-first, he went to the Holy Land in Egypt and then he went to Egypt and took that boat trip down the Nile.  This is in the '20s [1920s], when people weren't even talking about Africa, okay.  He came back, and he told us.  And, that's why the American Beach was so special.  If you look at the map, here's American Beach, that curve; doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, doop, that's Africa.  If you could walk straight across, you'd be right there in Egypt.  And, he'd tell us, "Look, children, if you go across, you'd be in Africa."  And, then in the afternoon when the sea breezes came from the southeast he'd say, "Here she comes, here she comes."  We look, what are talking about, "Here she comes?"  The southeast is at an angle and if you keep walking, you'd be in Angola.  This is where the Queen [Anna] Nzinga, you ever heard of her?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: He would tell us, "This is the woman who fought forty years to keep her people from being taken as slaves."  So, American Beach had a spiritual connection. It had a historical connection.  It was everything.  In fact, I have it in my will that I want my ashes on NaNa [American Beach, Florida], our sand dune.  And, even the sand dune to this day has become a burial site for people.  It's okay now, for cremation.  I don't know if you know this but, in the old days, black people wouldn't talk about cremation.
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Now, it's okay.  So, we have funerals there.  We have weddings.  The beach has taken on a whole new historical thing now with integration.  Because blacks can go other places now, okay.  But, for my great-grandfather, it was very spiritual, very spiritual.
Story_ID: 228222
Speaker 1: How did desegregation impact your life and how you were experiencing life?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said, since I came from a wealthier family, I didn't experience some of the horrors of segregation.  But, with integration, it affected the [American] Beach [Florida] terribly because many of the blacks moved away; the houses were abandoned.  That's where I really noticed the difference with--it goes--don't forget now, I went to an integrated hi-college [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].  I had white teachers in high school at this girls' high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].  So, I only remember stories that I could hear children talk about how maybe their parents were now working at the--hired job at the post office.  Or, they were now working in the banks and things of that sort.  But, for me directly, I don't remember that much big a difference.  Because we had everything we wanted anyway.  With the [Afro-American Life] Insurance Company [Jacksonville, Florida], we had our own beach.  We, you know, my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] had a chauffeur.  He had one of those little [Studebaker-]Packard [Corporation] cars, and don't worry, he sat up in the front seat, okay.  And, my sister [Dr. Johnnetta B. Cole] and I would be in the back.  And, I remember vividly, these experiences with him.  We'd go to get gas, he'd reach in his pocket to pay, for the money, it's a twenty dollar bill.  He'd tell, Alan [ph.], his chauffeur, "Go, we're going to the next store, we gotta get change."  My sister and I looking at each other.  "What is going on?  What you talking, you gotta get change.  What's going on?"  He said, "Look at this twenty dollar bill.  Do you know who that is?  That's [President Andrew] Jackson.  That man, he massacred the Indians [Native Americans].  He--what, he gone and what he did to the black people?  He chased the slaves down."  He would go to the next store and get four fives.  Who was on the fives?  [President] Abraham Lincoln.  He would say, "Children, even your money--you're making a statement.  Don't you dare pay with this money, with this twenty dollar bill."  See you never thought of that.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: This man was deep.  He was deep, Jodi [Merriday].  Life, everything had a meaning, even your money.  He said, "That's criminal to do that."  So, here my great-grandfather, the wealthiest man in Florida with a wad of five dollar bills.  What--that's how he paid, if he paid cash.  Abraham--that was his name; Abraham Lincoln Lewis.  That's deep.
Speaker 1: That is.
Speaker 2: That man was deep, child.  You know what else he would do?
Speaker 1: What else?
Speaker 2: Every Sunday we'd go to [Mount Olive A.M.E.] Church [Jacksonville, Florida], as I told you.  We sitting up in the back seat.  We're at this end of Sugar Hill [Jacksonville, Florida], at the other end were the projects.  Now he could have gone this way to go, 'cause we--the church was on east.  But, knowing he went straight down Jefferson Street.  We get at the foot of Jefferson Street, he'd roll down the window, and we got this lecture.  He said, "You know my children, you know why you live on that end?  It's because of people on this end are paying those premiums, and don't you ever forget it."  Those were the poor people.  He never, never forgot his poor roots.  Now, you know, let's be honest.  Most black people now, now as soon as they get that money; get that Cadillac, two, three of 'em; getting fine house; they don't wanna associate with any more black people.  Especially, not those, quote, in the lower part of the economic ladder; not my great-grandfather.  Even the beach, he deliberately made the lots fifty by one hundred [feet], so you wouldn't build mansions.  That way the poor people will be able to afford to live at American Beach.  That's deep.
Story_ID: 228223
Speaker 1: And, it's told that on American Beach [Florida], you could find the full--
Speaker 2: Range of everything.  We had the [Florida] Supreme Court justice living there, [HistoryMaker] Leander Shaw.  We had the first black man that graduated from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts] living there.  We had the first black female legislator living there.  In fact, I spoke at the National Trust [for Historic Preservation], I said, "We got so many firsts like being a perpetual virgin, okay."  Yet, if you come in on Lewis Street, the main street named for him [Abraham Lincoln Lewis], you'll see a boathouse.  It's very unusual, the way it's shaped; beautiful garden.  You know who lives there?  It's a showplace as far as I'm concerned, in the back part of the beach.  You know who lives there?
Speaker 1: Who lives there?
Speaker 2: A janitor.  Now, Jodi [Merriday], where in American can a janitor--the diversity!  The sociologists love us.  They come and study us.  They can't believe this because Americans talk about democracy.  That's why he called it American Beach.  He said, "White folks talk about democracy, they don't live it."  We are living it.  You've got millionaires, this one, a janitor, teachers; this is what we thought the American dream was about.  And, it's experienced at American Beach.  The man was deep.  I'm telling you.  He died in 1947.
Speaker 1: What was that like?
Speaker 2: There were so many people, oh, God.  I mean, it isn't a big deal now, but there were as many whites as blacks at his funeral.  I'd never shall forget it.  They used to call him the black Jesus.  He was something else, something else.  He never raised his voice.  Spoke always in this calm.  You know what he'd do, if you did something bad?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: He'd just stare at you.  That stare, oh, Jodi, you just wanna go, "Oh, please."  He wouldn't say anything.  Just stare at you.  He had that kind of power.  It's awesome, awesome, awesome.  You just don't find 'em like that no more, baby.  Rare.  You you're feel that spirit when you come to American Beach.  You'll feel it.  He's there.  He is there.  Absolutely.
Story_ID: 228224
Speaker 1: I wanna ask you some questions about your growing up and your education.  What elementary school did you attend?
Speaker 2: It was a school that was connected to the college, Edward Waters [College, Jacksonville, Florida], which is the only black--the oldest black college in Florida; Edward Waters College.  It was founded by the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  There was an elementary school there.  Mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] was a treasurer at Edward Waters.  And, the class wasn't that big as I remember, and it was again, the teachers were very kind, 'cause we never had the spankings or disciplinary type things.  But, from there I went to, as I said, to [Benjamin] Banneker [Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School] in [Washington] D.C., and from there to this all-girls [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].  So, I had a mixture of public school, a private school, and then a school up--what we call up north in D.C.
Speaker 1: In your elementary school do you recall any teachers that influenced you?  The names of any of them?
Speaker 2: I just--Miss Fancer [ph.], her dad was part of that A.M.E. church [Mount Olive A.M.E. Church, Jacksonville, Florida].  I remember, because when we had writing, even now when I write, all of my letters slant sort of like the way the waves are.  And, that's the way she wrote, and I wanted to write to like that.  So that, you know, you know how you--everything's slant.  The A is like this, it looks like a wave.  I remember that distinctively.  And, my other teacher I remember in middle--in junior high who taught Spanish.
Speaker 1: What is the name of your junior high?
Speaker 2: Banneker.
Speaker 1: Banneker.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Benjamin Banneker?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Banneker.  Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And what a contrast from--to show you how backward the southern schools were, now I'm going to--still segregated now, but it's in Washington, the kids up there were already taking Spanish and courses like that; geometry, in the seventh grade.  If--when I came back home, the kids in the South, in Jacksonville [Florida] were only taking that once they got to high school.  See nobody tells about how--
Speaker 1: Were there teachers in your middle school that you remember?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Anyone who influenced you?
Speaker 2: I guess, Miss Porter [ph.], my Spanish teacher.  I thought that was fascinating because that was the first time I sang.  I mean, I went on stage.  She had a little program, and I remember I sang 'La Violetta'.  It's a song about the little violet.  And, just the idea of another sound.  'Course, which was good for me as a singer, because I had to take other languages.  I had to study German, French, and Spanish.  So, I remember her, yeah.  That was great, 'La Cucaracha.'
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?  You mentioned earlier that you were--
Speaker 2: I'm the rascal, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'm the one, oh, child please.  Well, I'm, I was, what was that, you had the valedictorian, salutatorian, I was the third when I graduated from high school.  But, I graduated top of my class from college [Oberlin Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio].  Because I loved singing.  I mean, the music was fun thing to me.  And, my teacher were encouraging.  And, but, I'm must admit, I guess, I was kind of lazy, laid back.  I would wait 'til the last minute to get my lessons and that kind of stuff, you know.  And, [Dr.] Johnnetta [B. Cole], my--of course, my sister was very studious and methodical, and she still is.  I guess, that's why she makes such a good president (laughter) of a college.  I wouldn't have the patience, oh, God.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: No way (laughter).
Story_ID: 228225
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Well, I wanted to be--I've always liked being on the stage, as I said.  Because my mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] and daddy [John Betsch] would always show me off whenever they had company.  And, I liked the attention.  So, I guess, yeah, I wanted to sort of be the, the show person or whatever.  And, it happened when I went to Europe to meet--to do opera.
Speaker 1: What is influencing you as a young person?  Were there any experiences that you think really impacted how you came into your being?
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] very much so.  And, my--don't forget now, Jacksonville [Florida] was called the Harlem of the South.  We had--I mean, Ray Charles is there.  The nightclub was called the Two Spot [2 Spot, Jacksonville, Florida].  The real party was at the [American] Beach [Florida].  Ray Charles, Duke Ellington, Count Basie: they all played at the nightclub in the American Beach.  And, then, you know, in Jacksonville there was always something going on with entertainment, and we admired all these people.  Our whole world was so self-contained in this black community.  As I said, you just didn't see that many white anyway.  And, Todd Duncan, the--I remember Marian Anderson came through Jacksonville.  I think that's when I was thinking more about singing classical music, hearing her.
Speaker 1: What was that experience like, hearing Marian Anderson?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was awesome, absolutely.  We--I don't remember our having television; we had radio.  But, oh, yeah, she came through and--who was that other--oh, Roland Hayes, so, like I said, Jacksonville was definitely one of the places to be, to be seen and performing.  So, I was exposed to all that good stuff.  It's the second largest city in Jack--in Florida, so.  We got all the biggies.
Story_ID: 228226
Speaker 1: How were you spending your time as you were growing up?  Outside of perhaps some of the things that you've already mentioned?  Were there any books, or were there any sports, or organizations that you belonged to?
Speaker 2: Well, when I went to [Benjamin Banneker] Junior High School [Benjamin Banneker Academic High School; Washington, D.C.], we went to a King Smith's School for Dance [King-Smith School, Washington, D.C.].  I've always love dancing; modern dance.  We had it at high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].  And, so, I was a member of that.  It was called King Smith's School for Dance, music, art, something else.  I guess, that's why we didn't get into any more trouble.  'Cause da--mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] and daddy [John Betsch] kept us busy.  Oh, God, we were always going to some kind of dance club, or music; there was always--there were the recitals; music recitals.  My little piano teacher in Jacksonville [Florida].  Oh, she was neat.  She lived in the projects.  African American woman from, I think she was from Indiana.  And, she taught me jazz and classical which was good to get both.  Um-hm, it's very rare.
Speaker 1: What was some of the songs that she was teaching you?
Speaker 2: I remember we did Carnival, that one that Duke Ellington--'Caravan' (singing)!  She arranged that for four hands.  And, I placed the bass, it was like, it was sort of, you know.  Double--I mean, I'm both hands and she's playing the top part.  So, we had jazz.  We had classical music from this one woman.  And, she lived in the projects; black woman, sure did.  I remember her names was Miss Evelyn Squires.  She was left-handed too.  I like that.  'Cause my favorite jazz musician is Earl Gonna [ph.].  You know that left-hand (singing).  My teacher was left-handed.  So, I remember her; she was so good.  God, that woman was good.
Speaker 1: What were you thinking you wanted to be at that time?  Did it change?
Speaker 2: Well, I--oh, it changed.  Because I was gonna go into mu--piano and stuff and, but, then when I got to Oberlin [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] I decided I wanted to be a singer because it--that was fun, man, being the soloist with the choir and all that kind of good stuff.  And, then my teacher encouraged me to go to Europe to study with his teacher.  So, Paris [France], wow!  I mean, this--the idea of going to a foreign country, that gave it even more spice, spice, spice.  So, I did that.  I was dreaming about that.  And, I was very young.  Don't forget now, I went to first grade at four.  I graduated from high school at sixteen.  So, all the girls in my class were much older.  They had their boyfriends.  My daddy said, "Oh, no you don't, just 'cause all these other girls"--I mean, they're eighteen and nineteen, you know, with their boyfriends and I was just sixteen when I graduated from high school.  I was twenty when I graduated from college.  My sister was fifteen when she went to college, when she went, yeah.  Because she went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  What happened, they had that accelerated program, they took girls, I mean, people from the eleventh grade if you could pass the test.  And, [Dr.] Johnnetta [B. Cole] passed the test.  So, she went to Fisk in eleventh grade.
Story_ID: 228227
Speaker 1: I think we stopped, and we were discussing your sister.
Speaker 2: Oh, [Dr.] Johnnetta [B. Cole], oh, yeah.  So, she went to high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida] directly from--went to college directly from eleventh grade.  And, then after two years at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee].  I said, "Baby, come on up here with me."  So, she came up to Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio], and she majored in sociology and from there she got her master's [degree] at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] in anthropology.  And, the rest you know.  She went from there to [University of Massachusetts] Amherst [Amherst, Massachusetts] and from there to Hunter [College, New York, New York].  Meanwhile, her radical, vivacious sister is in Europe.  I was in Paris [France] for one year.  And, then, the teacher I was studying with had this pupil and he said, "They want somebody to sing Salome."  I'm thinking, "What?"  "Don't you wanna audition?"  I'm thinking, "Are you crazy?  I'm just twenty years old.  I've only studied in Europe one year, I'm gonna sing the most difficult opera in Germany?"  That's like going to the Vatican, you know.  The Germans consider their operas, you know--"This is our world."  Well, it's the same thing if a white person's gonna come here and start playing Miles Davis.  You're gonna think, "Hey, what's yo', what's yo' game here?"  You know?  So, here I am--don't forget, there very few blacks in Germany, except for there in the southern part where the military are stationed.  I was in the northern part.  So, Jodi [Merriday], I'm the only black in the town, child, you're talking about Queen Tut (laughter).  I walked down the street, everything would stop.  They never seen anything this dark in their lives, honey.  I had it--oh, it was--I'm thinking, now, if I'm back in Florida, if I walk into a store, I'm the last one to be waited on, okay.  Here, soon as I walked in, "Frau Betsch [HistoryMaker MaVynee "Beach Lady" Betsch]!" I'm thinking, oh, child, please, this is the life here.  And, I'm singing the most difficult role there is.  I'm on stage the whole time.  You know, most operas are just--sing (singing) then you go off.  Not with 'Salome' [Richard Strauss], you sing the entire time.  Then I have to a dance, the Dance of the Seven Veils.  Remember the Bible when she gets the head of Saint John [the Baptist]?  That's the opera.  One hundred and forty members of the orchestra, not a little chamber stuff.  I've got to sing over 140 members of the orchestra.  Twenty years old.  When I went to audition, the man, the conductor, just stared at me.  You know how--with these steel blue eyes and I'm--I guess, he was thinking, "Now, who do you think you are coming over here gonna sing this most--." Most women sing that when they're forty.  Because the Germans say by that time either you've just gotten rid of your husband, you're having a love affair, so all your hormones (laughter) are cooking up, and it affects your voice.  So, I auditioned.  He didn't say a word.  He said, "I want to hear you with the orchestra."  I'm scared to death.  I mean, could you imagine it, here I am coming to--all these people staring at me, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At twenty.
Speaker 2: Nobody's saying, you know, "Hang in there, baby," or nothing.  I'm not getting any little cheer up, no, they just--.  The orchestra, because they're mad, because they should've been going to lunch, here they gotta come in to audition for this black woman, coming in and gonna sing Salome.  Honey, I was ready for 'em.  I did the last scene.  It's a monologue after she's danced, she has the head and she sings for thirty minutes--thirty minutes!  Without stopping.  Child, when I got through they started clapping.  I started, "Thank you."  My little piano teacher [Evelyn Squires] and my momma [Mary Lewis Betsch] had me ready, baby.  And, I'm thinking it was the air at American Beach [Florida].  Don't forget at American Beach baby, you've got the pure ocean air.  See, I never grew up in a pur--if I had grown up in, oh God, Atlanta [Georgia]?  I don't know how you all stand this air here.  I can't wait to get back to the beach.  You'll notice it if you go live at a beach where there's pure air and then you come to a city.  It's terrible what y'all breathe; terrible.  So, I did it, baby.  He hired me just like that.
Speaker 1: And, you were well received.
Speaker 2: I was well received, honey.
Story_ID: 228228
Speaker 1: You should get the book.  It's called 'American Beach:  A Saga of Race, Wealth, and Memory.'  The writer [Russ Rymer] spent eight years.  It's a, it's a--most of the book is about me.  He went to Germany to do the research for the book.  It's printed by HarperCollins; big time.  He is a former writer for The New Yorker magazine.  He goes to Germany and gets the critics and has some translator, child please.  I was something else.  You should've seen my costume [for 'Salome,' Richard Strauss].  One was the black leotard with white chiffon.  Now, you--don't forget now, I'm doing the Dance of [the] Seven Veils--you never see me really naked.  But, what they do is with lighting.  You know, it's very subtle.  And, the other performance I did, I had seven veils.  I had the top on, and the seven veils are discretely taken off.  But, again, the way they did it with lighting.  And, they had this big chiffon curtain across the stage so--have you ever seen that, when the light hits a cloth like that, you get this sort of like in a dream, impressionistic--it was beautiful.  You should've seen it, baby.  I was bad.
Story_ID: 228229
Speaker 1: And, the question then becomes, what do you do after that ['Salome,' Richard Strauss]?
Speaker 2: Nothing.
Speaker 1: What (laughter)?
Speaker 2: What I did, I did ['Madama] Butterfly' [Giacomo Puccini] (laughter).  I did 'Carmen' [Georges Bizet].  I know.  'Cause my mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] said the sam--, she said, "[HistoryMaker] MaVynee ["Beach Lady" Betsch], now, wait a minute."  You know, "You're supposed to do that when you're--you're doing this right now?"
Speaker 1: You started your career (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Started off.
Speaker 1: With most people's ending.
Speaker 2: Sure did.  That's the Lewis-Betsch tradition I guess.  Or, that's all that good breeding and love of my family and hearing that music all the time.  Mother was always--she had this quartet from the [Mount Olive A.M.E.] Church [Jacksonville, Florida] and they would rehearse at the house.  See, I'm hearing all this as a child.  Mother could say--she had a beautiful contralto voice, which made it good for me 'cause my voice was darker.  She'd sing all four parts, you know (laughter).  So, I think it was Thursday nights they rehearsed.  I can remember and of cour--Wednesday night was choir rehearsal.  So, I'm hearing--I'm growing up with all this music, all the time.  It makes a difference.  It makes a difference.
Speaker 1: And, so, you mentioned to subsequent opera.  Were there any others that you--?
Speaker 2: Well, it--not really.  Because after then unfortunately, I went back to London [England].  Jodi [Merriday] that was my mistake.  My teacher was so good, and I just wanted to go back and check with him.  But, don't forget this is London when coal was the main source of energy.  I am not lying to you, we used to wear surgical mask; so polluted the air, you'd take the mask off and it, just the whole thing would just be dirty, black, coal.  You know, the soot from the--girl, I was, I was breathing like that.  Now, don't forget, now, I'm growing up in Florida with all this pure air, the [American] Beach [Florida], even in Germany, I was up in northern Germany near the mountains all this air.  I just, I couldn't deal with it.  I came home and I was just gonna come home for a while and then go back.  But, by that time my grandfather's [James Henry Lewis] dying and, so, I didn't stay in Europe more than ten years than after the singing.  And, he died, and I inherited the beach house, and the rest you know.  That's when I decided, I said, "Well, I've had the career, and it was fun."  And, like you said, "What are you gonna do after all that?"  I mean, it was, it was such an exciting time.  And, then I stayed home and tried to save what was left.  Because the beaches, even to today Judy--Jodi, they're trying every dirty trick to get us off of there.  I could tell--oh, when you read the book 'American Beach: A Saga [of Race, Wealth, and Memory, Russ Rymer],' you'll--that's some of the things they've tried.  We've got the Ritz-Carlton [Hotel] on one side; billion-dollar, billion-dollar.  On the other side you've got Amelia Island Plantation [Resort].  Darling, here we sit in the middle.  They want it so bad, they can taste it.  They've tried very trick, darling.  Pitting us against each other.  The whole shebang.  Oh, it's terrible.  Did you know just fifty years ago, you could've gone from Charleston [South Carolina] to Jacksonville [Florida]?  All of those island were mainly black owned.  They gypped those people out of their land.  They took--the lawyers would go down there, pit the children against each other.  The old people didn't know about all the deeds and all of that legal stuff, okay.  Gone.  There're now billion dollar golf resorts--see now don't forget, you have to understand what the South was like in those days.  The whites lived inland.  That's--the coast was where the slaves were.  They were on plantations with rice and so forth.  You didn't go out there, that's where the mosquitoes were.  You had your mansion in town.  Then they discovered golf.  The whites wanted the islands then.  These were the islands--and then the blacks had taken the island because of the slave owners--"Oh, let the slaves have 'em, we don't want 'em."  But, then they decided they wanted these golf, on these resorts.
Story_ID: 228230
Speaker 1: What is that like now having such a contrast to your right and left of where you actually are?
Speaker 2: It's something else.  Like I said, "I could look out my window and see these seven thirteen-story condominiums.  And, my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] as I told you, deliberately made the lots small so that only cottages could be there.  The history, and we just--when I--'cause I'm, as I told you, I'm one of these free spirits.  I go out on the beach at night sleeping in my little, sometimes my little lounge chair, and I look up at the stars and look out at the ocean, and I say, but we've got the same air.  The same ocean.  They're paying a million dollars for a lot.  Do you hear me, Jodi [Merriday]; just one lot, a million dollars.  And, I've got it free.  It's the only democratic world left, is the beach.
Speaker 1: And, you've become quite a teacher of that history there.  Do you frequently get people that are coming from the Ritz[-Carlton Hotel], or?
Speaker 2: Honey, they make the wrong turn.  They can't believe it.  They come in, "Where did you come from?"  (Laughter) I jump in the back of the car, or either I have buses--there's a travel agency here in Atlanta [Georgia] called Pennyman [Specialty Tours].  You ever hear of him?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: He brings the buses down.  Oh, yeah.  I get them from as far away as Virginia.  I've had buses from Chicago [Illinois].  I love it.  Many of them--the students use American Beach [Florida] as their, what do they call it, summer study group or whatever.  That's the newest thing in now; they come down.  And, like I said, "The teachers, I mean, people are writing their doctoral dissertations and master thesis--black history is in.  And, with Florida being so different from other southern--'cause, I mean, I hate to say, when you heard one horror story, you've hear 'em all, you know.  But, not in Florida.  Not only could black buy their way out of slavery, you had a whole free--you should read the book called, 'Black Society in Spanish Florida' by Jane Landers.  And, she's an anthropologist.  It was completely different, completely different.  So, they're fascinated, 'cause with my family too.  I mean, you know, I'm exactly your run of the mill black woman, you know, I'm kind of interesting.  So, it makes it a good theme for their--the universities are having a field day.  The man who wrote the book about Anna Kingsley ['Anna Madgigine Jai Kingsley: African Princess, Florida Slave, Plantation Slaveowner'], you'll have that on your tape, teaches history, Dr. [Daniel L.] Schafer.  He went to Senegal; did all the research.  He's right there at [University of North Florida] Jacksonville [Florida].  His students come out to interview me.  Oh, my God.  Honey, they studying us to death.  I've got the anthropologist, the sociologist, (laughter) the historians.  They're fascinated by Florida; completely different.  Don't forget, we've got the first free black settlement in the whole United States, right there in Saint Augustine [Florida].  You hear about Saint Augustine being the first city, but you don't know that, that fort was where the blacks, when they were coming over the border--you know the first rebellion, the first slave rebellion was up in South Carolina.  Bless their hearts, they didn't make it; Stono Rebellion.  They were coming south.  They weren't going north.  So, Florida was like the paradise.  This was the place you came.  And of course, with Harriet Tubman, there was--she was taking them up north.  But, in the early part of slave trade, you were coming south.  You made it to Florida and then from then perhaps you were going to Cuba, or over to the islands.  Or, stay in Florida because like I said, we had a free class there.  What are you talking about?  I mean, it was--so, I've got all that history as part of my--hearing it talk--
Story_ID: 228231
Speaker 1: And, then don't forget now, Jacksonville [Florida], was--in fact, I'm on his board--the man who broke up the Georgia [Ku Klux] Klan [KKK].  And, I hate to say this, but you all were the worst.  The Georgia Klan was the most vicious.  They killed their mothers, Jodi [Merriday].  It was that bad.  This man single-handedly broke up the Georgia Klan.  He lives where?  Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 2: How did he do it?
Speaker 1: Double agent.  And, you think so big John Wayne type--little short, little beady-eyes.  He would blend in.  They never suspected. He'd tell the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] what they were doing.  His name is Stetson Kennedy.  I'm on his board.  He lives right there in Jacksonville.  But, he's eighty-five years old.  See, I've got all that.  I've got all this history.  All this, folk heroes.  And, then of course, we've got the pirate.  Oh, my God, sex for the older woman.  This man haunts my dreams.  He is awesome.  We never had that in school.
Speaker 2: And, his name?
Speaker 1: Oh, Black Caesar [Henri Caeser], darling.  Oh, God.  He was awesome.  Born in 1767, part of the Haitian rebellion.  Oh, my God.  Then, he would take the money of all these Spanish galleons, and with that he bought his own ship.  He was head man in charge.  All the men under him were white.  He was the head man.  He would capture the slave ships and put 'em on the islands.  If you go to Miami [Florida] right now in the [Biscayne] National Park [Florida], what's it's called, oh, God, I can't think of it.  You'll see it says Caesar's Creek, where he would hide out.  They never found his loot.  It's buried somewhere.  We've got a folk hero.  I mean, my God, and children don't--when I tell children about this, they go wild.  "What!  What!"  'Cause you hear all these horror stories.  I mean, he was a man who was doing something about slavery.  Plus, when I tell 'em about how they used a quilt to get away.  We need to let people know about what was, you know, people were getting away from this horror.  It's so depressing all this stuff about slavery.  And, here's this man.  He sure lived.  Black Caesar, had his own ship.  You know that's bad, I love it (laughter).
Story_ID: 228232
Speaker 1: And, you've since taken on quite a few environmental issues.  Can you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  I'm the lady.  I've got a whale named for me.  I brought the picture.  He'll photograph it.  They're only three hundred of 'em left.  We [in American Beach, Florida] are very unique.  Because right along that edge, is where the right whales come to have their babies.  It's only from December to March.  And, like I said, I used to wear my hair up in a curve.  Well, it's still up here high now.  And, my friends go up in the airplane to photograph it.  And, on the heads of these whales are lice.  Don't worry, they're not parasites.  But, it's like a fingerprint.  You can always tell which one is which, because--by the photograph.  So, when they saw one with a real, lot of, hi--very high upon the head, they said, "Oh, that looks like [HistoryMaker] MaVynee ["Beach Lady" Betsch]."  I'm number 1151 (laughter).  She came back with a baby, when was it?  Year before last.  And, the [U.S.] Navy, unfortunately--usually, they can get to them in time.  But, she hit the baby and the (unclear) baby died.  And, we were so upset because they only, they practice birth control.  So, only every three years they have one.  And, only three hundred of them left, Jodi [Merriday].  It's getting serious.  'Cause, you know--
Speaker 1: How do they practice--?
Speaker 2: They don't--'cause the mother has to nurse that long.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: She has to nurse, I think almost over a year.  So, that she's not ready for--to get impregnated for another two and a half years.  But anyway, so, when the baby whale was killed we thought, "Oh, God," you know, "this is terrible."  'Cause every one that dies like that, it's gonna be another three years before would--honey, they called me, when was it, last year.  They mate up there in Newfoundland [Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada] right off the coast of Massachusetts.  They said, "Guess what?  Number 1151 is--come up and got herself knocked up, she's pregnant again, gonna have another baby."  I said, "Hot dog.  I knew I was a red hot mama and didn't know it," (laughter).
Speaker 1: So, she'll be back in December?
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: That's amazing.
Speaker 2: So, that's good news, darling.  But, we also have turtles that nest there and the birds and of course, my main thing for Africa are the pygmies.  I gave 'em lot of the money that I inherited to save the pygmies in the rainforest.  Because you have a man here living right here in Atlanta [Georgia].  I gave--Ivan, his name.  I hope you will interview him.  Dr. [Anthony Kweku] Andoh, he has twenty-five acres right out there near College Park [Atlanta, Georgia].  This man can take you in the jungles of Africa and show you every leaf, bark, and berry.  He's found the plant that can help people with AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome].  He's a genius.  His name is Dr. Andoh, live right here in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: How do you spell his name?
Speaker 2: A-N-D-O-H.  A-N-D-O--
Speaker 1: Is he Ghanaian?
Speaker 2: No.  Yeah, he's fro--Ghanaian.  He sure is.  He has his own botanical garden in Ghana.  And, he also has it here in Atlanta.  And, you can have cabinets.  You can go out there and get the herbs.  See, we--this is all our knowledge that was always, we used to call it the root lady in every black community.  We've lost this, Jodi.  Black people are now sick, darling.  We're number one for cancer, number one for this.  I'm thinking "What's going on here?"  We better go back to these old ways.  'Cause all of these chemical, many of them, the body can't assimilate but so much.  But, this Dr. Andoh, darling--anyway, where these plants are, are also where the pygmies live, you know, the little people who live in the jungles.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, they're my favorite.  Jodi, do you know what, we talk about democracy, these people actually--we've, what can you learn from primitive people?  I got news for you, baby.  You can learn everything.  The pygmies are my favorite.  Get this, when they get mad, you know what they do?
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: You know what we do, oh, we get armies.  'Cause we're gonna go attack some other country, kill up everybody.  He takes his little hut, turns it around, and for one day he won't speak to you.  Let you cool down.  Then, he takes his little hut and turns it back around and all is forgiven.  These--imagine, primitive people.  They've figured out how to neutralize violence.  Another thing, there are no chiefs.  You know, everything in this society is hierarchy.  You know, you've got the president of this one, of this one, you go down the line, da, da, da, da, da, da.  This one bosses this one.  Suppose they wake up that morning, they wanna go pick berries.  They've talked amongst themselves until everyone agrees.  If you don't wanna go--if they--if everybody don't agree, they don't go pick berries.  Nobody tells the other one what to do.  Da da da da.  And, here we have the teacher telling the pupil, employer telling employee.  These primitive people.  I love 'em.  They're beautiful.  So, that's where a lot of my money went to help them.
Story_ID: 228233
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you'd like to add to this interview, that I haven't asked you about?
Speaker 2: Gosh.  Just, I just hope people will be aware of these communities that are left and that they'll support them.  Because they had a reason.  There's Oak Bluff[s] up in [Martha's Vineyard] Massachusetts.  There's Sag Harbor in New York.  There's Highland's Beach [sic. Highland Beach, Maryland], a little beach that Frederick Douglass founded.  It's not on the ocean now.  It's on the far side.  There's South Carolina, the one I told you about, Atlantic Beach [South Carolina].  It needs help.  We are American Beach [Florida].  Soppalco [ph.] is still there.  Oh, she can tell wonderful stories, I love her; Garniea Bailey [ph.].   Because, you see, life is a circle.  We keep thinking it's a straight line.  Once you get pass this, it'll never happen again.  That's not true young people.  You're in for sad awakening.  If you think that you won't have a dictator of someone who can come in and turn this thing around and everything will be bad again, you're in for--hey, just study history.  And, when I speak to integrated school children, I said, "You know what, the next time, could be people blue ey--green eyes."  And, the white kids go, I never thought about that.  I say, "People always have to have somebody else to pick on."  It's a flaw in the human psyche.  You can learn how black people stuck together.  How my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis], how we united.  This was a horrible time in our history.  And, look what we did.  Built our own houses.  The Afr--the [Afro-American Life] Insurance Company [Jacksonville, Florida] financed everything.  And, now we walk around, you know, aw, don't, it's sad.  You better learn from history.  You--everybody can learn.  The whites, anybody, anybody who is the bottom part of the victim game plan; women who were victimized by men; children who are abused by their parents.  Everyone can learn how a person who is the downtrodden, how they survived and how they--and we did it; did we ever.  I remember A. Philip Randolph, the man who did the--arranged the thing for [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]; organized the sleeping car porters.  And, when the insurance company met out in California, he provided the cars so that they could go out there.  And, my, my great-grand--they was so happy.  Imagine going out in their own sleeping car.  You know, you had the berths.  You remember to good old days when you went by train.  So, it was a time, darling.  We need to tell that history.  Tell what, what was accomplished.  Because like I said, life is--can go around in a circle, darling.
Story_ID: 228234
Speaker 1: How do you feel about the way that you lived your life?
Speaker 2: It's very exciting.  I mean, I've been exposed to so much.  The years in Europe.  I mean, don't forget now, as I said, I was the only one there.  There weren't that many blacks in Europe.  There were jazz musicians now.  And, a lot of black writers in Europe.  Because--
Speaker 1: Who do you recall from the era that you were there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of the musicians, what's his name, Lionel Hampton.  He's a musician I would've never heard even in Europe.  And, of course, when I'm sitting in the audience, I'm the only black and I'd go back stage, "Hey, baby."  You know, I'm think, I can go out to din--they would invite me to dinner, 'cause I'd be the only black there.  I've had all that experience.  I mean, living there as a privileged musician, meeting African Americans I would never meet here.  I mean, I'd just be among other blacks here.  But, there, I would be able to go out to dinner with them.  And, I met Louis Armstrong and his wife [Lucille Wilson].  Yep.  When the Modern Jazz Quartet [John Lewis, Milt Jackson, Percy Heath, Connie Kay] came to Germany.  Oh, yeah.  Milt Jackson, all of them.  I went back and had dinner with them.  It was a wonderful time.  And, that's why I'm so anxious to be able to share this with children--
Story_ID: 228235
Speaker 1: And of course, everything, let me explain everything that I wear.  As you know, people use these horrible fish lines, and they leave 'em on the beach.  The animals get trapped, because this is plastic, and the whales cannot survive, and many times they're washed ashore, or dolphins.  So, I wear this when I tell the children.  And, now it has become a fashion thing.  You should see the kids in high school now.  They've got their [HistoryMaker MaVynee] "Beach Lady" [Betsch] jewelry on.  Because this tells and reminds them, dad don't leave your fish lines on the beach because you--the animals can't survive.  And, look at this shell.  Most shells open to the right.  This shell opens to the left.  Notice, if you hold it up, it's opening to the left which means even my jewelry is politically correct, okay.  And, if you look at Africa, Africa curves to the left.  If you look at the map.  This is a rare one.  If you go on the beach, at American Beach [Florida], if you find one about this big, child, please, you probably could get a thousand dollars for it, at a shell shop.  It's that rare.  Most of the shells that open to the right, those are the common ones, okay.  This is a shark's tooth.  Look at my jewelry.  See, isn't that beautiful?  This rings.  And, that has a message too.  Because when I see my friends with their diamond rings on, you should see--well, the first thing they do, they start taking them off.  Because you know what they're doing with the diamonds in Africa?  Civil war.  And, I tell them, "Questions"--just like my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] wouldn't pay with that twenty dollar bill--question where that diamond came from.  Because you may be supporting a civil war in Africa.  So, everything, my great-grandfather everything was a meaning.  He said the clothes you wear, all of this, this is just a beach towel.  You should see all my--and my t-shirts are all, they all have causes on them.  My jewelry that says, "Free Mumia [Abu-Jamal]."  The shells, I--everything has--and then of course, my hair.  This is seven feet.  Why seven?  Look at this, dreadlocks.  It took me twenty years.  That's why I can't get a husband, takes up all the bed (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Why seven?  What does Florida look like?  A seven.  So, I'm the historian at American Beach from Florida.  The only black beach.  So, even my hair is history.
Story_ID: 228236
Speaker 1: For those who are interested in following perhaps some part of the path that you've taken in life, what would your suggestions be for them?  Perhaps you can share with us--you've mentioned something about the spiritual journey of the butterflies.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  This was it.  Don't forget now, Sugar Hill [Jacksonville, Florida] is now under threat.  I mean, in other words, they're trying to buy us out.  The I-95 [Interstate 95] is coming through.  The [University] Hospital [University of Florida Health, Jacksonville, Florida] wants to engulf all this area.  So, the black people are selling.  And, unfortunately the pressure's on my mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] and everything else, and we did sell.  We moved to a place called Ribault Scenic [Drive, Jacksonville, Florida].
Speaker 1: Around what time was that?
Speaker 2: This is the '70s [1970s], early--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Seventies [1970s].  It was on a river--on a marsh.  Oh, God, I never shall fo--this was the first time, don't forget now, I'm a singer.  Having sung about, "Oh, the birds," and, "nature," in it.  But, it was all--I think, we all have this in our psychics, but something has to happen for it to really hit you.  Although, I'm singing about the beauty of nature and flowers and birds, only the way we had to move out on this marsh--and, I actually saw the birds.  The beautiful white heron, the little ducks would come in the winter.  And, the flowers, oh, my God, on the marsh in June, the wildflowers, that's how it started.  And, my favorite African American was always George Washington Carver.  That's why when I told you about that house being own by a janitor, when I give my lectures, I also tell the children in the bus I say, "Guess who else was a janitor?  George Washington Carver."  They're shocked.  What?  This is a man who revolutionized the whole South.  When I went to Europe, he was honored in the Royal Academy of Science [sic. Royal Society of Arts, London, England].  He was a janitor.  That's how he worked his way through college.  So, here I am--I always admired him because his relationship with plants and nature.  And, I always thought, "Oh, this is kind of romantic."  Surely--you know, it didn't hit me.  But, then when I go out on this--because we had to move--I'm thinking, "Oh, God, this is it.  This is paradise."  Maybe this is, if you went to biblical connections, this is the Eden.  Where we should all be living; in harmony with nature.  So, we moved there and from there when my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] dies--when my grandfather dies excuse me--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I inherit this beach house.  And, that's when it really hit me.  Aww, my God, our house is right here; this is the ocean.  I mean, so close.  And, not only do you have the birds, you have, as I said, the ghost crab.  All the little creatures and it just seem so, so natural, so beautiful.  I'd go out at night and bathe in the ocean.  And, of course, this whole connection with Africa, and another spiritual thing about American Beach [Florida], I forgot to tell you, in 1808 when the United States said no more slaves could come in, guess which area did it illegally; Fernandina [Beach, Florida], which is a city on the island [Amelia Island] where American Beach is.  When they got caught, Jodi [Merriday], guess where they dumped the bodies?  American Beach.  So, at night, I swear to God, you could hear sounds.  The African priestess comes out, where're the only place in the United States that has a ceremony for the dead.  Because in African, the funeral in many times is more elaborate than the wedding.  Because we believe in reincarnation, okay.  So, the African priestess comes out for Yemaya.  Yemaya is the goddess of the sea.  We have a ceremony always on Mother's Day, because of these spirits who are right there at American Beach.  So, here I am.  I've got the spirits with the history.  I've got the nature--
Story_ID: 228237
Speaker 1: --I've got the sound, music, and I'm writing this opera about this pirate.  Oh, wait 'til you see that love scene.
Speaker 2: You're writing an opera?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  Yes, ma'am.  It is awesome.  In the opera, his lover is Native American.  That's why I'm going up to [Washington] D.C. to be a part of that opening of the [National] Museum [of the American Indian, Washington, D.C.].  You know I'm a charter member.  They're giving us a reception.  I will go Wednesday night at six o'clock because I'm a charter member.  And, we all have--I've got Native American blood, I'm sure you do too.  That museum is gonna be awesome.  But, I've got all these, these spirits there.  The dead who, who didn't survive the Middle Passage.  Plus, the ones when they got caught and they dumped the bodies.  Plus, all this nature.  Don't forget not Yemaya is the goddess of the sea.  Oshun is the goddess of the bee--honey.  That's our favorite food, honey.  Oh, we used to have to appropriate honey whenever you use the worshipping of Oshun.  So, there the insects and that's how the butterflies--oh, God, the butterflies.  The book on butterfly watching, [National] Audubon [Society]'s book on butterfly watching ['The National Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Butterflies'] by Dr. Robert [Michael] Pyle, the world's authority on butterflies, is dedicated to me.  Most of my money, the first money I sent was a Native American group--tribe was trying to save an area where the butterflies were, and they couldn't pay the taxes, and I paid the taxes.  The name of the organization is called [The] Xerces [Society], X-E-R-C-E-S.  It's named for an endangered butterfly caught in California.  I have sponsored buyer diversity conferences in Brazil.  I--as I told you, I've sent money to the pygmies.  But, my big thing now is environmental justice because in America everyone thinks, "Well, okay, this is all well and good, you know, you can send money to save the bees.  But, what has this got to do poor black person here in the inner city?"  I've said, "Listen, baby, do you realize you are drinking polluted water."  Asthma, do you know which city has the highest rate of asthma for black people?  Atlanta [Georgia].  You're air here is so polluted.  Children here, oh, my God.  The largest toxic, what do you call it, waste dump is in Alabama.  And, see what it is, the big corporations come in and say, "Oh, we give you jo"--they do to a black community where it's poor, people--"oh, these will be jobs.'  Jodi [Merriday], these children are born now with deformities, okay.  Because the pollution has now gone into the ground water.  The largest, they call it cancer alley, have you ever heard of it?  It's in Louisiana.  Black people live all along Louisiana where these big petrochemical companies, they are just spewing all this pollution.  But, you see poor people been--the black people, being poor, don't have the legal, 'cause you gotta pay a lawyer, and they don't have the money to go to court to try to stop this.  So, they're the ones that they always pick on, the poor pop--look at the most communities.  Black people, it's usually the poor people who living in industrial part of the city.  You breathing all that foul air.  You're living a city where you have few trees.  And, then you wonder--and then the children with lead.  These old houses where black people live, the air--the lead, the paint comes off and the children breathe all this.  And, that affects your brain.  And, they say, "Well, black people not as smart as white people--" I guess not, you've got learning disabilities.  And, that's why I'm in environmental justice.  Dr. [Robert] Bullard who teaches there at Clark [Atlanta] University [Atlanta, Georgia] formed this environmental justice group.  And, we're trying to do what we can do, and the large white org--predominate white organizations, like Sierra Club, like Audubon, like what's another one, Greenpeace [International], now have environmental justice wings within their organizations to help minorities.  But, in most inner cities, baby, it's the horror.  Trust me.  So, I would advise young people, in fact, many of--I have an African American young man who's going to law school as an environmental justice lawyer.  Because we're getting the blunt of all this, absolutely, with polluted air, polluted water, and as I said, cancer alley is the place.  And, it's predominately black community.
Story_ID: 228238
Speaker 1: What do you still want to do that you have not done yet?
Speaker 2: I wanna travel.  I wanna see all these places I have to save.  Don't forget, I've stayed pretty much around Florida.  I'm hoping to get a motorhome.  I had one.  It was my museum.  But, I hope to get a motorhome and then turn it into a museum so when I travel I can take all my stuff with me.  And, as I do now, I still now speak at colleges and women's clubs and things of that sort, excuse me, I'd like to do that even more and bring the awareness of what our poor earth, darling, it's being polluted to death.  And, African Americans suffer much worst in proportion to the predomin--'cause they can move out in the suburbs.  They've got the trees, they've got air.  We're breathing these fumes from these cars.  We finally got California to use cleaner air.  Remember when they passed that law [Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990]?  That's all of our groups lobbying into [U.S.] Congress to get to use--now, you use unleaded gas.  Imagine, you were breathing all this, Jodi [Merriday].  In the inner city, and you wonder why the children are hypersensitive in school.  They don't study.  Their brains are being--hyat [ph.].  Your brain is an air plant.  It needs air.  It needs oxygen.  They have proven that soon as you start planted trees and the relationship of air to oxygen to the--it increases the children's performances in school.  You can't breathe this stuff and make straight A's; come off it.
Story_ID: 228239
Speaker 1: What are some of your other hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, not only that, it's--which translates into a health issue.  Don't forget the Afro[-American Life Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida] was also not only a life insurance, also a health insurance company.  And, my dream was to have American Beach [Florida] as part of maybe a triangle of health resorts.  Have you ever heard of Cottonwood [Hot Springs Spa and Motel, Cottonwood, Alabama]?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: It's a black--I don't know whether it's still there or not, it's in Alabama.  A black health resort.  We need places where people can go get--baby, don't go to Las Vegas [Nevada].  I mean, it's all right, but you know, if you, you can't walk and you're breathing like this, you need to--we need to heal our bodies, physically.  As I said, we're now number one for cancer; number one for prostate [cancer]; number one-- I remember when the white folks were coming to the root lady.  Black people were the ones who were healing.  We were the, what do you call, the women for the babies?
Speaker 1: Midwives.
Speaker 2: Midwives.  We knew all the roots.  My grandmother [Bertha Lewis] would take us into the woods and get all the herbs.  You know, you know how she died?
Speaker 1: How?
Speaker 2: One day she went upstairs and said, "I'm tired."  Laid out, and she down, get the bed and preceded to lie down and just died.  All these diseases we'll be in hospitals for weeks and so--come off it.  She knew how to heal her body.  She knew how to heal us.  And, this is my dream that American Beach would be part of the triangle.  That you'd go to Dr. [Anthony Kweku] Andoh, here in Atlanta [Georgia]; go to visit his cabins, get the herbs.  You come to American Beach for your salt baths, and we have chiropractors.  We've got several black people who're into natural healing.  You'd come there and spend a week.  Then maybe if you wanna go up to Cottonwood; I hope it's still here, they have mineral baths.  Oh, yeah.  These underground springs.  Isn't that wonderful.  Black, black owned.  And, heal your body then you got back and you'd be able to help your own community.  But, you can't do anything if you sick, "I got a headache, I'm feeling bad."  I don't think so.
Story_ID: 228240
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out to you the most?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh.  I guess, my years in Europe and childhood.  Oh, those happy days at the [American] Beach [Florida], God.  Even now I enjoy the beach too, but when you're a child everything is so, you know, whatever you want, you get (laughter).  We was spoiled, terribly.  I don't mean spoiled, you know, we didn't get everything, but--it was such a happy time.  Our parents [Mary Lewis Betsch and John Betsch] was so loving and it was such a big social--see it was a cause.  I think that's another thing that people are getting more, more selfish.  Their worlds becomes just, just me and my little bit.  Not for us, darling.  It was always the big picture, always the big picture.  So, that you always felt you had a reason to be doing something to help somebody else.  And, the insurance companies did it.  They were our economic liberators, darling.  Trust me.  You know the insurance companies would even give free examinations for the babies, if you got a premium.  They did it all.
Story_ID: 228241
Speaker 1: What values do you consider to be the most important and why?
Speaker 2: I guess, that--well, I guess, helping the community in--at large.  Because you see, now that I'm at American Beach [Florida], I also have this responsibility to make sure the history is told.  And, the environment and even the arts.  They used--we used to have a little dance class for children at the local school in, elementary school in Fernandina [Beach, Florida].  So, I'm giving them the arts side of--artistic side of my upbringing.  And, gosh, I guess that's the value; that you give back.  You just give back.  That's it.  And, we were always taught that.  And, as I said, my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] gave us that lecture when he rolled down that window and tell us why we lived on one end and the others on the other end.  He never forgot it; never forgot it.  And, the beach, as I said, was meant for people to have beach cottages; not mansions.  You had your mansion in town.  Why would you build a mansion on the beach?  So, it's a very satisfying feeling; very satisfying.
Story_ID: 228242
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered?  What do you want people to say about you?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Oh, the [HistoryMaker MaVynee] "Beach Lady" [Betsch].  The rascal, I guess (laughter).  Oh, gosh.  It's so funny, Jodi [Merriday], because I go to all the hearings, you know.  It's not possible for many African Americans to go and protest.  And, I don't have a husband.  I don't--I didn't have children.  [Dr.] Johnnetta [B. Cole] had the chi--three sons.  My brother [John Lewis, Jr.] had a daughter.  I was staying with her here in Atlanta [Georgia].  So, I just--I'm the one who shows up at all the hearings and, you know, protests and things of this sort.  I guess, the day I die, I'll be getting ready to go to my next protest.  There's always somebody in the community who has to do this.  And, I guess, that was my destiny.  Many people just tuned out; they don't care.  They're so turned off by politics, and it is discouraging.  Because you figure in the end, you know, all they have to do is go in there and bribe somebody.  But, make your statement, even if you lose.  And, that's what I do.  I go to all of them.  And, in fact, it's so funny in some of the hearings when I walk in, the commissioner say, "Well, we can start now the Beach Lady's here," (laughter).  And--because I don't have children and let's face it, Jodi, they put pressure on you.  You got jobs.  I'm retired, okay.  What are they gonna do to me, okay?  Put me in jail?  Oh, come on.  Can't you see me in jail with all this hair?  I would be the--(laughter), the sensation of the jailhouse.  So, I take upon the responsibility to do what I can for the larger community.
Story_ID: 228243
Speaker 1: Why do you think that history is important?
Speaker 2: Because we don't seem to learn from it.  We keep making the same stupid mistakes; same--I'll be seventy next year.  And, I hate to sound like the wise old woman, but having lived and experienced so much, I'm thinking, "But, don't you remember this?"  Black people did this, or look at the culture.  Look what it was like in the 14th century when the--we've had conquering armies.  Look at Rome [Italy].  I mean, what is that?  We don't seem to learn from things that didn't work.  So that we keep doing them.  Or, so, history is, I mean, I just--its number one for me.  If we don't, it just becomes a vicious cycle.  Like a revolving door, like a revolving door.  So, I'm out there doing my thing (laughter).
Story_ID: 228244
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I saved that sand dune at NaNa [American Beach, Florida].  That's so important, darling.  It's symbolic of so much that's special about American Beach [Florida].  As children, I remember we used to hide--they had a riot down there.  The name of the sheriff during segregated time was [Henry J.] Youngblood.
Speaker 1: When was the riot?
Speaker 2: This was like in the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was awesome.  And, we would hide behind--see don't forget now, this sand dune is sixty feet tall, and we would hide back there.  And, the quiet--see, Jodi [Merriday]--people have so little place to go now where it's quiet.  Sometimes when I walk on the beach and I see a fisherman out there, you know what I say to 'em?  I say, "Did you catch any fish?"  He say, "No.  But, you know what?  It's like all my troubles went out with that last tide."  Isn't that beautiful?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: That you can actually go somewhere.  I mean, everything, it's so many--well, first of all, it's too many of us.  What are we now, 6.5 billion?  And, first we tried group therapy with psych--and now the thing is, now people, for people to turn in to find their inner peace.  But, where can you go to find inner peace, where everything is so crowded?  And, the beach is one place.  Come to American Beach; come--the dune, you can go sit up on the dune and just look out there on that ocean.  And, it's like nothing else matters now.  All your troubles is gonna go out.  Tomorrow will come.  Don't worry about it.  There's a kind of peace that drugs can't give you, alcohol, nothing else.  And, this is something you can get by turning in for quiet, fact is, so.  If I've helped to save that, that will be the best legacy I can imagine.
Story_ID: 228245
Speaker 1: 'Course, where we lived was Sugar Hill [Jacksonville, Florida] as I said.  We had, later on we had a maid.  My--as I said, my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis] had a chauffeur; we always had a maid.  The last one was Mrs. Marshall [ph.], and it was interesting because I would take my grandfather [James Henry Lewis] for rides when we would take her home.  We would go the long way around.  And, we would drive through the white, predominately white area, because we just like to compare.  We had a gorgeous yard.  My grandfather had three acres.  Not the great-grandfather, the grandfather.  The house sat way back.  I had the--you drove in, in this horseshoe curve.  It was the showplace for the black community, okay?  But, again Jodi [Merriday], the thing that held all this together was my great-grandfather.  The--I never remember stories, I mean, you have to have some sort of jealousy or whatever.  I mean, here we were, very wealthy, and yet he was such a calming and--the only way I knew he was a millionaire was when I read about it in the paper.  Because the wealth never was the theme of whatever he had to relate to.  I never shall forget, a reporter asked him one day, he said, "Well, Mr. Lewis why, why don't you have more money?  After all, you and the president [Bion Barnett] of the Barnett Bank [Jacksonville, Florida] on first names--" Don't forget now this is segregated times.  It wasn't them--him calling him Mr. Barnett and the man--now, this is very important in the South; calling by first names.  And, whether you're addressed as Miss or Mister, this is very important in that whole game plan.  My great-grandfather and Mr. Barnett are first name basis, okay.  He said, "Why don't you have more money?"  My great-grandfather said, "You know what, money is like manure, if you don't have a little bit, the flower won't grow.  If you have too much, you kill it."  Think about it.  Once you reach a certain level of economic development, you've got to have the lawyers, who's got to watch the accountants, who's got to watch the other lawyers, who watching the other accountants--to keep your own money.  My great-grandfather figured that there's a way that you reach a certain level where--because you are, giving back to that same argument of him about giving back, that the money itself doesn't become the whole thing.  That it's neutralized, because you would have the jealousy.  We were never robbed.  Now, imagine, now here we're living on H Street, a twenty-two room house, Jodi [Merriday], everybody knows where we live now.
Speaker 2: How are you all received by other African Americans?
Speaker 1: Well, that's what I'm saying, I never remember anyone coming up to our house.  We always heard of robberies here that--da, da, da, da, da.  Nobody ever; he was so respected.  As I told you, at the funeral, they called him the Black Jesus.  He had such a respect and they knew we were his descendants.  Everyone knew the Lewis children.  It makes a difference the kind of wealth that you have.  You know what my great-grandfather used, another thing he used to tell us?  Children, what word is in business?  Come on, what word is in business?  B-U S-I-N, sin.  And, he'd tell us, "If the money isn't used," remember what I tell you about this giving back, "it's sin."  Isn't that something?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: He had--I mean, this man, born in 1865 never went to--past elementary school; worked in a, what you call it, paper mill; had this much insight.  This much, oh, God, I can't even think to, but that's the reason I'm thinking why that kind of wealth didn't bring about more animosity among other blacks.  And, the whites, as I said, here he is on first name basis with the president of the Barnett Bank, which was the number one bank in Florida, okay.  My great-grandfather, he could've gone out and got fifty million dollars if he wanted.  So was his name respected; so was his character respected--
Story_ID: 228246
Speaker 1: Unfortunately, it didn't happen with the rest of the family.  I had a cousin--that's how we lost eighty acres at the American Beach [Florida].  The typical rich kid, oh yeah.  Between the women, the dog track (laughter), yep.  The Afro[-American Life Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida] is going bankrupt.
Speaker 2: And, how many acres remain?
Speaker 1: We're down to 120 from the original 200.  So, it matters the kind of person who has it.  See, when people say money is the root--it's not the money that's the root of, it's the person who is using that money.  That's what makes the difference.  My great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis], for him it was, as I told you, a matter of giving.
Speaker 2: And, the 120 acres that remain, how is that land used now?
Speaker 1: Well, now we're on the National Register [of Historic Places].  We are a historic site [American Beach Historic District].  I've gotten that done.  So, that should give us some protection.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But, they still trying dirty tricks, darling.  Even--they've got black pinned against blacks.  The whites--right now, whites own maybe a third of the ocean front.  Because, don't forget now, the black abandoned the beach with integration.  The whites moved in speculating, "When I buy this up, you know, soon--a couple of more years, blacks will be gone--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: "--we're gonna have a bonanza."  We're not going anywhere.  We have one house built by whites on the oceanfront.  But, everything else is still predominately black.  We have maybe three or four whites living in the back part of the beach.  But, it's still predominately African American.  It was my great-grandfather.  It did--this man, and when he died, to show you that's when the Afro started going into bankruptcy.  To show you how it was his spirit that kept all that together.   It's really amazing.
Story_ID: 228247
Speaker 1: You asked me about my life, and I guess having gone in so many variations of this black/white world, I can really talk about the different kinds of experiences.  For example, when I'm leaving Jacksonville [Florida], having gone to a girls' school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida] with white teachers--now that's a whole different game plan, this is in segregated times.  Then I go to Oberlin [Conservatory of Music, Oberlin, Ohio] where I'm again in a minority situation, in a predominately white school.  My first time going to a white school now.  I had a black roommate, and the whole situation there, I never shall forget, with the dating situation where the dances--fortunately at Oberlin they didn't have sororities or fraternities, so you didn't get this real separation of black/white which you would have if you had sororities.  Mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] insisted that we go to Cleveland [Ohio].  So, I did join Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] in Cleveland, the Omega Chapter in Cleveland.  But, I didn't associate with that one at Oberlin.  So, that was a whole different game.  And, of course, being the musician, people are expecting more of you, having lived in the South.  And, believe me not all black people are good musicians.  That's another stereotype that we have, you know.  And, so, I have to live up and really perform, and it was--I couldn't take anything for granted with that.  And, then I go to Paris [France].  Oh, my God, this is, what can I say, as I said, this is where Richard Wright, many of the writers had been there.
Speaker 2: And, this was in the 1950s?
Speaker 1: This is in the '50s [1950s], absolutely.  I stayed with a French family, and they were wonderful to me.  My room--I don't know if you know who it is in Paris, where you have the concierge, and you go up in a little elevator.  And, this was a doctor's family, Madamme Chatignon [ph.].  And, I would go over to the Sorbonne [University of Paris, Paris, France] where the students were.  There were a lot of black students there.  And, of course, being in a foreign country my natural instinct was to bond with black students, so that was neat and many of them from foreign countries.  I mean, in Africa, the French colonial--God forbid--countries in Africa.  So, that was a different experience--
Story_ID: 228248
Speaker 1: Mother [Mary Lewis Betsch] would only send us money--our money would run out at the end of the month.  I never shall forget, we'd go to these restaurants (laughter), because we didn't have any money, and we would sing and perform, and the restaurant man would give us--it was sort of like romantic like 'La boheme' [Giacomo Puccini], in the opera, the poor people who'd have to go--so, and I've also been, always been kind of a romantic idealist anyway.  Because, see, don't forget my daddy [John Betsch] is marrying money.  Although, he--his family was, you know, not exactly poor.  But, my great-grand--my mother, well, this is money, okay.  So, daddy was sort of like the poor, you know, little free spirit guy, taking on all this wealth and everything.  So, when--it always seemed romantic that you would love--it really did matter that you loved somebody, it wasn't money and all this other stuff.  So, when we would go to the restaurants to sing and perform, it did seem only natural that he would give us food, which they did.  And, I never--I learned so many tricks.  Now, don't forget now, I'm coming from a wealthy family so I don't know.  This is my first time actually living a life of a poor student.  You know what we would do at--like I said, if the money ran out we would--the restaurants would give us food.  If you're cold, do you know if you put--what do you call that? Red pepper, in your socks--I mean, these are the things I wouldn't learn as a wealthy person, you know, it's unbelievable.  I would take a hot water bottle, put the hot water and take it and put it next to my stomach when I go to my practice room, because there's no heat.  I mean, the French are--you know, there's a little tiny little heater over here; I'm freezing!  And, of course, where I came, you know, our house was always warm.  We had central heat and all this other stuff.  And, so, that was a different experience to live.  And, then from then on out, most of the people I admire were poor.  As I said, there was [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart.  The man died a pauper.  And, so, then I go to Europe--go to Germany, which is even another step.  And--although I was paid very well.  I mean, as a soprano.  I mean, I'm the lead soprano and all this other stuff.  I completely identified with the students.  So, that was--I was the only black.  I would sing the spirituals, go to the different colleges.  Oh, the Germans loved it.  I mean, this--they knew more about jazz than many black people in America.  I mean, the Germans are, oh, my God, child please.  They knew it all.  So, I was intellectually already on a level with them that I wouldn't even have experienced with black people in America, 'cause many blacks still were brainwashed into thinking that jazz was some inferior form of music.  And, here in Germany, which is the epitome of intellectual, of music development, they thought--I mean, jazz for them was, oh, my God, I mean, that was just like getting a--and many of them were.  They were getting their Ph.D.s in Louis Armstrong, one-two (laughter).  So, I'm thinking, so, it's funny I go to Europe and I get more of a black cultural, what can I say, cultural shock.  Because, in here, I'm taking it all for granted.  Over there, because whites are admiring it and studying these, I'm thinking, "Hey, wait a minute.  This is, you know, this is something."  (Door bell ringing) (Unclear).  So that's another world.  Oh, it was fascinating, absolutely.
Story_ID: 228249
Speaker 1: Here I am.  I think I'm about thirteen months; the baby picture.  And, then this one is--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here I am to the right.  That's [Dr.] Johnnetta [B. Cole] and that's my cousin, we're in Washington [D.C.] when we went up there to--when I going to [Benjamin] Banneker [Junior High School; Benjamin Banneker Academic High School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're on the far left?
Speaker 2: No.  I'm on the far right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're on the right.
Speaker 2: And, my sister's on the far left and that's a cousin in the middle.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, she's an adopted, my grandmother [Bertha E. Lewis]--again, see I came in a family--you know, my grandmother adopted two children.  It's almost like this whole feeling of giving, not only my great-grandfather [Abraham Lincoln Lewis], but my grandmother had adopted two children.  She was the daughter of the woman she adopted.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: Bobbie Long.  Bobbie Long.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  B-O-B-B-I-E or Y?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I-E.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  I-E.  Okay.  And, just for our caption editor, Johnnetta spells her name?
Speaker 2: With two Ns.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Johnnetta.  Yes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Two N'; one T or two?
Speaker 2: Two T's.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Two N', two Ts.
Speaker 2: Got it.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Next photo.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next photo.  All right.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is on the--this is in Sugar Hills [Sugar Hill, Jacksonville, Florida].  This is that house, not my great-grandfather's house, this is grandfather's [James Henry Lewis] house.  Here he is, A. L. Lewis, right there as you can see--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: It's the shape of his head even that he used as a lesson for us to learn about life.  It's shaped like the peanut.  See how it goes in like a curve.  And, he would tell us how the peanut plant when it dies, it goes back to the earth to make the nut.  And, this was his way of tell us, you must always go back to your roots.  He used so many metaphors with us as children.  You couldn't walk down the street with him without him pointing out something that had a meaning.  He was just that sensitive.  And, his favorite proverb, are you ready for this?  African proverb: "When spider webs unite, they can tie up a lion."  It's that beautiful?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: This is my mom [Mary Lewis Betsch].  Here I am and my little sister, and that's my dad [John Betsch], grandfather.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  That's when we were in high school [Boylan-Haven School, Jacksonville, Florida].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, great.  Next photo.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's my dad, the little brother.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: My dad, mother's to the left.  His--my sister, Johnnetta.  I'm up here and my little brother [John Betsch, Jr.].  As I said, there's ten years between Johnetta and Johnny.  So, there he is.  That's before he started beating the drums.  We hadn't begun to tease him yet (laughter).
Speaker 1: This was at the Two Spot nightclub [2 Spot, Jacksonville, Florida].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: The Two Spot Nightclub was the club.  And, we probably were the first--the largest, I would say the largest in the South.  It had a balcony, oh, I can--oh, it was something else.  The sorority was sponsor for this debutantes ball.  And, of course, here's my grandfather.  There I am in the center and my boyfriend, later to become my fiance, which never materialized, because once I got to Europe, child please, I was in another world then.  But, bless his heart.  He was like the little childhood sweetheart so it was sweet little puppy love, and--you got that?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here I am right here and here's my sister and the other girls at the Two Spot.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Counting from the left without leaning in, you're how many over from the left?
Speaker 2: One, two, three; I'm four.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Four.  And, your sister is?
Speaker 2: Third.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Very (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Here I am.  See how my hair goes up in that curve I was telling you about?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell, who's in the photo?  When and where (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) This was wonderful.  About two years ago they made 'Sunshine State,' John Sayles was the director and with Angela Bassett.  The movie, in the movie, the little black beach was called Lincolnville but it was filmed at American Beach [Florida].  And, here's my sister, who came by to check it all out.  I'm here.  What's this guy from, LPD?  The actor, I don't know 'cause I don't have TV.  What's--anyway, here's Angela Bassett, my sister's husband.  And, this is the director of the [LaVilla] Museum [Ritz Theatre and Museum] at Jacksonville [Florida].  And, here I am, and I don't know if you're doing this, I was entertained that was another time at the beach.  But, that was 'Sunshine State,' it was wonderful; an independent film.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Every year--here I am with my hair and you can see the audience.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Tell us when and where.
Speaker 2: The Kingston [sic. Kingsley] Plantation is a national park [Timucuan Ecological & Historic Preserve, Florida].  I'm a descendant from this man [Zephaniah Kingsley] who married the slave [Anna Kingsley].  And, you can see the slave cabins.  It's in the national park.  And, every year in October, they have a celebration, and I'm one of the guest speakers, as--and, this time I was speaking specifically about my great-grandfather.  And--
Speaker 1: Okay.  In what year was this taken about?
Speaker 2: What is this 2000--I would say 2002.
Story_ID: 228250
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Here I am as Salome ['Salome,' Richard Strauss] with my veils.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And, when, when and where was it taken?
Speaker 1: Okay.  This was taken in Braunschweig [Germany], the most famous German company because Gerta [ph.] of the German port [ph.] performed there.  And, if you sang in Braunschweig, you would go to Berlin [Germany].  So, famous was this--don't forget, now this is a time when German is divided--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hum.
Speaker 1: You remember; east/west.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  East/west, yeah.
Speaker 1: I lived in Hanover [Germany] which was right near the border with East Germany.  But, this was protection in Braunschweig.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That is stunning.
Speaker 1: That's Heron, the--my stepfather, you know.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  That is stunning.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And, let's see now, what year was that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, you gotta do the one with the veils.  So, they see all that before I cut them.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What years was this again?
Speaker 1: This would have been like, I graduated in '55 [1955], like 1956, 1957.  Yeah, approximately, yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And, could you spell Braunschweig.
Speaker 1: Braunschweig, B-R-A-U-N-S-C-H-W-E-I-G, Braunschweig.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Great.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Ready for the next one.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: I have come home.  I'm now, I had moved to the [American] Beach [Florida] but then I moved back to Jacksonville [Florida] because they were gonna put a coal fired plant--unfortunately, my protest didn't, along with all my other friends, didn't help.  But, we moved, I moved back to Jacksonville so I could go to the county--the city meetings.  And, can you imagine in Florida, called the Sunshine State, they have a coal fired plant.  See, what I'm talking about, Jodi [Merriday].  I mean, the pollution; it's terrible.  And, you get this fine dust from coal, darling, it's in your lungs.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This was just one of the productions, the regisseur was from Paris [France] and it was a new--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  This is very special of the, of--you call him the regisseur.  This is a man who designs the sets and the costumes and everything.  And, rather than having--in one production I did have the head.  But, they put a chiffon, what you call it, cloth over it so it didn't look as--you know, aesthetically, you have understand that people are seeing all this; a beheaded head.  But, for this one, he used it symbolic and merely as a mask.  And, I had to sing for thirty minutes without stopping.  This is a monologue, the famous monologue after I've already danced the Dance of the Seven Veils.  Child, I was bad (laughter).
Speaker 1: See these lice.  Remember I told you about the lice that's on the head.  This whale is different from most; it's more fat.  That's why they call it the right whale because it had more blubber.  And, this is a photograph that they take.  And, this is 1151 and here, here's the little baby over there.  Little baby, yeah, right, the thing probably weights a ton.  And, she has to nursery for almost a year and a half and they have the babies right there on the coast near American Beach.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Eleven fifty-one.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is Carl Pope to the right.  The executive director of Sierra Club and he came to America Beach to see NaNa; that's the sand dune.  See us walking up the sand dune; this sixty foot tall sand dune.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was this taken?
Speaker 2: Let's see, that was about 2001.  Yeah, 2001.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Sierra Club, as I said, and many of these predominately white environmental groups are now having an environmental injustice wing--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: In fact, the Southeast regional director for Sierra Club is African American.
Speaker 1: Oh, wow!
Speaker 2: Yeah; for Sierra Club.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, her husband is for [The] Wilderness Society.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You've got to interview them.  Baby, they are awesome.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: These are the famous Lewis Papers that were discovered at the last minute.  This woman is 104 years old.  She was the last--well, she is now, oh, what do you call it, agent for the Afro[-American Life Insurance Company, Jacksonville, Florida].  She remembers, oh, God, the stories she could tell.  She's been there for years, and she's 104 years old.  She's with the year, so she's 104.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: She worked with the Afro for what, sixty-some years?  But, the man who found these papers were just walking down the street, and he walks into this old antique shop.  They were gonna throw them out.  Who's A.L. Lewis [Abraham Lincoln Lewis]?  They don't know who this is.  And, he walks in, and I have deeds from 1800s.  I have the original letter my great-grandfather wrote trying to get a bank started in Florida.  So, he gave the papers to me, and I in turn gave them to the museum; the LaVilla Museum [Ritz Theatre and Museum], which is the museum in Jacksonville [Florida].  I got news for you, that museum's so fabulous, you all don't have that, anything like that here in Atlanta [Georgia].  It's a museum, it's an art gallery, and a theatre.  It's where Ray Charles used to play.  Its called the--
Speaker 1: That's phenomenal.  All three in one place?
Speaker 2: All three in one place.  The city paid for it.  It's a 6.5 million dollar museum.  Oh, let's talk about Anna Kingsley.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  This is a woman--
Speaker 1: This is amazing.
Speaker 2: The slave master [Zephaniah Kingsley] married.  See the cabins.  These are the slave cabins.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Those are the slave cabins.  You can see them; they're still there.  He married this woman, and I'm a descendant.  Their great-granddaughter was my great-grandmother [Mary Frances Sammis], who was A. L. Lewis' first wife.   And, this is the man I was telling you about, Dr. [Daniel L.] Schafer.  So, he's the head of the history department at the University of North Florida [Jacksonville, Florida].  And, Anna Kingsley has become like his special--his expertise, in this.  He's gone to Senegal and done all the research and everything, so.  And, that's the little book he wrote; little booklet about her.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay--
