Story_ID: 343603
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Shawn Wilson; I'm the interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  This is Scott Stearns the videographer with The HistoryMakers and then Denise Gines, the observer whom you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: All right.  So I'll just start by having you state your name and spelling it out for me.
Speaker 2: My name is Juanita Powell Baranco [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco], J-U-A-N-I-T-A, Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L, Baranco, B-A-R-A-N-C-O.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 19th, 1949.
Speaker 1: Okay, place of birth?
Speaker 2: Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: April the 11th, 2006.
Speaker 1: Location of this interview?
Speaker 2: We're at Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a lawyer by training and I am an automobile dealer professionally.
Story_ID: 343604
Speaker 1: Okay, so I'm gonna start with five questions off the top, short answers, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chocolate (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The beach.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, I've got so many of them.  That's a toughie for me.  I use; I just used a couple of them today.  I may have to come back to that one (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --something'll come to me.
Story_ID: 343605
Speaker 1: We'll start with your background and your family tree and we'll talk about your mother's side of the family first.  So, if you can just state your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name--and she's deceased now, she died in 2002, but her name was Evelyn Evans Powell.
Speaker 1: And do you know your mother's date of birth?
Speaker 2: Yes, October 22, 1916.
Speaker 1: And where was it your mother grew up?
Speaker 2: She grew up in Grenada, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: So did you ever, did you ever get to go back to Mississippi, do you ever--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh did I ever, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yes ma'am (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) we--see I was raised primarily in Shreveport, Louisiana and my mother was from Grenada, Mississippi, and so Shreveport was sort of a metropolis, if you will, and so my mother worked, she was a school teacher.  She taught special ed [special education].  She majored in home economics in college.  She attended Clark College [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University] here in Atlanta [Georgia], and worked her way through school from junior high school all the way through college.  But anyway, while I was growing up in Shreveport, during the summer months, from Memorial Day to Labor Day basically, we were sort of shipped off to the country as we used to call it to visit with my grandparents, Albert Evans and Lessie White Evans.  Sort of an interesting story there, my grandparents owned about a 480-acre farm there in Grenada, Mississippi.  Which was a huge parcel of land for African Americans back in the day, but the way they got it I think is the interesting story.  Her--my, when my grandmother reached the ripe old age of eighteen she was considered somewhat of an old maid.  And so my grandmother's parents got together, or as we would say today, hooked up with my grandfather's parents and decided that since she was at the ripe old age of eighteen and my grandfather, Albert Evans, was a bit of a robust young man, shall we say, that the two of them should get married.  But what they really had in mind was the land.  Because they understood and knew that the two of them--or made it possible for the two of them to inherit two contiguous parcels of land.  And so it was really sort of a classical arranged marriage in a very real sense.  And so she got her acreage, he got his acreage, and it totaled up, when they got married, and ultimately inherited that acreage, it totaled up to about approximately 480--almost five hundred acres of land.  As my granddaddy used to say, "Good, gill bottom land," and what that means is that that is land that is quite fertile for the purposes of growing cotton.  So my grandfather had--his primary product was cotton but he raised everything, cows, chickens, hogs, peanuts.  He had a huge peanut patch, he had corn, you name it, it was a full-fledged farm.  And so I visited there, getting back to your question, I visited there in the summers pretty much all of my growing up years, we, I spent time on the farm.
Story_ID: 343606
Speaker 1: Now you spoke about your mother's [Evelyn Evans Powell]--your--those are your mother's parents, your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Those are my--
Speaker 1: --your grandparents--
Speaker 2: --mother's parents, yes.
Speaker 1: --that owned land?  Now, do you know anything about their backgrounds, I mean, about their parents'?
Speaker 2: Oh--
Speaker 1: Can you go back--
Speaker 2: --oh yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --oh yeah, I can keep going back now (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Let's keep going back then.
Speaker 2: All right, well now my--
Speaker 1: So, and then the names if you can and spelling out the names for me if it's a name that--
Speaker 2: Okay, well, my grandmother's name as I said, my mother's mother was Lessie White Evans, so that's L-E-S-S-I-E, her father's name, my mother's father's name, was Albert Evans.  Now Lessie's father's name was, his last name was White, and all I ever heard them call him was old man White, and they basically--that was his name because he was, African American but he looked white.  He was a tall, stately gentleman, white hair, nearly white skin and white mustache and he wore--and he rode a big white horse, you know, I never met him.  And my grandfather's parents, their names were, well the, the--again, you know, in the country they use so many nicknames, but my grandfather's father's name was Evans, his last name was Evans and I think it was William Evans, but I'm not sure about that, I may have to correct that.  But, his wife name, all I ever knew was Mammy Cat, that's all they ever called her was Mammy Cat, and she was a rather stern woman, I never met her either but I--just when I would see pictures of her, and I have a picture of her as a matter of fact in my living room, of the two of them, Mammy Cat and her husband, it was--they--she was just, she'd scare you just looking at Mammy Cat's picture.  My mother always said she was afraid of Mammy Cat, and she had nine kids, and my grandfather being one of them, and my grandmother, I don't mean--I'm flipping around here, but my grandmother was raised by her father and her stepmother, and she always attributed the fact that her mother died when she was three to a lot of the problems she had.  She was very close to her father, but again, in those days men were not that close to their children and the stepmother had other children by her father so she sort of got left by the wayside, which I guess is what ultimately led to her being an old maid at the age of eighteen.  But back on my grandfather's side on my mother's side, his parents really were slaves in this country.  And old man Evans, my grandfather's father, they used to tell stories about him when he was a slave, because he was considered, you know, well they said he was lazy is what they said.  He just didn't want to do anything and so the slave master, one of the stories that sticks out in my mind, is that they put a bell on him, and, so that way that they would know when he was working.  And so you can imagine what he did, he just sat under a shade tree and just rang the bell (laughter), you know.  So that was a big family joke, and we loved him, I mean, I didn't know him, but we loved hearing the stories about my great-grandfather and those--they really were slaves in this country in Mississippi.  And so my grandfather, again, he was a hardworking man so I don't believe his grand- his father was really lazy they just called him that.  I think he was pretty smart is what I think he was.  But my grandfather was really, really a hardworking guy but he sort of marched to his own drummer.  He had these, this five hundred acres, or almost five hundred acres of land [in Mississippi], and so it was customary in those days for white people to come and just take the land, they just would walk up and take it.  Well, what he did, he built his house up on a bluff, sort of a hill, and so when people would come up and attempt to take the land, he would just take his shotgun, and I will not repeat the words, but I know them, but I won't repeat the words that he said, because he called them all kinds of ugly names and--but he was able to protect, the bottom line is he was able to protect his land from white people coming to take the land.  So it sort of instilled in me, you know, that value of real estate, number one, and the value of owning your own business, your own enterprise, controlling your own destiny and the beauty and the value of freedom because they really, that generation that was one generation removed from slavery, as my grandfather was, really understood and valued freedom in a very different sense than what most of us can even conceive at this point in our history.  But, I mean, I, the rest of the stories are probably too racy for the camera you know, but I, well, you know, so and so meeting somebody in the smokehouse and, you know, so and so getting after so and so, and so I mean just the normal stuff that happens in every family I'm certain.  But there are lots of stories out there, and thank God, frankly, that my grandparents took the time to share them with us, even though we were rather young, they did share a lot of the stories with us.
Story_ID: 343607
Speaker 1: What stories did your mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] share with you about her childhood?
Speaker 2: Not many, see my mother left home, she left Grenada, Mississippi at the age of thirteen and because my grandfather [Albert Evans] said to her, he said, "Now listen, I'm not gonna send you to school any longer than the eighth grade, any further than the eighth grade."  Because after all, with an eighth grade education back then, you could teach school, so what more could a black woman want to do other than teach school.  But somehow she had read some book or somehow she got inspired by some teacher, I don't know what happened, but she realized that she wanted more than an eighth grade education, so for her high school, there was no high school for African Americans in Grenada, Mississippi, so she had to go to Greenwood, Mississippi, I believe it was.  And she attended high school there, then she came to Atlanta [Georgia], and attended Clark College [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University] so she basically worked her way through.  So her life was one of working.  She worked--and my grandmother [Lessie White Evans] did all she could, but my grandfather had washed his hands; he just didn't see any need for her to go any further than that eighth grade.  But my grandmother would sell cream; she would churn the milk and the, the cream I think she sold for eighteen dollars a pint.  And what she did with that eighteen dollars was, she bought a twenty-five dollar savings bond and every time she got eighteen dollars she would send that to my mother in the form of a twenty-five dollar savings bond.  So that's basically how mother got through college, you know, earning her way working and that kind of thing.  And of course, the work programs in college and high school certainly were nothing as formalized as they are now.  Basically you just ask someone if they would give you a job, I've got this young woman here she can work and help take care of the kids and that kind of thing.  So she supported herself along with my grandmother's twenty-five dollar savings bonds, U.S. savings bonds.
Speaker 1: Did, was your grandfather, was her father different with the boys?  Were the boys allowed (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were--
Speaker 1: to--
Speaker 2: --no boys.
Speaker 1: There were no boys--
Speaker 2: --there were--
Speaker 1: --so who were--
Speaker 2: --two sisters.
Speaker 1: So he only, they only had two children?
Speaker 2: They had one son who died at the age of two and it's unclear what he actually died of but the boy they had, and he was the baby, both girls, my mother and her sister, her name is Minnie Evans Shelton, she's still living by the way.  So the two girls, but there's thirteen years difference between my mother and her sister.  So she didn't even grow up with her sister because she left home at the age of thirteen, and my Aunt Minnie was born when my mother was thirteen.  So, you know, they never really were, except for vacations and Christmas and things like that, so my aunt was raised almost as an only child and my mother was raised almost as an only child.
Speaker 1: So what did your mother say about going to school in Greenwood, Mississippi?  Did she ever talk about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She didn't talk--
Speaker 1: --any stories about Greenwood, Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Not many--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: --stories about it, I mean, again, she was in school and she was working.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it wasn't necessarily a happy time, I don't think she was miserable, she lived with families and oftentimes she would mention--I think that's where she sort of gained her desire for cooking and home economics and knowing all those kinds of things.  See, in those days, people were really looking for a better life, and, or some people were, and she certainly was of that stature, so she was working for a cause, working for a reason, to improve herself and for, and to improve the whole race as far as that goes frankly.  So, she was willing to make that sacrifice and work, so she wasn't a party animal.  My mother was pretty stern too and pretty strict, and she was a tall, slender woman, very statuesque, a handsome woman is what we would say, you know.  She wasn't pretty in the classical sense of pretty, but she was a tall, handsome, very good looking woman.  Very thin, not like me (laughter), I took after my daddy [Jerome Powell], but she was a very tall, slender, woman.  In fact, she said one time, to me, she said, "Well you know I had a twenty-two waist until I was forty?"  I said, "Oh God."  But, so, she did a lot of work and she, sometimes she would comment on, "Well I learned how to make this dish from this woman that I worked for when I was in, at Clark or in, at so and so."  So she would talk about the people, I know at one point she worked for Mary McLeod Bethune, but that was after she finished college.  Her first job, I think was in Plains, Georgia.  And then she took a job with Miss Bethune.
Speaker 1: And what did she do for Miss Bethune?
Speaker 2: I think secretarial, administrative type work is, is what she did, yeah.
Story_ID: 343608
Speaker 1: So your mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] then--what year did she graduate Clark [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen thirty-eight [1938], 1938 is the year (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well that must have been rare to have a woman with a college degree--
Speaker 2: I think it was pretty rare, as a matter of fact in 1988, mother came to Atlanta [Georgia], and we were living here and it was her fiftieth reunion.  So she was determined to be here for that reunion.  And when she got here there were about eight or ten of them that made it, and everybody commented on how good they looked.  And so I then commented, I said, "Well yeah if they made it, they look good," (laughter), you know.  So, but she climbed those stairs, she did everything, she just knew everything, and I think the most emotional part for me was when she sat there and she did, they sang the alma mater for Clark College and she knew every word, fifty years later she knew every word.  So you know, a college education really meant something to someone coming from Grenada, Mississippi on the farm where people were barefoot and picking cotton, even though it was your own cotton you were planting and picking, in her case, not many African Americans could say that however, but I think it really meant something and so knowing that alma mater to the point that she did fifty--to even know it, every word, all three verses or four verses how many verses there were, to know that fifty years later, 1988 was, is pretty phenomenal.
Speaker 1: So did--how did she meet your father [Jerome Powell]?  And what year did she meet your father?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure of the year, but I know they met on a train.  She was working in Plains, Georgia, and she and some of her girls got together and one of them knew someone in Washington, D.C. but they decided they would take summer jobs so they went up to Atlantic City [New Jersey], they were on their way to Atlantic City to work, and I think she sort of had a secret crush on Lionel Hampton, and he was playing, you know, and she was just gonna, she was gonna be in Atlantic City, that was the hot job to have.  So they got on a train so one of the girls, her name was Laura D. Stamps [ph.], I did get a chance to meet her from I think Tupelo, Mississippi, or Itta Bena, Mississippi, one of those towns, decided that she had some friends, there was a guy, all I know is his initials were H-O-G, something, something, Gordon [ph.], but anyway they just called him H-O-G, they wanted to call him HOG, but they just called him H-0-G.  But anyway, she knew him, and they were best friends and he was one of my father's best friends so they said, she basically said, just like we would do today, "You know, I've got some guys we need to meet."  I was born in '49 [1949] so this had to be in the early to mid-'40s [1940s] or something.  She said, "So, we're gonna stop in Washington on our way to Atlantic City and kind of party with these guys."  And (laughter) course daddy tells a little different story than mother.  But daddy always said that they stopped--my daddy was, again, my mother was tall and slender, my father was short and chubby and loved--and lived life to its fullest, oh, in every sense of the word if you know what I mean.  So daddy said that he wanted, so he said, "Well, can you cook?"  So mother said, "Well yeah, I can cook."  So he said, "Well do you know how to cook bacon?"  'Cause apparently they had partied all night or something, so she said, "Yes."  And so he took her to wherever they were staying and whatever and so he said that because of the way she cooked that bacon, Lord, this is maybe embarrassing, because of the way she cooked that bacon that was the woman he was gonna marry.  And he also said, very (unclear), he said this on--he said, "You know, and she owns property."  So he said, "This is the person I'm gonna marry."  And so they dated, but she went on to Atlantic City and I thought that was just wonderful.  'Cause see the average girl back then--'cause my daddy was extremely handsome, very good looking, you know, naturally curly hair and all this kind of stuff and you know, he was just a fine looking man.  And a lot of girls would have just, you know, stopped their career dead in its tracks, married him, he was in law school, and did eventually become a lawyer, but nope, she went right on to Atlantic City 'cause he said, "Well, we can get you a job at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.] and so I--," this--I wanna get this straight, 'cause this is, if I can get this story straight. So mother said, "Well, I don't know anything about that, I'm a teacher, I don't know how to type and do those things."  So my daddy said something to this affect, "Do you know the difference between a typewriter and a slop jar?"  (Laughter) And so mother said, "Yeah, but I'm going to Atlantic City."  So you see--his point was, well then you can work at the Pentagon is what he was saying (laughter) if you know that difference.  But anyway, I just thought that was such a enlightened move on her part, you know, to just, "I'm going on to Atlantic City, I know this is a great job at the Pentagon that you may be able to hook up or whatever, but I'm sticking with my plans."  And what she did--I said, "Well what did you do in Atlantic City?"  She said she just handed out towels in the bathroom.  I said, "That's it?"  Said, "That's it, just handed out towels and people gave you tips and that was it."  But I know she did get a chance to see Lionel Hampton play, and that was one of her lifelong dreams.  In fact, later on in life my brother actually got her tickets to a concert, to one of Lionel Hampton's concerts, so, anyway that was one of her heartthrobs you know.
Story_ID: 343609
Speaker 1: So when was your father born, his--and where was his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He was born in 1914 in--I'm sorry, 1915, in Shreveport, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: And what was your father's name again for me?
Speaker 2: His name was Jerome Theodore Powell [Jerome Powell].  And he was one of five children born to Mattie [Mattie Powell] and Solomon E. Powell [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.].  My grandmother on my father's side, her name was Mattie Juanita, hence my name Juanita [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco].  But her name was Mattie Juanita, God I'm--her maiden name will come to me sooner or later but I'm missing it right now.  She was from Homer, Louisiana, and my father was born right there in Shreveport, Louisiana.  He--to Solomon E. Powell and Mattie E. Powell, my grandmother's family had been in the funeral home business and they owned a lot of land, oil land, oil rich land as a matter of fact, up in Homer, Louisiana.  My father's father, Solomon E. Powell, was a physician and in fact and you can go to Shreveport and look this up, they've done several articles on him through the years, but he was the first African American to ever practice medicine in the City of Shreveport, Louisiana.  He went to Meharry Medical School [sic. Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], he started out as a pharmacist, and then he became a practicing physician in Shreveport, Louisiana, and as I said, was the first African American to practice medicine in Shreveport and I'm sure one of the first to practice anywhere in this country.
Speaker 1: Do you know the year?
Speaker 2: I don't know the year, I really don't.  I thought you were gonna ask me that (laughter) but I can't make up a name, I just can't--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --think of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was Solomon Elijah Powell, Solomon Elijah Powell.
Speaker 1: And that was your father's--
Speaker 2: Father.
Speaker 1: Father's father?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it must have, I mean my--in the early 1900s (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I would imagine--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so, yes, I'm guessing so.
Story_ID: 343610
Speaker 1: What was your father's [Jerome Powell] childhood like, what did your father say about growing up in Shreveport [Louisiana] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, he had a--
Speaker 1: --having a doctor as a--
Speaker 2: --ball--
Speaker 1: --father--
Speaker 2: --he had a ball.  My father was a lawyer.  He went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], and then he went to Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] to take the Louisiana courses so that he could, you know, pass the bar and be in practice in Louisiana.  But he went to Howard University.  My father graduated from high school when he was fifteen because high school stopped at the eleventh grade.  So he was fifteen years old when he graduated, well he was, again he just lived life to its fullest.  There are so many stories about my dad, he, he just had to see the world.  He wanted to see the world, so he literally hoboed across America, California, New York, I mean, everywhere in America that a train went he was on it.  And he just hoboed his way across and lived a pretty good life.  He did that then he came back and went to college (laughter).  But he did that because he just, I mean he just always had that hankering to see the world.  He was in the [U.S.] Army and in fact he told me one time that he was in the group that cut down, oh, God, the two people from Italy during the World War II [WWII], that were spies or whatever, anyway he cut them down, I don't know why I can't call their names right now, they're very famous in history and I used to know this and now it's all kind of escaping me.  But, he--they--when they, you know they hung them upside down for being traitors and he was--his troop was the one that came and cut them down, yeah.
Speaker 1: So what years was he in the Army, do you know?
Speaker 2: Well (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Was the World War II--
Speaker 2: --if I was--
Speaker 1: --then?
Speaker 2: --they started having children at '47 [1947], and I don't--they didn't get married before, they had met before he went away but he, you know, didn't get married before, so when he got back from the Army, I guess it was in '45 [1945], or '46 [1946]--somewhere in '45 [1945] they must have gotten married.  I have a license at home but I don't remember the actual year.
Speaker 1: So what do you think, and I mean I guess I'm digging for maybe a few more stories but what do you think life was like for an African American, young kid whose father [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.] was a doctor in the South and his father was the first doctor in the State of Louisiana in that--what did that mean for his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I mean--
Speaker 1: --his son?
Speaker 2: --they were clearly in the elite.  But, you know, in those days we didn't really ra- I mean he--they were as spoiled as folk could be back then.  But people didn't spoil people to the extent that kids get spoiled today.  I mean his father for instance, one of the things 'cause he was a doctor when daddy would do something bad or whatever, which he often times did and he needed to be stitched up, he said his daddy stitched him up without any lidocaine, he just stitched him up cold, and that was to teach him a lesson, you know.  But, I mean, my dad is a great swimmer, but he learned how to swim in some sort of a swimming hole that most folks drowned in.  It has some sort of undertow in it, but that's where he learned how to swim.  I mean so, yeah they were spoiled for their day, or they had more, my grandfather built a huge house with six bedrooms and that kind of thing right there on Milam Street.
Speaker 1: What is Milam Street?
Speaker 2: That's the main street that runs through Shreveport, M-I-L-A-M, is the big street there.  My grandfather had a pharmacy; he had a drugstore, you know.  They were entrepreneurs, I mean they just, that's what they were.  I mean, he was a physician, but, I mean, people looked up to people like my grandfather because during the Depression [Great Depression] for instance, you know, they didn't have much money coming in and so people paid him with chickens, just the stories you hear, they're true.  He got paid with chickens and, you know, and in-kind donations and that kind of thing for his services as a physician.  So, my father grew up with four other siblings, he had a sister [Carrie Mae Powell] who was a concert pianist, he had a--see my grandfather, we called him Big Pa, what he did and I've, I think people could take some advice from this, but what he did was he said what everybody was gonna be.  He said, "Now you're gonna be a physician," and that was my Uncle Murphy [Murphy Powell], he became a physician.  He told my Uncle Vernon [Vernon Powell], "You're gonna be a dentist."  He told my daddy, "You're gonna be a lawyer."  And he told my aunt she was gonna be a school teacher, a librarian, and which she became a school teacher, librarian and a concert pianist.  I mean she was a phenomenal pianist, now I told you he had five kids right, well he forgot to tell my Uncle S.E. [Solomon E. Powell, Jr.] what he was gonna be (laughter) so he didn't fare as well.  He was a pharmacist, he got to be a pharmacist, but he was an alcoholic and he just did not, you know, reach his full potential.  He was really, really good looking and there was several rumors around about him dating several white movie stars, yeah.
Story_ID: 343611
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, I wanted to say it was Mussolini [Benito Mussolini] and his wife [sic. Mussolini's mistress, Clara Petacci] that my father [Jerome Powell] and his troop, or whatever they call it, cut down Mussolini and his wife when they were hung, so that was his one big experience in World War II [WWII].  And, but on to my Uncle S.E. [Solomon E. Powell, Jr.], his name was Solomon Elijah Powell after his father [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.], my grandfather and he was a pharmacist and, but he was extremely handsome, tall, slender guy, good-looking, lots of women, again, drank a little too much, smoked a little too much so he died very young.
Speaker 2: How young?
Speaker 1: I believe he was in his early forties when he died, when he passed away.  But at one point we are told that he and Ingrid Bergman had a real hot and heavy affair and she begged him to come to California, with her to accompany her to California which he opted not to do.  I'm not quite so sure why not but he eventually married my aunt, and--but he never settled down but anyway, he was a--I got to know him real well but most of the time he was sort of inebriated when we would see him. But the real lesson is--my grandfather--you need to really direct and guide your children a lot stronger than what people do, you know.  I grew up in the Spock, Dr. Spock [Benjamin Spock] generation where they told everybody, you know, "Let the kids figure out what they wanna do," and all that and I don't know I sort of, having raised four children of my own I now think that you really ought to be able--a little not to force children into anything, I'm not suggesting that but to kind of give a little guidance and some direction because they don't know and they're looking for it and you're looking at them hopefully as objectively as you can, so that's what my granddaddy did, he looked at his kids and said--and, and he was right with everyone of--the doctor was a phenomenal doctor.  The--my daddy was a phenomenal lawyer.  The same thing with my Uncle Vernon [Vernon Powell], a dentist, I mean people came from miles and miles, he lived in Lake Charles [Louisiana], and my Uncle S.E. was a good pharmacist.  Drunk, but good (laughter).
Story_ID: 343612
Speaker 1: When did your parents [Evelyn Evans Powell and Jerome Powell] actually get--how did they get back together?  What year did they marry, and how did they get from D.C [Washington, D.C.] to Shreveport [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, okay I can tell you all of that.  They when, when mother left Atlantic City [New Jersey], I guess she had a change of heart, so she went back to Plains, Georgia or wherever she was working, I think it was Plains, Georgia, packed up her stuff and, and moved back to D.C.  But daddy was gone, he went off to war [World War II, WWII], so she just took the job at the Pentagon [Washington, D.C.], I guess she really did know the difference between a typewriter and a slop jar.  So she took that job at the Pentagon that daddy had sort of hook--arranged for her while he was off fighting in Germany and in Europe. He also did some cooking while he was in the [U.S.] Army too, but that--his big story is the Mussolini [Benito Mussolini] thing.  But, so she wrote my moth- her mother, my grandmother [Lessie White Evans] this long letter, 'cause people communicated by letter in those days primarily, telling her of what she was doing and my grandmother was just livid.  She was absolutely livid, she felt like, you know, Washington, D.C. was too far away, she felt like she was giving up the security of this teaching job she had worked with--well Mary McLeod Bethune was not Mary McLeod Bethune at the time, but she was well enough known that people knew that she was on solid ground, et cetera.  But mother was determined and I guess she knew she was gonna get married and I think my grandmother really thought that my father might go off to war and not come back or go off to war and not want her when he, when he got back.  But that was not the case, they did get married and they had three children.  My oldest--I'm the baby and the only girl.  I have, I have had, two brothers, one is still living.  My oldest brother Jerome Theodore Powell II [Jerome Powell II] passed away in 2003.  He was Down syndrome and was obviously born Down syndrome and in those days it was very difficult, I'm told, and as you can just imagine, to have services.  Nobody really knew what to do with a Down syndrome child and they really didn't know what to do with an African American Down syndrome child.  I don't know what they did, I guess they found a way to institutionalize them or kill them or do something.  But my brother was literally, J.T. we called him, was really literally dying, so out of desperation mother and daddy drove him to the country to visit with my grandmother and leave him there to die basically.  And I think my brother Albert [Albert Powell] had been born and maybe even mother might have been pregnant with me at the time 'cause I think J.T.--well I wasn't born but my other brother Albert was born, and she had her hands full 'cause we were born literally a year apart.  So she might have been pregnant with me and she just couldn't handle it so she took him back to the country basically to die.  And my grandmother always tells the story, she said, "Well your mother came here with that boy and she had five boxes of medicine and she sat there and said, 'Mama, he needs to take this at one o'clock and this at--."  And you know how these old peop- my grandmother said, "I just sat there and I listened to everything Evelyn--," and they called her sister, "everything sister gal said I listened to her, so then they left me with this boy, he wouldn't eat, he was dying, I tried to give him all these medicines and things Evelyn had left but I, I couldn't figure it out."  And she said one day my grandfather [Albert Evans], one I call pop, and my grandmother I call Mama Lessie, she said, "We were sitting there, your pop and me were sitting there and the next--we had some greens and cornbread, next thing I know that boy reached over and grabbed that cornbread and reached for those greens."  And so my granddaddy said, "Lessie, let that boy eat."  So she said, "I let him eat, he was dying anyway I just let him eat."  Well of course by the time mother got back not only had he eaten, but he was healthy and she had nourished him back to health with those--and my daddy always swore, "It was that pot liquor from those greens that made that boy live."  Whatever, between cornbread and organic, what we would now call organic foods, you know, 'cause they didn't use pesticides or anything in those days, things in those days so between that pot liquor, the cornbread and the buttermilk, everything was I--was I promise you was organic.  My daddy said that's what brought him back to life.  But they really took him to the country to basically to die and with the medicines and everything but, she said, "I just couldn't keep up with that medicine."  When he reached for those greens, she said, "I let him have it."  My--she said, "Your granddaddy said, 'Let him have it,' so I let him have it."  So, he lived to be fifty-seven years old, which the life expectancy, even today, for Down syndrome children is, forty is maxed out.  But he lived a very high quality of life, my father took care of him like nobody's business.  I mean wherever my daddy went, J.T. went too.  And he was never institutionalized, he stayed at home with us, we loved him we cared for him.  I was at his side when he finally--my mother died in 2002 and as you might imagine a year later he passed away.  It was just, he used to call mother his nurse, you know, 'cause he was bedridden at this point and didn't have a good quality of life the last five years, he was bedridden and so he passed away in 2003, J.T.
Story_ID: 343613
Speaker 1: At the point that they marry and--how do they get from D.C. [Washington, D.C.], does your father [Jerome Powell] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: --come back from the [U.S.] Army--
Speaker 2: He--
Speaker 1: --leaves the Army, comes back to D.C.?
Speaker 2: --well they had, mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] had set her mind, they were living in D.C. they didn't want to come back to the, the hardcore South and the racism, they, she loved Washington.  And, but my grandfather, Dr. Sol E. Powell [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.], the physician, got very, very, ill and he summoned his children and he had an awful lot of property, rental property and things and he needed my father to manage that property.  So he wanted daddy to come back home is what happened so they moved back home, much to my mother's chagrin.  She did not want to live in Shreveport [Louisiana] that was not her plan, she quit her job and got married and had babies to live in D.C., is what she wanted to do, they had a wonderful life there.  We used to go to the grocery store with my brother's little red wagon, everything was in walking distance, it was just a great life, which I remember some of it 'cause I was four years old when we moved back to Shreveport.  And you know, but it was because my father was ill--my grandfather was ill and dying and his wife [Mattie Powell] had already died, his wife, my--Mama Mattie we called her, died before my grandfather, but he was dying and knew that he was dying, after all, he was a physician.  And so he came back to really see after the family business 'cause the other boys had moved away.  My aunt [Carrie Mae Powell] was still living there but his sister, his only sister, but the boys had all moved away.  And so that's why they moved back to Shreveport.
Story_ID: 343614
Speaker 1: So what are your earliest memories of growing up in Shreveport [Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember living in Washington, D.C. actually because we had a red kitchen table with red leather chairs that, and that kitchen table, that metal table is still at my mama's [Evelyn Evans Powell] house right now.  So it followed us and it's still right there to this day.  So I remember playing outside in Washington and mother would turn--in the summer months she'd turn the hose on and all, and let us get wet and play in the water.  We had a cat, the cat bit me, I bit the cat back (laughter), I mean I remember all of that.  So Shreveport, okay now, this is a real interesting piece, I never knew life without a television because the television was invented around '48 [1948] or '49 [1949], well my daddy [Jerome Powell], again, living life to its fullest, you know, being a, a, a very bright guy went out and bought a television in Washington before I was even young--old enough to understand what was going on, I was born in '49 [1949], so he had a television at the time I was born, see.  So we moved to Shreveport, my father bought a house on Weinstock Street, 1932 Weinstock; I don't know how I remember that.  But, nice house, nice neighbors, you know, you know, middle income house for the day.  Well we walked in with this television; well no one in Shreveport had ever seen a television.  Well I was a pretty precocious kid by the time I was four and I was, "What do you mean you don't know what a television is, who are these people?"  You know, "Who are these people, my gosh, I mean where are they from, they don't know what television is?"  You know 'cause I had never known life without television, unlike most people my age, they remember when they got their first television.  Well I don't because we were living in Washington, D.C. and so I don't remember.  I've always known, we've always had a television as long as I could remember.  But anyway, so of course we, you know, were pretty smug about this television, you know, so it was sitting over there and you know I wanted to cont- I knew how to work it and operate it and all that kind of stuff, oh my gosh.  But I had to be in control of the television, okay, so my brother would have his friends, they'd wanna watch whatever they wanted to watch.  I was watching 'Howdy Doody' ['The Howdy Doody Show'] you know, he wanted to watch the westerns and he loved Gene Autry, I liked Roy Rogers, Roy Rogers and Dale Evans, and we fought over those things and, and I just had to win all the time.  I was, I was a mess.
Story_ID: 343615
Speaker 1: Did you go to Sunday school?  What was church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We went to--
Speaker 1: --life like?
Speaker 2: --we went to church--my grandfather, Dr. Sol E. Powell [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.], and it's still right there today, founded our church there in Shreveport [Louisiana], Williams Memorial C.M.E Temple Church.  I'll repeat that, Williams Memorial C.M.E. Temple Church, right there on Peabody Street in Shreveport, Louisiana.  And my grandfather was one of the founders of that church so that's the church we went to, I grew up in that church.  Sunday school, I was looking--in fact I was visiting home the other, just a few weeks ago and looking back, you know, at all the ministers I remembered and that was kind of scary.  'Cause I remembered Reverend Lakey [Othal L. Lakey], Reverend Thomas [R.C. Thomas], I mean, Reverend Johnson [James T. Johnson, Sr.], I could go back quite a few you know, and I was like, "Okay (laughter), you're getting up there girl."  But yeah, I grew up in that church.  It's a C.M.E., Methodist church, which stands for Christian Methodist Episcopal, it used to stand for Colored Methodist Episcopal, you know to distinguish from African Methodist Episcopal [A.M.E], colored was a little more sophisticated name.  But they eventually changed it to Christian 'cause that's a little more politically correct shall we say.
Speaker 1: Now did color have anything to do with lighter skinned than the Africans?
Speaker 2: You know, it wasn't a factor as much in north Louisiana as much as it was in south Louisiana.  My experience was different from most blacks because Louisiana standards I'm fairly dark, I would be considered, you know, and you--and (unclear) but I didn't hear any of this until I got grown and married a man from south Louisiana.  And I heard about the brown paper bag test, and, all, I didn't know any of that coming up because in my area there's a place in Natchitoches [Natchitoches Parish, Louisiana], called Cane River, and I guess people from Cane River who watch this is gonna get upset but a lot of the fair skinned people came from Cane River and they were known primarily for not being very bright, very smart.  There were some exceptions that were just near geniuses, but the average one of them wasn't that smart in my experience at Notre Dame High School [Shreveport, Louisiana].  And so the dark skinned people, and I was considered one of them, we were all the smartest people, you know, and that's not ex, not ex, not--that's a generality so there were certainly a lot of exceptions, I mean I can think of a lot of light skinned people who were valedictorian and so forth but who were from Cane River in that area.  But, so we didn't have that same preference, if you will, for the really, really fair people with straight hair, it just wasn't that big a deal because a lot of them had lice and we spent time--we became--we were friends and we spent time trying to comb that hair 'cause a lot of 'em had all kind of ridiculous myths that if they combed their hair it was gonna get nappy, you know.  So they didn't comb it and of course it knotted up just like what we, today, we would call those dreadlocks.  And I remember this girl Ruth Face [ph.], "I'm gonna comb this hair, you sit down, let me get this hair combed."  You know, and then we'd throw the combs and bushes away 'cause they might've had lice or something like that you know.  So I, my experience is not typical and I recognize that it's not typical.  In fact, there's a book out about Cane River that talks about a lot of this kind of stuff so, you know, it's good, good reading, it's a great book.  But, I mean, again, those are generalities, but the nuns, see I went to Catholic school, but see there were a group of black parents, Lynn McDonald [ph.] and black parents that started Notre Dame High School.  There was no black Catholic high school; there was a black elementary school, Our Lady of Blessed Sacrament [Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament Catholic Academy, Shreveport, Louisiana].  So they got to work and sold dinners and had car washes and raised the money for Notre Dame High School, and that's where I went to high school, which was a predominately black school.  We took state championship, it was, matter of fact Mr. Isaac Ben Greggs who is now the band director of Southern University [Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], the famous Southern University marching band, he was my high school band director, see.  But he came to us he had his main job was at the public school and junior high school so our band, our high school band, okay, we rehearsed at seven o'clock in the morning and at four o'clock in the afternoon or five o'clock in the afternoon when he finished at J.S. Clark Junior High School [Shreveport, Louisiana], his real paying job.  But his heart was at Notre Dame because we took, we were state champion, state championship band, band and football as a matter of fact.
Story_ID: 343616
Speaker 1: So we're gonna talk some more about your high school but I wanna go back a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Go back yes.
Speaker 1: --a little to, to some of the earliest--what do you remember holidays being like in your household, Christmas--
Speaker 2: Well my--
Speaker 1: --Easter?
Speaker 2: --mother [Evelyn Evans Powell], again, was a home economics major.  My mother could cook and see what she had, what I know now, she had combined all that country with her formal training, with Louisiana so she had a unique--and it's not just me, everybody in Shreveport [Louisiana], everybody that ever tasted her cooking said, "Oh my God, this is the best roast."  Sunday dinner was roast beef, squash casserole, string beans and potatoes.  That was Sunday dinner at my house almost without fail.  My father [Jerome Powell] didn't eat chicken, and I'll tell you a little story about that.  He didn't eat any kind of fowl.  What happened when he was a little boy growing up in Shreveport, you know in those days when you had company coming you put the chickens up, and we did it in Grenada, Mississippi, you 'em up and clean them out and then you kill the chicken for company.  Well he had done all this work, killing four--they had some big holiday coming, he had killed four, five chickens, feathered them, you know, singed the feathers, cleaned them, gutted them, did all that work but the adults got to eat first.  So, the adults sat there and they ate all the prime pieces of chicken, my dad, again, he loved to eat you know.  So he got, so when it came to him--for the children to eat, all that was left were the feet and I mean the feet.  'Cause folk cooked every part of the chicken back then, everything that could be cooked they did it.  So, in, again, children were not--they didn't talk back in those days.  So instead of him saying, "I don't want the feet."  He said, "Oh, I don't like chicken."  And he took that to his grave.  So that's why we had roast beef every Sunday, 'cause Daddy would not eat turkey, he wouldn't eat chicken, he told me he just didn't eat any kind of fowl, and he took that to his grave.  He never ate another piece of chicken after he made that big declaration.  Well his--I didn't even mention my great-grandmother, his grandmother, his grandmother, Carrie Powell, lived in, I mean she lived with them at the house that my grandfather [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.] built.  But she also worked at the fire station and she made biscuits every morning but she would get up at three o'clock every morning and go to the fire station and make biscuits and cook breakfast.  Well that's where daddy developed his appetite 'cause he would get up every morning with her 'cause she--he was her favorite and she lived to be 103, my great-grandmother.  And, in fact, she saw Abe Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln] (laughter), she told that story.  She was a little girl swinging and Abe Lincoln came by in a carriage, yeah, so she actually saw Abe Lincoln.  But anyway, he got up every morning with her to go make biscuits and cook bacon and that in those days bacon was bacon, it definitely wouldn't pass muster today--would not, it'd be politically incorrect food.  But she made that every morning at the fire house for them.
Story_ID: 343617
Speaker 1: Now do you remember your neighborhood that you lived in as a, I'm assuming it was legally segregated, Louisiana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah it--
Speaker 1: --at the time?
Speaker 2: --was definitely segregated, I had a--but, you know, I had a great neighb- yeah I can name all my neighbors.  I--Mr. and Mrs. Gill [ph.] to the right, they had chickens actually.  Nobody else in the city [Shreveport, Louisiana] had chickens, but they still had a few chickens and they pecked my dog Cocoa to death which was, woo.  That, that, that story just is simply that, you know, mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] said, "I'm gone take--I have--," after she got pecked he got off in the yard and then he got pecked and so she said she was taking him to the veterinarian so I called, she called back and she said, "Well, we had to put Cocoa to sleep."  And of course, as a child I just said, "Well, okay, big deal."  So when she walked out I said, "Well where's Cocoa?"  She said, "Well I told you we had to put him to sleep."  "Okay, well when is he gonna wake up?"  And I got hit with the reality of what that was about.  But, my other neighb- so that was Mrs. Gill, whom I still loved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you just tell me their names and then also like quickly what they did, like the Gills, what did they do for a living?  Just--
Speaker 2: Very--
Speaker 1: --to make up the neighborhood.
Speaker 2: --very interesting, I don't know what they did.  Mr. Gill was basically a junk man.  And mother struggled trying to put fences up and trying to make Mr. Gill clean up his yard and all that stuff.  And he had dogs and chickens as I just told you.  And, but Mrs. Gill was not educated but I used to go sit on the porch and talk with her.  And most of my social upbringing was really done by Mrs. Gill.  But she would always say--or I said, "What age do you think girls should start dating, Mrs. Gill?"  Then she'd say, "Well I don't think they should date before sixteen."  Good, write that down, you know, so I just--I was rather introverted as a child and so I spent my time with mostly old people, Mrs. Gill being one of them.  So I spent a lot of time on her porch even though mother spent all her time fussing at Brother Gill for having all that junk in the backyard.  And now as an adult I understand what she was saying, it probably had, was causing rats and roaches and everything else and so she really was just on him 24/7.  But it didn't seem to bother him very much.  He had a son whose name was Daniel [ph.].  And Daniel and I played with my brothers [Jerome Powell II and Albert Powell] mostly but we were all good friends and things like that.  My other neighbor was Barbara [Barbara McDade-Gordon] and Pat McDade; they were being raised by their grandmother, Miss Whiting [ph.], Miss Whiting was mean as I don't know what.  But they were my best friends in the neighborhood.  In the summertime, mother would let us stay out all night, and, you know, we had stars back then and we would count, we would find the North Star [Polaris], find that, we'd watch the drunks walk down the street, you know, neighborhoods were safe.  But mother would let us stay out until one and two o'clock in the morning in the summertime.  And we just talked and talked, before I got shipped off to the country or when I first got back, you know, in between country visits that's what we did.  And we just had a great time we would, we walked everywhere.  One time we decided we were walking all the way downtown which I know is about a three mile walk now.  But at the time we used to catch a trolley, there was a trolley that ran in front of my house so we used to catch the trolley and go downtown.  In fact, there's a little story there.  I had never heard of the Civil Rights Movement, I had never heard of anything.  But blacks always sat in the back of the bus, now this is a true story.  And one day I just decided, I think I was like eight or nine years old.  I just decided I wasn't sitting back there.  So there were, you know the bus was lined up, you had all your traditional seats but in the front of the bus they had the seats that sort of faced each other.  And so there were two white women, so obviously I made a concerted decision to sit right by these two white women so I just went and sat there, boy, all of my friends and my brother, "Juanita [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco], come on back, come back, come back."  I sat there, I didn't move, just didn't move.  I don't know what got into me, and I'm not trying to put myself on the level with Rosa Parks 'cause I was a child.  I, and it wasn't--I wasn't trying to be in the Civil Rights Movement, I don't think I had really heard of it.  I wasn't trying to do anything.  I just decided there was nothing wrong and I was just gonna sit there.  So no one, for some reason nobody said anything to me, now I don't know, somebody else could have said something to my parents later, I don't know what, but nobody said a word, but I sat right there with two women, white women and I sat and there, I was just a child of course, like nine or ten years old or something.  But I just sat there.
Story_ID: 343618
Speaker 1: Well did your parents [Evelyn Evans Powell and Jerome Powell] ever talk about at home what you could and couldn't do, places you could and could not go because of your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Never.
Speaker 1: --race?
Speaker 2: Never said a word.  When we traveled to Mississippi, and we did it at least twice a year, back and forth that's four trips, I know we always packed a lunch, but that was special.  I know we always stopped on the side of the road to use the bathroom, didn't bother me 'cause I mean it was like, "I gotta use the bathroom right now."  So we stopped, and you opened the doors and you used the bathroom.  So, it had never occurred to me in my coming up that the reason that we were using the bathroom on the side of the road 'cause we couldn't use the--and they weren't gonna take us through any sort of embarrassing situation.  So, no, I, they really never--now by the time I got to high school [Notre Dame High School, Shreveport, Louisiana], of course, you know, we were understanding things because that's when they started integrating the schools.  I had gone to all segregated schools, all black.
Speaker 1: Let's talk about that, up until what point?  What, where (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Until LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], until college.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when you started first grade at the Catholic school--
Speaker 2: I started first grade at Central Free Methodist El- I went to elementary school at Central Free Methodist Elementary School [Central Free Methodist Christian Day School, Shreveport, Louisiana], the school is still there and it's--that is Central Free Methodist, that is the denomination.  And that's the name of that school.  So I went from there, from kindergarten through eighth grade at Central Free Methodist, and then from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And it was all black?
Speaker 2: It was all black.
Speaker 1: The teachers were black as well?
Speaker 2: The teachers were black there, all black.
Speaker 1: Women, men?
Speaker 2: Women and men.  Mrs. Brewer [ph.] was our principal, Reverend Jackmon [James Jackmon], who's still there, was my fifth grade teacher, and Reverend Thompson [ph.], who's deceased and who eventually married Miss Davis [ph.].  Miss Davis is still there, Mrs. Thompson.  Now he was, I'm going to guess South American.  He was very, very dark and had an accent.  And boy he--I was quite a challenge for him, but (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What type of a student were you?  Rambunctious, quiet--
Speaker 2: I ver- I was, oh, no, they used to say, "Can you please ask Juanita [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] to stop talking."  Every day, "Mother, please, Juanita stop talking, will you please stop talking."  Yeah, I talked too much.  But my first grade teacher is someone that I remember with all the fondness in the world, her name was Mrs. Heard [ph.].  And I really do attribute a lot to her.  But I loved to read, always loved to read, and was always reading what we now know, ahead of my grade level.  We didn't call it that in those days, I was just one of the smart kids or whatever.  So, we had a practice that they would have you stand up and you would read until you got to a word you couldn't pronounce.  And I was just reading for days, I'd be standing up reading for days.  Well this particular day she called on me and around the second sentence I ran into a word that I didn't know.  And I'll never forget it, I will never forget it, but see we were taught to read phonetically, you know, A goes, a, a, a, B goes, buh, buh, and so on and so forth.  So, boy my eyes swelled and tears just rolled down my eyes and Mrs. Heard said, "Stop and pronounce it phonetically, do it."  Well, it was a P-H word.  The word was phenomenon, and I was in first grade.  And my eyes swelled up to cry and she said, "You can do it, pronounce the word, do it phonetically."  And I cried and said, "Phenomenon."  She said, "That's it."  And she, she was a little, tiny lady, you know.  She jumped, she hooted, and then I kept reading, boy and I was reading, you know, whatever, the kids hated for me to read 'cause I was gonna be reading for so long, you know, woo.  That was a powerful experience because it just really got me, my confidence up and so forth and it just taught me to stick to it and you have everything you need to make it.
Story_ID: 343619
Speaker 1: In my life there have been a number of occasions, the one I mentioned with Mrs. Heard [ph.], there was another occasion with Mrs. Foppe, I was in seventh grade [at Central Free Methodist Elementary School; Central Free Methodist Christian Day School, Shreveport, Louisiana] and, again, just a great English student.  By this point we were conjugating verbs, you know, all six tenses and so forth just going on and on and on, and I was just really good at it.  And there was a young man, I'll never forget him, his name was Rodney Chapman [ph.], and he was just picking on me.  I guess as an adult I can look back and maybe he had a little crush, but he just made my life miserable, I had a brother [Jerome Powell II] who was Down syndrome, he talked about that and made me cry every day.  And one day Mrs. Foppe, who was probably one of the most brilliant teachers I've ever had, just a brilliant woman. She asked me to conjugate these verbs using all the tenses, and she chose a difficult verb like be, B-E, the word be or--and then run and all the hard ones.  And then she got--and one for him to do, and he couldn't do it at all.  And boy oh boy did she punish him, but, I think as an adult looking back on it she knew that she was out to get him for me 'cause he was just picking on me about my brother and everything else.  And so she used my knowledge and my smarts to make him look bad.  She told me, she asked me if I would help tutor Rodney Chapman, and of course I didn't want to do it but I did it.  But it, the way she handled it and the way she made him look like a dummy was just payback enough for me.  And it just, I just beamed as a result of it, and so my point is between Ms. Heard and Mrs. Foppe that somebody, somewhere, those people put their hands on me and said, you know, identified me, they said, "You know, you're a smart little girl, you're gonna be something, you're gonna make something of yourself."  And I just feel that for every successful person in the world that somebody, somewhere has put their hands on their shoulders and said, "You a smart little old boy, I think you gonna be tight, you know, you look good, you got everything together."  And so many children today don't have that.  So many children of yesterday didn't have it.  But when you--if the one ingredient--and I've been involved in education as you probably know from my bio, a lot as a policy maker.  But the one thing that we, that anybody can do, and I always make a point of it, when I see a child--I take an exercise class at a school, every time I see a child I say, "I believe you're a smart little boy, I think you're a smart little girl."  I don't know what they are, but I say that--you can just see that pride just rising in them.  And I just think if people--you know, we talk about what can each one of us do, there's something everybody can do, just put your hand on somebody and say, "You know, you all right and I think you gonna be something."  And instead of saying, "You're never gonna be anything, you're never gonna be--make anything of your life, you're gonna end up just like your daddy being a drunk and a--," you know, don't say that to children.  So, I just, I know that's what made a difference in my life, is people saying, you know--and even in, before I went to law school [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], I was sitting at home, finished college [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], what to do, what to do.  Some guy, one of my father's [Jerome Powell] friends came to the door, I answered, I said, "Hello, how are you?"  He said, "Wow."  And I had a little conversation, he said, "Boy you're very articulate, I suppose you're gonna be a lawyer like your daddy?"  "Uh, I think I wanna go to law school," (laughter) you know.  And that, you know, just those simple things you don't know the impact that they have.  So I mean it's just important, it happened for me and I try to make it happen for other kids as well.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Foppe, Miss Foppe?
Speaker 1: F-O-P-P-E with an accent aigu (laughter).
Story_ID: 343620
Speaker 1: Between the first and eighth grade [at Central Free Methodist Elementary School; Central Free Methodist Christian Day School, Shreveport, Louisiana], you know, before junior high school or before high school, what did you think you were gonna be?  What did you think you were gonna be?  What were you aspiring to be at that time?  You said, I'm gonna be this when I grow up?
Speaker 2: Well you know I will be honest with you, I didn't have a clue.  I was, our means, our end goal was to get an education.  Which was one of the reasons I ended up in business was because I was looking at things, not knowing it at the time, seeing that most of us were seeking an education as if it was an end in and of itself.  As opposed to being a means to an end, you know, so we wanted to make good grades, we wanted to do well, that was my goal.  I wanted to go to college, I wanted to do well.  I was the salutatorian of my class, you know.  I needed to be successful.  I always assumed I was going to be successful, how, where, I had--didn't have a clue, didn't have a clue.  But all of the things I'm telling you about obviously added up.  That entrepreneurial thing, I read James Baldwin, like it was the Bible when I was coming up, you know, Richard Wright, those are my heroes.  And I, you know, the farm, my [paternal] grandfather [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.] and the pharmacy, I just have entrepreneurial roots, my father [Jerome Powell] owned a service station, he was a practicing lawyer in Shreveport [Louisiana] but he also owned a service station.  So, you know, it all adds up, but I never sat down in high school and said, "I just wanna be a lawyer."  I never sat down and said, "I have to be this, that."  No, I didn't do it.
Speaker 1: So, did your father not do what his father had done?  Says, "Okay, you're gonna be this, you're gonna be that," he left it open for you?
Speaker 2: He left it open, he left it open.  I don't know how they got these messages to us.  I think what my parents did is they tried to surround us with quality people; they themselves were obviously quality people.  But they made sure that we went to quality schools as best that they could afford.  They made sure that we went to church and we had Sunday school teachers, the best that we could get our hands on.  So these people were in--they controlled our environment is what I think that they did.  And it, I think it kind of worked.
Speaker 1: Before we talk about high school I wanna know what type of--I'm stepping back for a moment, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's okay.
Speaker 1: --you reminded me of something.  What type of law did your father practice in Shreveport?  Was it civil--
Speaker 2: Just a general--
Speaker 1: --rights?
Speaker 2: --practice, civil--
Speaker 1: Did he have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) law, yeah, but he did everything, criminal law, civil law, estate and wills, everything, it was a general--
Speaker 1: Do you--
Speaker 2: --practice.
Speaker 1: --remember any cases that he worked on that were--that meant something to him or that he brought home and talked about?
Speaker 2: No he didn't talk much about his work, I mean, I would go to court with him sometimes, but usually he was getting somebody outta jail (laughter).  I mean, that was, that was a lot--if he was in court that was what he was doing.  Again, he had inherited a lot of real estate which he managed, he had a service station which he ran or my mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] ran primarily, but it was his, he went out and got that Esso, E-S-S-O, with a big grand opening, with dancing girls and girls in bathing suits which I had never seen before.  But, so, he was a businessman as much as he was a lawyer, but he knew the law and he was very good at it.  Had a good rapport with the judges and that's how you got folk out of jail, you'd need to know the judge and say the right thing and then it was done.  But he did a lot of estate planning and that kind of thing, an awful lot of that.  That was the bulk of it, but in terms of, you know, filing a liability suit, things like that, no, he didn't get into that very much at all that I can recall.
Story_ID: 343621
Speaker 1: So, high school, what high school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Notre Dame High School [Shreveport, Louisiana], that was a Catholic high school for African Americans that was started by African American mothers primarily.
Speaker 1: Who were the teachers, did they bring in priests and nuns (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We had nuns.
Speaker 1: --that were black or white--
Speaker 2: They were white.
Speaker 1: They were white.
Speaker 2: They were white, we had white nuns, Sister Stevens [ph.] was my English teacher, Sister Ferdinand [ph.] was my chemistry teacher and Sister Lucy [Mary Lucy] was our principal.  Sister Monica [ph.] taught religion and--Sister Marian [ph.] was my algebra and my French teacher.
Speaker 1: So do you know why they brought in the nuns to teach you guys as opposed to black teachers?  Was there any--
Speaker 2: Oh, well in those days your teachers were nuns.  I mean there--the, see, they had orders in the Catholic church, nuns belong--all nuns are ordered nuns.  That is they belong to an order, as opposed to a priest, you have ordered priests, like Franciscans and the Jesuits and so forth, but there're also diocesan priests, which means you belong to the Archdiocese of Atlanta [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Atlanta] or the Archdiocese of Chicago [Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago], okay, but nuns, all nuns belong to an order.  So different orders have different missions, they could be the--a mission of mercy, the healing, and the ones that we had were, their mission was education.  So a lot of these nuns felt like if they were going to be on a mission of education they needed to be in minority or disadvantaged situations.  So all of our nuns were white, I--at that point I had never seen a black nun in Shreveport [Louisiana].  Folk in south Louisiana had, they had the Josephite nuns [Sisters of St Joseph of the Sacred Heart], which was a black order, an African American order.  So they saw black nuns, but we didn't see that in Shreveport at my school.  We only saw--and I don't remember the order, but they were all white.
Speaker 1: What was the experience like--high school, Notre Dame High School?
Speaker 2: It was fun because we were an up-start, as we would say in business.  So, you know, we ended up after four or five years we had a state championship football team, we had a state championship band. It was, it was a full-fledged high school experience.  We wore uniforms, which was fine, nobody really had a problem with it 'cause most of them had gone to elementary school together at Blessed Sacrament [Our Lady of the Blessed Sacrament Catholic Academy, Shreveport, Louisiana] where they wore uniforms.  I didn't wear uniforms at my elementary school [Central Free Methodist Elementary School; Central Free Methodist Christian Day School, Shreveport, Louisiana], but, you know, just loved having a uniform 'cause it was the same thing every day and everybody had it on so it was no pressure, so we liked that.  And I was in the band and I was in the choir.
Speaker 1: What did you play?  What instrument?
Speaker 2: Well I played the belaire [ph.] in the marching band, and I played the oboe in the concert band.  And the way I got in the band, I was really kind of shy and had no intention of being in the band, but Mr. Greggs [Isaac Ben Greggs] walked in our homeroom, we didn't know what he was 'cause he was big, Mr. Greggs, the band director of the big kids, you know, we don't do that.  You know, so he walked in and he said, "Everybody in here on the honor roll stand up."  So we all just kind of stood up not knowing--why would Mr. Greggs want everybody in the honor roll to stand up.  So we stood up 'cause we were told to stand up, he said, "Now everybody that's standing up, everybody who has taken piano lessons raise your hand."  So I raised my hand 'cause I've taken, you know, four or five years of piano lessons, he said, "Y'all follow me."  So we followed him, he said, "Y'all in the band."  I said, "But--."  "Uh-uh, I said you in the band."  So I was like, "Well darn I really don't wanna be in the band."  You know, so, that's how I got in the band (laughter).
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-six [1966].
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's go back then because you--we--in '54 [1954], is when schools were integrated, Brown versus Board of Ed [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  When did, when were schools integrated in Shreveport?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Nineteen sixty-six [1966].  In '65 [1965]--and I'm not sure what was happening in the public schools back then, quite honestly, but there were two white schools, Catholic schools, and that's what we were dealing with, was St. Vincent's [St. Vincent's Academy, Shreveport, Louisiana] and St. John's [St. John's School; Cathedral of St. John Berchmans Catholic School, Shreveport, Louisiana], it was a boys and girls school.  So they came to us and said we want you all to take a test, and whoever passes the test is gonna go to the white school.  So they took the top 10 percent, you know, and so they gave us a test and I won, I beat out this girl, her name was Cynthia Rochelle, you always remember these little things like that.  And Carly Edwards and I were the top two, well I don't know what happened, apparently I think the nuns for some reason didn't think I was mature enough to go, or something.  They didn't--I was not the choice, but I did outscore her on that first test.  So they gave us the test again, well she outscored me, by two points or something.  So they sent Cynthia Rochelle and Carly Edwards and I was frankly pretty relieved, I didn't wanna go over there anyway, and I'm not sure if we knew why we were taking the test the first time around, or not, I don't remember if we did or not we may have.  But I know she--I beat her by two points and she beat me by two points and they took her, she and Carly.  And it may just have been that they thought that she would have been able to withstand the pressures of integration better than I could, I don't know.
Speaker 1: So after the test was taken and you knew that those two, you knew that the two students would have to go and integrate the school did you have any feelings about that?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh, I was glad it was them and not me that's all I knew.  It was glad--I was glad to have it be them and not me (laughter).  I didn't want any part of it 'cause you know they were having problems, they were having problems going to prom.  They were gonna miss all the fun or could conceivably.  In fact, I don't think Cynthia came to prom, come to think of it.  You know, because she was--they were in that school so they weren't going to that prom, or maybe they went and didn't have a good time.  But they really weren't in our school anymore.  So I mean, we saw them at graduation or something, I don't--we saw her again but it was, it was over.
Story_ID: 343622
Speaker 1: So during high school [Notre Dame High School, Shreveport, Louisiana] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was in senior year.
Speaker 1: --senior year, how was college intro- how were the colleges introduced to you and what your choices would be--
Speaker 2: Just like everybody else--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean, we--you looked at white schools, you looked at black schools, you looked at everything.  I--you took the SAT, I outscored myself on the SAT test, I don't know how I tested into honors English and honors math.  God only knows how I did that, you know, 'cause I was not the greatest math student.  I managed to get Bs and a couple of A's in--or geometry was an easy subject for me so I got--I brought my average, my math average up with geometry.  Trigonometry I couldn't do better than a B, but yeah, I mean, it was just like anybody else, you know, the nuns walked us through it.  You looked at schools and--I wanted to go to Howard University [Washington, D.C] is where I wanted to go, but once again, I must have been an awfully immature little girl.  Well I had never dated, I never dated in high school like the other girls I just--
Speaker 1: Well you had your notebook that said sixteen--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, and I did have, I did date the quarterback of the football team for a minute, but he just, he wasn't right enough for me (laughter), oh God.  Darrell Griffin [ph.], God was he a good looking guy, but, we had a couple of dates and I just wasn't ready, I mean I just wasn't ready to date so I turned that loose pretty quickly.  But, I was gonna tell you another story about the--my first entree into the Catholic high school, because I had a teacher and her name was Miss Sims [ph.] and she, I guess I should be leaving some of these names off, but, anyway, she told us, now I just had this experience with Rodney Chapman [ph.] and Mrs. Foppe, where I told you I could conjugate verbs, English was my thing, I knew it upside down inside out.  So, she told us that the three principal parts of the verb reach were reach, reached and retch.  So I immediately went home and told my mother [Evelyn Evans Powell], I said, "Mother, let me tell you what Miss Sims just said, 'The three principal parts of the verb reach are reach--'."  So, mother was like--now mother was one of these people, the teacher's always right.  So she said, "You must've--you must not have heard her correctly."  I said, "Oh yes I did, I know she said that."  She said, "No, you didn't hear her right."  I said, "Yes she did."  But anyway, I went on back, and I use that story to illustrate, you know, when you've got good home train--I mean, I learned to speak English from my mother and my father [Jerome Powell].  Yes, Mrs. Foppe was a brilliant teacher and taught me the rules and the regimented part of it, but you know, I knew reach, reached and retch was wrong way before Mrs. Foppe in the seventh grade [at Central Free Methodist Elementary School; Central Free Methodist Christian Day School, Shreveport, Louisiana].  I mean that was horrible.  But anyway, so I just told mother this was a terrible school and that I needed to go to public school after this (laughter), but of course, she didn't buy it, didn't bite, and that was the end of it.  So, but I had fun in high school when my biology teacher--and I had some terrible teachers, but something was going on in biology and I knew more about the subject then my teacher and I had read the book and read the chapter and I was like, "Well, no this is wrong."  And his name was Ollie Simpson I think, or Ollie Jones [ph.].  Well of course we called him Mr. Jones but whenever he would leave out we turned it into Ollie's romper room.  There was a little television show, cartoon, "It's Ollie's romper room, it's Ollie's romper room."  So started singing that every time he'd walk out the room--had no control over us.  So they finally got a guy in Mr. Bradford [ph.].  Oh God did he have control, he--so he ended up being our home--'cause he was the only teacher that can control us.  So he came and he became our homeroom teacher and he got us flat under control.  But he's a great guy, his wife, Lillian Bradford [ph.] is, you know, she, I guess helped him get us straight.  But they gave our graduation party from high school at their home, they gave our graduation party.  And that was to keep us off the streets.  We didn't know it, we thought that Mr. Bradford and Mrs. Bradford were hip enough to do it so we--right after graduation that's where we went and we partied right at their home, at their house, so.
Speaker 1: Very nice.
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Story_ID: 343623
Speaker 1: --How did you choose Louisiana State [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]?
Speaker 2: Well, by that time I really had gotten in there.  I had finished reading, you know, everything under the sun.  I understood what James Baldwin's life was like and Richard Wright, I really got it by this point.  I was really into the Civil Rights Movement.  I had, that summer I had picketed at Stan's Record Shop [Shreveport, Louisiana] and, because they had--they sold all their records to black folk but didn't have one black employee.  So we were picketing, we did the sit-ins at the Woolworth's [F.W. Woolworth Company] counter we were doing it all by this point.
Speaker 1: Well what point did that start?
Speaker 2: Well that probably started right after my first year in college.  So, but I was getting into civil rights when it was, you know, well into it by this point, '65 [1965], in there, we were into it by this point.
Speaker 1: When did you physi- when did you get into it as a teenager, you were a teenager?
Speaker 2: Well, no I was, well see I went to college at sixteen, so by the time I came home after that first year is when I really got into it.  We got into it in college a lot too, I mean we were together at the football games and we would have these discussions about, well do we go and sit all the black kids together or--and do we, if we do, do we just cheer for the black people on LSU's [Louisiana State University] team or do we cheer for all black people on both teams, and then we didn't go to the Mississippi game, Ole Miss [University of Mississippi, Oxford, Mississippi], we just didn't go, that's too much for any, I don't care how militant, you didn't go to Ole Miss, that's just one game you weren't gonna attend.  So, you know, so we, I mean, college was fun too, I mean, I had a great time in college but it was, you know, David Duke was my classmate.  He graduated from high school in 1966 too.  Did I know David Duke?  No (laughter) but he was at what we called free speech rally, alley, free speech alley.
Speaker 1: What is that?
Speaker 2: That was just a little stump and you would go and rant and rave about anything under the sun.  And David Duke would get there and he would just rant and rave about everything, black folk this--and then we'd have a few folk who would challenge him.  I never got up and challenged him because it was, it was just--they were crazy, you know, he was just crazy.
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of the--you--the record store, some specific civil rights incidents that you were involved in, you talked about Stan's Record Store.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Stan's Record Shop, we were picketing there because they had sold most of their records to African Americans, youth, but they had no African American employees there.  So we picketed Stan's Record Shop, and, you know, for the purpose of getting black employees.  But we had guns, you know, the police came with guns to our heads and we just, you know, we were following the Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] rule of nonviolence.  And so we just marched and kept marching with our signs and so forth and just never budged.  I never got arrested, I think my father [Jerome Powell] must have done something, 'cause he was a lawyer so he must have had enough influence to call them off or whatever, but my father and mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] I think feared for my life a lot 'cause I was by this point was extremely militant.  I had an afro that was way out there and I was out there you know, I was, we were all little Angela Davises [HistoryMaker Angela Davis].
Speaker 1: Yeah, like Angela Dav- who did you up to at the time, like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Angela Davis and the Black Panthers [Black Panther Party] (laughter), I mean I thought they were just great.  Well, H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] was from Baton Rouge [Louisiana] and I was right there so, you know, they were ordinary people, I'm--you know, and black folk weren't stupid, I mean we realized what Hoover [J. Edgar Hoover] was doing and, I mean, that stuff was pretty real.  I mean it, it wasn't just a fad, I mean we took it very seriously and, you know, we were picketing for good reason, I mean, we felt like this was our job and we felt like our parents had let us down.  That they had not done what they should have done and now it was the job had fallen squarely on our shoulders.  And this was up to us to correct this wrong, and we were determined, hell bent and determined to fix it.
Speaker 1: So, in '68 [1968] when King was assassinated, where were you?
Speaker 2: I was at LSU and we wanted them to raise the--lower the flag to half-mast and they wouldn't do it.  So we got to the parade ground, we called it, it's where all the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] people used to parade and march and where all the flag football teams played.  And we just stood on that flagpole and we just would not be moved all day, all night we just stayed right there and they finally lowered it.  They finally lowered it.
Story_ID: 343624
Speaker 1: So this is one in '69 [1969], I know you married your husband, but prior to getting married, how did you meet your husband?
Speaker 2: Oh, the way everybody in college meets, you know, at a party (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now had you pledged Delta [Delta Sigma Theta Sorority] at this time or were you--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I pledged actually after I was married, yeah, um-hm, yeah.  So he was on his way to California (laughter) to meet his fiance and one of my dear friends, Brenda Edmond, was dating and about to be married to my husband's first cousin.  But Brenda didn't introduce me to Gregory [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco], let me stop now, I'm getting this confused.  It was a guy by the name of Ed Hardnett, Poochie, who's still a very, very close friend of ours.  We called him Poochie, everybody still--these nicknames from the country follow you all the way through the '60s [1960s] okay, and 2006 we're still calling him Poochie.  But anyway, he was a very, very, close friend and had dated one of my close friends but Poochie and I never dated but we were just really, really, good friends.  So he said, "There's a guy named Greg Baranco who's coming in town and he's throwing a party."  Well I had actually called Poochie, 'cause I was in summer school, I guess I had been picketing too much, or whatever, anyway I had to be in summer school, it was not by choice.  So I called Poochie and said, "Well, let's go out."  And I--there was a little club in Baton Rouge [Louisiana] called, Two GatS [Two GatS Social Club], ooh gosh, and I just loved Two GatS, it was truly, truly a hole in the wall, you know, you wouldn't be caught dead in there right now, but I mean, it--I just loved this little club.  It was tight, the music was good, dancing, you know, all this stuff.  So I said, "Well, let's go to Two GatS," so Poochie called me back and said, "Well, you know this guy named Greg Baranco is in town and he's throwing a party."  And I'm like, "I don't wanna go to no party, that's not what I'm trying to do."  I said, I wanna go to Two GatS 'cause I'm in summer school I don't wanna be here, I don't wanna be stuck at a house party, let's go there."  So, transportation was limited to say the least, so Greg Baranco shows up and he's got a station wagon, so if you wanted to go out it was Saturday night you were piled in that station wagon or else you were in the dormitory for the night.  So we all piled in the station wagon, I piled in the back of the station wagon and he says to me, and this had to be '67 [1967], this had to be '67 [1967], so he says to me, he says--and, 'cause he was--my husband was always a gentleman, he said, "Well, would you ladies care to introduce yourselves?"  So when he got to me on the backseat I said, "Uh-uh," I didn't say a word, I just sat there, was having a bad hair day, hair was all over my head, you know, early perms didn't do much good, but whatever.  So, he said, now he looked in the rearview mirror and he said, "And you young lady, what is your name?"  So I didn't say a word.  So one of my friends, Edwina [ph.], says, "Her name is Juanita [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco]," like that, but anyway, we go on to the party and we play a game which I can't say on camera, but anyway one of those games people play at parties, and we got back, I was on the front seat of the car (laughter).  On the way back, and so the rest is history as they say.
Speaker 1: So you decided to marry in 1969?
Speaker 2: Yes we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--the actual date of your wedding?
Speaker 2: The actual date was July 5th, 1969.
Speaker 1: And you were still a college student at the time?
Speaker 2: I was still a college student.
Speaker 1: Well you hadn't dated, you weren't a dater why (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well see--
Speaker 1: --did you marry so early?
Speaker 2: Well, I had dated in college now; I didn't say I didn't date--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I say I didn't date in high school [Notre Dame High School, Shreveport, Louisiana]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I got to college and I got that thing taken care of, so, you know I had quite a few little dates and boyfriends and stuff and was pretty serious about a guy at the time I met Gregory.  But it was one of those love at first sight kind of things and so, see, we went through those riots and things with Martin Luther King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death, we were dating all that time.  He was at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and I was at LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana], so all that was going on at the same time.
Speaker 1: And Southern was in Baton Rouge, correct?
Speaker 2: And so was LSU.
Speaker 1: And LSU also (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but, I mean, Southern was on the north side of town and LSU was on the south, is on the south side of town.  And so is Southern on the no-  Southern is on the north side of town and LSU is on the south side of town.
Speaker 1: So you marry in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm--
Story_ID: 343625
Speaker 1: What year do you graduate college [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I finally--'cause two children later--
Speaker 1: Yeah, so tell me--
Speaker 2: --or is it one child--
Speaker 1: --what happens--
Speaker 2: --later?
Speaker 1: --then.  You, you marry in '69 [1969]?
Speaker 2: And then we start our family, and then I decided--he finishes school [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana]--well, we go to Detroit [Michigan], right after we get married and he gets a job at, with Ford Motor Company at the Dearborn Stamping Plant [Ford Dearborn Stamping Plant, Dearborn, Michigan].  And he has not finished college and neither have I finished college so then he decides and we both decide that we kind of need to figure out how we gonna eat, we've done this and so how are we gonna eat.  So then he, after he takes this internship in Detroit at the Dearborn stam- we lived in Detroit on Euclid Avenue, which looking back at it was probably a terrible decision but that's all we could afford because Euclid Avenue, you're too young to know, but that's where the riots took place in '68 [1968] so they were just reeling from those riots in '68 [1968] by the time we got there.  It was just torn up, you know, but we lived there in a less than desirable neighborhood at that time because of the riots of '68 [1968] after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was killed and so forth, assassinated and so forth.  So he, we come back and so we decide that he is going to finish school first.  I take a job at one of the local department stores and then we, well, you know, we just work and he goes to school and I work and then during the time he was at Dearborn Stamping Plant he says to me, he says, "You know what, I think these dealers are the way to go, we need to get a dealership."  So I liken it to a service station, 'cause my father [Jerome Powell] had a service station.  And in fact, most of the early car dealers were in fact service station owners, the ones that they appointed initially back in the '50s [1950s], they were service station owners.  Now that might have been what my daddy was thinking about when he got that car--that Esso dealership.  But that's who they appointed for that distribution channel, they got service station dealers, so I said, "Well, yeah, I've had that experience working at a service station," so I thought that would translate.
Story_ID: 360362
Speaker 1: I would like to start where we were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --talking about--
Speaker 2: The--
Speaker 1: --and getting my gran- why B.V., why--he was my husband's father, why when you were asking me why--how did my parents [Evelyn Evans Powell and Jerome Powell] take this marriage thing and going to Detroit [Michigan] and all that.  Well they were, my father was a lot more comfortable with it because I found out after the fact that my husband's father, who was a dentist, had in fact lived with my father's family and my grandfather who was a doctor.  Now why did he live with them?  He lived with him, my grandfather a doctor, and my husband's father a dentist, because he was doing an internship for two years.  So in those days there were very few opportunities for an African American dentist or doctor to do an internship so his parents, Dr. B.V. Baranco [Beverly Victor Baranco, Jr.], his parents told him to go to Shreveport [Louisiana] and live with Dr. Sol E. Powell [Solomon E. Powell, Sr.] and do his internship.  He ended up staying two years in my grandfather's house, okay.  So, my father, from my father's side of things it was a little more palatable for him that I was running off and marrying this guy whose name is Greg Baranco [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco].  And I, my father was pretty astute; I mean he had been pretty rambunctious, he hoboed across America for god's sake, so he was able to see the substance of my husband, whereas my mother was like, "Uh-uh, this little boy, uh-uh, this is not a good thing."  So she was not thrilled at all.  But, I mean she'd been rather pioneering herself.  She left home when she was thirteen.  I remember coming up she le- I ran my mother's house when I was like thirteen years old.  She went away to work on her master's degree at Grambling College [Grambling State University, Grambling, Louisiana] and mother was gone all summer.  I took care of my brother [Jerome Powell II] who was Down syndrome, I did everything.  I ran--I mean my cooking wasn't good but I did it.  I ran that house, you know.  And so I was, you know, I had decided I wanted to do it so that was the end of that.
Story_ID: 360363
Speaker 1: But since we're talking about your mother [Evelyn Evans Powell], tell me about the foundation she started.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: For your brother [Jerome Powell II] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See--
Speaker 1: --and, okay.
Speaker 2: --when we moved to Shreveport [Louisiana] from Washington, D.C., as I said, there were no facilities for African American children who were Down syndrome.  So mother actually stated the organization, in fact, my mother and father [Jerome Powell] together started it.  My father actually got in his car with a group of black preachers and my father took them to the White House in Washington, D.C. to see Eisenhower [President Dwight David "Ike" Eisenhower], President Eisenhower, and convinced them that they needed to put some funds down in Shreveport, Louisiana to start this association for retarded citizens, and that's what it was called, the Caddo-Bossier Association for Retarded Citizens [Caddo Bossier Association for Mentally Retarded Children; The Arc Caddo-Bossier, Shreveport, Louisiana], my mother was the--one of the founders of that.  It was her idea and of course it was segregated back then, they had an association for white children but nothing for African Americans.  And the outgrowth of that were the sheltered workshops that you now hear about and all that.  I'm now on the foundation board in Shreveport for The Arc of Caddo-Bossier, it's not politically correct to say, Association for Retarded Children anymore, so it's The Arc of Caddo-Bossier.  So, my mother started that so, you know, she was quite a pioneer as I said, she left home when she was thirteen and worked her way through college [Clark University; Clark Atlanta University, Atlanta, Georgia] and then quit her good paying job in Plains, Georgia to basically stay in Washington, D.C., work at the Pentagon and marry my father.
Story_ID: 360364
Speaker 1: Where were you physically located when you decided, when both you and Greg [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco] decided, okay, I'm gonna go back to school and we will--first and then you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We were in Detroit [Michigan].
Speaker 1: You were in Detroit?
Speaker 2: We were in Detroit sitting there--
Speaker 1: So where did he go back to school?
Speaker 2: --on Euclid Avenue watching all those murders take place below our window and we said, "Okay, let's get it together."  And so we just mapped it out, we sat there on a--with a piece of paper and we mapped it all out.
Speaker 1: How did you do it, tell me the--
Speaker 2: Well he--
Speaker 1: --steps okay.
Speaker 2: --was further along, 'cause he's a year older than I am, he was further along in school than I was, so we decided that he would go to school first and finish up 'cause it was gonna be easier for him to do it, then he'd get a job then I'd go back to school.  We didn't decide the law school but we decided the dealership piece right there on Euclid Avenue in Detroit.  We said we're gonna go back and get an automobile dealership, that's what we want to do.  So we decided--we did not decide that I was going to law school but I knew I would be involved in the business.  I thought my contribution primarily was just going to be my entrepreneurial skills because of my father's [Jerome Powell] service station, which I thought was a natural evolution from a service station to a car dealership.  Turns out it really was pretty much the norm back in the '50s [1950s], that's how they got appointed.  Car dealers were appointed that way, they came from the service station owners.  So we just mapped it out, we said that's what we wanted to do and we went back and we got started and we did it (laughter).
Speaker 1: So he, what year did he graduate and then what year did you go back to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He graduated--
Speaker 1: --school?
Speaker 2: --in '71 [1971] and I was graduated in '73 [1973].
Speaker 1: From where?
Speaker 2: LSU [Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].
Speaker 1: LSU, so both of you, so you moved back to?
Speaker 2: We mo- when we left Detroit we moved back to Baton Rouge [Louisiana].  Baton Rouge was my husband's hometown, so we moved--and I had already started LSU he had already started Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana] so it was natural that we move back to Baton Rouge and he just had more of a base there.  He had sisters there, his mother [Evelyn Baranco] was deceased, my husband lost his mother when he was eighteen so she was deceased--she was deceased but he had sisters and a father [Beverly Victor Baranco, Jr.] and we had more of an infrastructure there he felt than anywhere else and so that's where we just naturally migrated back to--and I was comfortable in Baton Rouge, I'd been going to school there, had friends there, was very close to his sisters.  I was very, very close to all of his sisters, particularly one sister, Vivian [Vivian Baranco Robertson], especially.  She and I were very, more like 'cause I didn't have any sisters so she was the big sister that I had always longed for.
Speaker 1: So you got a bachelor's degree in?
Speaker 2: Psychology, and then I went on to law school [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  I worked that summer at my husband's father's dental office; well I finished in December--
Speaker 1: Of?
Speaker 2: --of '73 [1973] and so I started in September in law school.
Speaker 1: But tell me how you got to law school, was it the story when the guy came to your father's--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right, I was at home, Gregory and I were there visiting my parents, we were in the back and I got up to answer the door.  So I just spoke to the gentleman, I said, "Hello, how are you?"  I knew I recognized him as being a friend of my father's.  And so we chatted for a few minutes, and at the end of the conversation he said, "Well, you're a very articulate young lady I suppose you're going to law school like your father."  I said, "Hmm."  So I ran back, "Gregory, wake up, I'm going to law school."  He said, "That's great."  And of course, immediately we started thinking, that's the way you can contribute to the business because you really need to have--and I really know it's been invaluable having a lawyer in a business.  And a number of business people, business owners do that either themselves or they send their children to law school.  So I said, that's it, I'm going to law school.  So what we did, he--when we got back to Baton Rouge he started working at a car dealership immediately, and by the time I was graduated then that's when I decided I was going to law school, well by the time he--I got into law school he had been accepted, shortly thereafter he got accepted into the General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] dealer development--minority dealer development program, General Motors minority dealer development program.
Story_ID: 360365
Speaker 1: While I was in law school, he [Baranco's husband, HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco] was actually in the GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] minority development program, okay.  And so it was pretty, a pretty good hardship on us because by that time we had two children and I was trying to go to law school with two children and he was away for large periods--in fact, he actually had an apartment in New Orleans [Louisiana] 'cause that's where you had to--the way the program worked you worked at a dealership and you worked, and then you were in school.  You were in school then you went back and worked in the dealership.  Well the dealership that they found that was willing to train him was in New Orleans, it was Royal Oldsmobile in New Orleans.  So there I was in the married student apartments and see we had--when he was selling cars we were doing pretty well and we would often times go in together on weekends and I'd help him, you know, put his paperwork--he had got promoted into management, and we'd put the paperwork together and do the finance deals and things like that, so we worked real hard at it.  And so his being away was pretty rough 'cause we had needed two apartments instead of one so that meant that we were in the married student apartments, which were not pretty, and he had an efficiency apartment in New Orleans.  And we visited quite a bit back and forth, obviously we were young and so forth so yeah, we visited a lot back and forth but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So in 1978 how did you get the capital to open the--was it a Pontiac?
Speaker 1: It was a Pontiac; it was Smith-Johnson Pontiac, course we knew we wanted to buy a dealership and we had been looking all over and some places I wouldn't accept, some places he wouldn't accept.  But I loved Atlanta [Georgia], had visited here a couple of times, once, frankly, in high school and just loved it, had thought about going to Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] as a matter of fact.  But, you know, we were trying to integrate everything so that's how I ended up at LSU [Louisiana State University Law School; Paul M. Hebert Law Center, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So, I'd finished law school and we were really, really looking, pregnant with a third child by this point, fact I took both bar exams pregnant (laughter) when we--the Louisiana bar and the Georgia bar, I was pregnant for both of them.  But anyway, so we, I, we were both working part-time jobs.  I was working part-time and so forth.  He was working full-time at a dealership so I had the bright idea, I said, "You know what, I think I wanna go and borrow some money."  So I went to the bank, just marched in on my own and said I wanted to make a loan for five thousand dollars.  As the bank looked--banker looked at me like I was crazy, said, you know, "Well you don't have any collateral--you are--there's no way."  I said, "Well, let me tell you what I'm gonna do."  See banking was--even though it was black and white and that kind of thing, again I had gone to LSU, I didn't know anybody necessarily but I just walked in and, you know, whatever.  So I said, "What I'm gonna do."  I said, "I'm not gonna take this money out, I wanna borrow the money in my name and put it in a savings account and then I'm gonna pay the note and I'm gonna prove to you that I can pay this note."  So that's what I did.  He said, "Well okay, I'll take a chance on you."  I don't know why this guy did that, probably couldn't do it now for anything but, so I did it.  And I paid the note, so then I had five thousand dollars so I said, okay.  Now I could have just saved it but I needed to get that credit and I knew that, I understood that so then after I paid that off, I went and I borrowed ten thousand dollars and I paid that note.  So now I've got fifteen thousand dollars in the bank and I think I did it one more time, it was another ten thousand dollars and that's the money we used to start the dealership (laughter), twenty-five thousand dollars is all we started with you know.  But we had loans from General Motors and things like that but basically our own personal money, twenty-five thousand dollars.
Speaker 2: Where was that first Pontiac dealership located?
Speaker 1: In East Point, Georgia on Main Street, and it was Smith-Johnson Pontiac.  Mr. Johnson [Bernard C. Johnson] and Mr. Smith [W. Cfies Smith, Jr.] were elderly and ready to retire and they were gonna sell their dealership but they were determined to sell it to someone--they weren't interested in the minority thing so much but they wanted somebody who was not gonna come in with a big company and get rid of all their employees.  But we were coming, we were young, we were from Baton Rouge [Louisiana], we had no employees, ourselves and maybe two, three people we could talk into coming with us.  Ed Hardnett was one; David Anding [ph.] was another.  So we talked a few folk, friends to come on, work with us, you know.  So, we basically just started right there, so they were willing to sell it at a reasonable rate, they were retired, had made all the money they needed.  They weren't looking to make a killing on the sale of this dealership.  So they sold it to us at a reasonable price, we put up our little twenty-five thousand and we started the first Baranco dealership.
Speaker 2: And that was in, what part (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) April--
Speaker 2: --of Georgia?
Speaker 1: --fourth, nineteen seventy-eight [April 4, 1978].
Story_ID: 360366
Speaker 1: And then I also read that in--okay, so that dealership [Baranco Pontiac, Inc., East Point, Georgia] was started, you both worked there for a couple of years and then you decided you needed the--tell me what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, what, we didn't decide anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What--we were very young and unfortunately pretty stupid.  So we agreed with General Motors [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company] and Pontiac that we would move that dealership within two years.  Well, of course we didn't have a clue as to what that really meant, building a brand new building.  They wanted us to go out to south DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia] in that corridor, which was one of the most affluent areas at the time, middle income, you know, good Pontiac area.  So they wanted us to move the dealership out there and we had agreed in the beginning that we would do that.  And so we did just that, we moved that dealership.  We built a brand new dealership, well I don't know if your history books will reflect, but in '78 [1978] and '79 [1979] we had a big old recession, and an energy crisis, and it was just awful.  And we practically lost everything we had; in fact we did lose everything we had.  I don't know how we stayed in business, but we did, we managed to get a few people paid or enough people paid and get payroll paid every now and then.  So, but, yeah we were bankrupt, we didn't file bankruptcy, but for all practical purposes we were bankrupt in '79 [1979] and '81 [1981], by the time we got that building built.  Not '79 [1979] but by '81 [1981] we got the building built.  So we moved out there and built this energy efficient building and it was solar-powered and we recycled oil for the energy source and we did a lot of creative things back in the early '80s [1980s].
Speaker 1: And I guess what I--but you--at some point you then decided, I guess, that you wanted to go back and practice law or that you should--how did you going (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh--
Speaker 1: --back to practice law come into--
Speaker 2: --good point--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --recession, yeah, so I went--at that point we were pretty broke and it was pretty obvious that if we were gonna feed these children that somebody needed to go to work, there were four children by this point.  So we were like, okay, well you have a law degree, you've passed the bar in two jurisdictions, surely you can get a job.  So I went to the attorney general's office here in Georgia and got myself a job and started working right away and I worked for three years until--
Speaker 1: As?
Speaker 2: --as an assistant attorney general, yes, well I got promoted eventually.  I was associate then an assistant attorney general.
Speaker 1: And what did--what do you do as an assistant attorney general of Georgia, what were--
Speaker 2: Well you do everything; I mean it depends on what division you were in.  I worked in--it was division seven, I remember it very fondly, and we did, we represented the secretary of state and all of the boards, the licensing boards, the securities board.  We represented the medical doctors, by that I meant the medical profession, so we took licenses of people who weren't doing what they were supposed to be doing.  I was really a prosecutor for professionals (laughter) pharmacists and doctors and nurses and things like that.
Speaker 1: So you did that from '70 [1970] or from (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) From '81 [1981]--
Speaker 1: --eighty [1980]?
Speaker 2: --let me see, let's see from about '80 [1980] to '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: What happened in 1983?
Speaker 2: Well by that time I, you know, the busi- I had gotten all I needed to get out of the AG's [attorney general] office.  I mean it was--I didn't deceive anybody, they knew it was temporary that I was going back to the business as soon as the business was turned around.  So the economy changed, you know, we got out of that recession and we--the economy got better so then I went back into the business.
Speaker 1: And you went back into the business, and at what point did you open the second business after--was it--it was the early '80s [1980s] also wasn't it, or mid-'80s [1980s], '85 [1985]?
Speaker 2: Well we had opened that store in '81 [1981], that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The solar--
Speaker 2: --Pontiac store--
Speaker 1: --the Pontiac store?
Speaker 2: Yeah the solar, you know, that building.  We had opened that dealership I believe in '81 [1981], which was what the problem was, so by '83 [1983] I was back into the business again.  We were still in that facility right there on Covington Highway.  And then we purchased, let me see, we started working on Acura, I believe, and it was I think the first Acura was built in '86 [1986], and it was so hot and so new and so modern and so much, so different from anything we had seen that we were just really hot-to-trot, so we worked real hard, and we couldn't get the franchise--we couldn't get appointed initially, and finally we talked them into the franchise but they gave us the franchise in Tallahassee [Florida], no they gave us a franchise in Lafayette [Louisiana], that's what it was.  So we happened to know, my husband  [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco] happened to know the dealer in Lafayette and they had given him the franchise in Tallahassee, well Tallahassee was closer to us, Lafayette was his home, so we called him up and said, "Well, how about doing a trade, a little flip-flop there."  So he said, "Yes."  Not only yes, but yes and double yes.  So we switched, so we got the franchise in Tallahassee.  Carey, by that time Carey Paul had opened up the franchise on the south side of town, which I am the dealer of right now today, and was pulling out of the Acura business.  It was a tough business to be in 'cause the franchise didn't get off with the jumpstart that they thought it was gonna have so it was slow getting started and catching on.  So he was wanting to sell it, so we sold the Tallahassee franchise to the Proctors and then we bought Carey Paul's franchise here in Atlanta and that's how we got back to Atlanta with our Acura franchise [Baranco Acura, Morrow, Georgia].  Then we bought a Lincoln-Mercury dealership [Baranco Lincoln-Mercury, Inc., Duluth, Georgia] in '89 [1989] and then in 2001 we bought Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead [Atlanta, Georgia], or we started Mercedes, Mercedes-Benz of Buckhead--
Story_ID: 360367
Speaker 1: So during the time the business starts to go well you start to work within the community in education, so in 1985, let's go back, you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay, well what happened--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --at our Pontiac store [Baranco Pontiac, Inc., Decatur, Georgia] on Covington Highway, we kind of noticed we had a lot of keying going on, just little vandalism and we--there was a high school nearby and we figured out that that vandalism was primarily coming from the high school, so we had the bright idea that we--I had the idea that I'd go over there and get involved in that school.  So we did, we did just that we started mentoring the children, we started having our employees teach classes over there we all just jumped in.  My husband [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco], I did, our employees we just went over there.  Eventually we started hiring some of their students part-time and after a period of three to six months all those little small vandalists, those, that little vandalism just ceased, it just went away.  So we sort of got committed, and somehow I got, I guess we just got sort of known in the community we were African Americans, we had a business, and there was a local savings and loan, Decatur Federal Savings and Loan [Decatur Federal Savings and Loan Association, Decatur, Georgia] that came to my husband and me and said, "We want to have either one of you on the board, we don't care which one."  Oh, I know what happened, I'm skipping something here.  What happened, I got very involved in the school system, basically because I had children in the public school system and I raised my hand at a couple of public meetings, asked a couple of questions.  Somehow it got back to somebody in DeKalb County [Georgia], DeKalb County had been involved in a lawsuit, a desegregation of the school system lawsuit for some twenty years.  So, Judge O'Kelley [William Clark O'Kelley] had decided he was gonna appoint an advisory committee to help settle the lawsuit.  So somehow he got me on that law--on that committee and he also got Bob McMahan, who was vice president at the time, of Decatur Federal.  I didn't know who anybody was; I was just on the committee.  Well I came up with the bright idea that perhaps we ought to have magnet schools and that that would--because this forced integration wasn't working, the bussing, forced bussing was not working, why don't we have magnet schools and attract white students to black schools and that's the way to get to achieve integration.  Well I fought until three and four o'clock in the mornings, many times, we would--just hashing out these issues, just literally just going at it because, you know, people had a lot at stake, so they thought, so finally that's--we, we ended up with magnet schools in DeKalb County.  And that was because Judge O'Kelley asked me to serve on that advisory (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) DeKalb County Education Task Force?
Speaker 2: Yes, DeKalb County Education Task Force.  From that the gentleman, Bob McMahan turned--was on that committee, so he was a vice president of Decatur Federal, he then came and asked me if I would serve on the board for Decatur Federal Savings and Loan.  I said to my husband, "This is more up your alley, why don't you do it?"  He said, "Oh no, he met you at the task force, you go and do it."  I said, "God," I was really nervous, I didn't know anything about banking other than made a few loans, you know.  So anyway I agreed, reluctantly, to be on that, then Decatur Federal merged with First Union [First Union National Bank of Georgia, Atlanta, Georgia], as a result Governor Joe Frank Harris heard about my work with the advisory committee, he asked me to be on the state board of education [Georgia Board of Education], that led to the board of regents [Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia], I mean everything just sort of started overlapping at that point--
Speaker 1: So the state board of education was like--you were on that Georgia state board of education from '85 [1985] to '91 [1991]?
Speaker 2: That is--that sounds right--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know it was a total of six years I think.
Story_ID: 360368
Speaker 1: And then the Georgia, the board of regents [Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia]?
Speaker 2: For ten years.
Speaker 1: For ten years.
Speaker 2: And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And--
Speaker 2: --I chaired that board.
Speaker 1: And you were--
Speaker 2: Not for ten years--
Speaker 1: Okay, but you were the first African American--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --woman--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, it was--I had had a sort of a bad experience on the state board of education [Georgia Board of Education], because I thought I had earned the right--I knew I had earned the right to be chair, but it wasn't happening and they put a lot--my fellow colleagues on the board of education, put a lot of blockages in the way of my becoming chairman.  Doing things like voting for this guy for four years and so forth and so on and things like that.  So, when I got on the board of regents, I said to myself, I'm gonna play it a little smarter because I really do want to be the first African American female chair of the board of regents.  And of course times had changed, you know it's amazing the difference in attitudes over three or four years or certainly over five to ten years.  So I played my strategy a little differently and was an excellent board member frankly, as I had been on the state board of education, came with a lot of creative ideas, alternative routes to certification for teachers on the state board of education.  And I did the same thing on the board of regents, just came with a lot of creative kinds of concepts.  And my mission on the board of regents, particularly when I was chair, was to put the Georgia system on the map because we knew we had a great system but nobody knew about it.  So I sat out on a mission to talk with the national education publications and to put us on the map.  We hired a brand new chancellor who was phenomenal and we went on the road, a duo, Steven Portch and [HistoryMaker] Juanita Baranco, we did conferences, we spoke everywhere that anybody would listen, and all of a sudden we were able to hire phenomenal professors and people who were the top notch in their fields, and we just were able to attract the best and the brightest among our teaching faculties of our campuses around the system.  So it was just a great experience, I became chair, and worked really, really hard and got a lot done for the entire system, not just for African Americans, which we did not leave behind, but we raised our standards for admissions but we still had a lot of accessibility for our students, and just, just had a ball on the state board--on the board of regents, and the state board of education.
Story_ID: 360369
Speaker 1: So during that same time there was an issue with a bank not giving black loans and your husband [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco] encouraged some other business members to go in, and something about a black bank?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, we founded a black bank during that time, okay, First Southern Bank [Lithonia, Georgia].  I don't know that there was any particular issue, I mean, it was just  generally well known that well when you're trying to develop a community and that's just one of the legs that you have to have is the financing leg.  I had a vision of a subdivision, of an upscale subdivision in our community.
Speaker 1: What year did you have the vision of the upscale subdivision?
Speaker 2: Well I had always been toying with it.  So, we, I guess it was in the early '80s [1980s] I had been toying with it because--so every time we went to try to borrow money to develop a subdivision, there were no comparables in the area so there for the loans were being deterred--were being turned down.  So we finally decide we'd leverage our business [Baranco Automotive Group] and get this subdivision off the ground.  So we found some property and we developed a subdivision [Sandstone Shores] in south DeKalb [DeKalb County, Georgia], which was the first upscale subdivision in south DeKalb, ever.  And one of the first in Atlanta [Georgia], I know for a fact that it spawned a lot of development around the country 'cause people came in from Chicago [Illinois], from Atlanta, from everywhere to see this little subdivision that we had started in south DeKalb.  Well, it took a piece out of Juanita [HistoryMaker Juanita Baranco] and Greg's behind to get that done because we had to leverage our dealership.  That's all that we had, you know, I mean, so the banks wouldn't loan the money for it 'cause they said, "Nobody's gonna move in here."  But we went out ourselves and sold every lot, and, we did the same thing for the bank.  So, after that experience is when--well, actually a fellow by the name of Herb Reese came to my husband, he has been struggling trying to start this bank in south DeKalb.  So he couldn't get it off the ground so my husband said, "Okay, I'm gonna take it, I'll take it on."  And basically went out the--primarily my husband, and raised every dime of the $5 million with--from individuals.  And what we knew and understood is that often times when banks are started, we're not at the table, or when anything is started, so you don't get a low basis in the stock, you don't get to start from the beginning.  So this was an opportunity to start something like a bank where we could get African Americans to get started from the very beginning phases of the bank.  And so people invested and it was a great experience, and it was an entrepreneurial bank, and our emphasis was making loans, not just to blacks, but to anybody who--because we felt like we could spot talent (laughter) 'cause somebody spotted us so we felt like we could spot talent so that's what we did.  And we grew the bank and it eventually sold and merged with Citizens Trust Bank [Atlanta, Georgia], another minority owned bank, and the rest is history.
Story_ID: 342092
Speaker 1: I was saying that I had recently received, I was first runner-up as a finalist for the Time Magazine Quality Dealer Award which is really the highest award that a dealer can get.  So I received that award in 2002 and my mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] had just passed and it was a pretty emotional time for me, but they--it was a very intense kind of a questionnaire.  You had to talk about everything you'd ever done in life.  And when I sort of sat back and read it almost saddened me to look at everything I had actually done because you know, you add into that the soccer games and the baseball, basketball, football, all the things, ballet, jazz, tap dance, gymnastics, swimming, four kids and four on swimming teams and you just wonder, well how in the world, who is that woman, you know, I surely--not I (laughter).  And then you realize it really was you that had--that you've done all of that and it'll sort of make you sit up and take notice and, you know, I have no regrets, let me hasten to add that, I have no regrets.  But I see why there's sort of a backlash from young women now who may not want to take on all of that.  I mean, we really sort of bought into, if you will, the superwoman myth.  And I can bring home the bacon and fry it up in the pan and we can, but I think that what we've learned from all that, certainly what I've learned and what I try and teach is that you have to make choices.  You have to have priorities and what--and have to understand what those priorities are and what's important to you.  And it's important not to try and be superwoman.  Because we, I, and, a lot of women like me were out there and we were in male dominated fields.  There is no more male dominated field than the car business and that's my chosen field.  And so you really fight some battles along the way, you know.  The employees who disrespect you, who don't respect you and those are two different things, the employees that just feel that you're too dumb and too stupid and you're not gonna get it, you know.  And they come in and they try to, you know, bamboozle you and think that they compliment you on what you're wearing that you're gonna just roll over and not notice that they're stealing you blind (laughter), you know.  And so you've been--when all is said and done you go through a lot to get to this point in development and I think it's important, at least I feel that one of the most important things I do is try to mentor young women.  Because it is a tough business, it's a tough world out there for women.  And when I see this sort of retreatment on the part of women saying, "We really don't wanna do all that."  And even from my own daughters in some instances, you wanna say, "Well look, there are some rewards and it is worth it."  And I think it's incumbent upon every generation to take the mantle and do what they're supposed to do in their, you know, in the--during the Civil Rights Movement we did what we had to do, we marched and we picketed, you know.  We had to open some doors in Corporate America and in these male dominated fields.  We had to do that and now the next generation, their task is to move us to the next level.  To be the ones who are opening the doors, if you will, you know.  They've got to become the decision makers, the CEOs, they've gotta take, grab that mantle and be brave enough and bold enough and to get it done 'cause we're smart enough already, okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 342093
Speaker 1: So when you think about what you've done, when you've seen your--when you've seen you and your husband [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco] build a company from just a few employees and few thousand dollars in sales to over three hundred and millions, over a hundred million dollars in sales, what do you think?
Speaker 2: I think that if somebody can look at that and be inspired by that then it was worth it.  And in fact I know that someone has looked at it and been inspired at--by it and has moved on.  We have trained, the last time I counted, twenty-four dealers, African American dealers, have come through the Baranco organization [Baranco Automotive Group].  And they're out there in the world running successful dealerships, yeah, so.  And I think that I'm proud of what I've done, not only for me and for my family but for my race in a very real sense because you see, if you look at my background with my [maternal] grandfather [Albert Evans] owning a farm and having to fight to keep the farm.  With my father [Jerome Powell] owning a service station, with my mother [Evelyn Evans Powell] going through school working her way through school, owning, my father owning a service station and all of the racism and prejudices and sexisms and everything that we've gone through, I, my whole purpose in life was to say, frankly, that African Americans can run and operate a successful business.  Because when I was coming up and I would see there's nothing wrong with some of the mom and pops and things like that, but people said, "Well, we don't want to go to a black business because you're not gonna get the same level of service, you're not gonna get the same quality of merchandise and all of those things."  Well the reality is black businesses, and I am no exception, are, we're all terribly undercapitalized; we are out here struggling every day.  We are fighting and swimming upstream, not that white businesses don't have to fight and work hard, they do, but you know, there is a difference if one person is swimming, let's say you swim a mile and I swim a mile, but your mile is downstream and mine is upstream, now which one of us had to work the hardest?  I mean, so, it's not an equal playing field and that's okay, I'm not complaining about it.  But I do acknowledge it, and the fact is that we have had to struggle when we started out, you know, we were being redlined, and that means that, you know, a customer comes to me with a certain credit score and I can't, the lender, the creditor, whether it's a captive, that means it's a manufacturer's arm, where--and they won't loan the money, they go somewhere else to another one of my competitors, a white competitor and they loan--and they, and they make the deal.  I mean we fought all of that.  I didn't file a lawsuit but we just fought it politically, so, you know, we've gone through a lot in these twenty-seven, twenty-eight years of business.  So it's been a lot of work and it's been hard but I think it's been worth it.
Story_ID: 342094
Speaker 1: Can I ask you what happened to the bank that, with the $5 million, what was the end of the story that--when your husband [HistoryMaker Gregory Baranco] got the money to help start the bank [First Southern Bank, Lithonia, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Well the bank grew and it grew and was very, very successful but we really wanted to grow the bank at a much more rapid rate.  And the most, the most effective and the easiest way to do it would be to merge.  We had a strong employee base and Citizens Trust [Citizens Trust Bank, Atlanta, Georgia] had a lot more money, and I'm not gonna talk about the numbers so much right now, but we, my husband sat down and with [HistoryMaker] Herman Russell, the president of Citizens Trust Bank at the time, or chairman of the board, and those two chairs sat down and decided to merge the two banks.  And it was a very historic moment because, you know, the rumor mill, you know, is that black folk don't get along and they can't successfully merge anything so that was another part of the plan, was to say that black folk can get together and put these two successful institutions together and make one very, very solid, sound, financial institution, so.
Speaker 1: And what about Sandy Estates, what's the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sandstone Shores [DeKalb County, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Sandstone Shores?
Speaker 2: Which we've done Phase II now.  We live on--I mean the subdivision is on a lake and we developed the first half of the lake, and we got a right of first refusal on the property on the other half.  So we developed the smaller side first is what I did, and we laid that out we stayed there ten years and then we bought the second, other half of the lake.  And developed it and course they outdid everything on the first half.  Those folk over there, we were the--still the developers, but they built some monstrosities over there, it's a beautiful subdivision, it's just lovely.
Speaker 1: So who makes up the subdivision if it's okay for you tell me, are there mainly African Americans or are (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They are all African Americans.  That was not the plan, we planned a very integrated neighborhood, but it just didn't happen, it just didn't happen, and that's okay, that's okay, we--it's a great neighborhood by anybody's standards.  It's a great neighborhood, so that was not the plan that it would be all African Americans but that's what it is.
Story_ID: 342095
Speaker 1: What are your hopes, when you look, I mean, into the future for African Americans as a people, what are your hopes for us as a people?
Speaker 2: Economic parity.  I think that is still--I started out in this business trying to prove a point that economic parity was something that we needed something that we deserved and something we had to have.  And that education was a means to an end, not an end in and of itself.  So my hope is that we take our education, that we continue to get educated, and understand the role of education in this world.  That we understand we live in a capitalistic society.  That we find our place, that we start our businesses, I would see us owning Fortune 500 companies, running Fortune 500 companies.  We have the credentials, we have the capability, but we're not at the top.  And everything I do is still working towards that. I wanna grow, continue to grow my own company so there--I'm not finished yet (laughter).  I have a lot more growing to do and we're well on the way to doing just that.
Speaker 1: So when you think about yourself, I mean I read something where in 1982 you couldn't pay the phone bill, and this is 2006, you know, your net worth is millions of dollars (laughter), I mean when you look back can you, is, was there, is there a road map that you can lay out for people?  Can, is there something--how did you do it when people say to you, "How did you do it?"  What do you say?
Speaker 2: I say, "Stick to it."  Because you're gonna get noes all along the way, I mean, it's like the car business or any business, it's a numbers game.  At the end of the day you're gonna get twenty-five noes and three yeses, that's--so I have to wake up the next day and get three more yeses, I mean that's what it is.  It really is all about stick-to-it-iveness, because, I mean, you can have all the brains and the smarts and the knowledge and the planning and the strategic planning, and the everything you can have.  The analytical ability, the critical thinking, you can have all of that and you, and you need all of that, but if you don't have that ability to stick to it.  If you don't feel that confidence in yourself, you know, I got this, you know, I'm the best there is, and I know I'm gonna make it.  And I don't care who tells me no this morning, I'm going to move on until I get a yes.  And that's what it's all about, I mean, you have to have it internally, you have to internalize that, I'm going to be a success no matter what, and you have to move towards that every day and never, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, ever, give up, you just can't do it.  And you're going to face some impossible odds, then you really say, "God, there is no--."  And I'm telling you right now today, right now today last week, "Okay, there's no way I'm getting through this.  This is, you know, these are some impossible odds, this is it."  But you do get, you don't get used to it, but you get a little more comfortable with that, you know.  And so you just say, "I've got breath in my body, I'm gonna get this done."
Speaker 1: You're also the recipient of the first Trumpet Award that was given?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was great, yeah, [HistoryMaker] Xernona Clayton, the Trumpet Awards have moved on to be a pretty special thing now, and so it's nice to be recognized by a national award and it's pretty special that evening and we go to the Trumpet Awards every year and my name is still on the program as the first (laughter).
Story_ID: 342096
Speaker 1: One of the pivotal moments I've read was that you had to close the Covington Highway [Decatur, Georgia] location [of Baranco Pontiac, Inc.]?
Speaker 2: That wasn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No?
Speaker 2: --really a pivotal moment--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay--
Speaker 2: No, we--
Speaker 1: --okay.
Speaker 2: --we closed that by choice--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --we moved that location to a different location--
Speaker 1: Right, you moved it--
Speaker 2: --the area had just kind of gone, I mean I didn't like leaving DeKalb County [Georgia], so that was tough for me but, really tough as a matter of fact.  But it, the area had just gone down and--but that property we kept and have--and in the process of developing into a multi-use property with seniors--for seniors and townhomes and it's gonna be a beautiful use of that property.
Speaker 1: Right, well the reason I talk about that because also in that same piece I read, they talked about how within that, although you regretted having to close Covington because it was DeKalb, but how you'd done so much for that community that they hated to see you go and you know--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they hated to lose you but that you still stayed within the community (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah we--
Speaker 1: --they felt and worked with them--
Speaker 2: --yeah, we lived in the community--
Speaker 1: Right--
Speaker 2: we work there--
Speaker 1: --and worked.
Speaker 2: --and so that's my home, that's our home and we love it.  And we still have other business interests in DeKalb County, just that that dealership couldn't survive right there, so we had to make a tough business decision to move it to a different location.
Speaker 1: You sa- I read also that you, if you can just touch briefly on buying black, I read that you know, how black people don't necessarily know how to or don't make it a point to do so.
Speaker 2: Well, I mean, we talked about that a lot in the '80s [1980s], and the '90s [1990s], and it's still true about supporting people who support you is what it is.  Not so much buying black as it is about supporting people who support you.  And people who are giving to the community and giving and working in the community, and giving everything they have or can in the community, those people ought to be supported.  I mean, other races seemingly understand that, but we still haven't quite grasped that concept.  That we need to make intelligent buys from manufacturers, from people who support us, not just companies that put a black face up there.  But companies that are black-owned and are giving in the community.  You know, when you get ready to have your football team and you go to so and so dealer, if they give to you then that's where you need to buy your car from, you know.  And it's just the way the world runs, and again, it's not just buying black, it's about supporting those who support us and our goals and our objectives and our programs and projects.
Story_ID: 342097
Speaker 1: So do you talk a lot about history or your own history with your kids?  Do they know where you've been, where you've come from, where you are today?
Speaker 2: I do talk about it a lot with my own children.  I pride myself on living in the present, however, you know.  I mean, I think it's terribly important not only, not just from an analytical perspective to see well why did this make me the person that I am, but certainly to learn and to grow from our historical backgrounds.  I feel that, and this is old school thought, but I really feel that a lot of people have died and have put blood, sweat and tears in your becoming a success, and for you to not do so does all, it is a disservice to all of those predecessors who have gone before you.  So, I feel that that's a moral obligation to do well because a lot of people sacrificed for you to be at this point, and for you to not own up to that heritage, for you to just flake off, and not do your very best to be the very best that you can be I think is a disservice to those people.
Speaker 1: You spoke a little, I read something about inheritance and that's something we as black people have not yet grasped either is, you know, a big disparity between whites and blacks is what you leave behind for the people that are left behind when you're gone.
Speaker 2: We're clearly the consumers (laughter) of the world.  We love to dress well and to look good and to drive fancy cars, yeah, keep driving fancy cars, now don't stop doing that--buy big houses and stuff but, I mean, it's a pattern that starts in life and follows us in death that we don't save, we don't invest wisely.  We spend most of what we get, and the economy's pretty tight now so it's kind of hard not to do, not to do that.  But it's important to leave something for the next generation to build on, otherwise you're constantly starting over.  And that's the pattern that most of us find ourselves in, so it is my hope to be able to leave something, not enough that they don't have to go to work, okay (laughter).  I want them to go to work, but they need to have a foundation on which to build and that's what each generation has an obligation to do.  Is to leave that foundation on which the next generation can build.
Story_ID: 342098
Speaker 1: Well, you're too young to think about your legacy, but you can think about what you wanna be remembered for and what is it at this moment you'd want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd like to be remembered for being a successful businesswoman.  I would like to be remembered for being involved civically.  A person who was involved in her community, I'd like to be remembered for being a good grandmother, I missed the opportunity to be a great mother so (laughter) I'll try to be a--no, I think that our--your children are to a large extent, are your legacy.  And what they do and the way they treat people is a large--is largely a reflection of how they were reared, and so I would hope that my children, in fact I know they do 'cause they're all grown now, they represent me well.  And so I feel awfully proud of that and now we have five grandchildren who are representing us well and I'm awfully proud of that as well.
Speaker 1: So was it tougher being a mom or a businesswoman?
Speaker 2: A mom, that's real easy.  Absolutely, the toughest job anyone will ever do in life is being a mother.  Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: So do you think your mom [Evelyn Evans Powell] had it easier than you and her mom [Lessie White Evans]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --easier than her, you think it gets tougher as it--
Speaker 2: Yes, I think every generation gets tough, and almost to the point of impossible.  In fact I said one--I don't know how anybody can raise a child in 2006, I mean, yes the challenges get to be so grave and so difficult and so much more complex.  And the things that make our lives easier, like the Internet and computers and so forth, also serve to complicate our lives.  So yes, I think it is tougher, each generation is tougher to raise children.  In fact I read something the other day where they were advising people not to have but one child 'cause you couldn't raise more than one successfully, I mean it's just real tough, it really is, yeah.
Story_ID: 342099
Speaker 1: Well we appreciate your time, but I would like to know for, or just have you reflect on why you agreed to become a HistoryMaker, to be a part of our project?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all let me say I'm honored to be a part of the project and to have been asked to be a part of the project is such an honor.  So I agreed for that reason 'cause I am human and I just recognized what an honor it is.  But I think that there is such a void for African American women that I feel that I've made a lot of sacrifices and that I can share some of my--can be a role model and or a mentor, if you will.  So if nothing else, people will look at me and say, well if she did it, I can do it too.   So, that's another reason that I agreed to do it because I feel that you have an obligation to help others along the way.  Somebody helped me, you know, somebody put their hand on my shoulder and said, "Well, you're a pretty smart little girl."  So that's what I wanna do globally is put my hands on the shoulders of some women and some African American girls and say, "You're pretty sharp, and you got a lot going for you, and you can far exceed anything that I've done as long as you have that confidence in yourself to do it, you're gonna make it."
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: You're welcome (laughter).
Speaker 1: But I can't let you go without you filling in your phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: I knew you were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We said, we'd come back to it (laughter)--
Speaker 2: --and I've been thinking about that all along, did I say anything this afternoon already, I have so many sayings it is amazing to me that I have drawn a blank.  I cannot believe it, I have so many sayings that I use all the time.
Speaker 1: Well my favorite that you've said here today is that, the putting the hands on someone's shoulders, I love that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --expression and, and just the visual of it, I mean I think it's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --it says everything--
Speaker 2: The literal and the figurative vision of--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --that is, and it does, you really do it, you just grab them and say, "You got this."  You know.  But I have so many sayings that I say on a day-to-day basis and I'm sure as soon as I get in my car this evening, if we're not locked in here for the night, I forgot about that, I told the guys not to leave us in here.  That--I'm just drawing a blank on a saying.
