Story_ID: 476428
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines and I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer.  Would you state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Name is Robert John Bacon, Dr. Robert John Bacon, Sr. [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.].  Bacon, B-A-C-O-N, you had breakfast this morning, so that's it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: March 9, 1923.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Como, C-O-M-O, Mississippi, Panola County.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired physician.  I'm specifically a retired urologist.
Speaker 1: And what is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Houston, Texas.
Speaker 1: All right.  And today's date?
Speaker 2: February 9, 2007.
Speaker 1: Seven [2007], all right--
Story_ID: 476429
Speaker 1: Now we'll begin with what I call People magazine-ish type questions.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Pink, in certain instances.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the one that led to entrapment by Bernice Bacon [Bernice Narcisse Bacon] my wife, my former wife, my late wife.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Appeared in pink and that did it.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) What food do you like to eat?  What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't have anything that's, in particular, you know.  I basically, I guess, I'm a meat eater but I do like vegetables too.  And I think, asparagus--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --among the vegetables.  And, of course, the mixed greens.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Not particularly, you know, this thing of having favorites, I don't know, you could ask me a lot of favorites, and I'd have to stop and think but off right now I can't think of necessarily any time, here I think it's just a matter of what can I do at a particular time.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And my likes and dislikes change with the seasons.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you what, I have enjoyed--figures, I went to the Bahamas and I really enjoyed it, and also I went on a jazz cruise which I think was almost unforgettable, but those were the two most remarkable ones that I can think of in retrospect.
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite saying or phrase?
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.  Quite often I think in terms of a few things, I'm not a theologian but I sometimes think of the expression, "The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want" [Psalm 23:1], and that makes me think of not being so greedy at times (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 476430
Speaker 1: Let's begin by talking about your mother and her family.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Tell me your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother was Minnie Lee Askew [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon], Askew was her maiden name.
Speaker 1: Can you spell it for me?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A-S-K-E-W.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Minnie Lee Askew.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And when was she born?
Speaker 2: Mother was born July 1, 1904.
Speaker 1: And where was she born?
Speaker 2: I think she was born also in Como, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: All right.  Tell me about her parents.
Speaker 2: Don't know too much about her, her father, Robert, was a barber.
Speaker 1: Her, Robert Askew?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Robert Askew was a barber.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was killed in an automobile train accident when he was about forty-five years old.  And Grandma Eunice [Eunice Jackson], my mother's mother, she remarried some years later and she married a guy named Jackson [General Jackson].  But my mother had several uncles and aunts, most of whom I never had a chance to meet because our moving from Mississippi when I was young, I didn't get a chance to see them.  Plus, a lot of them in the great migrations out of Mississippi in '28 [1928], '29 [1929], many of them had moved to the--Detroit [Michigan] and to Ohio, you know, that's industrial cities.  So there were several of my mother's uncles and aunts, I never got a chance to meet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did your mother share any stories about her growing up in Mississippi?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  She used to always talk about her activities.  Mother was always active in the church.  And also she liked to tell family stories about the relationship she had with her brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Richard [Richard Askew (ph.)] and Ruffin [Ruffin Askew (ph.)], with her sister, Aunt Alice [Alice Askew Fitzgerald].  And that, you know, it's a funny thing but most of her stories somehow music always came into play.  And it ended up with Richard, especially, became a musician in addition to being a barber.  And mother could tinkle a little bit on the piano and she could plunk a few strings on the guitar.  In fact, I think there was a story said that when she was growing up there in Como, Mississippi, sometimes on Saturdays she and some others would be what you might say street troubadours, you know, about that time, if you make a couple of nickels, you're in good shape.  But music was her great love, and education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And how much education did she have?
Speaker 2: For Mississippi she had a lot.  I think mother went to school a total of about, I'd say about eight or nine years, which today would be about four or five at the most because she only went to school five months out of the year.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did she work outside the home?
Speaker 2: Later, in later years mother worked as a cook and a nanny.
Story_ID: 476431
Speaker 1: Were there any other stories that she [Bacon's mother, Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] shared about her growing up?  What were some of the stories then?  She talked about her and her brothers [Richard Askew (ph.) and Ruffin Askew (ph.)] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well--
Speaker 1: --and sisters?
Speaker 2: --as I say, most of her, you know, it's coming now that you mention it, most of her stories were family related.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The stories always centered around she and her brothers, her sister [Alice Askew Fitzgerald], relationships with her mother [Eunice Jackson] and her stepfather [General Jackson] and then it was some of her relatives.  And, you know, most of them had a humorous twist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't ever recall mother telling any sad stories, you know.  And there were some tragedies in her family but it seemed she kind of emphasized a more or less a positive side of life.  And most of her things, like I said she was always active in the church.  So that all her stories centered around that and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Can you tell us a story that she might have told you?
Speaker 2: Well, one of the stories she used to tell about some, sometimes she used to call the jackleg preachers coming to town.  And they would tell the story about this, what was supposed to have been a very prominent minister coming to preach at her church.  And one of, one of the good sisters wanted to put, you know, water on the pulpit, he told her, "That's all right, sister, I have some here."  And they noticed as he started his sermon he'd take a little sip and talk, take a little sip and talk.  Well, in retrospect, by the time that glass was half empty, the rev was really doing his number, he was stomping and shouting and sweating and whatnot.  And one of the good sisters decided the reverend should have some more water so she, when he wasn't looking, she didn't, it was water, she took this glass off the lectern and it was gin, homemade gin (laughter).  Then she liked to tell stories, of course, about the lodge meetings, you know, I think it's almost, I believe, that's where 'Amos 'n' Andy' stole some of their stuff from the lodges, but mother would tell about the lodge meeting and always this argument about who had the money, (laughter) who kept the books, and why we were fifty cents short this week, and fifteen short the next week.  Those, those were the type of stories she told.  But they always centered around, in some way they centered around people, and there as I said, they were always something on the funny side, something to keep you laughing about some of her kin folks, who was in jail, who wasn't in jail.  About one of the good relatives who was a known bootlegger and how his connection with the local sheriff, how he'd go to jail, spend the day in jail, at night his wife would pick him up and he'd go down to the still and work all night making whiskey and then she'd bring him back to the jail in the morning.  And then when the sheriff would raid the still, he'd--and for some reason only about three or four bottles would be destroyed, those bottles we found out later were nothing but water but somehow the real (laughter) stuff disappeared.  But those were the type of stories she would tell, they would always keep, something to keep you laughing.  And as I said, mostly around the church people, but always funny.
Story_ID: 476432
Speaker 1: Did she [Bacon's mother, Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] grow up on a farm?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, she'd tell you.  Now sometimes, this is in a more serious note, she would tell you about how she had to work, you know, the typical thing in Mississippi picking cotton, chopping cotton, farming as a whole, milking cows, feeding cows, feeding livestock, churning milk to make butter, making your own clothes, got one bath a month, Saturday morning you took that bath in the bathtub 'cause you're going to town, getting up at four o'clock in the morning, cooking then go to work in the field, come back, you know.  And even there though she would find something humorous to tell you.  But it was typical Mississippi work, you worked from sunrise to sunset and then a little after.  And that crawling along picking cotton was not the easiest thing, those knees and those hands, you know, picking that.  But somehow she found some way of making some humor out of that.  But it was typical, oh, yeah, and, of course, in the fall you were doing a couple of things, it was time to start killing those hogs and making the chitterlings.  So then my dad [Frank Bacon] and I couldn't stand the odor of those things for nothing but mother loved them (laughter).  And making the hams, you know, smoking the hams, and then canning, you know, the vegetables.  She'd go in her garden, canning the greens and the okra and the tomatoes and things like that, so that you stayed busy.  And that was the seasonal thing but then in the, in the fall you could see those fires burning.  Oh, yeah and making molasses 'cause they grew the--they had a little sugar cane they drew syrup from and it made the molasses.  So you're making molasses over here, you're killing and butchering hogs over here, and you're canning over there, so everybody at around about, oh, I'd say October, November, you're pretty busy, then you could go to school.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But in, in late March you had to stop 'cause it's now time to go planting the crops.  So you had schooling from oh, you might say, November, late October through maybe most of March and that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now the land that your, your mother grew up on, did her parents own that land?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I don't recall any of mother's folks owning land.  The landownership came through my dad's family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as I could determine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because later you see, after Grandma Eunice [Eunice Jackson] married this guy Jackson [General Jackson], she moved to Arkansas because when I was born, grandma was living in Arkansas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when she moved there I don't, can't say for sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Was there any talk about slavery in your mother's line, in her family line?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  When I say there was talk, there, at the Cistern Hill Baptist Church near Como [Mississippi], if you walk through that cemetery you see these headstones, "Born in slavery, died free."  And I don't know how many of those you would see but invariably you'd hear people talk about.  And there were some of the older folks whose immediate parents had been slaves, you know.  You take people in their seventies, a few who lived to be seventy years old and invariably their parents had been slaves.  And you hear, and you hear, I heard a many a tale about slaves, especially the escape route.  It seems that at some time or another somewhere through Panola County [Mississippi], I guess there was a Underground Railroad because I did hear stories about how slaves came through there and went through these swamps to escape.  And then, you know, when the folks were saying, 'Wade in the Water,' or they were telling 'em, you know, that, the song was a way of communication, wade in the water, children, okay, we're gonna escape tonight, get in the water.  'Over My Head' ['Up Over My Head'], I see trouble in there, hey, wait a minute, if you're gonna escape tonight watch out the weather is gonna turn.  And then if they sang 'Standing on the Banks of Jordan' ['I Stood on the River of Jordan'], they weren't talking about the Jordan River, they're talking about Lake Superior and the boat coming over from Lake Superior, you know.  You know, and what is it?  'Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,' that was a boat (laughter).  So that was the story they would tell.  So there were some stories about slavery.  But there was so much segregation (laughter) during the time, there, there was enough slavery going on and on it was called segregation or Jim Crow, yeah, so we heard, you heard your share of stories.
Story_ID: 476433
Speaker 1: All right, let's talk about your father.  Tell me his name.
Speaker 2: Dad's name was Frank, Frank Bacon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And when was he born?
Speaker 2: Dad was born in 1904 also.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born there in Como, Mississippi, as well.
Speaker 1: All right.  And his parents were?
Speaker 2: Horace Bacon and Martha [Martha Bacon].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you do know their parents?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't much about dad's grandparents.  I'd every now and then I'd hear something about 'em but I didn't get to know them that much.  Now knowledge of the families became limited because when I was about five years we moved from Mississippi and my only contacts would come a few summers when I'd go back to visit and, of course, generally, hearing the folks talk about it.  But I don't remember a whole lot of talk about dad's grandparents.
Speaker 1: No, about his parents.
Speaker 2: I mean, oh, his parents.  Well, Granddaddy Bacon, Horace Bacon, dad's father, was a, he was pretty well known because Horace Bacon, oh, Lord, he belonged to everything down there.  He was a Mason, he was a, what's the other thing the Masons had?  The 33rd Degree Masons, Shriners, or whatever it was.  He belonged to just about every fraternal organization down there.  Plus he was deacon of a couple of churches.  And he was a very successful farmer.  Now he wasn't, and Horace Bacon was not a shareholder, a sharecropper, Horace Bacon worked for cash.  And his first, when I first remember granddad, he was working on the Taylor Plantation [Como, Mississippi], that's where I was born, on the Taylor Plantation.  But shortly after I was born granddad hooked up with a guy named Maude Short, and there was some land that the Corps of Engineers [U.S. Army Corps of Engineers] were draining, swampland, and they were digging what, people, they really look like rivers but its drainage canals.  So granddad had a contract with, Horace--with Maude Short to drain off this land and to start planting it and that was it.  To tell you how successful Horace Bacon was, in Panola County [Mississippi] there were three blacks who had automobiles, Horace Bacon bought a new car every three years.  Now it's hard for people to imagine but at that time for a black man to buy a car every three years, what's he doing?  But Horace Bacon and Mr. Gross [ph.] and I forgot the other gentleman's name, they bought automobiles.  'Cause the only whites who had automobiles down there were the planters.  There may be a few working whites but most of the working whites rode a mule or a horse or a wagon.  And these blacks also were landowners because granddad later became a landowner.  Mr. Gross had been a landowner for years because now in southern Mississippi it was almost impossible for blacks to buy property.  And, of course, we were in northern Mississippi, you see (laughter).  But granddad was a very sharp, astute man in his farming.  I can recall one year when everybody was planting cotton, granddad decided to plant peas to make hay and watermelons and corn and no stuff that was the year the price of cotton dropped down to practically nothing but corn and peas went up.  And, you know, people had their signs about planting, I remember my granddad, they'd ask, "Well Horace, when do you plant?"  He said, "When the ground is dry."  You know, folks had, they'd, you know, look at the sky and look at that or get out your almanac, that's, he didn't go by all that and he made it.  And there's one tale I wanna tell you about him.  You know, one of the things was in the South at that time you did not look Mr. Charlie in the eye when you talked to him, you looked down or around or up in the sky.  So I was there and I was visiting that summer when granddad had his seventy-fifth birthday there and we're living, he was living in Sardis, Mississippi then, and this general walks up, "Well, Horace, they tell me that you're having a seventy-fifth birthday today."  Yeah, mister whatever his name.  "Well, Horace, why'd you live to be so old?"  And granddad got right in his face, he said, "Just to be a son of a bitch."
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And walked away.  And he'd just buy, had bought that guy for less than a penny.  He looked that man in the eye, he used some bad words, and that--they said about remember, now that I remember.
Story_ID: 476434
Speaker 1: And another time I think he told somebody, a guy was asking why he was living so long, he said, "Just to be spiteful," but I could remember, oh, next thing.  My dad's younger brother, Roosevelt [Roosevelt Bacon], was about twenty, twenty-one years old.  Roosevelt had gotten married, married Emma [sic. Lucy Bacon], and I was--again, the summer I was visiting.  And in the morning when they go out to the barn to get the mules, hook 'em up to go plowing, they're out getting ready to do this and Roosevelt got into some argument with granddad, I don't know what it was about but Roosevelt was sitting on a post and granddad had this bridle in his hand I always remember, now here's Roosevelt, twenty years old, a good 6', 6'2", weighed about two hundred pounds, and I remember granddad yanked him off that post and threw him on the ground and put his foot in his chest and I remember he stood over him and said, "Nothing bears my name talks back to me."  Now that I remember.  Nothing that bears my name talks back to me and they didn't, that he had complete control.  And yet granddaddy was not a mean man.  Married about, I don't know, we lost count of the marriages, of course, after his wife died (laughter).  So Horace Bacon was a character to talk about.  I think I could talk about him for the (laughter) rest of the day.  But anyway he, as I said, he was a very successful farmer and dad has several brothers.  The older brother, Ernest [Ernest Bacon], never learned to read and write but he could count money.  Dad had the equivalent of about, my father went to school for about equivalent of two years.  My father for all practical purposes, semi-illiterate, and so I tell people being illiterate doesn't mean you're--mean stupid, it means you can't read and can't write because in all my lifetime I don't think I ever, I've met a smarter man or more effective man than Frank Bacon and I've met some pretty smart people in my lifetime.  Dad could barely read, could barely write but he had a whole lot of sense.  And to show you how effective he was, when I used to hear people use the expression, you know, hear somebody say, "Well, I'll be frank with you," I always thought people were talking about my daddy.  You know, somebody, oh, what you talking about father (laughter)?  And then, then now he had a sister, Willett [Willett Bacon].  So after Grandma Martha [Martha Bacon] died, Willett became the matron of the family so to speak.  But granddaddy, let's see granddad, see Grandma Martha died, they tell me he stayed single for a number of years then he married Miss Davey [ph.], he married, granddad was married about four or five times.  Oh, tell you this.  You know, in the country, at that time when you get, when a man died, the widow, of course, would be there in black, and at some time during the funeral the widow would stand up, well, when granddad died, they tell me that half the women in the church (laughter) were in black and they never did ask (laughter) anybody to stand up because they didn't know who the hell it was gonna be (laughter).  The funeral, the funeral lasted almost eight hours, had three preachers and each one preached twice.  When they'd go out to have the, you know, and they didn't have a cemetery, they had a graveyard right there by the church, so it was a graveside ceremony and, of course, all these organizations that he belonged to everybody had to have their say, you know.  And, of course, there's always that relative who was mourning him so deeply, oh, Cousin Horace, I'm gonna miss you, and they're lowering the body this guy is jumping down in the grave, in the grave.  So somebody said, "Let that fool stay down there (laughter)."  The other thing was, the undertaker, the funeral director was a very smart man, he bought his own pallbearers because by the time the funeral came off, the regular pallbearers all those boys were kind of soaked out.  See down behind the church there was a little jug down there, and the boys would give the signal I'm going down (laughter).  Dad said when my father went to it, dad said his, said Granddaddy Bacon's funeral was a three-ring circus.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Do you remember his wife's name?  You're talking about your, your father's (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Grandma Martha, she, Grandma Martha, her name was Martha.  And her sister, Aunt Latt [ph.], Aunt Latt was a midwife.  And I understand she delivered most of the babies in Panola County [Mississippi].  In fact, it seems that there were two doctors in the county and when the women got pregnant, black or white, they would invariably say, call Latt.  And she would deliver most of the babies and if they had problems, then she'd call the doctor.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: But Grandma Martha died as I say, she died in childbirth, oh, I think dad was about fifteen or sixteen years old when his mother died.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  Now just to, to make sure that we're clear--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --your father's grandfather was also Horace Bacon?
Speaker 1: I don't know my, I think, no, I don't know my dad's grandfather's name, I don't remember him.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: There was the, some of the relatives for dad, there was the Crumps, C-R-U-M-P, family that were related to dad's family but I only knew one of them and that was a, one of dad's cousins named Pete [Peter Crump].  But I didn't know any of the Crumps.
Story_ID: 476435
Speaker 1: Tell me about, if you have a story about how your mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] and father [Frank Bacon] met?
Speaker 2: I think there's a story I got, there was one of the, what they used to have down there, the revival.  You know, at that time when they had a revival you would sit on the, what they call, out on the mourners' bench I don't know how they spell that, I don't know if they spell it M-O-U-R-N, mourning, but anyway when you got to be about a teenager and had a revival you were supposed to go sit on the mourners' bench and get religion and confess Christ, if you didn't, then you better not go home.  But at this big revival mother was there 'cause mother was the secretary, she had already confessed her sins.  And I think dad had too but anyway I understand they met at some revival.  And the courtship started and as dad told me, I think for work, he, where Granddaddy Bacon [Horace Bacon] was living to where mother's folks were living was about four or five miles.  And dad said he got tired of coming after working all day to hitch up his mule and ride five miles to go court, so finally after a couple of trips he decided this is it, so he said, look we need to get married 'cause I'm tired of traveling (laughter) so far.  I think the courtship lasted about two months and they got married.
Speaker 1: Do you know how old they were when they got married?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as I recall, mother was nineteen, they were both, mother was eighteen and dad was nineteen.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She was almost an old woman, you know, at that time, then when a girl got to be sixteen, it was time to start looking for a husband.
Speaker 1: So where did they live?  Where, where did they have the marriage (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Now, they were, well, we lived there in, and we started out in Como, Mississippi.  And when I was about three, maybe four years old, that's when granddad got this contract with Maude Short, and we moved over to what we call Sardis, Mississippi, S-A-R-D-I-S, and that's where we were living when we left Mississippi.
Speaker 1: When you left Como?
Speaker 2: We left Como, I think, see I was born in '23 [1923] so we left Como, I guess, about 1925, '26 [1926], and moved to Sardis.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Or to say, near about to Sardis 'cause, you know, we're about, I think Sardis, the city itself or the town itself was about five or six, eight miles away.
Story_ID: 476436
Speaker 1: Tell me your earliest childhood memory.
Speaker 2: The earliest thing I could remember was this house that I was born, it wasn't a house it was a cabin, and they talk about log cabins, this was a log cabin with a tin roof, two rooms, you had this open space like a porch, a room on this side, bedroom on this side, bedroom on that side, and this covered area, you go back and behind this bedroom was the kitchen.  And the house was made of logs with a tin roof.  And we did not an outhouse, you just went behind some bushes.  And you had your Sears Roebucks [Sears, Roebuck and Co.] or your Montgomery Ward catalog or whatever newspaper you could find or a corncob, that was it.  'Cause they talk about outhouses and I don't recall ever seeing an outhouse, it was a bush or a tree or a ditch (laughter).  So anyway we moved from there--and but the thing about it, we moved to Maude Short, then we got a regular, a better house and it was not a log cabin, it was made of regular shingles or you might say wood.  And the bedrooms were bigger, the kitchen was more adept, and the porch was more ornate.  The houses were painted and they still had the tin roof though but the houses were--the windows, had better windows and doors, you had screen doors.  The other house there were no screen doors there but here at the Short, Maude Short, you had screen doors and you had good solid doors that closed and you had a, a better fireplace.  And, in fact, in some of the rooms you had a stove because a fireplace doesn't heat too well.  But in Maude Short some of the rooms you had a stove so that the whole room could be heated because, you know, in the kitchen, people go in the kitchen, because that stove heats the whole room.  So Short, the housing much better.
Speaker 1: Tell, spell the name of the, the town that you're saying, Maude Short?
Speaker 2: Sardis, Mississippi, S-A-R-D-I-S.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  And you said you moved (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And the guy is named Maude, I, I guess it was M-A-U-D [sic.], Maude, Short, S-H-O-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now the county was Panola County [Mississippi].  Panola County was different from most counties because you had two county seats.  'Cause if somebody said go to the county seat you'd have to ask 'em which one?  Do I go to Sardis or I go to Batesville [Mississippi].  I think Batesville, B-A-T-E-S, ville.  Because some years later when I was trying to settle some family affairs and I was supposed to go to the court, I'm going to court in Sardis and fortunately I met somebody who said oh, no, you have to go down to Batesville and that's when I found out they had two (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Panola County was different.
Story_ID: 476437
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your early years, your elementary school years.
Speaker 2: Elementary school, we were, with the Great Migration, as you recall from reading, back oh, somewhere starting around '26 [1926], '27 [1927] and especially in '28 [1928], through '30 [1930], '32 [1932], blacks were leaving Mississippi and the South as a whole in droves.  And we, my dad [Frank Bacon] left in the fall of '28 [1928] to go to Illinois because mother's sister, Aunt Alice [Alice Askew Fitzgerald] and her husband were already living there.  And dad went up and joined them.  And mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] and I left Sardis [Mississippi], we left there in March of '29 [1929], and we moved to this town of Lake Forest, Illinois.  City or a town, at that time a village about thirty miles north of Chicago [Illinois], it sits right on the lake [Lake Michigan].  And the population at that time was about three thousand.  But Lake Forest was very, very much upper middle class so, and I forgot the number of millionaires in that town because it was the Swifts, Armour, and Cudahy, controlled the meat packing.  McLaughlin [Frederic McLaughlin] controlled the coffee [McLaughlin's Manor House Coffee] and the Chicago Blackhawks.  Kirk's had the family, they had the soap or we call now detergent, had Family Flakes.  Curtiss [Curtiss Candy Company] and Wrigley [Wm. Wrigley Jr. Company, Chicago, Illinois] and some others had candy and gum.  Jelke and Hellmann was the mayonnaise folks, now these are people who lived in Lake Forest.  And let me intersect, interject this right now.  You know, they always talk about how we black folks how we can dance and all that, I wanna tell you something.  I was taught how to dance by a millionaire white woman, Irene Castle McLaughlin taught me how to dance.  Irene Castle in early years, she and her brother [Vernon Castle] back in the late '20s [1920s] were America's big dance team and she married this guy McLaughlin.  And when they got married they, he was living on his estate there in Lake Forest and she became active with the local Lake Forest YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  And she and went out and recruited a number of the young black girls, I think, between six and sixteen, she recruited them, and there were about oh, twelve or fifteen of these girls, Lake Forest had a very small black population.  So anyway, after she got these girls, well, they wanted to have a party, and the party started.
Story_ID: 476438
Speaker 1: Before we go forward talking about the dance--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --let's go back and just clarify some things about your mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] and father [Frank Bacon] and where they--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --were living when you were born.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So explain to me one more time, your mother and father were living on the Taylor Plantation [Como, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Dad was living on the Taylor Plantation.
Speaker 1: Your father was?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't know where, what plantation or where mother was living.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: All I can tell you, she was living in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But she was not living on the Taylor Plantation as far as I know.
Speaker 1: I got you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So when they got married (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When they got married, you know, mother moved on the, with dad on the Taylor Plantation.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where I was born, on the Taylor Plantation.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I got you.
Story_ID: 476439
Speaker 1: Tell me the story about the Irene Castle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Castle McLaughlin [Irene Castle McLaughlin].  Yeah, since she married this millionaire McLaughlin [Frederic McLaughlin] who had at that time, McLaughlin's Manor House Coffee.  And when she came to Lake Forest [Illinois] and she became one of the workers at the local YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and she noticed there were no black girls there so she went out and solicited and recruited some of the young black ladies, and Lake Forest had a very small black population, and I think there were about twelve, maybe fifteen black girls at the most.  So they wanted to have this party and they wanted to dance and then they brought it to her attention most of the guys we didn't know how to dance.  So Mrs. McLaughlin got a group of ladies together and they brought us up there, brought the young fellows up there to the YWCA.  And the YWCA was upstairs, Marshall Field's [Marshall Field and Company] was downstairs.  We go upstairs one Saturday morning and we were there for about five or six hours, learning how to dance.  And Irene Castle McLaughlin, a millionaire white woman, taught Robert John Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] how to dance.  There were two steps this way and that way and, you know, that little square you made, and that's how I learned to dance.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: So after we had our dance lessons then the following Saturday afternoon we had our first dance.  I think I was about, I guess, about twelve years old something like, eleven or twelve years old but that's how I learned to dance.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now--
Speaker 2: But let me interject this at the moment.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lake Forest, Illinois, was a real unusual town to this extent for the blacks, there were very few blacks there but most of the blacks there were a educated group so to speak.  Example, there was Mr. Sloan [ph.] who was a blacksmith and the big country club, there's Onwentsia country club [Onwentsia Club, Lake Forest, Illinois], had this big horse show every year, and he had the contract to take care of all those horses out there.  Plus at that time a lot of other people in Lake Forest had polo ponies so he took care of them.  His daughters were graduates of, I've forgotten what school, but one of his daughters was somewhat a semi-recognized artist.  But he was, I think he, I think he was a Tuskegee [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] man.  Mr. Coleman [ph.] who was a graduate of Tuskegee in electricity.  Mrs. Ward [ph.] was a graduate of Tuskegee in home economics.  But at that time they suffered the same thing, Mrs. Ward got her job working as a maid.  Mr. Coleman was working common labor with a contracting company, I think later on he did some electrical work.  Then there was the McIntosh family, Clarence McIntosh and his wife, Thelma [Thelma McIntosh], were graduates of Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], at that time Hampton Institute.  And he had the choice job, Clarence McIntosh worked in the United States Post Office [U.S. Post Office Department; U.S. Postal Service].  And his wife was home as a homemaker.  They had three children, Henry [Henry McIntosh], Vera [Vera McIntosh], and Walter [Walter McIntosh].  His sister, Dara Walker [ph.] was, I think, she worked as a teacher's aide, she was a college graduate.  Had a sister that they, nobody ever knew her, was a (unclear)--they kind of kept her hidden away.  Then the Casselberrys, William Casselberry and his brother Arthur [Arthur Casselberry], they ran a trucking business hauling and whatnot, and in the wintertime they ran the snow plows, and also during the year round, these estates were outside of the city limits, they did the garbage disposal and collections.  Mr., oh, and the Mathews family, Mr. Mathews [Julian Mathews] and his sons had a livery service.  They had their uniforms, the boots, shiny boots and their caps, and they had these five Auburn and Cord cars and that was the car then.  And they had this contract each morning they would pick these guys up, take 'em to the railroad station, then they'd be there at 4:15 to catch the millionaire special coming out of Chicago [Illinois], to take them home.  Now as long as Mr. Mathews had his livery service, the city council would not grant Yellow Cab [Yellow Cab Company] or Checker cab [Checker Taxi] a franchise.  Alfonso Williams had the shoeshine parlor and the pressing place.  Peacock [ph.] had the cleaners.  You'd take your clothes to Peacock they would be cleaned but they had to go to Alfonso to be pressed.  You'd take your clothes over to Mr.--I've forgotten the guy's name, who had a shoe shop, to be repaired but you took 'em to Alfonso to be shined.  You'd pass by Alfonso's shop and there would be maybe a couple hundred pairs of shoes sitting out there.  And this truck of his, you see, hundreds of clothes lined up.  Showing you how prosperous he was, in 1932 when the so-called Depression [Great Depression] was on, at that time, Alfonso Williams built a $30,000 home, you know what it is now?  That's about a $400,000 to $500,000 home on Spruce Avenue.  There was Mr. Jones [ph.] who had the truck, in the summertime he had fruits and vegetables 'cause when he wasn't looking we used to swipe grapes, (laughter) got caught got the worst whipping in my life (laughter) but in the summer he had fruits and vegetables.  In the wintertime, oh, yeah and sometimes he had ice, but in the wintertime he would have coal and wood.  And I, I'm trying to think, I think he went to Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio].
Story_ID: 476440
Speaker 1: And there were two brothers there, Harry [ph.] and another, I can't remember their last names but one played the violin and the other played the piano, they were Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio] grads.  And the Casselberrys I think they came, they had gone to Alabama A, M, and N, Agricultural, Mechanical, and Normal [The State Agricultural and Mechanical Institute for Negroes; Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University, Normal, Alabama].  Then there was the, there were two Jordan [ph.] families there.  One of the Jordans, he was in the trucking business.  The other was, had contracts to take care of the yards and whatnot of some of those big estates.  But all these blacks were businessmen, they're all (unclear).  The only black domestics at that time were my mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] and dad [Fred Bacon] and Uncle Ed [ph.] and Aunt Alice [Alice Askew Fitzgerald] and Ma [Alice Black] and Pa Black [Sherman Black].  They were six blacks there who worked as domestics.  All the other blacks were in business.  A couple of black women they said was doing laundry but they didn't do the laundry in the usual sense of the word, these women had contracts to take care of laundry.  Viola Casselberry, she had, and as I recall, she did the laundry for the Cudahys, Swifts, and the Curtisses.  She had a regular contract to do so much because certain days to pick up this laundry, certain days she'd deliver.  And the laundry had a list, she ran a regular laundry at her house.  Mrs. Slaughter, Miss Coleman and one of the other women, ran it as a business.  And it wasn't, it weren't, you know, the usual laundry type thing, they had an actual contracts agreements with these different families to do the laundry.  Who else was around there?  Oh, yeah, Carl, Carl Slaughter.  Carl, I think, Carl was on the police department for a while then he did something else.  Arthur Bernard [ph.], at that time knew how to fly an airplane but he had a job with Swift and Company, at the stockyards in Chicago [Illinois] where he was a, some type of supervisor but he was a licensed airplane pilot.  Then, of course, we had, another guy had, you know, at that time the railroad was the thing, Pullman car porters.  But anyway all, most of these blacks had been to college, some had degrees but most of them had some college training.  There was a very limited number but that was the type of thing we ran into and that was my, and I was an outsider, and as an outsider I had to fight my way through.  If I had a fight with Bill Coleman [William Coleman], that meant Jerry [Jerry Coleman, Jr.], his older brother, would be looking for me (laughter).  If I had a fight with Bill Casselberry [William Casselberry], then I had to look for his cousin, James [James Casselberry, Sr.], and his brother, Jack [John Casselberry].  But I finally picked up two allies, 'cause see I'd beat the hell out of Bill, and I could do it and that Bill Coleman and Bill Casselberry I could lick them any day of the week but I couldn't beat their brothers.  But then I picked up two allies.  You heard the term Nick the Greek [Nick Dandolos]?  Well, I knew Nick the Greek back in 1930, 1920, 1930.  He was at that time, well we had a term for it because his mother had, wasn't married when he was born.  And then there's another guy, a black guy, his name was Casselberry, Alan Casselberry [ph.] same thing with him, his mother had him out of child, out of wedlock.  So these two guys could lick anybody in town and they became my allies.  Well, when it became known that if you fight Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], you had to look out for them, I didn't have any more trouble (laughter).  I had, I had my bodyguard (laughter).
Story_ID: 476441
Speaker 1: But Lake Forest [Illinois] was quite a town, it was, the school system there was one of the most advanced in the country, naturally it would be with that group of people.  Because one of the first school systems in the country to have intercoms was the Lake Forest schools, Gorton School [Lake Forest, Illinois], and Halsey School [Lake Forest, Illinois].  John E. Baggett was the superintendent of schools there, he was an old bushy haired Irish man with a squeaky voice, and he loved art, the arts.  So in every classroom at those schools there would be a picture, several pictures, copies of world's great art.  In the hallways there were pictures, copies of world great art.  At Gorton School when you walked into the lobby there was a 'Winged Victory' ['Winged Victory of Samothrace'].  At Halsey School when you walked in the lobby there was 'Venus de Milo.'  And as a student you had to learn every one of those, you had an examination that John E. Baggett conducted.  And knowing that this was 'The Horse Fair' by Rosa Bonheur or 'The Blue Boy' by Sir Joshua Reynolds [sic. Thomas Gainsborough], you had to know it.  You just couldn't identify the picture, you had to tell the story behind that picture, you had to tell what type of frame that it was in, where it was hung, you had to tell something about the paintings, the paint that went into it, and the history of the artist.  And if you failed that course, it was like failing arithmetic, or, or history.  Once a week Ms. Hatch [ph.] came out to teach art.  One day she was at Halsey School, one day she was at Gorton School.
Speaker 2: Which school did you go to?
Speaker 1: I went to both because they're both the same level it just depend on which side of town you lived on.  When I lived on the south side of town, of Lake Forest, on the, yeah, the south side of Lake Forest I went to Gorton School.  And then when we moved, I went to Halsey School.  But, and Thursdays Ms. Hatch came to Gorton School, Wednesdays she was at Halsey for art.  Mr. Walker [ph.] taught music, one day he would be at Gorton, one day he'd be at Halsey.  Now, John E. Baggett stopped me in the hall and the other black kids and took us in his office, in that old squeaky voice of his he says, "I want you to hear a voice that you hear only once in a thousand years," and he put on this record and this melodious full voice boomed out at us, Marian Anderson singing 'Listen to the Lambs.'  Turned it over, and Marian Anderson singing 'Ave Maria.'  At that time she was well known in Europe but she was just beginning to be known in this country.  But I remembered later on when Walter, Dr. Walter Damrosch who conducted the Chicago Symphony [Chicago Symphony Orchestra]--no, no Leopold Stokowski said, everybody knew it, would say, "This is a voice you hear once in a thousand years."
Story_ID: 476442
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, we're still talking about Gorton School [Lake Forest, Illinois] and Halsey School [Lake Forest, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.  So--
Speaker 1: At the time that this incident came when Marian Anderson was at the Gorton School.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And, and as I say though, but at both schools when they had this intercom system, every Friday from two to three o'clock, we would listen to Dr. Walter Damrosch conducting the Chicago Symphony Orchestra [sic.] and that was a class 'cause you took an examination.  Now, for two Fridays though the class started at 1:30 to 3:00, and what was he talking about?  Black music, Negro music, Negro spirituals, Negro jazz, and whatnot.  They devoted three hours to Negro music.  He devoted one hour to--at that time we called hillbilly but I always remember that time he gave more time to the blacks.  And in this thing he pointed out how those songs that we're singing, these blues that we're singing and the jazz we're playing, how it meshed into the classical music because he did something at that time that later on Marsalis did.  On one of the, one particular Friday they're at the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, and I think a local jazz, orchestra, jazz orchestra in Chicago [Illinois] and each one would take, they would take maybe it would start out with this classical piece and the symphony orchestra would play so much and then the jazz band would do the same number in their version and vice versa.  And then for the blues, and this is also when I learned the value and what spirituals were really all about because he pointed out when we had slaves the first thing the slave owners did they wouldn't let the slaves have drums because that was a way of communication, at least they thought it was.  So the slaves used music.  And at night when the slaves said, "I looked over Jordan, what did I see coming to carry me home" ['Swing Low, Sweet Chariot'], the slave was talking about standing on the shore of Lake Superior watching that boat coming over from Canada.  When the slave said, "I hold my head, I see trouble in the air" ['Over My Head'], hey, look if you're trying to escape then I can watch out 'cause we have some bad weather.  And this is where I learned the double meaning of that 'cause later on during the Civil Rights Movement this came out again.  But Dr. Walter Damrosch explained that to us at that time.  This is what?  Nineteen thirty-two [1932], '33 [1933], '34 [1934], somewhere in there.  But I always remembered that we had three hours devoted to Negro music.
Speaker 2: Who were your teachers?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see there, we had a different teacher first year, I think in first grade I had Miss Hill [ph.].  Then there was Ms. Hatch, of course, taught art, Mr. Walker [ph.] taught music, Mr. Green [ph.] taught vocational arts, Mr. Van Der Vaart [ph.] taught science, oh, Miss Gray [ph.], oh, yeah, very interesting, Miss Gray taught the fifth grade.  Miss Cooper [ph.] taught the sixth grade and Miss Cooper was in the great flood that hit Dallas [Texas], I mean, Galveston [Texas] back in oh, what, in the turn of the century when Galveston was wiped out, well, she was here and she was one of the few people who survived that hurricane.  And if I heard that story once, we heard it, we heard it on average once a week (laughter).  But anyway, those are some of the teachers that I had.  Mr. Baggett [John E. Baggett] was the superintendent of the schools, and when he retired after thirty-three years in which he missed three days because he was snowed in, and Mr. Loess [ph.] took over.  When John E. Baggett was the superintendent of the schools, on your birthday, from the time you would enter that school until you were twenty-one, you got a birthday card from him, handwritten because he put great emphasis on writing and he had beautiful handwriting.  And every summer when he would travel, every student in Gorton School and Halsey School, like I said it had to be about at least four hundred of us or maybe more, we'd all get a handwritten card from, postcard from him.  But the thing is, and my mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] saved, and when my mother moved here, I think, I got 'em out there some place now, about what, yeah, fifteen postcards addressed to me for my birthday because I recall when I was at medical school here comes a birthday card from John E. Baggett.  And he was written up by the way in Reader's Digest as a most unforgettable character.  And I'll show you a picture that was made and there were three blacks in this class, myself, Henry McIntosh and Josephine Harrison [ph.].  And in this picture the three of us are on this end and when Mr. Baggett saw that he told them no, and he kept Henry at this end, moved me to that end, and put Josephine in the middle.  He did not want the three of us together.
Story_ID: 476443
Speaker 1: When some awards were being made, the American Legion was giving out some awards, the smartest person in the school system was Ruth Cohen, Jewish.  As I recall according to the Iowa system of testing [Iowa Test of Basic Skills] she had an IQ of 171, 181.  You know who was second?  Old Robert Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] was number two.  Robert Bacon's IQ was 151, 160.  And academically Robert Bacon chased Ruth Cohen from the fifth grade through high school (laughter), never caught her.  She had a sister who was one of the most beautiful women I've ever seen, she was near genius.  She had a brother who was also the same.  But for some reason he could never pass French, he had to go to summer school three years in a row (laughter) to finally pass French.  But Ruth ended up, she went to, she got a scholarship, she went to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], and in five years she had a master's [degree] and a Ph.D. in biophysics.  She and the guy she married were down there in Tennessee in that big atomic plant in Tennessee.  When she died that's where, she had retired from down there.  I don't know what happened to her brother and sister.  But anyway, the American Legion would give out these awards every year for the top girl and the top boy.  So when the awards were being made, first award goes to Virginia Copithorne, Virginia's dad ran and was part of Wells and Copithorne hardware, big legionnaire.  Second award goes to Trevor Kovan [ph.], father was a janitor at school and, and Trevor's father was the boss of the American Legion.  And when that program was over John E. Baggett called everybody to the side and wanted to know where the hell did they get those grades from?  In the meanwhile, Mr. Copithorne as I recall said Virginia couldn't have hers because he knew damn well that Virginia was not the top girl.  And they were at that, I think at that time, there were two blacks that belonged to the American Legion post, Walter Williams [ph.] and Clarence McIntosh, but all hell broke loose at that American Legion post I understand.  So when I got to high school [Lake Forest High School, Lake Forest, Illinois], who got the awards in high school, Ruth Cohen and Robert Bacon got the awards for citizenship, academic this and that (laughter).  And what happened to Trevor, he was a good C student in high school, Virginia was always a good B student but Trevor was not an honor student.  But that was one of my good experiences with race there.  The other came when Mr. Emma [Joseph Emma], who ran the Deerpath Theatre [Lake Forest, Illinois], suddenly decided that the blacks should sit in the balcony.  Because one Saturday, oh, you know, Saturday we go see what, one, Buck--one of the big western movies, you know, you had the movie, the coming attractions, the cartoon and all that.  And we go there and, oh, yeah, and the serials too, and we go there and he tells us we got to go upstairs.  So we go up there and we thought maybe something (unclear).  After a while we realize nobody's up there but the black kids.  And who was it?  Lillian Harrison [ph.], and one of the other girls, I think, one of the Casselberry girls, they went downstairs and wanted to know what it's all about.  And they get an all off the wall answer and he, so anyway there's somebody brought it up at the city council meeting, and Mr. Emma gave a whole lot of roundabout reasons but he was informed that that was not in the best interest of the city and it dropped.
Story_ID: 476444
Speaker 1: Go back to John E. Baggett.  John E. Baggett would spank your butt.  I know about it 'cause one morning we were playing marbles and I'm a hunching, and one of the guys caught me hunching, you couldn't hunch, you know.  And when he caught me hunching he said something and I'm gonna slap him, you know, who you calling hunching.  And it seems as when I drew my hand back I heard that word, that voice from doom, "Robert [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.]," and had me by my ear, walks me into his office, took my shorts down, took out that little strap he had, put me across his knee and wailed me about three times and wrote that beautiful note that I have to take home 'cause when you come back, you got to have an answer.  Lord, I got to take this thing home.  I got to go face, you know who.  So on the way home I see Paul Tibbetts, I used to whip his butt for exercise.  So I (laughter) decided that I need a little exercise.  Paul Tibbetts beat the hell out of me (laughter).  I get home, mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] used to sing in the choir church, mother is sitting on the front porch with her choir book and I walked up all bedraggled.  "Robert?"  "Yes, ma'am?"  "Baby, what happened to you?"  "Ma'am?"  "What happened to you?"  "Ma'am?"  "Robert?"  "Yes, ma'am.  Mama I was in a fight."  "Who were you fighting with?"  "Uh?"  "Who are you fighting with, Robert?"  "Paul Tibbetts."  "Uh-huh.  What's that in your pocket?"  "Ma'am?"  I said, "What's that in your pocket?"  And that was that note.  "Bring it here."  "Um-hm."  "Go get me a switch."  Now, if you don't go out there and take a limb off the tree, you don't want her to go 'cause she's gone bring the damn tree in (laughter).  "So well, Mama, you know, Mr. Baggett's already spanked me and Paul Tibbetts beat me up."  "All right, you don't get any supper, go to bed."  Great deal, up the steps I go.  Go up there and take a bath.  Took me a bath and got in bed, had my little comic books and I had a dog, Tag [ph.] gets in the bed, and, you know, so what, I missed supper, ain't no big thing.  Next morning I get dressed coming down the steps, as I took that last step, "Bring your ass in here." Do you know that woman whooped my butt that morning, I went to school with a stinging behind, with a note.  But let me take you back to Mississippi for a hot minute, at Crossroads Baptist Church [ph.], big revival, I've forgotten this preacher's name I, but he was a big known guy, he wore they used to call a frock-tail coat, you know, and the striped pants and the wing collar.  And let's see, I guess, Crossroads Church is about twice the size of this room but the place is packed.  I'm sitting in the back row with some other kids and we're back there acting up and I remember my mother turned around and she's, mother was, was in her like other, she was an usher, got on her white dress, white stockings, and that was a big thing.  And she turns around, shakes her head and (unclear).  We get to acting up again, mother turns again and shakes her head, and I'm a fool, do you know what I did?  Stuck my tongue out.  To this day I've been trying to figure out, did she walk down the aisle, did she float across there, but somehow the next thing I knew this voice of doom, "Bring your ass out here," in church.  Woman snatched my butt (laughter) up there in church and Lord, if I could just get to that door (laughter).  Now next thing is, where did you get--that switch come from?  She's sitting up in church with a switch, had she anticipated something?  But she started whipping my butt before we got to the door (laughter).  I used to tease her about that later on I told her I said, you know, you a mean old heifer.  But anyway there in Lake Forest [Illinois], Mr. Baggett would spank your butt.  So okay.  Now Lake Forest sat between Great Lakes Naval Station [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] and Fort Sheridan [Illinois] army post.  So the kids, some of the kids from those two places would go, go, come to school in Lake Forest.  And I remember this guy, his father was in the [U.S.] Navy, he was a naval officer and he was a big red headed guy.  He was kind of a bully and he'd bully the kids around and, and, and a couple of times we'd have little, you know, school guard scrapes and I had, he'd hit some of the kids and punch 'em like that.  So one day Mr. Baggett caught him, I think doing something, I think the kids were playing softball and he threw a bag or something at somebody, and anyway Mr. Baggett took him in and spanked him.  So he goes home and the next thing when the school board meets, his mother and father are there to protest to the school board about their son being spanked.  Mr. Hale [ph.], who ran the laundry was chairman of the board, education board, and he informed the folks that well, you know, everybody on this board went to school under John E. Baggett and I think everybody on this board at one time or another got a spanking from him.  And Mr. Copithorne says, "Yes, and Virginia [Virginia Copithorne], my daughter, Virginia just got a spanking just last week."  And so this long story short, said, "Look, if you don't want John E. Baggett to spank your son you got two things to do, or three things, one, you can take him out of school and send him someplace else, or he's gonna come to school and be obedient and quit bullying kids and act right, otherwise if he does wrong, if John E. Baggett wants to spank him, he's gonna get spanked, no ifs, no ands, or buts, and that was it."  And it was kind of an honor though, you know, to tell like, yeah, old man spanked me, or I had to go see old man 'cause that that was kind of, you know, you really--put you a little bit different.  And you know what?  That weren't no, no--when he spanked your butt you got spanked.  And I don't know about the girls but I know for the boys 'cause when he spanked my butt and listen, girl, my behind was stinging when I walked out of there.
Story_ID: 476445
Speaker 1: But anyway the Lake Forest [Illinois] public schools were highly rated.  At that time they had that old rule, teachers, women teachers couldn't be married.  But as I recall, I never did go, but somebody said about the pay scale at that time teachers were making, you know, depends on Illinois they were making $90, $75, $90, maybe $100 a month.  But as I recall somebody said in Lake Forest they made $125, $150 a month so they had a standing list of people wanted to teach.  I never did confirm this but someone all, also said at one time that if you had a master's degree that put you to the head of the line.  So in other words, Lake Forest always had some topnotch teachers.
Speaker 2: They never had black teachers?
Speaker 1: Nope.  Some years later they got a black teacher.  And I don't know if any ever applied or not.  Oh, I mentioned Sloan [ph.], who was a blacksmith, someone once said that his daughter applied to teach art and but what happened there I don't know whether she really applied or not.  I can't verify it, I heard the word that she had but I also know this is about the time I, when I heard about it, she had, they had moved, she had moved anyway.  Mr. Sloan and his wife were still there but she moved I think to Chicago [Illinois] or Detroit [Michigan], someplace.  So whether or not she had applied I don't know but I don't think they had any black teachers 'til years later.
Speaker 2: So you always attended integrated schools?
Speaker 1: Until I went to college [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Because see at that time we didn't have a high school in Lake Forest, the kids would catch the, they used to have what I call a streetcar, it looked like electrical train, and they went down to Highland Park [Illinois] to what they called Deerfield-Shields Township High School [Deerfield-Shields High School].  But in 1940, 1937, 1936, '35 [1935], '36 [1936], Lake Forest opened its high school because mine was the first four-year class to graduate, when my class finished in '41 [1941] we was the first class ever to go on to Lake Forest High School [Lake Forest, Illinois] for four years.
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: And later on I'll show you some of the pictures from that.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And but, and the Lake Forest High School, at that time, the number one high school in the United States was a high school in, in what?  In Michigan, in Highland Park, Michigan, and I think Lake Forest was number two or three because Evanston Township High School [Evanston, Illinois] was highly rated at that time too, those were in the State of Illinois, Lake Forest, and Evanston [Illinois] had the top high schools.  And I think Oak Park [Illinois] and some other suburbs.  But Lake Forest High School was quite a school.  They had a hell of a faculty.
Speaker 2: What were some of the things, extracurricular activities that you were, participated in?
Speaker 1: Well, athletic activities.  We start, I started out, well, in the elementary school, you know, we had the intramural sports.  But from competitive sports started at, at, in high school and I played football, I lettered in football and I lettered in track.
Story_ID: 476446
Speaker 1: Before we go forward and continue to talk about high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --I wanted to know whether you went, attended school in Mississippi, I know you were younger--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, the first school I went to was a Rosenwald school.  Rosenwald [Julius Rosenwald] had constructed a number of these little one room schools throughout the State of Mississippi, and for years that was the only source of education for blacks.  And a lot of people doesn't realize it was a limited number of schools for whites as well.  But anyway, this Rosenwald school was right across, not across the street but across the road as I say from the Rock Hill Baptist Church [New Rock Hill Baptist Church, Sardis, Mississippi].  And that's where I went for school, and I went through more or less, it's almost like being babysitting, that's for the folks working.  And my cousin, Laura [ph.], who was like a sister to me, Laura was enrolled there so Laura would take me with her.  And I became a teacher's pet 'cause I think I was the youngest one and I was a cute little thing, you know (laughter).  And, but that's where I learned to read, my, I learned, I was a pretty good student at four years of age I started learning how to read and write.  And I was about four, maybe five years old because right after it we moved, and my formal education started in Lake Forest [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But my first school started there at Rosenwald, um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, we're still in elementary school--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --or getting ready to go to high school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you talked about music--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --the appreciation of music but did you ever play an instrument?  No?
Speaker 2: When I got to high school, I was gonna play in the band.  My father [Frank Bacon] went out and paid thirty-five dollars for a cornet 'cause I was gonna play in the band, I'm gonna be another Louis Armstrong.  I ended up playing football.  And I don't think I played ten notes on that cornet.  And do you know about a few years ago before my mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] moved down here [Houston, Texas], that cornet was still in the bedroom.
Speaker 1: That's funny.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But no and it's a funny thing as much as I love music 'cause that cabinet behind you is filled with CDs, cabinet in there, and here I got, I guess, a couple hundred records, and when I was in, in high school, in our local high school paper, I wrote the article on music, jazz music, records, popular music.  Used to go down to the Three Deuces [Chicago, Illinois], down on State Street because the building, a kid I was in school with at Lake Forest [Lake Forest High School, Lake Forest, Illinois], his dad owned the building, so we'd go down to the Three Deuces on the weekends to hear Stuff Smith and all the famous jazz musicians coming in.  And loved music but I never learned to play anything.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: That's fine.  So you go to high school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and this is a brand new high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell me about your experience?
Speaker 2: Well, Lake Forest High School as I said when we got there it was a new school.  I think the school opened, officially I think the school opened when I went to it in '37 [1937], I think the school opened in '36 [1936].  But ours was the first four-year class to finish.  And enrollment in the school was about, as I recall, its peak when I was there enrollment was about five hundred.  And as students, I told you before we had students whose folks were in the [U.S.] Navy or folks were in the [U.S.] Army from Great Lakes Naval Station [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois] and Fort Sheridan [Illinois], and, of course, naturally the recipients of Lake Forest [Illinois] and the little town Lake Bluff [Illinois] which is immediately north of Lake Forest.  But the school enrollment as I recall was about five hundred and it was quite, quite a faculty.  We had, as I recall, from something--just about I think all our faculty had master's degrees.  And I'm trying to think, I don't know if we had any Ph.D.'s or not but I know all our folks had master's degrees.  And had quite a curriculum because for me when I finished I had four years of mathematics, with trigonometry, algebra, geometry, plane geometry and all that.  I had four years of English, four years of chemistry and biology, three years of history because I was able to carry five subjects, you know, the average student carried four but there were a group of us who were honor students and we were allowed to carry five subjects.  Tell you this, the local paper when the grades would come out, the Lake Forest newspaper would print the names of the students who were honor students.  So the first edition comes out and there, of course, Ruth Cohen, you know, five A's, you know, so what.  But there is Bob, Robert, Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], three A's and two Bs.  Who is this Bob Bacon?  The phone, the people I was living with, Ma [Alice Black] and Pa Black [Sherman Black] who I lived with, phone is ringing.  "Alice, Sherman, what's this about Robert having three A's and two Bs?"  "Yeah, he got 'em."  The next time around, Ruth Cohen, five A's, Bob Bacon, five A's.  What?  "Bob Bacon, where'd he get these five, how did--," you know, one lady called and wanted to know how did I get five A's.  Called my mother on her job, mother says, she said, "Do what?  How did Robert get five A's?"  She said, "'Cause he went to school every day."  And she said, "And I think the teacher gave 'em on the basis of his examinations."  But, some people couldn't understand, I guess, it's the hardest, some folks around there, you know, how'd you make five A's?
Story_ID: 476447
Speaker 1: Tell me about, you talked about a couple that raised you, tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, you see when my, in 1933, '32 [1932], '33 [1933], '33 [1933], mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] and dad [Frank Bacon] took what they call a couple job.  And that was a very popular form of employment at that time, where a man and his wife would take a job working for a family and as part of their pay, they would have living quarters there.  Well, when mother and dad took this job there was no place for me to live so, Sherman [Sherman Black] and Alice Black said, "We'll take care of him."  And I'll tell you this, the only difference I realize between Sherman and Alice Black and my mother and father was physical.  Dad was 6', weighed about 185 pounds, Pa Black was 5'7" weighed about 145 pounds.  Mother was about 5'8", and weighed about 160 pounds, Ma Black was 5'2" and weighed about 120 pounds, that was the only difference.  And they were from down there, and they were from Mississippi 'cause they were from around Sardis [Mississippi].  Mr. Black was, now, Ma Black she was from down the south part, I think, she was from Greenfield, Mississippi.  But Pa Black was around Sardis so he and dad had known each other.  And so I stayed with them from the time I was about ten years old, yeah, from 1933 through 1941 because in '42 [1942] my mother and dad had left and they took, they had started their own housekeeping then.  When I left Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and came home that summer, mother and dad had moved to Evanston [Illinois].  But for ten years, almost eleven years, I was with Ma and Pa Black.  And, and I had a, had an excellent relationship with them because Ma Black would, and or Pa Black would come over to the school to visit the PTA [Parent Teacher Association], check my report card, and all that.  In some respects, as I say, other than for physical differences, I hardly knew the difference between one or the other.  And I guess, really I got the attention because Ma Black had never had a, she was unfortunate, she could never have children.  She was pregnant a couple of times but she, at somewhere around about the third month, fourth month, she would abort, had a miscarriage, so that I was it.  Because Pa Black taught me how to box, which was really important because you see, as I told you I'd go out, and I remember some of the guys I'd get out there and they'd, and I couldn't box and they'd beat me up.  And then Pa Black took me in the backyard, bought some boxing gloves home, he took me out there in the backyard and we went through a drill of boxing, I guess, every evening for about two weeks (smacks hands) and I went out looking for 'em.  First guy I looked for was Titus Hayes [ph.], 'cause Titus, I remember we were boxing one day and he hit me right smack dab in my mouth with a hard right hand.  And I went looking for him, had the boxing gloves with me, (laughter) beat the hell out of (unclear) (laughter).  Then the next time Jack Casselberry [John Casselberry] came by one day, came by the house where we were living on Edgewood Road, and we used to box out there in the front yard.  And, and Jack used to whip my butt.  But Jack had never seen the weaving and bobbing and he didn't know what a left hook was.  Well, I showed him what Pa Black had taught me.  So between Nick the Greek [Nick Dandolos], and Bud Alan Casselberry [ph.] and my boxing lessons, Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] had a whole bunch of friends (laughter).  But no, I tell you what it really did for me, it gave me a hell of a lot of confidence.  That learning how to box gave me a sense of worth, and gave me a whole lot of confidence to--not from the bully standpoint just in believing in myself, that was the big thing.
Story_ID: 476448
Speaker 1: You grew up in the time of the Depression [Great Depression].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Would you say that you just really, it didn't affect you at all?
Speaker 2: You know what, I looked, we were talking about that a while back.  It affected me but not, I know as children, you know, you didn't realize what it was really going to take, there was a time I couldn't go to school.  Why?  Because I didn't have any galoshes or rubbers, and my dad didn't have enough money to have my shoes sewed, so I had to stay home a couple of days so finally got enough money to buy a pair of galoshes.  There was another time when mother and I had to stay in the kitchen all day because dad didn't have enough money to buy some coal so we could heat the house.  And I don't know, you know, there are some other things like that and I could remember those days.  But, and oh, yeah, and for lunch going to school I think I had peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and homemade pancakes, I think that's one thing I got tired of those damn homemade pancakes.  But other than that, you know, I look back on how things were, were really rough but I don't remember any feeling, effect, I know it probably affected me, these things in ways I'm not aware of even today, you know.  But I don't remember, just like I see some of the things on TV and the stories I read, and because I could remember there, in my class or in my classes there were some of the other kids their folks were poor.  I, you know, we had these upper middle class kids, the middle class, and some of us were on the other end of the spectrum.  But I can't tell you about the great suffering, you know.  And I think part of it was the fact, that sense of security I had at home.  Because as I tell people I used to get angry at my mother because of the way she'd fuss at my dad because during the Depression, with a lot of guys out of work, my father had three jobs, his primary job was a dishwasher and second cook at Sorenson's Restaurant [Lake Forest, Illinois].  His second job was these two widows whose yards and furnaces and hot water heaters he took care of.  And the third job was some old man who every now and then he'd washed his car.  My father would leave home at 4:00 or 4:30 in the morning and wouldn't come home until 9, 10:00 at night.  And a couple of times Dad came home, mother would meet him at the door, she was raising hell about something, and I thought she was the meanest woman in the world.  And then later, because one time I told her about it and it affected her.  But then Minnie Bacon [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] did this, Minnie Bacon let me know from the get go, now I know you don't get to leave, I hear kids go, you know, they didn't get to see their father and what this deprived them of, I didn't see my daddy to talk with him, I bet you if I added up all the times that I spent with my father, it wouldn't add up to thirty days in the way of speaking.  But I knew who Frank Bacon was 'cause Minnie Bacon let me know from the get go, you got this because of Frank.  We're doing this because of Frank.  We're going here because of Frank.  And as I told you there was a period of time in my life when people said, I'll be frank with you, I thought they were talking about my daddy.  But Minnie Bacon let me know that you're--who your father is, and what he means to me and to you.  Oh, yeah, I raise hell with him, that's my privilege but can't nobody else raise hell with him.  Now somebody else say something bad about Frank, "Who in the hell you talking about, that's my husband," you know.  And I heard it said that some lady said something about daddy one time and boy I thought mother was gonna try to whip her, mother told her, said, "Wait a minute are you talking about my husband?"  Now she turn around and give daddy, and, of course, dad just sits there and look at her sometimes, (laughter) you know.  And I know the time mother was walking back and forward raising the, dad would go to sleep and my mother would go wake him up, wake up don't you hear me (laughter).  But no, she, so that, the Depression, I don't remember it, like I see some of these movies and people talking, I don't remember any real tragedy.  No, I wasn't having, what was it, like I said having peanut butter and jelly sandwiches and those homemade pancakes, and a lot of times for what, the dinner would be that ham, that fried, piece of fried ham and some canned corn and a piece of toast and a glass of milk.  And every now and then have some bananas or some fruit but for some reason, I can't say, you know, I was devoid of this or I was denied that that because as I said I had the security of a family.  And I think that's where the difference comes in, that you can miss a whole lot of material things but if you got that family support and a sense of being and a sense of belonging, it doesn't strike you that way.  And I had that with my mother and then as I said with Ma [Alice Black] and Pa Black [Sherman Black] I always had that.  Then my dad's folks, Granddaddy Bacon [Horace Bacon], I was his thing, that was my, that's my grandson.
Story_ID: 476449
Speaker 1: Now when you were in high school [Lake Forest High School, Lake Forest, Illinois] can you remember a teacher that stands out in your mind--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that encouraged you?
Speaker 2: Yep.  There were two, Miss Tibbetts, who taught English I, she was the one that took us down to hear Marian Anderson.  And I remember when this woman came on, this, down at the, it's, what the name of that, the hall named after this Greek guy, but anyway, when the curtains withdrew there was this very stately woman in this black flowing gown, standing there, and the guy at the piano, and this very graceful bow and introduction and this woman starts singing and that rich voice that I'd heard, you know, on the intercom, now I'm seeing it and hearing it.  And then when she finished her first session, when she sang that last song and bowed, for about ten seconds that theater was so quiet you could hear people breathing and then all of a sudden it just erupted.  Now this is not the jazz crowd, this is a crowd, the people in the area, upper class people.  Well, these people are going nuts.  And I'm sitting there, looking up, this woman is really something.  Then we had intermission.  We come back and she, she finishes that second part of her, then sing 'Ave Maria,' oh, my Lord, flowers and applause, I don't know how many curtain calls she made.  But that was the type of thing Miss Tibbetts introduced me too.  Then what was that, girl--Paul Robeson, saw him.  And then the guy who was a tenor, I'm trying to think, can't remember, the black guy who was a tenor but anyway these are people that she took us to see.  And then there was Mr. Swann [ph.] who was like they call the homeroom teacher at that time, you know.  And Mr. Swann was the one that did a lot of encouraging me academically.  He was the one who look at my grades.  And I could recall when I got those five A's we walked in, you'd go to your homeroom and that's where you get your report cards.  And Mr. Swann is getting 'em, so everybody is sitting down and Mr. Swann gets up and he says okay, I'm gonna pass out the, the report card.  And he usually do 'em alphabetically.  Well, Frank Ambler would be first, Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], second but, you know, Frank Ambler and he passed over me, so I'm afraid, for some reason he didn't call me, in fact, he says, oh, yes, he said, "I got the last card here," he says, "we got to bow," he said, "do you know we got a guy in this class got five A's?"  Well, I'm still not (unclear), and everybody's looking around, he says, "Bob come up here."  I get up there, he says, "Here's our five A man," and that's when it hit me.  And the room went quiet.  Bob Bacon got five A's.  And he would sit there, periodically he'd call me in to talk with me.  And some of our conversations were not necessarily about school and whatnot we'd just talk in general.  And then the next one was Mr. Iker [ph.], who taught history and civics.  Well Iker had gone to the London School of Economics [London School of Economics and Political Science, London, England] and when he was there he met, I forgot this guy's name who was from Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].  And Mr. Iker started talking to me about Fisk.  And Mr. Iker started talking to me about Africa.  So those three had a profound effect.  Now Lindenmeyer [Edgar William Lindenmeyer] who was the, taught physical education and coached, he and I had a very strange relationship.  Lindenmeyer had his idea of how blacks were supposed to act, I didn't act that way.  And we crossed horns a couple of times.  Well, at that time Mrs. Coleman [Elizabeth Coleman], who lived right across the street, both her sons died, Jerry [Jerry Coleman, Jr.] had a bad heart, and Bill [William Coleman] had severe asthma.  So with her laundry business I would take, I would take the things out, the laundry out, I'd pick up the laundry and I recall and we played football on Friday afternoons.  Well, that Friday Mrs. Coleman called and said, "Robert, I need you, please can you take these things out," 'cause she was having some financial trouble and she needed some money.  So I didn't go to the football game, I delivered her clothes, picked up the money, picked her up and took her to the bank and went, I took her to the bank, took her to a couple other places and paid some bills and then took her shopping.  So Monday when I go to school, Lindenmeyer sent for me.  Why wasn't I at the game?  And I wanted to tell him about, you know, helping Mrs. Coleman and he politely told me that he didn't know whether I should be on the team.  Okay.  So that evening, and Mrs. Coleman's property ran right there against the, here's the school and here's the back of her property, so when I come out the back door of the school I step almost in her yard, and I'm cutting through her yard and I don't know what the conversation was but anyway in the course of the conversation I mentioned the fact that I had been, oh, yeah, she wanted to know, "What are you doing here, aren't you going to football practice?"  And I told her no.  Why?  Tuesday, I wasn't there to hear it, but they tell me Tuesday morning, Mrs. Coleman, her sister, Bessie Jordan [ph.], Mrs. Lenore [ph.], who was the next door neighbor and was the Sunday school superintendent, about five black women appeared in Mr. Moore [Raymond Moore]--who was the principal, appeared in his office, and they came to talk about Robert.  The idea that Robert, who had been put off the team, and they started talking about how Robert was helping Mrs. Coleman this widowed woman, how he, why he helped her, and how he'd help the others and how Robert was at the age of sixteen became a Sunday school superintendent, the youngest Sunday school superintendent in the Northwood River District [Northwood River District Association] of the National Baptist--BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America] and Sunday school conference, Henry Allen Boyd secretary-treasurer (laughter).
Story_ID: 476450
Speaker 1: They tell me that when Mr. Moore [Raymond Moore] sent for Lindenmeyer [Edgar William Lindenmeyer] that when he walked in, said Mrs. Coleman [Elizabeth Coleman] got in his face and asked him how could he be so cruel and what and asked him did he realize what I meant to her.  That that team, that football was more important than her welfare and the welfare of hers, 'cause she had, still had two children, Jerry [Jerry Coleman, Jr.], Bob [sic. William Coleman] and Frances [Frances Coleman] but they tell me it was real heated.  So anyway, the next thing I knew, that evening I'm getting ready to go home I get a call that said, "Bob [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] report to Lindenmeyer's office."  And I go down, he tells me to suit up, put your clothes on, go to practice.  He never said another word to me about it.  But as I said but our relationship was always because sometimes when we'd talk I didn't talk the way I was supposed to.  See Lindenmeyer had gone to University of Missouri [Columbia, Missouri], and he was from Missouri, like Henry McIntosh, and Henry McIntosh's mother [Thelma McIntosh] and dad were college graduates, and something happened, and Mr. McIntosh came by, and Clarence McIntosh's vocabulary kind of got to him.  Lindenmeyer wasn't used to black folks at this level of education.  And it was my attitude, and then the, oh, yeah.  He was the one when I got these five A's, I understand he was kind of curious about my getting five A's.  And Henry, Henry McIntosh, Henry had something like three Bs and an A, Henry was a good B plus, A minus student.  And so, you know, these blacks, he was encountering at Lake Forest High School [Lake Forest, Illinois], they was a little bit different, that that ain't the way y'all supposed to act, this ain't the way we acted in Missouri.  But with me, our relationship was always a little strange like that.  But I was a very good football player and a hell of a track star.  I had, I was elected president of the, I mean captain of the track team, co-captain of the football team.  I was, my senior year I was president of the student council and also president of the boys club.  And again some of the folks wanted to know, "How did Robert do this?"  (Laughter) You know, it was amazing how people would call, wanna know how did you do this, you know.
Speaker 2: So which teacher was the one who was talking to you about going to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Mr. Iker [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: A Jewish guy.
Speaker 2: Is that how you decided to go to Fisk?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hm.  That and I went, and oh, another thing, now this is where old Lindenmeyer did come into play.  Henry and I were, Henry McIntosh and I were quite, we were both damn good athletes, Henry was a hell of a football player and track star.  So Lindenmeyer called us both in his office one day and he was talking about these scholarship offers he had from Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota], Arizona [University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona], and what other school?  Minnesota, Arizona, oh, yeah, and Beloit [Beloit College, Beloit, Wisconsin] which was a--what you call a little (unclear), Beloit, in all there were about four or five schools.  But anyway, 'cause Henry and I went up to Minnesota as a visit 'cause Horace Bell was up there and we went up there and that place was looking so, it was cold that day and, and it looked it just almost out in the desert almost, it was cold as the devil and that and the guys on the football team a lot of them they had a dorm under the football stadium there.  But we didn't like it up there.  But anyway when we got back to school, I remember Lindenmeyer called us in the office and I remember he told us, said, "Now listen," he said, "you're getting ready to go into a very, very important part of your life."  He said, "And what's gonna happen to you over the next four years is gonna shape the rest of your life," he said, "from the standpoint of your family, and whatnot."  He said, "Now one of the things you wanna enjoy your social life."  He says, "You wanna go where when you walk across the campus you can kiss every girl on that campus, nobody'll think anything about it."  And he says, "Now, you know, you can't do that at some of these other schools," he was very frank about it.  Well, then Mr. Iker had some ladies, folks from Fisk to drop by to visit with me.  Well, Henry didn't have any choice, he's going to Hampton [Hampton Institute; Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia], you know, that's where his mother and daddy go so it was no fun, you know, where you're going, you, you know.  But anyway that's, that's what led me to Fisk.  But that, but Lindenmeyer and that was one time he, he came around me and told us that, yeah, you can go out here to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] and these schools and they'll cheer you on the field but when you walk off the field what's gonna happen?  But if you go to this, one of these black schools, you walk off the field, you walk, and the girls are waiting for you, and if you wanna kiss one, fine.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Lindenmeyer?
Speaker 1: L-I-N-D-E-Y-M-E-Y-E-R [sic.], Lindenmeyer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had been an All-American lineman at the University of Missouri.
Story_ID: 476451
Speaker 1: Tell me, have you, did you hold any jobs, did you work while--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, listen girl (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) you were in school?
Speaker 2: I had my first job when I was eleven years old, and that was at the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association].  I went up there, I was a kind of gofer, you know, running errands, emptying waste cans, the waste baskets and dusting off the desks and the little odds and ends they needed.  Then when I was fourteen, when I started high school [Lake Forest High School, Lake Forest, Illinois], I got a job at--what's that woman's name?  Had a, opened a boutique, Lillian Heffernan opened a boutique there.  And next door was the Reynolds real estate office.  So there about twice a week, I would go and wash the windows inside and out.  And at the real estate company I would mop the floors and wax.  And at the boutique I'd run the vacuum.  Then when I got to be sixteen when I get a driver's license, I got my job working at Krafft Drug Store [Lake Forest, Illinois] because I could drive the car and, and they used to have delivery, you know, you'd call up and they'd deliver your prescriptions, and, of course, at drugstores he had a, in the basement he had a hell of a liquor store down there.  And I'd deliver the, whatever, you know, the ice cream and all that stuff.  So, so in the summer I worked full time.  In the summertime I worked from ten o'clock in the morning to ten o'clock at night, six days a week.  Salary, I think, when we started out it was what, $16.50 a week.  And Henry McIntosh and I started out along with Jack Brody [ph.].  Well, we look up and Brody, what we thought was being promoted 'cause Brody is being moved behind the soda fountain.  Well, Henry and I, you know, we go to old man Krafft [Carl L. Krafft], "Hey, wait a minute we could, you know, we were here first."  So Mr. Krafft, now what he told us, said, "Listen," he said, "Brody will be behind that fountain the rest of his life," he said, "now you two are going somewhere in life."  He said, plus the fact, he said, "Now Brody will make $2 or $3 a day, maybe, in tips."  He said, "Do you guys know how much you make in tips?"  And a lot of us was making, when you take on Sundays when I had all the ice cream deliveries, Sunday I'd make $10 to $15, can you imagine $10 to $15 at that time?  That's a couple hundred dollars now.  And me and Henry got to thinking about, no, we don't want.  Thirty or forty years later, when I went back to Lake Forest [Illinois] I was in private practice, who's behind the soda fountain?  John Brody, he's now the fountain manager, but old man Krafft was right, he was still behind that damn soda fountain.  I'm driving my Cadillac.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.  So--
Speaker 2: With that big Cadillac and Brody comes outside and says, "Bob [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] is that your car?"  I say, "Oh, yeah, Texas rollerskates."  I did it on purpose 'cause some other folks around there had used to talk about me.  I made damn sure they saw Bob Bacon in his Fleetwood Cadillac.  Did you give me the finger?  But I made damn sure 'cause one lady, Rosa Walker [ph.], I mean old, old lady Walker had a, a niece Rosa and she had, oh, no, yeah, yeah, had a niece, but she had two nephews who were McIntosh, Clarence [Clarence McIntosh] and Walter McIntosh, you know.  One day we were playing marbles or something we get in a fight and I beat the hell out of both of 'em and she called herself, I mean she broke up the fight and I remember she tanned my hide though and told me to stay off the McIntosh property.  Well, that McIntosh clan owned a great big section of land in Lake Forest.  And told me never to come, put foot on that property again.  Some years later when I'm in medical school [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and in that [U.S.] Army program in medical school, I go back to Lake Forest and she sees me in uniform, "Oh, well, Robert, you're in the Army now." I said, "Yes, ma'am."  And I turn around, she recognized that patch, "Robert, you're in medical school?"  "Yes, ma'am."  "Oh, well, Robert, you must come by and see Rosa." I said, "No, ma'am I can't do that."  "Why not?"  I said, "You told me," and you know, I blurted it out before I knew what had happened. I said, "But you remember you told me never to set foot on your property."  And the look on her face, and I started to walk away and I felt like bad and I went back and I remembered I hugged her, I said, "Mrs. Walker, I'm sorry."  And she said, "Robert, I understand."  She said, "But you come by?"  I said, "Yes, ma'am."  'Cause I talk to Rosa, now Rosa's in Kentucky.  But so, but anyway, when I got that Cadillac I made damn sure that old lady Walker saw that Cadillac and couple of other folks, oh, yeah, Lindenmeyer [Edgar William Lindenmeyer] too 'cause he, he had made some remark at one time.  But I went back to Lake Forest just to be damn sure certain people saw me driving my Fleetwood Cadillac (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I'll always remember, Brody was still behind that fountain.
Story_ID: 476452
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you graduate from high school [Lake Forest High School, Lake Forest, Illinois] in 1941 (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, June, 1941.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you go to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that experience.
Speaker 2: Well, the, the clinching factor of going to Fisk, of course, I got the scholarship but I forgot this lady's name but she was the manager for the Jubilees, Fisk Jubilee Singers.  And at that time there were four men who represented the Jubilee Singers, and she brought them by the house to visit.  And these four guys come in, I mean the way they were dressed, these, you know, they these, they didn't have on the zoot suit type, but these guys are clean, I mean, ties and whatnot, class all the way.  So off to Fisk I go, Nashville, Tennessee.  Got there, see the campus, oh, my god, how did I make this mistake?  They'd had a drought that summer so the campus, a lot of the grass was brown, and the social, social studies building look like it was leaning to me.  I said oh, my God.  And then go into Livingstone Hall, old building, Jubilee Hall, up there.  Well, what broke the silence I met a guy, C.J., Calvin Jesse James [Calvin James, Jr.] from Gary, Indiana.  And I had met C.J. that summer in Waukegan [Illinois] at a party.  So that was the only person I knew at Fisk.  And C.J. had been around, C.J. was from Gary, Indiana, he was one of them street boys.  And he had spent one year at Southern [Southern University; Southern University and Agricultural and Mechanical College, Baton Rouge, Louisiana].  So he and I became roommates.
Story_ID: 476453
Speaker 1: But then the big events happened, all these students started coming and, sugar, baby, that's when I almost lost it 'cause there they were, high yellows, teasing tans, tomato paste blacks, Colorado blues, I had never seen so many black, pretty black women in all my life.  Big legs, little legs, all kinds of legs, all kinds of complexion, I'm telling you.  I didn't know how to handle myself.  And, and at that time at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], for lunch, I mean, for dinner it was family style.  So I'd go and I'd sit at a table, I remember Raven Rivera, who was this junior or senior, she was the hostess and Sharp [ph.] was the host.  Anyway, here is this mean brown skin, this thick black hair, "How do you do, Mr. Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.]?"  And she just reached across to say hello, look, I would have had to touch her.  And across from me was what, Betty Neal [ph.], and Dimples [ph.], I've forgotten Dimples' last name.  Anywhere there were three, only two men at the table and eight women, there were ten to a table.  I don't know, I'm, I don't recall whether I ate or not.  I don't know whether I ate, I don't know if I even drank water.  But I'm telling you, like I said, thank god I went to Lake Forest High School [Lake Forest, Illinois] 'cause all, I didn't have to take many of the courses 'cause I'd had advanced courses, you know.  And I think there was one course I had to take called C.C., contemporary civilization 'cause otherwise I would have flunked out the first day.  'Cause for the first six weeks I was in school, all I could think about all them pretty women.  I had never, 'cause there in Lake Forest [Illinois] there were a few girls there.  Well, up in Waukegan [Illinois] they had a large black population but most of them gals up there looked like longshoremen.  And in Evanston [Illinois] a lot of black girls down there but all of them had boyfriends and they had some jealous boyfriends so you couldn't look at them.  Well I had dated a couple of girls there in Lake Forest, well, in fact, first date I had was with Anabelle Dixon [ph.] she was white but that didn't (unclear).  But here all these pretty black women, my Lord.  'Cause I recall when I went back for Christmas, went home and Lindenmeyer [Edgar William Lindenmeyer] the coach came by and he did it on purpose 'cause he came, "Oh, Bob, how you doing, dropped by to say, well, you know, I still got some scholarship offers, so you might be interested," unh-uh, hell no, (laughter) I ain't going nowhere.  Child, and listen, Raven Rivera was a girl, I talk with she and her husband now, but she was a senior, I think.  And Meharry Medical College [Nashville, Tennessee] is right across the street from Fisk.  Well, you got guys over there, are trying to date her, you got guys at Fisk at, and, you know, she had, but anyway we were gonna have this get acquainted dance there.  Well the first date I asked was a girl from New York, Jackie Levy [ph.], I asked her about going.  And Jackie informed me that she didn't come to Fisk to waste her time with Fisk boys, she came to get herself a Meharry man.  Okay.  So then Raven says, "Mr. Bacon," they were kind of formal when you first got down there.  "Do you have an--," she, she didn't say date, "do you have an engagement for this get acquainted?"  I said, "No, ma'am," saying she's a senior so I'm saying, no, ma'am.  She said, "Why don't you escort me?"  What?  So I get back to the dorm that night the guys are talking about, you know, who they're gonna date and what's all going on.  And I was telling somebody, I remember C.J. [Calvin James, Jr.] says, and you called your roommate lady or old gal, that was a nickname, so says, "Gal, do you have a date for," and I say, "Oh, I think so."  "Well who you gonna take?"  I said, "Well, I guess I'll take Raven Rivera."  "What?  You a damn liar."  I said, okay.  The dance starts and Bob Bacon walks in with Raven Rivera.  Hot damn.  Child, I'm telling you, I don't think my feet touched the floor.  And I'm dancing with this girl and she gets halfway close to me, oh, Lord.  I don't know what happened after that (laughter).  But anyway so the dance is over and Raven being a senior, the senior women and honor, now the juniors were honors, they lived in what they call cottages, so she lived in one of these houses and I think there were about eight, ten girls staying there and the dorm, the matron was a graduate student.  And we get there, dance is over at twelve o'clock, well, the girls were making ice cream and had made some cake.  So when we get there they say, "Hey, Bob, stay around have some ice cream and cake," you know.  So we sit around there, it was a beautiful evening and we sit around chitchatting getting acquainted and I look up it's almost 1:30.  I started getting ready to go, all the girls say wait a minute, wait a minute, and they all run back in the house and they come back, and everybody came out there kissing me and rubbing lipstick on me.  So when I get back, I didn't realize it, I got lipstick on my coat, I got lipstick--
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Speaker 1: --so I walk in the room and my roommate and the other guys in there want to know where have I been?  And they look up and see all this lipstick, man, what, they couldn't, I wouldn't tell 'em what happened.  I played it real cool 'cause oh, that's what my daddy [Frank Bacon] taught me, you know, the old expression, it's best to have people think you're a fool than open your mouth and remove all doubt, I wouldn't say a word.  And nobody could understand how this country guy, that comes here and he's got the queen of the campus.  I wouldn't tell 'em nothing but because I, really I don't know if I could have talked to him because I'm still floating on the idea that I have gone to this dance with Raven Rivera.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: How did it happen (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So--
Story_ID: 476454
Speaker 1: How did you, after a couple of weeks, get into the swing of things with your academics (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, after that I got adjusted, you know, and I became president of the class.  And the big, the biggest thing that happened at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] that year, for three or four years Fisk University had had a losing football team, they hadn't won a game in two or three years.  But that year Ben Majors, Joe Vaughn [Joe Vaughn, Jr.], Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], Chambliss [ph.] had transferred from Iowa, and they had this guy came over from Jackson [Mississippi], from Memphis [Tennessee], there were about seven of us who had played football in high school, had previously, on the team.  So and they had this victory bell there by the (unclear).  The first game of year, we played and we beat Fort Valley [Fort Valley State College; Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  I think we beat 'em something like 13-6.  The kids almost broke that bell ringing it.  And, of course, we all became instant heroes.  But we ended up that year, I think we played what ten games and I think we won what, we won six and lost four but that was the first year that Fisk had a winning football team in years.  And then you had Chambliss and a guy called Cool Papa Ridley [ph.] from Detroit [Michigan] on the basketball team, we had a hell of a basketball team that year.  So that year Fisk's athletic program (unclear).  But at Fisk, of course, put great emphasis on the liberal arts of music and, and, of course, they had a terrific department for chemistry and physics.  Jim Lawson [James Raymond Lawson] was the youngest guy to ever get a Ph.D. in physics from the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], he was the head of physics.  And the big thing at Fisk at that time, was a pre-med and pre-dental with Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] being right across the street.  And, of course, the other thing was sociology because Dr. Johnson [Charles S. Johnson] who was head of sociology, he was the guy that wrote that hellfire report about the Haymarket riots in Chicago [Illinois], and he had made quite a name for himself as a sociologist, and he was head of the department of sociology there.  Dr. Brady [St. Elmo Brady] who headed chemistry had, was quite a researcher for Sinclair Oil Company [Sinclair Oil Corporation].  Vic Fields [ph.] was also, had made a, was also doing research for some company.  Because at that time most black schools they weren't getting into the research market but Vic, and Dr. Brady, and Lawson, those three, that's a pretty, for black schools they had some pretty good research grants.  But anyway, as the school, population of the school was about 550 so you got to know everybody.  And which is really good because you made friends like now, this past Christmas I mailed out about 125 cards to people that I know.  A couple of years ago I remembered I mailed out two hundred, now it's down to about eighty-five.
Speaker 1: What was your major?
Speaker 2: Chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Pre-med.
Speaker 1: And was there a teacher there that, that you took (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, well, there was a--
Speaker 1: --a liking to there?
Speaker 2: --yeah, there was Dr. Brady who taught chemistry, and Miss Shane [Mary D. Shane], who was the assistant registrar, were very instrumental in my development there at the school.  And, of course, the others, well, we had close relationships with all our faculty but those two especially.  And that's where I met Betty Grayson, the second year I was there I met Betty Grayson [Betty Grayson Turpin], that was a courtship and ended up marrying Bernice Bacon [Bernice Narcisse Bacon] instead, though (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you met your wife there?
Speaker 2: I met her when I was at, in Meharry, I met her, my wife, years later.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: But anyway, no, at Fisk, there were (unclear)--
Speaker 1: When did you graduate from Fisk?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate, in--
Speaker 2: I didn't graduate from Fisk.  What happened--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I got early acceptance to Meharry, so in February of '45 [1945] I left, along with several others, we left Fisk and went to Meharry.  And what happened to us, that was during World War II [WWII], and at that time the [U.S.] Army had a program, called it ASTP, Army Specialized Training Program.  And medical students, dental students, and engineers, you would go into the Army as a private first class and they would send you to school and they'd pay all your expenses and whatnot.  So in February, we all went down to Camp Forrest [Tullahoma, Tennessee], those, those of us who had been accepted, went down to Camp Forrest, we were inducted into the Army and came back to Nashville [Tennessee] in March we started our classes at Meharry.  At that time during the war the school went continuous, you didn't have any summer breaks.  And I, as a result we graduated from Meharry in '47 [1947].  But so I didn't get a degree from Fisk.  We were supposed to, at one time they said all of us who had what, ninety-six hours were to get a degree but something happened and we didn't, they were about see, I think, Bacon, Williams [ph.], Darden [ph.], Parsons [ph.], Majors [ph.], Gaffney [Donald Gaffney], Chambliss, there were about, I've forgotten, about nine or ten guys from Fisk that went to Meharry in my class, there was five, and the class ahead of us, I think at one time, Fisk, there were probably more Fisk grads at Meharry than any other particular school.  We had a lot of guys from Texas and I think Virginia.  See at that time I know if you were from Texas because some law was passed, since the medical schools in Texas wouldn't accept blacks, they would pay the guys to come to Fisk or Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.], I mean, to Meharry, Meharry or Howard (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Meharry, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Do--
Speaker 2: So we had quite a contingent from Texas there.
Story_ID: 476455
Speaker 1: But anyway, I was starting to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do you have a--well, do you have any, well before you go any further--
Speaker 1: Hm.
Speaker 2: --do you have any stories about the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Listen, when we're, after we were inducted, we were inducted at Camp Forrest [Tullahoma, Tennessee], then they sent us down to, what is this camp in Georgia to be fully processed?  And this is where we ran into something, and the lady came out, you remember the story about all those blacks who were treated for syphilis and nobody told them about it?  Well, we went to this camp down there in Georgia and we saw all these guys down there who were getting these spinal taps, and some of these guys, the psychological, see these guys walking around all bent over, scared to death 'cause they had a spinal tap, just knew they'd be paralyzed for life.  And this is where we heard about all these black guys with syphilis.  And really, I think at that point 'cause I forgot what the name of that camp was, but anywhere there were several hundred guys down there and they had 'em off in this section.  And we heard about all these guys had syphilis.  And then this was the first time I heard the old poem about the monkey and the lion.  Do you know one night, I know from about eleven o'clock at night to three or four o'clock in the morning, I heard voice, verse after verse, guy had made up so many verses behind that thing he had became a legend.  And then we, and oh, oh, yes.  And we met a group of white guys who were medical students from Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University], and that's in Nashville [Tennessee], and we established some relationships with them.  But the big thing was this, as I recall later on, we found out about we had met these guys who were being treated for, not being treated, had syphilis, but they didn't treat 'em, and we had met those guys.  And I recall, 'cause I say, see you could always recognize them 'cause these guys are walking around there, all bent over, crippled.  So then they put 'em all in this company and they brought in Sergeant Johnson [ph.].  Sergeant Johnson was an old time 10th Cavalry [10th Cavalry Regiment] guy and, you know, 10th Cavalry was an all-black unit.  Sergeant Johnson was, well, he was master sergeant, had stripes from here up.  Had been in the Army I guess since he was two months old, but he had on his boots and those whipcord breeches and the, the crease was so sharp it would cut you to death, and that big campaign hat.  And I had drawn the assignment to be a company clerk one night for this group.  So about two o'clock in the morning, "Wake up, little man, yes, wake up little boy."  I said, "Yes, sir."  "Go get 'em out, boy, bring 'em out here."  So I go through the barracks blowing the whistle on your feet, on the double.  We get out there and it's raining and that old big heavy coat and that pack, you know, that pack weighed at that time, the old army pack was almost fifty pounds.  Sergeant Johnson was about 6'4" but he's got this little squeaky voice, and he's on the bull horn, "All right, we're gonna leave here running and if we can't run, we're gonna walk right fast, and if we can't walk fast, we're gonna walk slow, and when you can't walk you better get on the ground and crawl, and when you can't crawl you better lay there and holler."  Well, I'm sitting there and Lord, I got to go on this hike too.  He called me, he had some name for me, he told me to get in the jeep.  So I had, I got a chance to ride 'cause some, some of the equipment was in there.  But he took on one of those, what I think it was about a twenty mile hike in that rain, in that Georgia red clay.  After that the next day you didn't see nobody walking all stooped over because if you got, if you got your spinal tap, if you had some trouble straightening up, well, I'll tell you what, son, you go over there and see Sergeant Johnson, I think I can do all right (laughter).
Story_ID: 476456
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So off to Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] we go.  And that that was another world starting at Meharry because now, oh, yeah, one of the things we got, when I was at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], now for the second time in my life, I'm seeing black doctors.  Let me take you back to Lake Forest [Illinois].  My mother from 1928 to 1932, my mother like she stayed sick all the time.  She had been to I don't know how many doctors.  Well, then somebody told her about this Dr. Smith [ph.] up at Waukegan [Illinois].  Waukegan was about twelve, fifteen miles north of Lake Forest.  So they call Dr. Smith and he comes down and he's driving this black Cadillac and he's about the color of that bag or he's about as black as that end down there.  Got on that suit, everything's fitting him, strictly--he was from where, where, from Jamaica or something, had that accent.  When he got out the car he told me, "What's your name, son?"  I said, "Robert [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.]."  "Well, my name is Robert, here take my bag, Robert."  He let me carry his bag, go in the house.  And he takes mother in the room, closes her door, after a while he comes, comes there here's got this, oh, asked me to go get a paper bag.  I went in the kitchen, got a paper bag, he called me back, he had taken all this medicine mother had, put in a paper bag and told me to put it in the trash can.  Mother said he went in his bag and he got something out and gave mother a shot, I don't know what he gave her but anyway, I guess, it was ten, fifteen years before I heard Minnie Bacon [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon] complain again.  But then I met Dr. Smith and I saw him a couple of times after that and that's I think what started me thinking about medicine because when I got to Meharry I had what I call the three Ms in mind, medicine, the ministry, or the military.  Now I had qualified for West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York].  Congressman, what was that guy's name, I can't remember, I have to--anyway, had, was ready to appoint me to West Point but Paul Tibbetts' brother was at West Point and he came by the house and told, told Ma [Alice Black] and Pa Black [Sherman Black], if they let me come up to West Point he'd kill 'em, 'cause Ben--Bill Davis [sic. Benjamin O. Davis, Jr.] was up there, and he told me how Bill Davis was there and nobody would speak to that man.  The only people spoke to Bill Davis, some enlisted men, black enlisted men with the 10th Cavalry [10th Cavalry Regiment] and he had to go down into the stables for them to talk.  But the faculty and students at West Point would not speak to him.  When he went to class, went to drill and whatnot, when they called the roll they'd skip over his name.  And he told me how badly he was being treated and he said, "Don't you let Robert come up here."  Well, to me that was a challenge, well, this, this for me, you know.  So anyway I didn't get to go to West Point.  Now the ministry, now I wasn't gone be a preacher necessary but my idea was to become a preacher and I have this church to build my political thing up because there in Chicago [Illinois], I've forgotten this guy's name, was a big preacher and he had a hell of political clout 'cause he had a church about 1500 members, so when he opened his mouth people listened.  So then but when I got down to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] and Meharry was across the street and I met Dr. Smith, so medicine took over and that's how I ended up going to medical school.  And, of course, the other thing was Dr. Smith had an adopted daughter they tried to hook me up with but that didn't work (laughter).  I wonder where Frances [ph.] is, I haven't heard from her in years, nobody knows what happened to her.  She just literally disappeared.
Story_ID: 476457
Speaker 1: But anyway (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what happened at--
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: --Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Hm?
Speaker 2: Tell me about (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, Meharry, that--
Speaker 2: --Meharry.
Speaker 1: --that was really something.  First of all, now this is what, boy, the thing of learning discipline.  That what, you see when the war [World War II, WWII] came along, they had to shorten some courses you take, like right now they got this thing on TV called 'Grey's Anatomy.'  Well, 'Gray's Anatomy' [Henry Gray] is a textbook, anatomy textbook about that thick, looks like a Bible.  And that, what is it, that old book on physiology, it's about that thick.  Anyway, as I tell people, they cut the course, anatomy, from nine months to six but they didn't take a page out of that damn book, so we had to take nine months in six.  And I remember my roommate and I we'd go to, when we'd leave class, we'd get out of class about four o'clock, we have a break, then we have assembly about five o'clock, and then we'd march over to Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], they fed us in the dining hall at Fisk.  We'd go to our room, we'd get to our room and we'd take off our uniforms and we'd take a break and we'd take a nap for about an hour, then we'd get up and go to the student co-op, get a bucket of ice and some Cokes [Coca-Cola] and 7-Ups because after a while coffee wouldn't, didn't do a thing, come back, get at that table, had a table a little bit bigger than that, fluorescent light in the middle, he's on one side, I'm on the other.  And from about 8:00 until about 4:30, take a break every now and we're sitting there studying anatomy, then physiology.  That went on, starting Sunday night through Friday night.  The only night you didn't do that was Saturday night.  We lived off of three or four hours sleep a day for six months.  And then you take anatomy.  We had a guy called, his name was Williams, A.A. Williams, he looked just like Count Basie the bandleader but he was from Jamaica, had that accent.  And that son of a gun would come in there and when he'd come down the hall it look like Mandrake the Magician the way his coat, that lab coat standing out.  And he'd come there and he chewed gum with his front teeth, and he'd stand there, he'd look around, he's chewing his gum here, I think he felt the power 'cause he called, all right, listen to your name, I can almost call that roll now, Arrington [ph.], Asher [ph.], Atkins [ph.], Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], Bell [ph.], Boddie [ph.], Bobs [ph.], Brown [ph.].  Here sir, well, Atkins was a civilian he wasn't in the [U.S.] Army, but anyway everybody would say here, sir.  And the last name would be Lydia Wright [Lydia T. Wright], Wright, here.  Then there'd be that silence, because the first hour of anatomy was that what we call oral, he'd call somebody's name and he had to go up in front of the class and whatever question he'd ask, you'd have to answer, or maybe he'd hand you a piece of material like, I walked up one time and he handed me a thumb, the bone out of the thumb, and his expression was talk to your bone.  That man had us living in total fear until a guy named Bryant [ph.], Bryant was from Arkansas, Bryant's father was a big general practitioner, and Bryant kept telling us, he said, "Look fellows," he said, we'd call him Count Basie, "the Count doesn't know a damn thing about anatomy."  Now doctor, oh, the orthopedic surgeon, he knew, but anyway, and Bryant, one payday we got paid, if we were going to, Army sent us to school, and hey we're getting paid $103 a month.  I was thinking about retiring, $103 a month, that's going in my pocket 'cause all my school expenses are paid.  But anyway, so we come out the paymaster, Bryant is standing out there, Bryant said all right, and Bryant had money from his dad, Bryant said all right, said I got a thousand dollars here, I want you to match it, he said I'm a prove to you all that Count doesn't know a damn thing about anatomy.  All right.  Guys put up their money.  Bryant walked out of there with about $6,000, took it down to the bursar's office 'cause, put it in the safe.  Monday morning, when Count calls the roll you go through it, so and you could always tell when your name was coming up 'cause see, the first hour only about four people would be called.  But anyway, Bryant's turn came that Wednesday 'cause Bryant said, "Okay, boys," said, "I'm gonna prove to you today what I said."  So we get in there, silence, all right, Bryant.  Bryant walks up there and Count hands him and said, "Talk to the bone."  "Yeah, Count," Bryant buttons up his lab coat.  "Now, Count you want me to talk about some, now Count before we--," and he called him Count by the way, he wasn't calling him Dr. Williams, I said now, and this discussion went on for my fellow classmates.  And Bryant, Bryant knew the old double talk routine the comedians used to do, Bryant started that crap, Bryant is double talking, he's walking up to the blackboard making all kinds of crazy marks, now Count, you remember, so and so but by act as (unclear), and you, I'm sure you read that article, Count, um-hm, um-hm.  Bryant ain't said a damn thing, girl.  And we're sitting there, it's seventy-five, we're sitting there, we cannot believe that this is going on.  But Bryant stood up there, ain't said a damn thing.  Hands Count the bone, "All right, Bryant, Bryant this is pretty descript.  However, I cannot give you--I'll give you an A minus."
Story_ID: 476458
Speaker 1: Later on that week he [A.A. Williams] called on Hogan [ph.], the ethmoid bone, bone up here, now that ethmoid bone is a very complicated bone.  And Hogan had this thing down to a T.  Hogan discussed this bone, Hogan, Hogan, now, I don't know, think you know the bone but I give you a C plus.  Bryant [ph.], Hogan.  What happened?  We almost stopped trying to learn anatomy 'cause after that we found out when Count would call you, you'd get up, walk up like, oh, Cazort [Ralph J. Cazort], who later taught pharmacology, called on Cazort one day, Cazort buttons up his coats, walks all the way around, and walks and they had these pipes overhead, you know, for, I mean, for water and all that.  Now he's asking Cazort something about, I think something about the leg, or anyway Cazort goes up there and grabs these pipes and is exercising himself demonstrating muscles in his arms and back and he's supposed to be talking about the foot I think, but Cazort strips off his shirt, he's stripped down to the waist and he is just walking back and forth and he's grabbing these pipes.  "Cazort, a very good demonstration."  Cazort, so damn wrong it's unbelievable.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'm telling, you, girl, we sat, we cannot believe this.  The man, how could he not understand something?  So after that we said, now we're gonna study physiology, but to hell with anatomy and all 'cause when Count called you, grab that bone, give me that bone.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And just start jabbering.  Then comes--
Speaker 2: So, what year did you leave Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Forty-seven [1947]?
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it was in 1947.
Speaker 1: All right.  Then we get to physiology, we had three instructors.  Dr. Roth [ph.].  Remember Sydney Greenstreet, ever see Sydney Greenstreet the actor?  Dr. Roth could have been his twin brother.  He had a limp 'cause one leg was shorter than the other.  And Roth was about one of the driest people I ever met in my life.  He'd come in with his notes and he'd start, and we had physiology right after lunch, and so you're fighting that thing to keep awake.  And Roth is--you say, trying to stay awake.  And then he'd call you after an hour of talking.  And if you didn't know, "Well, Mr. Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.]?  I see you don't know.  How are Terry and the Pirates?  Little Orphan Annie doing all right?"  Little snide remarks like that.  Roth became so despised, you know, they tell me later on the kids planted a tree in his--they planted a tree out in the campus in his honor, you know, they tell me the kids went out there in broad daylight and peed all over that tree.  Said the girls, they said, you see the girls taking their panties down peeing on that, they killed that damn tree.  But Roth really, he'd make those snide remarks.  Okay, then Sampson [ph.], Sampson was pretty good.  But then there was Dr. Lee [ph.].  You could hear Lee coming down the hall.  And Lee, he knew his physiology and he made the, look like you could just feel what he was talking about.  So when the grades would come out, you'd go up there, on Roth's part, examination, most of the grades were, you know, Ds and Es or failures.  Sampson, see some Cs and Bs.  But Lee all A's 'cause he knew what he was talking about.  In pathology we had Dr. Quinland [William S. Quinland], Dr. Q.  He was from the islands, had that heavy accent.  He was the one that thing came out in the paper one day about a man suing his wife because he said she got ugly.  Man, he always said, ought to be made to stay with that woman, she was ugly when he married her, so she's ugly now.  And he told us, said, "The man that marries a ugly woman ought to be made to stay with her."  He says, "I look at my wife, oh, yeah," and the man got mad because another time somebody said something to his wife and Dr. Quinland said, well he said if he ever found out that some guys wanted, trying to hit on his wife, said, "Listen what's the matter with you woman, no other man wants you, I don't want no woman no other man wants," (laughter).
Story_ID: 476459
Speaker 1: Continue, you said there was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) While there at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] there were two incidents that to me were of great significance.  While there we began to hear rumors that we later learned about that Tuskegee experiment [Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male].  Nothing specific was ever said, but we had a Dr. Brown [ph.] to come there to teach a course in syphilis.  And while he was teaching this course we began to hear some rumors about something about Alabama but nobody ever became specific.  And it seemed on one occasion when something came up about what was going on, all of sudden they hushed up.  Because Dr. Brown as I recall had something he was scheduled to give a lecture but it didn't come off.  So we don't know if some pressure was brought to bear but we were hearing rumors about this thing at Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] back in the '40s [1940s].  Another thing we learned was how to evaluate these reports on blacks and whites when they contrasted them, example, out in North Carolina a report was coming out about pelvic inflammatory diseases as they called it in women, or PID they called it.  Now this report was contrasting some white women with black women.  The white women were college students I think at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] or North Carolina [University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] or some school like that.  The black women were girls working at the [U.S.] Army camp and most of 'em were known prostitutes.  Well, fortunately, somebody got wind of that report before it was published and thanks to that group we knew at Vanderbilt [Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee] plus some others, it never came out to be published.  But that taught us that hereafter whenever we got those reports, just to really look at those things carefully and see exactly who you're talking about, what segment of the population are you referring to, are they all on the same level intellectually or all on the same level financially, as, you know.  But those, that, that was something that came out.  Also at that time some of the contributions that black physicians were making but you never got to see 'em because the Journal of the American Medical Association and other journals wouldn't publish them.  However, the Journal of the National Medical Association did.  While I was at Meharry in 19--what, '46 [1946], the American Medical- the National Medical Association was about, I think met, was it in Louisville, Kentucky, or Chicago [Illinois], anyway that was the year they issued their white paper report on the state of health in this country and they made a recommendation that healthcare should be divided into three levels.  Level one would be those people who through their own pocketbook you might say, could afford to pay for their insurance and doctor bills and all that.  Number two with those people who would, you know, going to the doctor, buying medicine, okay, but what they would need would be coverage for going to the hospital.  Number three would be those people who needed everything from the bottom to the top.  Do you know so much pressure was brought to bear, the National Medical Association, some of its authors were accused of being Communists and Socialists?  And I understand later some of them that were really threatened.  So much pressure was brought to bear that the following year I think, they had more or less retracted that program.  Then it bounced back again around about 1948.  And this is when we start advocating what Medicare should be, three categories.  Because when Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] came in, now Harry Truman [President Harry S. Truman] brought it up in '48 [1948] but when Lyndon Johnson became president, and the representative was talking to him, he told him, say, look, said, "The only way I can get this through [U.S.] Congress, we got to cover everybody."  And that's why Medicare came out the way it did.  But just think, if Medicare had those three different groups, we'd probably have a lot better coverage because right now in this country a lot of people can afford to pay their own insurances and, and care.  We're paying millionaires Medicare benefits.  And in some respects, for a while I didn't know why 'cause when I was teaching down at the medical school, the insurance the school insured me with I didn't need Medicare.  They finally had to drop it and I had to go back to Medicare 'cause the benefits got so high but anyway, we could have had a three phase program, a three stage program, and that's what the National Medical Association advocated.  But the price we're paying, it was hard to believe that on a program like that some of those men who wrote that proposal were brought tremendous pressures.  I think not too long ago there was some program I think on TV in which they mentioned that or I read something in Jet or someplace, but I, it was amazing to know how those men were threatened and the association as a whole, I think they were brought under a lot of pressure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they had to more or less retract that thing.
Story_ID: 476460
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that was the thing I learned there because after graduating Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] came, you know, the internships and residencies.  But this is where I started meeting and finding out how much the black physicians had contributed to, to our care as a whole because I met some outstanding mentors there at Meharry.  Matthew Walker [Matthew Walker, Sr.] didn't take a backseat to nobody in the field of surgery.  And it was admitted.  And as late, as early as 1945, '46 [1946], we were getting lectures about lung cancer and smoking and, of course, nobody paid it any attention.  I think Meharry medical school or Washington University in St. Louis [St. Louis, Missouri] and I think the guys out at Johns Hopkins [Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland] were but three schools whose faculty were saying then that smoking was a cause of lung cancer.  And, of course, the tobacco companies exerted their pressures, and, you know, it didn't get too far.  But this is when I met some outstanding men.  Dr. James [ph.], the black prince in obstetrics and gynecology and some of the contributions he made.  And then some of the men who graduated from there, the class ahead of me, a guy named Lawrence [ph.] who went out, later ended up out at the University of Iowa Medical Center [University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics, Iowa City, Iowa] as one of their outstanding surgeons.  Some of them guys are produced by Meharry and Howard [Howard University College of Medicine, Washington, D.C.].  But it was a learning experience from the standpoint of knowing what we could do and what we were doing but how little of it was known.  I think that was the thing that really got to us.  All these things were, but it would come out only in the national, Journal of the National Medical Association.  Because up at Howard, R. Frank Jones and his partner [Kline Price] wrote some of the most original articles in the field of urology, that's my field, and those articles were never published in The Journal of Urology until some years ago.  And Frank--but they came out in the Journal of the National Medical Association.  In fact, Hereford [Merle Hereford] and Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] wrote a paper.  If you go to The Journal of Urology, it came out in the Missouri state journal [Journal of the Missouri State Medical Association; Missouri Medicine].  And then Bacon wrote another, Bacon wrote another paper didn't come out in The Journal of Urology, came out in the local paper, Journal of the International College of Surgeons.  But those, the American Medical Association, for years--but it was rather ironic a couple of years ago, who should be president of the American Medical Association?  A black doctor from Detroit [Michigan].
Story_ID: 476461
Speaker 1: After Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Well, after Meharry, I went up to Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County] in Chicago [Illinois] to do my internship.
Speaker 1: What hospital, I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: Provident.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: P-R-O-V-I-D-E-N-T, Provident.  That's the hospital where John Hale [sic. Daniel Hale Williams], they claim it was the first American surgeon to operate on the heart.  Somewhere back in the early 1900s, a black guy got shot and the bullets lodged in the coating that surrounds the heart and John Hale opened the guy's heart to remove that bullet.  And he's acknowledged to have been the first guy to do, you might say open heart surgery.  And there was a Dr. Dailey [Ulysses Grant Dailey], who had perfected a technique of removing the thyroid gland under local anesthesia.  And there we met the fabulous, what was that guy's name, I can't remember his name but anyway one of the first black doctors to graduate from Cornell [Cornell University, Ithaca, New York].  And this is when I found out with the movie actor, who was that, back in the '30s [1930s], I'm trying to think of, movie actor in theater, black guy, I can't think of his name but anyway he graduated from university, Northwestern University Medical School [Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois] in 1928 but he never practiced medicine.  He's the guy that appeared in, what was the black plays, oh, hm, Lord my mind's going blank on me.  All right, I'll think of his name after a while but anyway he was the guy that never practiced medicine but he graduated from Northwestern Medical School in 1928 because they didn't have another black graduate from Northwestern I guess until sometime after World War II [WWII].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in '48 [1948] you were doing your residency there (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, 'Emperor Jones' ['The Emperor Jones,' Eugene O'Neill]--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: --was it, 'Emperor Jones' I think it was.  Well, go ahead, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So you do your residency at--
Speaker 2: My internship was--
Speaker 1: Your internship, okay.
Speaker 2: --at Provident in Chicago.  And then I went down to Homer Phillips, Homer G. Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital] in St. Louis [Missouri] to do my residency in urology.
Story_ID: 476462
Speaker 1: What made you decide on urology?
Speaker 2: Again, influenced by Dr. Grant [Walter H. Grant].  A Dr. Grant there in Chicago [Illinois] was a urologist, and when I was on his service, now when I was on some of the other services there you take when I was on medicine and surgery, the doctors there it look like they were so busy, you know, you, I'd go and examine a patient and I'd write up my history and physical and most of the time the attending physician wouldn't even look at it.  And I'd go in the operating room with some of those guys, it would be the operating surgeon, his assistant, the resident, and I'm down here, and thank god I was taller than some of them and I had to look over everybody to see what was going on.  But when I got to the urology service, Grant and the other two guys, I can't remember their names, Whitfield [Harvey J. Whitfield, Sr.], and I forgot the other guy but, oh, Chauncey Morton, when they sent patients into the hospital [Provident Hospital; Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], one they would call the hospital and tell me, "Bob [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], I'm sending Mr. So and So or Miss So and So in," and why they sent 'em in.  And I'd go and see the patient and I'd examine 'em, write up a history and physical and then when they'd come in, they would come in like, Dr. Grant would come in, sit down by the patient's bedside and, "All right, Bob, what did you find," or he'd say Dr. Bacon, and I'd sit there, history and physical, um-hm, he would not only read my notes but he would correct my sentence structure, "Bob, you should have made, this should end the sentence here, your sentence is too long."  And then we got in the operating room, he'd do this, you see this, yes, sir, he'd say it again, put your hand here, do this, do that.  Or we get around, but now listen, tonight I want you to get your textbook and I want you to read this section or that section 'cause tomorrow this is what we're gonna do.  So we get to the operating room, while we're scrubbing, "Did you read so and so last night," I say, "Yes, sir."  Ah, well, all right.  And he'd ask me a couple of questions, get in the operating room, now remember what you read yesterday, here it is here, here it is.  The man was teaching and made urology really seem interesting because my, prior to that time urology to me was nothing but with Chauncey and Dr. Grant, and Whitfield, it became quite a thing.  And then I heard about the fabulous R. Frank Jones and Kline Price at the Howard University in Washington [D.C.] because I got to read some of his articles.  So there was an opening for a resident in urology at Homer Phillips [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] 'cause I was going to, originally gonna go, we're going out to Kansas City General [Kansas City General Hospital, Kansas City, Missouri] in obstetrics and gynecology which was my second choice but then when I heard about this opening at Homer Phillips, I took that and I went down there to do my residency.  And, and it was quite fulfilling because it was, had a good staff down there.  We were affiliated with Washington University medical school [Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri] and they had some, they had some leading urologists over there and they'd come over to Homer Phillips plus Dr. Hereford [Merle Hereford] who was a, a student of Frank Jones and Dr. Abrams [ph.], they had some very highly trained men teaching us over there, so we had a good staff.  And it made, and it was a learning thing.  And we had a lot of good clinical experiences so that it was very fulfilling.  And it was a busy hospital, it was, it was, you know, it was a part of the county hospital system.  That's where all the black folks came to Homer Phillips at that time.  And so I had, I stayed there for three years.  I trained there and had a chance while I was there to meet some more outstanding black physicians and learn more about what some of them were doing.  And some of the guys I met then later, they became famous because there was a Dr. Whitaker [ph.] who later was honored by President Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] on two occasions, I think he was also, later on, I think, doctor, I mean, I think, I'm not too sure, but I believe Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] may have given him some honors too but Whitaker was an outstanding surgeon.  We got the doctor there that taught, was head of the eye department, I can't remember his name but he made quite a worldwide reputation for his work in ophthalmology.  So I got to meet some men who at that time or later on became really outstanding.
Story_ID: 476463
Speaker 1: And when I left there [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri], I went in the [U.S.] Army and I was in Korea for nineteen months.  And that was another eye-opening experience.  Two things happened over there that I won't forget.  When I got to the 10th Station Hospital I was a first lieutenant and I was in the surgery department.  The orthopedic surgeon there was board certified.  I don't think the chief of surgery was board certified but I was board eligible, in other words the only person that outranked me on the standpoint of training was this orthopedic guy but I'm board eligible.  I've completed all the requirements to be recognized as a specialist and I'm a first lieutenant.  Sometime later when promotions came out, all those black, white guys who were first lieutenants all got promoted to captains, none of the black doctors in what we call the Pusan area [Pusan Perimeter] got promoted.  Bruce Green [ph.] who was a dentist, C.W. Williams who was a first lieutenant over at the 21st Station Hospital [sic. 21st Evacuation Hospital, Busan, South Korea], he didn't get promoted, Cox [ph.], Gaffney, well, Donald Gaffney was over there but there were about five or six black, eight doctors in the Pusan Perimeter, none of the black doctors were promoted.  Garland Olson [ph.] was a major--Garland Olson was a captain who was board certified, he was a certified specialist in internal medicine and in cardiology, and because I think Garland kind of dated this white gal, he was, they end up sending him to a battalion, they said, they sent this man to the front, this man should have been over at Tokyo General Hospital [JR Tokyo General Hospital, Tokyo, Japan] but he didn't get, but none of the black doctors got promoted.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And then you said the second thing happened (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But the guys, and the black doctors in the [U.S.] Air Force did great 'cause of Hank [ph.], and Hank ended up being a full colonel.  A couple of other guys who were in the Air Force.  Later on some of the black guys, now the black doctors who went to Europe and North Africa or even some who said they did--but there in Korea we didn't get it.
Speaker 2: You said two things happened.  What was the second thing?
Speaker 1: Well, three things.  The second thing was, under MacArthur [Douglas MacArthur] these units coming in, at that time, it was Truman [President Harry S. Truman] had issued that order integrating the Army.  And when some of these integrated units would come into Korea, they'd pull the black guys out and put in what we call port companies or trucking companies under MacArthur.  Because down the street from the 21st Evacuation Hospital was a trucking company, I, I forgot this guy, but he was a black guy, he was a major and he was a paratrooper but they had him down in a trucking company.  I met another black guy who was a captain, he was a, basically had been an artillery man, they had him with a smoke, one of these chemical smoke companies.  But I met a number of black officers and sergeants who were trained to be paratroopers, artillery men, and whatnot, and they were in, in port companies and trucking companies.  When they kicked MacArthur out and brought Maxwell [Maxwell D. Taylor], brought Maxwell Taylor in, I recall at the hospital some of those guys from West Point [United States Military Academy, West Point, New York] were saying that we got us a leader now.  Now MacArthur was brilliant true enough, but I think MacArthur was kind of prejudiced, but when Maxwell Taylor came in, in October a memorandum came out, his headquarters in Tokyo [Japan], to the extent of saying I want these men back and in sixty days all those black guys who had been taken out of a combat unit were back.  My boy who was with the trucking company, he went back to the paratroopers.  And the other guys went to what they call the Triple Nickles, the 555th Airborne Artillery [555th Parachute Infantry Battalion].  My man in the smoke company he went back, all those black officers who were trained then back to where they were supposed to go, that's with Maxwell Taylor but under MacArthur, unh-uh.  Just like we're in Tokyo, when MacArthur went to his headquarters, baby, that was a ceremony.  If you were within forty miles (laughter) of that base you better stand and be ready to salute.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: But when Maxwell Taylor took over, you didn't know when he came and when he left, but baby, when MacArthur was heading to his headquarters everybody in Tokyo knew it, sirens and everything going and when he left.  But anyway, so that was, that that that was the, the, the other experience that I had over there.  Then I learned something about American history.  In the fall of, I went there in '51 [1951], in the fall of '52 [1952], or was it '51 [1951], '51 [1951] I guess it would be, they started having these anti-American riots among the Koreans.  Syngman Rhee was the president, and I remember the guys said, wait a minute, we're supposed to be over to help these South Koreans and yet they're attacking us.  What the hell is going on?
Story_ID: 476464
Speaker 1: One Saturday afternoon my roommates, C.W. Williams, Garland Olson [ph.] and I are downtown in Pusan [Busan, South Korea].  And, of course, half the population were known as Lee, we're at Mr. Lee's outdoor cafe, sitting there having a drink.  And it's several truckloads of GIs drive in the square and when they do, out come all these students, Korean students, and they're attacking these guys.  Well, we see this, we get to running inside, Mr. Lee said, hey, you don't move, you don't have to go.  So then he says stay there.  What happened?  Those students did not put their hands on one black soldier, it was a couple of blacks got knocked down indirectly, they did not attack one black soldier.  Okay, that rioting got so bad and they said, we kind of settled things down, so they decide they're gone have a series of town hall meetings to get people talking to each other.  So on this particular afternoon this Dr. Lee [ph.], B.S., M.S., University of California, Ph.D., University of San Francisco [San Francisco, California], comes out to talk to us.  We're all assembled, all these doctors and nurses and, and officers aren't in there, I guess, about two or three hundred of us was in this auditorium.  So he walks up on the stage and says you guys know why you're here?  And I remember old Colonel Pierre [ph.] who I guess would be a good right-wing guy said, yeah, you know, anti-Communists, stop the Communists, blah, blah, and I remember Lee, he says bullshit.  He says, "You're here because you guys double crossed us."  Say what?  He said, "In 1900 Korea was a one united country with an empress [Empress Myeongseong] and we had a treaty with the United States guaranteeing our sovereignty."  He said, "Then when the Russian and Japanese went to war, you sent Douglas MacArthur's father over here, Arthur MacArthur [Arthur MacArthur, Jr.] to settle things."  Said Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] sent him over here.  And what did he do?  To settle the war he divided Korea, he put the, I think the Russians up north and the Japanese up south.  And at that time the Korean parliament was right down the street.  He said, "Now just like you have your Declaration of Independence and the [U.S.] Constitution on display," he says, "come with me, I'm gonna show you the treaties guaranteeing our sovereignty, the letters that the empress wrote to the president and that were never answered."  And we went down there and there they were, in transcript and in English in beautiful handwriting, and that's what happened.  Then my eyes were opened.  We found out later how Panama, we got the Panama Canal, how did we get it?  We went down to Colombia and started a revolution and when it split off, we, the United States, set up the country of Panama, set up Panama and made the Panamanians sign a contract giving us the Panama Canal.  Same thing happened in Chile with Pinochet [Augusto Pinochet], we went there and, and kicked Allende [Salvador Allende] out and brought Pinochet in and what happened under Pinochet?  How many people disappeared, they still don't know what happened?  And what's going on in Iraq?  I can remember in 1932 when I was a kid reading the papers when we had a revolution sponsored by the United States in Iraq, the Islamics had taken over then, they claimed they were Communists, but now Muslims and Communists don't go together.  But anyway, the United States went over and we kicked them out and brought the shah in.  And I don't know if you--but you see these pictures, this handsome dude and that beautiful woman he was with, that he was married to because Dr. Granville Sawyer [Granville M. Sawyer], when he was president of Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], had a whole bunch of Iranians teaching at Texas Southern and he went to Iran for, he was honored by the shah and had this picture of Dr. Sawyer meeting the empress.  But then what happened under the shah?  Land, his folks took over the land, unemployment went from 2 to 4 percent to damn near 20 percent.  The number of people that went to jail then and why do we support him?  'Cause he bought our airplanes and tanks.  And what happened they finally kicked him out and that's when the government we see over in Iran now, but we had interfered in Iran.  And I remember reading the newspapers back in the '30s [1930s].  So but that thing, that one incident, when that guy told us when he said, why are you over here, he said, bullshit, oh, why, but that's the reason.  He was the guy also told us that in Indonesia, that Ho Chi Minh during World War II [WWII], Ho Chi Minh tried to come to the United States to set up a treaty with the government, but the northeastern group, Republicans, said that he was a Communist, wouldn't let him come in.  And then also told us about in China in World War II how Chiang Kai-shek, he had that beautiful woman [Soong Mei-ling] he was married to, she was as corrupt and rotten as ever.  But girl, I learned more about American foreign policy over there than you can shake a stick at, and it all boiled down to the chickens are coming home to roost.  But that thing shook us all up.
Story_ID: 476465
Speaker 1: So what happens when you leave the [U.S.] Army?  What year do you come out of the Army?
Speaker 2: I left that Army in '53 [1953] and that's when I came here.
Speaker 1: Came where?
Speaker 2: Here to Houston [Texas] to practice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My wife [Bernice Narcisse Bacon] was here.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How did you meet your wife?
Speaker 2: About three weeks before graduation, Gladys Ford [Gladys Inez Ford], who was here from Houston and was a medical student there at Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], Bernice came down to Meharry to visit Gladys.  And also Bernice came down there supposedly to see John H. Wells because everybody knew that John H. Wells, who was a freshmen medical student, and Bernice Narcisse was gonna get married.  Everybody also knew that Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] and Betty Grayson [Betty Grayson Turpin] are gonna get married.  Bob is at Meharry, Betty is at, gone to New Jersey, Betty had finished Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee].  Bob Bacon is introduced to Bernice Narcisse and there's this beautiful woman in pink and this was almost took me back to Raven Rivera.  Make a long story short, six weeks later we were married.  And when she died last year we had been fifty-six years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And out of that marriage there are two sons.
Speaker 1: And what are your sons' names?
Speaker 2: The oldest son is Robert John Bacon, Jr. [Robert J. Bacon, Jr.], who is a practicing psychiatrist, board eligible psychiatrist here in Houston.  And the youngest son is Kenneth Joseph Bacon [Kenneth Bacon], vice president for Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association], the second largest corporation in the United States of America, mortgage company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So now tell me, in 1953 you come to Houston--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --to set up your practice?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) When I came here, you might say I was really the first, in some respects, really the second certified specialist, black specialist here because old Dr. Fletcher [ph.] was here but Fletcher had been specialized out of New York and Fletcher was practicing out here more or less in retirement.  Well, I came here, first of all, I have to admit that I approached the doctors wrong, I was a little too arrogant I think for some of the guys.  Plus, at the same time there was a certain amount of envy and hostility about this young black guy coming here being a specialist.  The population as a whole was not totally prepared and also my doctors.  Give you one example of what I faced.  John H. Wells had a terrific general practice and at that time guys made house calls.  So John H. had this old lady over there in the old Fourth Ward [Houston, Texas] who was having some urinary tract problems so he calls me up and says come on, go to this house call with me.  I said fine.  We go over there and this lady is lying up in bed, John H. introduces me to her, then he starts telling about my credentials, this is Dr. Bacon, the specialist out of St. Louis [Missouri], blah, blah, blah.  And all while he was talking to her she had her head turned over.  And when he got through, she turned her head and looked me dead in the eye and told me, said, "Ain't no nigger specialists."  The first two years I was here I damn near starved to death because the only thing that kept me alive was my wife teaching school.  But slowly things started happening.  A couple of things, some of the older guys start supporting me but then some of the younger doctors start moving in, most of them had been trained.  Louis Robey had been trained in surgery, came in.  Edna Brooks, who was trained in medicine, came in.  John Madison, who had been here in general practice, had gone back and did some training and came back specializing in internal medicine.  And then Hollins [Blanchard Hollins], Higgins [Clarence Higgins].  Anyway, the newer group of black doctors were coming in and we're all guys who had finished residencies like me and we knew this thing about, you know, referring patients one to the other.  And that's what happened and we started what was known as the Lockwood Professional Group.  And we put up the first, well, the second professional building out in the Kashmere Gardens area [Houston, Texas] and there were eleven of us out there.  Jesse Hayes [ph.] who was in ophthalmology, he was a graduate of Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana], board certified, and I.  Higgins who had finished Meharry was certified in pediatrics.  Hollins, who had finished Meharry was certified in obstetrics and gynecology.  Barnett [Herman Barnett III] was the first black to graduate from University of Texas Medical School at Galveston [University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas] and he was board eligible in surgery.  Mullins [ph.] finished Meharry, he was board eligible in internal medicine.  Riddle [Arthur J. Riddle], the dentist, was eligible as, qualified as an oral surgeon.  What's the other guy's name?  We had another dentist out there, hm, he was qualified in one of the dental specialties.  So all the guys out there were qualified in specialties and we had put up our own building and the pharmacy.  And got going fine, and then but my ambition had always been to be affiliated with part of a teaching institution.  And in 1975 that opportunity, 1974, '75 [1975] that opportunity came to me.  But one of the big things that happened when I came here, you talk about people affecting your life, I met one Dr. Michael J. O'Heroon [ph.].  I met him one year when I came down here.  Dr. J.D. Bowles [John Dudley Bowles] was a big general practitioner, and J.D. was going to the National Medical Association meeting and I was still doing my residency in St. Louis [Homer G. Phillips Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri] but I had some vacation time coming so I came down to see my wife and my son.  So he had me to take over his office and what happened?  They had a bus strike (laughter).
Story_ID: 476466
Speaker 1: Civil rights, you mentioned civil rights.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause this is '58 [1958] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All right.  Well, what happened in the civil rights, well, out here at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], they had a group called the PYA, Progressive Youth Administration [sic. Progressive Youth Association].  And these kids started sit-ins and they were joined by some white students from Rice University [Houston, Texas].  At a meeting we had here, and at that time, the black doctors, we had an organization called Houston Medical Forum.  And we decided we would support these kids but we would not interfere with them, we'll just give them financial support.  So when these kids started their sit-ins, every Saturday they'd go sit-in and they'd get arrested.  And our group of doctors we'd go down and bail 'em out.  And now they wouldn't release all these kids at once, they'd do it one here and one there and sometimes we'd be down there from ten o'clock at night to six and seven the next morning.  But we supported them and when they had some trials we put up the money to pay their legal fees, so that's how we got involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  Then later the next thing came along, of course, when the blacks started running for public office and Barbara Jordan came along.  And I got heavily involved with her because the first time she ran, she ran for the House of Representatives [Texas House of Representatives], state house of representatives.  And she lost but we were amazed that she lost by such a narrow margin.  So we put it together and she and her group got together and they looked at how the districts were laid out.  So the next time around, I think, did she run again for the house, I think, but then when she ran for the state senate [Texas Senate], we looked at the district she was running from and we saw we had a good chance.  Well, by that time she had gotten some backing from the, some of the power structures, one was Miss Ima Hogg who was one of the old line Texas families, lived out west here, multimillionaire who gave Barbara her support.  But I was chairman of Barbara's finance committee and this is how I got a chance to meet Lyndon Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] because Lyndon, boy, he and Lady Bird [Lady Bird Johnson] they, they were truly hung, hung behind Barbara, they thought she was it.  And this is when I learned something about politics.  When Barbara was ready to run for the House [U.S. House of Representatives], for [U.S.] Congress, okay, we're raising funds, we had an office downtown on Main Street.  And one night a guy from, came by from Lyndon's staff and he asked about the money and I, oh, I was bragging we had raised forty, fifty thousand dollars, he said, "That's no money."  So this particular night all these sirens and whatnot, and police cars roll in and [U.S.] Secret Service men are coming in, LBJ comes in and Bill, I think, I think, it was Bill Moyers was with him.  But anyway, one of the aides asked who was in charge of finance, somebody said Dr. Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] was, so we go off on the side and he asked about the money again.  Oh, yeah, we got about seventy thousand dollars, he said unh-uh.  So he says, "We're gonna have to get some more money."  This was what, Saturday evening.  Monday in the mail, when I go in there Monday night the mail is there, there's a check for fifteen hundred dollars from a fireman's local in Seattle, Washington.  There's a check for fifteen hundred dollars from a fireman's local in, I think, Baltimore [Maryland].  But anyway, over the next week we started getting money from all over the United States, labor unions, Democratic groups.  When the deal went down we had over one hundred thousand dollars.  But Barbara won the thing, you know, she walked away with it.  And, of course, she went to Washington [D.C.] and she made a reputation up there.
Story_ID: 476467
Speaker 1: But then something weird happened because Wickliff [Al Wickliff], whose son used to be next to her, Wickliff was her campaign manager, so when Barbara [Barbara Jordan] comes up for her second term, I get a phone call inviting me to the opening of her headquarters.  What do you mean inviting me to your headquarters, I'm supposed to be there?  I don't know what's going on, so I called Wickliff.  Wickliff said, "I didn't know she was opening her headquarters."  I said, "Aren't you the campaign manager?"  He said no.  Well, we found out Barbara, all that group, we had been with her since 1954 or '55 [1955], '55 [1955], Wickliff, myself, and I'm trying to think, this girl who was a barber, and another couple of lawyers, there were a group of about nine or ten of us had been with her for the whole time she was running, you know.  She dropped every one of us, and to this day, and she's dead now, we never found out why.  She had a whole new staff.  And why she dropped us I do not know and we never heard a thank you from her, never got a word or a letter or anything saying thank you.  It's something we never could get over.  But she was one hell of a woman though.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She had made her mark but so when she left [U.S.] Congress, where'd she go?  To LBJ School [Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs] at the University of Texas [University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas], she's a professor up there.  She was teaching up there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And when she died she was on the faculty up there but and the fact she was at the LBJ School was no mystery, we knew why, 'cause I said, 'cause the Johnson family thought, they thought the world of her and, she was a hell of a woman though, I have to give her credit.  But she had retired and she and this lady who was her companion they had bought a home up there near Austin [Texas].  And she had been ill once or twice because before she left Congress, she came by here one day, we had a, I was on the board of directors for the Texas Department of Corrections [Texas Department of Criminal Justice], and they were meeting here at my house that Sunday so I invited Barbara by and she came by and I noticed when she had got out of the car, how she had to take a step to--and I noticed her, her, the way she was walking, when she sat down, she never did bend her knees and we found out then that she was having some problems.  And later a neighbor down the street, Nabi Middleton [ph.] was in Washington [D.C.], and he came back and Nabi called me and said, "Barbara's having trouble."  And I said, "Why?"  He said, "She's in a wheelchair."  And so the next time I saw Barbara she was in a wheelchair.  And the last time I saw her, I was in Austin for a meeting and she was in a wheelchair.  And then she had that first experience where something happened to her but somebody managed to give her a resuscitation, revived her, but then had that last attack, she died.  They had the funeral around the corner here at the church [Good Hope Missionary Baptist Church, Houston, Texas] around here.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Plus, Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton] down for the funeral and whatnot.  But--
Speaker 2: Tell--
Speaker 1: --she had made her mark.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But as I say, we never knew why she dropped us.  But it was a learning experience for her to see how politics worked, how that money flowed and where it would come from.
Story_ID: 476468
Speaker 1: Tell me about all the organizations that you belong to?
Speaker 2: Well, I think a significant organization we have here, had here, the Houston Urological Society.  And there were 129 members and one black, me.  In 1975 when I left private practice, went out to Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], I looked up, and I was elected secretary-treasurer of the organization.  So for eighteen years, I was secretary-treasurer of the Houston Urological Society, and then my last two years I was elected president.  When I took over as president we were four thousand dollars in the red.  When I stepped down or when I had completed my second term, we had ten thousand bucks [dollars] in the bank.  Now that wasn't due to me though 'cause I can't take credit for that because what I had at that time I had a terrific board of directors and these guys really went to work on that budget and came up with some original ideas and as a result we ended up with some money.  But the fact as being the only black here I am elected president.  And it was during that time too, the guys put my name up for president of the doctors club, I got slaughtered on that one though.  But then at Baylor when I went out to Baylor, oh, wait a minute.
Speaker 1: Is that, is that when you left private practice?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let's see now privately, in private practice let's see I had, had served on the grand jury.  I had been elected president of the Houston Medical Forum twice.  I think the first time was somewhere in the '50s [1950s] and the second time it was somewhere in the late '60s [1960s] it was about a ten year hiatus that I was elected president.  Also I think in the late '50s [1950s] I was elected president of the Lone Star State Medical Association [Lone Star State Medical, Dental, and Pharmaceutical Association], I got a resume out there but that that was the state organization of black doctors.  In 1973 before going, leaving private practice, I was appointed to the board of directors for the state department of corrections [Texas Department of Corrections; Texas Department of Criminal Justice], state prison system and I served on that for six years.  And I think the most significant thing there when I left, we had got some black security, people had been promoted, we had some blacks who had, attained the rank of lieutenant, I think one had become captain and we had developed a definite group of sergeants 'cause when I first got there I don't think any of those black guys had any positions.
Story_ID: 476469
Speaker 1: Subsequent to that, while I was still at Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas], I served as a reviewer for the state board of medical, medical examiners.  Now, my job there was to be part of the group conducting hearings related to physicians who had been accused of malpractice or wrongdoing.  And one of the most significant things, back here when all these lawsuits came up about the silicone breast implants.  Well, here in Texas, I've forgotten how many hundred cases had come up, so the question came about whether or not the doctors had done any of these cases wrong, had they made these implants when they should have been done because everybody knew if the lawyer could find one case where the doctor had done it wrong, that would really break it open.  So I along with about five or six other doctors went out here to one of the buildings and we spent two and a half days out there, we reviewed every one of those cases.  And not one time did we find the doctors had not followed protocol in doing the cases.  So that didn't help the plaintiff lawyers at all but we cleared the doctors of that.  And during the six years I served in that capacity I think I attended about twenty-four meetings of a committee, usually there would be three of us in which charges were filed against physicians.  And in several of those meetings I was chairman and a couple of times and once, once or twice to show up I was the only one there.  And it was something, it was another learning experience, these doctors being charged with all types of malpractice.  But the one thing that I, it finally dawned up on me was, the doctors who are being charged with alcoholism or drug abuse were all younger guys.  And then looking at this thing, I started thinking about my experiences at Baylor when we used to interview the students who were applying for medical school and I started hearing some of those techniques, in other words, I would find out these guys, like, good case.  Young man had been to MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts], honor student, wanted to go into aeronautics but what happened?  Daddy was a big time doctor, uncle, so everybody are doctors, so you become a doctor.  Here he was drinking alcohol and sniffing cocaine.  So when a hearing came up, I asked him myself, "Why did you become a doctor?"  And before he could answer his wife spoke up, she said, "Peer pressure."  I said, "What do you mean?"  And she pointed out how all the family, so I asked him, I said, "Is that why you became a doctor?"  And he kind of hung his head, he said, "I guess so."  I said, "What did you really wanna do?"  He said, "I wanted to become an aeronautical engineer."  I said, I told his wife, I said, "Listen dear," I said, "I'm gonna put this case aside and you take your husband home, you pack his bags and your bags and y'all get the hell out of Texas and go on back up to Massachusetts and I'll find, we'll find, you know, we can put this case aside."  I said, "Because you're not gonna be a practicing physician so why have a case, you know?"  And I always remember when they got ready to go she came up and gave me the biggest hug and she laid a hell of a kiss, kind of scared me (laughter).  But then I started checking and really this was this, so many times these younger guys, you know, you start questioning 'em closely and sometimes you just ask the question and they'd be a little hesitant, they'd hesitate.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Or sometimes they'd hang their head.  And what it was these guys didn't wanna be doctors.  And here in Houston [Texas] a couple of black guys that I knew, they didn't wanna be doctors but, you know, family says you ought to be.
Speaker 2: Well, tell me when you were at Baylor--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --what year was this?
Speaker 1: I went to Baylor in 1975.  I went there as an assistant professor in the department of urology and I was appointed director of the outpatient clinics over at Ben Taub Hospital [Houston, Texas].  And later I took over also the employee clinic at Ben Taub Hospital and I completely renovated it, changed it around.
Speaker 2: So what happens after Baylor?
Speaker 1: Well, at Baylor and then in what about 1985, I was promoted to an associate professor which gave me tenure, a lifetime contract.  And while I was at Baylor, let's see I was on, oh, god knows how many committees 'cause I worked my butt up at the two biggest committees--
Story_ID: 476470
Speaker 1: I was on the admissions committee, and when the kids would apply I would, we had this office, and each one of us had a little cubbyhole and cubicle.  And you would look at these applications and you would evaluate them on a scale of one to ten.  And everybody who got, say a six or above would be invited for an interview.  And when they come down, they would be interviewed by at least three and sometimes five people, depending on how many people were available that weekend and 'cause we have to assure the kids had, because you had five interviews and so and so had three doesn't mean anything, it was just a matter of, you know, of who's available.  And that was a learning experience.  Also, this is when we got in kind of the race issue of getting more blacks and Hispanics coming into Baylor [Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas].  And Dr. Mae McMillan [Mae F. McMillan], Joe Bedford, oh, anyway, it was about four or five black doctors.  I think we were effective because by the time I left, the number of black students and, and Hispanics had increased decidedly.  It wasn't overwhelming but going from two or three to fifteen or twenty is a hell of a thing when you consider what it takes to get into medical school.  When you consider you got 2500 people applying and you can only take 160, 165, that's pretty rough.  And I did a lot of recruiting.  I started traveling to most of the predominantly historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  And what I found out, of course, a lot of places didn't know about Baylor especially out of state, you take when I went up to Hampton [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] they didn't know anything about Baylor.  And some they knew about it at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] because of the students from Houston [Texas] going there.  But anyway, I introduced Baylor College of Medicine to a lot of the black schools and we, as I said, we along with several other blacks, we increased the enrollments.  Then I had that real tight committee, served on committee, that promotions committee, this is the committee decided who would be promoted and who wouldn't be.  Now that was a rough horse to ride because here you got to tell some kid that hey, you're not gone be promoted or hey, we're gonna, you're gonna be dismissed, that was a tough one.  And then also on the financial aid committee, here's a kid comes in wants to make a loan, why?  'Cause he's got a motorcycle and a car (laughter) and he wants some money to pay the note on his motorcycle, are you crazy?  Then, of course, the minority affairs committee.  Then because I was, I later became assistant dean, I became a member of the executive committee, so that when the top wheels met, I was able to sit in with the president, Dr. DeBakey [Michael E. DeBakey] and all the big wheels, and this is where I started learning about how the school operated and who did what.  And that was a learning, brought me in contact with them.  And then when the race issue came up, they, and I was challenged on it one day by one of our more conservative members of the committee, I pointed out, I said, "Gentlemen, the problem that we have lies in this room," I said, "it's not with Dr. Butler [William T. Butler], the president, it's not with me," I said, "but it's with everybody in this room."  I said, "But at the same time the solution to that problem is here in his room, and it's not with Dr. Butler, the president, nor with me, it's with all of us."  In other words, until all the top wheels, the president and department heads become involved in this process, we're not gonna get anywhere.  Because what had happened--
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: --one year we were gonna have, I think, I was, oh, all these later, I think, that year we were gonna have something like forty, close to forty or forty-five minority kids admitted, I think something like twenty African Americans, about twenty-five, thirty Mexican Americans or Latinos, you know, you know, it was I said almost one-third of the class coming, oh, man.  One black showed up.  Only eight or nine Mexican Americans showed up, and that scared everyone, what's going on?  Somewhere some rumor had started about the school, and we never could find out where it started but somebody gave out impression that something had happened there to black and Latino students and these kids went elsewhere.  And I caught hell with going down to these schools to tell these kids that wasn't so.  So I went in this meeting and that's what I told 'em.  I can't go out here and solve this problem, it's gonna take all of us.  But I guess the way I said it offended some people because later when I had a meeting with the president of the school, he asked me had I made any plans for retirement (laughter).  And it just so happened I had 'cause I was approaching my seventieth birthday and I knew if I didn't start drawing my retirement--plus I had promised my wife [Bernice Narcisse Bacon] we were gonna take off and do our thing, you know.  But it really struck me, I came home and told her (laughter) and I said, "You can," I said, "I think we can start packing now."  And (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So what, what year did you leave there?
Speaker 1: I retired from Baylor in 1993.  I went there in '75 [1975], and retired at the end of, well, it was really '94 [1994] at the end of the school year.
Story_ID: 476471
Speaker 1: From there I worked for a while part time with the city [Houston, Texas] in the STD clinics.  And now that was an experience, working in the sexually transmitted disease clinics.  Honey, that was something to behold.
Speaker 2: And you worked there how, for a couple of years?
Speaker 1: Ah, let's see, I think I worked until my wife [Bernice Narcisse Bacon] started getting sick, I worked there until about '99 [1999].  I was supposed to be part time, when I first went to the city, I was supposed to work about sixteen hours a week.  I ended up working sometimes fifty-some hours a week but I loved it.  But, you know, like over here and here's a young lady coming eighteen years old, she's got two or three kids, one in the oven and you pick up her records she's been treated for gonorrhea, she's been treated for syphilis, she's been treated for herpes, she's been treated for every damn known sexually transmitted disease, not once, she's been treated for syphilis, for gonorrhea, two or three times, she's been treated for syphilis twice.  She's been treated for, and, of course, herpes you never get over that.  But she's had everything in the book and she's not the only--by the dozens.  And then you sit there and you go to talk to these kids, and I had to learn how to talk, I thought I knew how to talk, how to convince 'em, I had to learn the language all over again.  And when it got to this thing on, on AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], there was one segment of some of these youngsters, especially in the Hispanic men, they didn't believe they could get it.  You would sit there and talk to these kids, "No, no, I'm okay."  And then what are you gone do when a young man comes in and his test shows he's positive for HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] and his mama calls you up and cusses you out 'cause her son ain't got nothing like that.  Or the guys got syphilis and HIV and he tells you he ain't got it.  Why?  'Cause the Lord ain't gonna let him get nothing like that (laughter).  How do you talk to, I had to learn all over again how to control your temper.  But that was a, I think every time I walked in that clinic, I learned something.  But also sometimes it was frightening.  When you look out there and everything, and here's the other thing.  All right, when the city decided they'd start charging ten dollars, the services we render in any private doctors office would run $125, $150 plus that test for AIDS at that time alone was forty dollars, fifty dollars but to run all these other tests plus examinations, plus the medicines.  These kids would come on, didn't have any money but you look down he's got on $125 worth of shoes, got a telephone, he's got the earrings, got the gold teeth, that tells about his sense of values or her sense of values.  Or like over here at one of the clinics, you got to know how to talk to him and tell him, all right, son, you don't have the money, tell you, boy, give me one of them shoes or hand me that earring.  Well, I think I can get some money, go outside and stand outside in ten minutes come back and give you ten dollars.  Or we had a program for the young ladies and by coming there they could, they could collect ten dollars and they'd say, "Don't, don't tell him."  Why, why not?  'Cause that boyfriend of hers, if he knew he had ten dollars, she had ten dollars, he'd take it from her or she'd have to give it to him, they're almost pimping.  I mean this is where sometimes you wanna cry.
Story_ID: 476472
Speaker 1: What are your concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Education.  And when I say education I just don't mean books and whatnot.  The first thing I think, the main thing is most of our youngsters don't know who they are.  As I told a group one time I said, "Go back and start with the first grade and go through high school and tell me how, if you compressed all that into a book with a thousand pages," I said, "you might find one paragraph in there about blacks."  You might find two sentences in there about Mexican Americans.  And with the blacks, Booker T. Washington.  But do they tell you about blacks serving under George Washington's Continental Army, no.  Tell you about, (unclear) and whatnot.  They tell you about Martha Washington [sic. Dolley Madison] saving the silverware when they burned Washington [D.C.], but they didn't tell you about the black guy who rebuilt the city.  They don't tell you a damn thing about blacks.  Or as I tell 'em the church, you go to church, out in Fifth Ward [Houston, Texas], walk in a Baptist church, a black Baptist church, everything, you know, Jesus and all the disciples, everybody's white.  But nobody'll tell you how Constantine the emperor of Rome told the pope, I want everybody to be white.  'Cause see there's one chapter in the Bible that describes Jesus and Jesus ain't have no rusty feet like, heels like mine, ain't had no nappy, if he had nappy hair, you know, who he was or as Redd Foxx said, if you live in that part of the world, you know, (laughter) he could have been.  But what I'm saying is, we don't know who we are.  Or like a young lady that said, when he said about Africa, "I don't know about being in Africa, I ain't never been to Africa."  Hey, wait a minute baby, have you heard about the Queen of Sheba, wouldn't you like to say you're descended from her?  Gal, came and made an ass out of Solomon, had his son.  Or how about Haile Selassie, you know.  Or how about the Falashas, black Jews who walked out of Egypt with Moses.  They don't know what you're talking about.  But if we just knew some of that and knew what it meant to have a dollar or really have a dollar, two things.
Speaker 1: Now tell me, your concern is the, or your concerns are about education?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What are your hopes?
Speaker 2: I hope that we will realize the value and really understand what an education is really all about.  I hope that we will learn like I said, what it means to have a dollar and how to get and use that dollar.  It's not enough to get the dollar, it's how you use it after you get it.  And we have to realize this, it's more than just educating the black community, we need to educate both sides of the community, but let's start at home first, get home organized then we can get out in the street and go across town because it's just as important for the other elements of the community to know who we are as it is for us to know.  And I have an article that I'm gonna give you a copy of, written by Dr. Sheila [ph.] when he was teaching at Texas Southern [Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas], 'Methods to Control the Negro, Heart, Mind, and Soul' [ph.].  And five things that were done to control the slaves and it's still in existence right now, just more subtle.  They had the patrollers out, well, how what's the relationship in any city you go in, what's the relationship between the police department and the black community?  We got a black police chief [Harold Hurtt] here, police chief, chief here now, we had one before.  It helps some but in some sections of town the relationship between the police department and those people ain't changed one damn bit.  And in any city you go in to, Los Angeles [California], some of the cities right now are just that far away from another riot between the citizens and the police department.  And having a black chief of police doesn't always mean it, Atlanta [Georgia], Houston [Texas], like I said we got a black man now, chief of police, we had one once before and it helps some, but there's some areas out here in the Sunnyside [Houston, Texas], some areas in the Fifth Ward, they're just gonna, I don't give a damn who you got for chief of police, the relationship ain't there.  And then you talk to some of these boys on the police force, that has improved since they upped the standards but a while back the average white guy on the police force maybe he finished high school, there's a problem--
Story_ID: 476473
Speaker 1: Tell me, Dr. Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.], how do you wanna be remembered?
Speaker 2: I really don't know.  I think the biggest thing I'd wanna be remembered by my sons [Robert J. Bacon, Jr. and Kenneth Bacon] as being a father and not their best friend, that stuff about my, I'm their best friend, I don't wanna be their best friend, I just wanna be their father.  And I want them to be, I don't want them to be my best friend, I want them to be my sons.  And I want them to remember me as that was my dad.  And one of the most significant things happened to me some years ago, my son sat me down in that room there, you get me, and he told me, "If we don't know now what you have tried to teach us, we're failures, but we feel you've been a good teacher, we know right from wrong, and you're a good dad."  That did it.  And I quit butting into their affairs.  So now my grandkids I tell 'em, they ask me something I say, "Have you talked to your mom and pop, because I'm not coming between you and your mom and daddy."  But then I felt like I was somebody.  I knew I was somebody because my sons told me, hey, you're doing all right.  But I would want to remember that he was my dad, not my best friend, he was just my dad.  That's all.  Excuse me, I still have periods of depression subsequent to the death of my wife [Bernice Narcisse Bacon] and the death of my mother [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon].  And I remember when my father died, I was doing all right 'til I looked up and this old lady who was white, who was ninety-five years old, raining like you couldn't imagine, and that old lady came out in all that rain to pay her respects to Frank [Frank Bacon].  And boy, that thing hit me and I think I guess I cried a bucket of tears 'cause it just, it struck me, again, you say Frank, hey, that's my daddy.  And then and I think maybe I'd like to be remembered like I remember Frank or like people remember Horace Bacon, 'cause granddaddy was a hell of a man too.  And, and, and the thing about both of them was, you walk the line and you're able to look every man straight in the eye.
Story_ID: 476474
Speaker 1: This represents the, the Illinois group attending Meharry [Meharry Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee] and preparing for their internships in 1947.  And that's me on the extreme right.  Standing over us is Dr. Smith [ph.], the alumni secretary.  And the lady there is Mrs. White [ph.] who was the registrar at Meharry at that time.
Speaker 2: Got this Matt [Matthew Hickey]?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yep.
Speaker 2: Ready?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: My wife and I in Seoul, Korea [Seoul, South Korea], in 1987 attending a meeting of the World Peace Through Law organization.  A hundred and seventy five nations were represented.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is Bob Bacon [HistoryMaker Dr. Robert J. Bacon, Sr.] somewhere in high school, at Lake Forest High School [Lake Forest, Illinois] probably about 1941, 1942.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Family gathering at the Club DeLisa [Chicago, Illinois].  That's my dad [Frank Bacon] on the extreme left and next to him is my uncle and some other members of the family.  Ma [Alice Black] and Pa Black [Sherman Black] are that couple there on the right, next to Uncle Joe [ph.].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Do you know what date?
Speaker 1: Do you know what year this might have been?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: Know what year it might have been?
Speaker 2: No, that's probably in the late, late '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Got it.
Speaker 2: This is my wife and my oldest son, Bob [Robert J. Bacon, Jr.], when Bob, I guess, was about maybe two years old which would have been about 1949, 19--about 1949.  But that's my beautiful wife, (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.  Got it.
Speaker 2: This is a significant photograph, my wife, that's my son Robert, Dr. Robert Bacon on the left, my wife, and my youngest son, Kenneth [Kenneth Bacon], on the right.  This photograph was showing that they were shareholders in the newly organized Riverside National Bank [Houston, Texas].  The first black owned bank in the State of Texas.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: Again my wife.  And now a picture of me above, that was me--
Speaker 1: We can only do one at a time.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.  That's my wife prior to, immediately prior to our marriage.
Speaker 1: What year?
Speaker 2: I would say it was about 1947, '46 [1946].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my second year at Meharry, it was 1945, '46 [1946].  At that time I was in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 2: It's my youngest son and his family at Martha's Vineyard, Massachusetts.  My son, Kenneth, on the left, his daughter, Kimberly [Kimberly Bacon], his wife, Judy [Judy Bacon], and his son, Daniel [Daniel Bacon].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On the left is my son, Kenneth, behind is his son, his son, my grandson, Daniel, on the right there with the big mustache is my oldest son, Robert, in the middle, the lady in the middle that's Minnie Bacon [Minnie Lee Askew Bacon], my grand- my mother at age 101.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My youngest son, Kenneth, and his wife, Judy, visiting with Mrs. Bush [Barbara Bush] when her husband [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was president.  At that time Kenneth was, had just started with Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association].  I don't know the year.
Speaker 1: My grandfather, Horace Bacon, and his family.  That's granddad there holding, on the far right is my grandfather, Horace Bacon, and at, in that row on the far left is his sister, Aunt Latt [ph.] who was a big midwife, and in the middle is Grandma Martha [Martha Bacon].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Nineteen ninety-four [1994], this is my mother, Minnie Bacon, 1999 rather, at age ninety-five.  She expired at the age of 101.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 1: Lake Forest High School championship football team.  In the back row, number forty-four, is Robert Bacon.  In the back row second from the left is John Agar, the first husband of Shirley Temple, the movie star.  In the second row on the left is, at number thirty-five, Ed Cook [Edward B. Cook] who was quite a well-known jockey, a big disc jockey around Chicago [Illinois] back in the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is probably the fifth or sixth grade class at Gorton High School [sic. Gorton School] in Lake Forest, Illinois.  The young lady in the back, second from the right is Josephine Harrison [ph.], now residing in California.  The young man in the second row on the far right is Henry McIntosh, who is now deceased.  And, of course, second from the right on the second row is one Robert Bacon.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Graduating class of Lake Forest High School in 1941, 105 graduates, 100 white, five black.  I believe three of the blacks are still around and about thirty-five, maybe forty of the whites are still with us.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is the last one.
Speaker 2: And this is my late wife, Bernice [Bernice Narcisse Bacon].  This was made, I guess, about 1953, '54 [1954], shortly after we came here [Houston, Texas] and started my practice.  She was a very, very beautiful woman.
