Story_ID: 57737
Speaker 1: Give me your name, full name and spell it, please, as well as give me any other names that you use or nicknames.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Reverend Larry S. Bullock.  B-U-L-L-O-C-K and today is Thursday, July 20, 2000.
Speaker 1: And your birth date, please.
Speaker 2: April 14, 1946.
Speaker 1: One moment, please.  April 14?
Speaker 2: April 14, 1946.
Speaker 1: City, state and country of birth.
Speaker 2: Winston Salem, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 57738
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I like fish, and I like cornbread, and I like blackberry pie.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My favorite phrase is, "Without faith, it is impossible to please God."
Speaker 1: Time of year or season?
Speaker 2: I like the fall, and I like the spring, and I don't like the summer, when it's hot and humid in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I enjoy vacationing in Canada, any province of Canada.  And I recently returned from Europe, and I enjoyed Paris [France].  Wouldn't want to live there, but I enjoyed visiting it, vacationing there.
Story_ID: 57739
Speaker 1: Can you give me the name of your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Both parents are deceased.  My mother's name is Anna, maiden name Potea, P-O-T-E-A, part Cherokee Indian.  My father, his name is Edward, last name is Bullock.  His family is from Norfolk, Virginia.
Speaker 1: Would you name your siblings in the order of birth?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister, who is deceased, her name was Barbara Holbrook Bullock; followed by my second sister, who is Pricilla, who is alive and a mother in North Carolina; then Dorothy; then Michael, my oldest brother; Clinton, the second boy; and Jacqueline, the baby of the family; all of whom live in the state of North Carolina, city of Winston-Salem.
Speaker 1: And where in this birth order is Larry?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest boy.
Story_ID: 57740
Speaker 1: Can you just tell me something about your mother [Anna Potea]? What was your impression of your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother was an LPN [licensed practical nurse] at a time when that was quite an honorable profession in the African American community.  My mother would embarrass me a lot.  She doted over me.  And even when my other brothers and sisters came along, she had a habit of telling them that I was her favorite, and I would ask her not to do that.  But she was my mother and I was her son, and so she did what she wanted to do.  My mother was a great cook.  My mother was very encouraging toward me, and felt that somehow or another I was a blessing to her--I don't know all of the background to that--and was very supportive of me.  And through my life in the South, in integration as a trailblazer, she was always there for me, even 'til the day that she died.  So I have very fond memories of my mother.  In my household, my mother was the disciplinarian.  I cannot recall her physically disciplining me, but I recall many occasions where she punished me by grounding me.  We didn't call it grounding then.  She just said, "You're gonna stay in the yard." And as I got older, involved in athletics, that was quite traumatic when she would punish me by grounding me.  But as I said, the thing that I remember most about my mother is that she was so supportive of me at an early age.  And because of that, I think I had the success that I did in school and of course later, in athletics and in public life.
Speaker 1: How old was your mother when you were born?
Speaker 2: My mother was 31 years old.
Story_ID: 57741
Speaker 1: Do you remember much about your mother's [Anna Potea] parents?
Speaker 2: I recall quite vividly my maternal grandmother [Pearl Gwyn], who I loved dearly.  She was part Cherokee as well.  Very long hair, hair down to--down to her waist.  And my maternal grandfather, Jessie Gwyn, was a baseball enthusiast, and he had about four brothers.  And I recall fondly we'd always go out on Saturday to the baseball games.  Needless to say, my community was predominantly African American.  So the games were played by African Americans on Saturday, and it was quite an entertainment.  My grandmother spoiled us.  And she made the best gingersnap cookies, I think, in the neighborhood.  So when we would go visit grandma, I always went there knowing that we were gonna get the cookies and all the other things we want.  And, of course, she would tell my mother that we were in her house, and that she would do for the grandkids what she wanted to do.  So my grandmother was very, very loving, very kind, an excellent cook.  Those are things that I remember, those visits that we'd make to grandparents' house.
Speaker 1: What did your grandfather do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was a farmer, a tobacco farmer in Winston-Salem [North Carolina] and Mount Airy [North Carolina], and a place called Pilot Mountain, North Carolina.  Andy Griffin made it famous, and he called it Mt. Pilot but the generic name was Pilot Mountain, North Carolina.  So that's around the northeastern part of the state--northwestern part of the state.
Story_ID: 57742
Speaker 1: And what are your memories of your father [Edward Bullock]?
Speaker 2: My father was a hard-working man.  And we saw him when he would come home on weekends 'cause he traveled.  He was supportive of what we call harness racing--race horses.  And so he worked for this white man, Mr. Thomas--Thompson, I'm sorry, Thompson--in North Carolina.  So he would travel a lot with him, you know, driving him and being with him.  And I recall once my father took me to Roanoke, Virginia and allowed me to get up in the buggy to ride the harness race horses.  And that was a big treat for me.  And this white family, Mr. Thompson's family--they took a liking to me because I was Edward's son and they would let me ride the horses.  I just thought that was wonderful when I was able to travel with him.  And the other thing that I always looked forward when he came home on the weekend.  'Cause as I got older, I was able to take his ties and his suits and his shoes.  And he'd fuss a little bit but he'd let me have 'em.  And so I always looked forward to when I became a teenager, of getting my dad's ties and shirts and shoes.
Speaker 1: Were you as close with his parents as you were your mother's parents?
Speaker 2: No, I don't know much about my father's family.  They were from Norfolk, Virginia, and I don't recall meeting them after I became a teenager.  If I met them at an early age, I don't recall that.  I don't know the whole history of his family in Norfolk, but I don't recall meeting them.
Story_ID: 57743
Speaker 1: From your perspective as a "favorite son," what was life like growing up in the Bullock household?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother [Anna Potea] insisted that we perform our chores.  The girls were responsible for the things in the house.  And the boys were responsible for things--when my younger brothers came along; prior to that, it was just me--responsible for things outside the house, whether it was the yard or whether it was going to the store or running errands, or whatever the case may be.  Making certain everybody got to the bus stop, caught the bus, those kinds of things.  And I started working outside of the home probably at age ten or eleven when I would mow lawns on Saturday in my community.  And as I left that, I became a caddy at the golf course so I would caddy on Saturday and Sunday at the golf course.  And, and of course, when I went to college it was athletics and working.  And I worked in a textile factory in a--in a shipping, shipping room.  So our family was a family that believed that everybody had a responsibility and they had various chores that they had to perform.  And my mom saw to it that we performed those chores.  It is where I learned how to clean, how to mop, how to sweep, how to cook a little bit, not much.  And of course, I learned that, when my mom left and my dad [Edward Bullock] left, I was in charge of the house.  And that was very clear.  My father would say when he left, "You're the man of the house."  And so he instilled that in me.
Speaker 1: And that's the basis of your natural leadership?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Of course, the part that has not been mentioned was my involvement in the church at age twelve.  And I was given leadership responsibility there.  And, of course, I think athletics played a major role in my life.  It taught me responsibility.  It taught me discipline.  It taught me teamwork, it forced me to discipline myself in my studies.  And so, I think athletics, the church, and of course, my, my family helped shape my character in terms of responsibility, personal responsibility, in terms of how I should treat my wife [Gloria Bullock] and my children.  Much of that is carry-over from that.
Story_ID: 57744
Speaker 1: And out of this period of growth, what would you say was the most challenging experience you had?
Speaker 2: Well, I guess I was somewhat different, in that I was called upon in the mid-'60s [1960s] in the state of North Carolina to be a trailblazer.  I was the first black to integrate the high school.  I was the first black to go to my college [Catawba College, Salisbury, North Carolina].  And so the early part of my life, from grades eight to eleven, I was in predominantly black schools and in a black environment.  And in that environment, I was a leader in both junior high and high.  As a matter of fact, I chaired--not chaired, but I was the president of my class from freshman to junior in the black high school.  And of course, I was involved in athletics, all three sports--baseball, basketball, football--and was the captain of the team.  So at that time in my life, I was a leader in the black community.  And of course, at age twelve I joined the church and became active in Methodist youth fellowship because one of my high school teachers--who was not a high school teacher at the time, was not my teacher, but a high school teacher nonetheless--gave me responsibilities in the church.  Once a month, we'd lead the worship service, and we would be called on to say our pieces and make various recitations.  So in the church, the responsibility was the same as it was in high school.  And so, I think the church and the community helped shape me and it was expected that I would be a leader.  In my senior year, it is a time when the broader community called on me to go integrate an all-white high school [Mount Airy High School] in Mount Airy, North Carolina, where I was the first black student, black athlete, and black graduate.  And with that came a tremendous amount of community support from the black community who were proud that someone was integrating that all-white high school.  And of course, the white leaders of the community--the real movers and shakers--were proud that they had someone that they could integrate the schools with.  And so, that really was the beginning of my involvement in both public life and in public leadership.  At that time I was, needless to say, first and foremost an athlete.  I was a basketball/football player and ran track.
Story_ID: 57745
Speaker 1: During that time, did you consciously make a decision to go into public life or--
Speaker 2: Interesting enough, I was introduced to public life in the senior year of high school.  Which was the one year that I went to the, what was then predominantly, all white high school, Mount Airy High School [Mount Airy, North Carolina].  And I took a course, a geography course under a teacher by the name of Ms. Myr'am Levering, who was a Quaker, whose husband was a Quaker and very involved in the Society of Friends.  And one week they said, "We'd like for you to go with us to a retreat."  And so, they took me to Black Mountain, North Carolina, which is up in the northeastern part of the state, up by Asheville [North Carolina].  And it was a retreat where I had the opportunity to meet then-Secretary General of the United Nations, U Thant, from Burma.  And I came back to school, and I said to Ms. Levering, "I think I'd like to do that."  And so, I had no knowledge prior to that what I was gonna go to college to major in.  Primarily, I was gonna go to college to play basketball, play football.  And she said, "Well, you think you'd like to do that?"  I said, "I think I would."  So she said, "Why don't you major in political science or history when you go to college?"  And so I decided then, I was gonna major in history.  And I always liked history.  And so then, I went to college [Catawba College, Salisbury, North Carolina].  And my first year, I was gonna major in history, and I had a very bad experience my first year in college being the first black.  And then, I switched to political science, and that led me into pre-law and aspirations to run for public office.
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about that bad experience?
Speaker 2: It was a experience that probably shaped my destiny.  When I arrived at Catawba College in Salisbury, North Carolina, in September of 1965, I enrolled in my courses.  And I took a course in United States history.  A professor, who was Dr. C. Craig Singer, was the professor.  And after the first test--I got it back and I think I got a C+ or something like that.  And I went to him because I was quite disturbed that I'd got a C+ because I loved history.  And I knew I was a, a good student in history.  And he told me at that time that I would never make more than a "B" in his class.  That that's the best that a black could get in his class.  So I then went and told the coach, who then said, "Let me handle it."  And then he talked to some people, and they agreed that I should not major in history, that I could major in political science.  And they took me out of the history curriculum and that's how I got into the political science and made friendship with another white family by the last name of Coopers.  Mr. Peter Cooper and his wife, who took an interest in me.  And then I majored in political science and became involved in the campus activity of the--what you call World Peace Club.  And the Quakers were involved.  And I become involved in the International Relations Club in addition to playing basketball and running track.  And so, that's how I got into politics at the undergraduate level and at the college level.  Because of that incident that shaped my destiny.
Story_ID: 57746
Speaker 1: From your college years until you actually started running for office, was there any other political activity in between?
Speaker 2: Well, interesting enough, in college, the athletic director of the college [Catawba College, Salisbury, North Carolina] retired.  And he retired because he was going to run for Congress.  And in North Carolina, he was running as a Republican, and at that time, North Carolina was a Democratic state.  And his name was Earl Ruth.  And so, when he was running, he asked any of the people on campus if we wanted to get involved.  I didn't have much knowledge at that time of partisan politics.  All I knew, that he was Coach Ruth, the athletic director and that I could get involved in this campaign.  And so, my first political campaign that I involved myself in was in the campaign for Congress for the Republican candidate from the state of North Carolina.  And that was quite--in hindsight, that was quite a sight.
Speaker 1: Why do you say that?
Speaker 2: You didn't see a lot of blacks supporting Republicans in the South.
Story_ID: 57747
Speaker 1: What year did you come to the Chicago [Illinois] area?
Speaker 2: 1969.
Speaker 1: And what were your first thoughts of Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, I drove here all the way from North Carolina.  I lived in Evanston, Illinois.  I was impressed with the vastness of the city.  I was not in awe, even though I came from a very small city in North Carolina.  I was impressed that black people were doing things here as black people were doing things in the South.  I was not so much interested in politics when I first came.  I came en route to law school.  And I ended up teaching, as you know, in Evanston for a while before I got directly involved in partisan politics in Chicago.  And so, it was from that teaching that I made some contacts and decided, subsequently, to move to the city and to become actively involved in local politics and state politics.  But I--my first impression of Chicago is that it was large.  And that black people were influential in the late '60s [1960s].  And, of course, I naturally gravitated toward civil rights, which is [Operation] Breadbasket, Operation PUSH now.  And became more involved and immersed in the civil rights activities.
Speaker 1: When you started getting active in politics, why is it you chose the state now?
Speaker 2: Because of my job prior to running for office.  When I left education, I was a lobbyist for the Illinois Hospital Association, the first black lobbyist for that association, in 1970--'71 [1971], I'm sorry, '71.  The opportunity presented itself that the executive director of the association--I guess had been lobbying in Springfield [Illinois].  And they'd just kinda developed the image of being pro-Republican.  And I guess a way of showing some even-handedness was to find an African American that could also serve as a lobbyist for them.  And so I went to Springfield as a lobbyist and went to Washington, D.C. as a lobbyist for the Hospital Association.  I worked there for two years, until I made my first attempt at elective office.  So, that's how I came to state politics, as a lobbyist for a hospital association.
Story_ID: 57748
Speaker 1: What is the biggest lesson being in state politics taught?
Speaker 2: I think the biggest lesson I learned in the State of Illinois, politics in the State of Illinois, is that to be effective you must not hold grudges.  To be effective.
Speaker 1: And what would--what summary kind of statement would you say about your career in politics?
Speaker 2: I used to say that I wasted fifteen years in public life before going into the ministry.  And the more I prayed about it and talked to some people, I was told that all that I had done and all that I had obtained was in preparation for me to do the work of ministry.  And so, I don't look with it--with as much disdain as perhaps I did five, six, eight years ago.  Politics is very rough in Chicago [Illinois].  It's very rough in the State of Illinois.  And, as an aside, I'm reading a book now by Robert Woodward.  It's a number one best-seller, New York Times book list, entitled Shadow.  And it talks about the presidency, post-Watergate.  And so, the one thing that I felt most bitter about when I left public life is that the press had taken a posture that all public officials were dishonest, that the parties could not be trusted, and that in order for the media to be effective, it had to find scandal and destroy people.  And so that concerned me more than anything else--the kind of hostility that developed between the press and elected officials.  And maybe it was my own perspective, but when I read Woodward's book, it kind of confirms what I felt.  There was this basic distrust between media and politics that I think was unhealthy.
Speaker 1: Do politicians come to their career knowing to some degree that there's always gonna be that back and forth?
Speaker 2: I did not because I came to politics at a time when the enthusiasm was high on the part of African Americans.  The first time I ran for office, I think I quoted English philosopher Edmond Burke, who said, "The only thing necessary for evil to triumph is for good men and women to do nothing."  And it was post-Watergate.  And I really felt that, as a young man who'd taken the time to get the academic preparation, that I could run for elective office and make a difference, that I could benefit a community.  And that, quite frankly, with my talents and skills, that I could go far if people would evaluate me based on talents and skills.  So I did not come into politics with any cynicism.  I came in with great optimism and I worked very hard.  And I worked with my colleagues, both sides of the aisle.  I worked with my colleagues from African American communities, and from the European communities.  So I was really, you might say, wild-eyed and bushy-tailed and rarin' to go in state politics.
Story_ID: 57749
Speaker 1: And I guess your orientation too, after having been raised, you know, in a position of respect and so forth and whatever, and you had never been challenged as the media challenged you in a new way.  How was that for you when you ran into your legal difficulties?
Speaker 2: Well I never felt bad about the press in terms of them asking questions on the issues, in terms of them probing because, quite frankly, I enjoyed it.  Because I thought I had taken the right position on the issues.  And so I enjoyed that.  And I considered myself a progressive Democrat.  And so I didn't have a blatant resentment toward the press.  And I was very open and supportive of the press and actually solicited the press' support, because I was politically ambitious, as all people are.  And you want the press' support.  And so it didn't bother me that the press was doing its job.  What, I think, ultimately bothered me is, to the extent that the press gives no regard to one's family.  No regard to one as a person.  And this is true today.  And I think that was a beginning of what we're seeing the full manifestation of today in public life: that we will have good people refusing to stand for public office and to enter politics.  A) because they will not subject their families to the kind of acrimony and hostility that sometime comes from the press.  And I think, also, the net effect is it causes the public to be extremely cynical.
Story_ID: 57750
Speaker 1: How did you keep your home life together within the context of how your children were reading what they were hearing back and forth?  And how your wife [Gloria Bullock] was putting up with whatever she ran into and her--
Speaker 2: Well, my public life, ninety-five percent of it was very good because I was well-received--and tremendous honors, Legislator of the Year--I would say, by a dozen such organizations.  Supported some great candidates: deputy campaign manager Carter/Mondale, deputy campaign manager Adlai [E.] Stevenson for governor.  And so my family, as best I could, was brought out when I felt that it was positive and that they would enjoy the venue, if you will, of public life.  And, of course, it was not unusual for me to be honored, and especially in the black community, which was my community that was very supportive of me.  The fact that I was elected four times says to me that somebody supported me.  And the fact when I ran for Congress to take then-Mayor Harold Washington's seat that Charlie Hayes subsequently won, that we received the level of support that we did.  And so, one of the ways I think that I was able to shield the family from the acrimony of the press and public life is that I basically just didn't have them involved in every single aspect of public life.  And my wife being a professional, she had her own profession.
Story_ID: 57751
Speaker 1: So how was it being the first in your community, the first African American to integrate several things?
Speaker 2: Well, in Mount Airy, North Carolina, which is the northwestern part of the state, south of the Virginia line--a small community.  Probably, I would say, at best 30,000, 35,000 people, the black community less than five or seven percent.  Closer to Virginia than to the heartland of the state of North Carolina, Winston-Salem, which is where I was originally raised and born.  In Mount Airy, North Carolina, between September of '94 [1994] and June of '95 [1995], I was quite often in the newspaper as an athlete.  Not so much as a student.  My attendance at Mount Airy High School [Mount Airy, North Carolina] received tremendous publicity, that the first black student was enrolling in Mount Airy High School.  Subsequently, I'll share with you a little bit about what happened my first years at college [Catawba College], which was in Salisbury, North Carolina, seventeen miles from the national headquarters of the Ku Klux Klan.  But in high school, I was well received because I was an athlete.  And according to the press, they said I was a pretty good athlete.  I was a basketball player.  I ran track, and I also played football.  So, the first sport that I participated in was football.  And then, of course, subsequent football is the basketball season.  And I ultimately went to college on a full basketball scholarship, having decided to play basketball rather than football.  But in Mount Airy, North Carolina, there were people--I remember the principal at the time, a gentleman by the name of Mr. Hamilton, who has remained a lifelong friend.  His son was a senior as well.  He subsequently went on to West Point.  The irony of this is that his son was the quarterback the year before I got there.  And when I got there, I became the quarterback.  So the principal's son was second string quarterback to me.  But the family embraced me and supported me.  And that meant a lot to me.  And I remember that to this day, that the family of the Hamiltons were so supportive, and wrote letters of recommendation for me to go to college.  And, I think, had some hand in deciding the college that I ultimately selected, which was Catawba College in Salisbury, North Carolina.  When we played the football games, it's entirely different.  We played many of the rural schools, and I was not well received.  And so, the way as a young athlete--not mature at all--that I was able to overcome the hostilities that built up inside of me was to convince the football coach to let me play both offense and defense.  So that when I played offense, I could pay 'em back for the things that they did to me.  And normally, if you know anything about athletics, you don't let your quarterback play defense.  But he knew that I had to have some way of releasing my hostility.  They would sic dogs on me, they would sit in the stands and throw objects at me.  When we would stop on some roads, we had to eat in the bus.  Because I was with the team, we could not sit down at the restaurants.  But in the midst of all of that, I was determined--and my mother was equally determined--that I was gonna stay there.  I'd made the decision, and that I was going to succeed.  And so that taught me a tremendous amount of self-control.  It also inspired me to do well, because I was being challenged at every moment--even by some of my teammates.
Story_ID: 57752
Speaker 1: And, of course, the broader civil rights struggle was happening.  What did you draw from that?
Speaker 2: Well, I must admit that I was not as sophisticated politically then as I am now.  I knew about the demonstrations taking place in Greensboro, North Carolina, and other places throughout the nation.  But I must admit I wasn't as cognizant of what was going on at the time.  I was a high school senior, an athlete who's trying to do the best he can and do the class work and hopefully establish a record that I could go to a college.  And so, my outlook was getting to college as the first person in my family.  Not only to go to college, but to finish.
Speaker 1: And the reason you picked Catawba College [Salisbury, North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: I think it was--I think it was probably because the coach at that college had been a former basketball coach at my high school.  And all of the people around me that were significant in my life encouraged me to select it.  My first choice was not to go to Catawba College.  I talked to my mother [Anna Potea] and my aunt, and I signed with a--what we call now, a historic black college.  I signed with Winston-Salem State University, in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and I was going to go there and play basketball for a man by the name of "Big House" Gaines, who you may know is the--probably the top, winningest coach in college basketball.  Clarence "Big House" Gaines.  His son coached here for a while at the Chicago Bulls [NBA].  I actually signed with him, and in mid-summer I changed my mind.  And of course, he's never let me forget that to this day.  He would come up and give me a backhand or something, remind me of how I disappointed him.  And for the first year in college I felt bad about it, because I did break my word, but at the same time, the influential people around me were saying, "You need to be the first in college.  You did good here in high school, so go to Catawba.  You can do a lot for your people, you can do a lot for the community, and you'll get a good education."  A whole host of things were said, in addition to the fact that I--my mom didn't have to pay any money.
Story_ID: 57753
Speaker 1: So, during your college years, now you're more aware of the broader civil rights struggle.  And how were your years in Catawba [Catawba College, Salisbury, North Caroline], as it relates to your challenges of being first?
Speaker 2: Interesting thing, when I arrived in Catawba College in September of 1965, my mom [Anna Potea] had saw fit to help me get a car first--second car that I had.  It was a green Plymouth Sport Fury.  And I pulled up to the campus of the college.  I was extremely excited about going to college.  My family was happy, I'd packed my clothes and had my trunk in it.  And I pulled into quadrangle, the center of the campus, to an administrations building.  And as I pulled around in the campus quadrangle, I looked up in a tree, and they had hung me in effigy.  And they had the words, "Nigger, go home."  My head told me to go home.  My heart said, "No, you stay here.  Don't dare go back and let your mother know that you're a quitter."  But I was burned in effigy.  So, I checked in.  And of course, the whole campus was embarrassed.  And I told you about the episode with the professor.  So it was not a bed of roses.  But I graduated in four years, Dean's List student, with a undergraduate degree in political science, pre-law.
Story_ID: 57754
Speaker 1: So, your awareness of the national scene--you were kinda involved, so involved in college years, you didn't--at what point in your college and young adult life did you start to become more aware beyond your personal experiences that, we're kinda all in this together?
Speaker 2: After the assassination of Martin Luther King [Jr.], when I sat in the student center and cried, and asked myself why, why would they do this to him.  That kind of got me involved in this thing that we talk about, civil rights.  And I saw that through government, I thought that we could make a difference.  And I said that throughout my political life, that I thought government could make a difference.  I remember the last year of my college.  I was doing student teaching and they were looking for places to send us to do our student teaching.  And, for some reason, I got sent to Kannapolis, North Carolina, seventeen miles from headquarters of the Ku Klux Klan.  And I was in Salisbury, North Carolina.  And I recall some of the experiences when I walked into that classroom.  The kids loved me.  The kids were very supportive and very receptive, and I had a good experience in the classroom.  It wasn't always the case outside the classroom.  And so, when I came to up south, to Chicago [Illinois] and Evanston [Illinois], I was fully aware, at that time, of what this nation was involved in, in 1969.  But yet, I was determined to follow my dream of going into public life.  And it shaped my character, it shaped my outlook on public life, so that when I ran for office the first time, I did not run as an establishment candidate.  I ran as an independent Democrat for alderman in Chicago.  I ran a second time for state representative as an independent Democrat, and the third time, I was elected, you know, to the House as a Democrat.  And the [Democratic] Party did support me.  But my enthusiasm for the civil rights movement was evidenced in the fact that I was willing to challenge the established Party at the time in the city, that I did not see as adequately representing the interest of black people.
Story_ID: 57755
Speaker 1: At Catawba College [Salisbury, North Carolina], interesting--when I arrived in 1965, two of us came--three.  As a matter of fact, had a football player who second year became my roommate.  We were given roommates who were obviously not African American, since there were only two of us, two basketball players.  And during that time, Livingston College--located in the same city [Salisbury, North Carolina], historical black college, AME [African Methodist Episcopal] Zion school.  We were encouraged as athletes to go to Livingston College to meet some people.  And the emphasis was that they did not want us dating the white girls on the campus.  When I left Catawba in 1969, I think there were about six or seven African Americans on campus.  They had brought in some African American females as well, but the rest of us were all athletes.  Today I don't know if they have maybe three or four hundred blacks, but in 1969 of June, I was the first black graduate of that college, which is a United Church of Christ German reform school in Salisbury, North Carolina.
Story_ID: 57756
Speaker 1: When you transitioned into politics here through Operation Breadbasket--would you trace that process?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was a volunteer.  And then Operation PUSH had become Operation PUSH-Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] and Dr. Clay Evans had changed the name as Operation PUSH.  And I was a volunteer on Saturday morning and working with them.  Also, when I was a lobbyist for the Illinois Hospital Association, Reverend Jackson and I had a chance to meet each other personally, and he took an interest in me.  And I had--was preparing to write my master's thesis.  I got my first Masters from Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], the same school of Mayor [Harold] Washington.  And other great leaders in the city have gotten their masters [degrees] there.  And I did my thesis on revenue sharing--governmental transfer payments, and that was an issue that was of concern, at the time, to Operation PUSH.  And Reverend Jackson would ask me to come and to speak about that, and to help with panel discussions at PUSH.  And I recall once, when he could not be on nationwide TV, and he was to bate--was to debate then, the former governor, he was then-Governor of Iowa.  His name was [Norman Arthur] Erbe.  And Reverend Jackson was going somewhere across the globe, as he routinely did.  But he called and told Reverend [Willie] Barrow to have me go on TV and represent him and discuss revenue sharing.  And so, there I was, you know, not yet wet behind the ear, representing Operation PUSH on Channel 9, debating the former governor of Iowa on revenue sharing--which was something that, you know, then-Congressman Wilbur Mills had shaped in the Congress.  After that, I did tours with he and Reverend Barrow as we'd go across the country doing civil rights work.  I'd gone with them once to Birmingham, Alabama, to meet Coretta Scott King and to meet Jim [Joseph?] Lowery and Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy.  And was just doing those things that one would normally do because Reverend Jackson had said to us, "Those of us who had come through The Civil Rights Movement and had been fortunate enough to get an education," as he often said, "from those white schools--you have an obligation to come back and to contribute to the community."  And, being young, as I was at the time, both being intimidated and impressed, I took him at his word.  And so, I gave my time, as a volunteer in The Civil Rights Movement, Operation PUSH.  And then, there was a period of time there when PUSH was absent an executive director, and he brought me on as his special assistant for about six months at Operation PUSH, and I served as his special assistant.  And I left to run for office again, and got elected.
Speaker 1: And those people you named who encouraged you to do so?
Speaker 2: From Evanston [Illinois], there was a lady by the name of Frances Davis, and another lady by the name of Alice Tregay, who were very prominent fixtures at Operation PUSH, and a gentleman by the name of Tom Fuller.  They were the ones that encouraged me to get involved in civil rights, actively involved in civil rights.  And we would travel from Evanston to Chicago for the Saturday morning breakfast meetings, and that was my first introduction to The Civil Rights Movement in Chicago with Operation PUSH.
Story_ID: 57757
Speaker 1: What were the years like between your political life and today?
Speaker 2: I left office in 1986.  We're now sitting fourteen years later.  I'm an ordained Methodist minister in the African Methodist Episcopal Church.  I'm the assistant pastor in Evanston, Illinois, at Ebenezer A.M.E. Church, a 117 year-old institution.  Four people have left the church and become bishops in our church.  I own two corporations, both of whom are involved in construction engineering and construction manufacturing.  I spend time in both the U.S. and in Europe.  I have a daughter, who is now a senior.  I have a grandson and a grandson on the way.  My grandson's five years old and I got a grandson coming in September.  And through all of that, I've also picked up a second master's degree in Divinity--McCormick Theological Seminary on the campus of University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  And I'm president of the Suburban Black Contractors Association--eight year-old firm, an association that was founded by me.  And I have accumulated awards in the religious community for my work.  And so, when I look back over my life since politics, I'm blessed.  I'm happier now than I've ever been.  I realize, as one of my friends said to me, "You know, you've got the best deal."  I wrote Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Jr.] a note once, told him I'm glad we traded places--that I went into ministry and he went into politics.  And I said to him, "I had the best of the deal."  Those in politics get a Lexus.  I get a fiery chariot when I leave.
Story_ID: 57758
Speaker 1: The set of events that encouraged me in politics [sic, ministry], I think, occurred in probably 1988, a very low point in my life.  Extremely depressed, lonely, isolated--and I came to the conclusion that, with all of my intellect and all of my ability, that I was not in a position to help my family or myself.  And I humbled myself, and I cried out to God, and I said to Him, "If you get me through this ordeal, I will commit the rest of my life to serving you."  And he kept His end of the deal and I'm keeping my end of the deal.  And He blessed me, He blessed my family, He blessed my business.  And so, the thing that I say to people all the time--they say, "Reverend Bullock, how do you find the time to do all of this?  You preach, you teach, you go to seminary part-time, but yet and still, you take full load courses."  And I graduate--graduated in June of 2000 with a masters in divinity and took four courses and called myself a part-time student.  And I say to them, "By God's grace."  Whom He calls, He sends, and whom He sends, He blesses.  All of my political life, people would often make statements, "Oh, you're going to be a minister."  And in my own arrogance and hubris, I would say, "Oh no, no, not me, I'm just working for the people."  But, in fact, God had touched me a long time ago.  And He had allowed me to pursue the desires of my heart.  But there came a time when He said to me, "You will do what I've called you to do, and that's to serve me."  Now, I do it with joy, and I do it with great delight.  I'm blessed as a result of it.  And for the rest of my life, I say to all of my friends--including my business associates, because I don't check my religion at the door.  I don't rub it in your face, but I don't check it at the door.  And I tell them, "What you get first and foremost is an ambassador for Christ."  And for the rest of my life, that's what I'm gonna do.
Story_ID: 57759
Speaker 1: I guess the question is, how did I feel coming from the South and going to Operation PUSH in this big urban area [Chicago, Illinois] and getting involved in civil rights.  First of all, I was impressed that Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] saw in me something that he felt could be used by both Operation PUSH and the African American community--at the time was called the black community.  And so I was impressed by that.  And I met some interesting public officials at that time who would come through the doors of Operation PUSH.  So it was quite impressive.  One of the things I remember when I came to PUSH, and I'd make my presentations and you know, having written my master's thesis.  Reverend Jackson needed this information.  He says, "You know, because people like you to go to college and get this education, you have an obligation to come and share that with the community, participate in the movement."  I mean, he really gave the heavy sales pitch.  And--but he said to me, he says, "One thing I think you ought to know.  You've got a lot of education, but you need to be educated in 'nigger-ology.'"  And I didn't quite understand that.  But what he was saying is that I needed to take all of that intellect and find a way to use it effectively in the black community and for the black community.  He was saying that I didn't have enough of the black experience, and he probably was correct.  And so I said, "Okay."  And I went to work with PUSH and with these leaders across this, this globe.  The situation at the time is that to be involved with Operation PUSH, out of necessity politically, you'd have to be an independent Democrat because the agenda was against the Democratic operation in Chicago.  So I naturally gravitated toward the independent black Democratic movement and working with liberals and not necessarily with Republicans--but yet, sometime with Republicans.  And that's how my political philosophy was shaped in the urban politics of Chicago, through Operation PUSH and the independent Democratic movement.
Speaker 2: Can you give me an example of one of your lessons in 'nigger-ology'?
Speaker 1: (Laughing) Well, I think [Reverend] Jesse [Jackson Sr.] would tell me to--we'd go and we'd make these speeches, and it would be Reverend [Willie] Barrow, would be him, and myself.  And I would make my presentation from a heavy economic emphasis--how [U.S.] Congress constructs the laws.  And he would say to me, "You've gotta say to black folks how this affects them, and you've gotta understand that black folks are not interested in those three dollar words.  They want to have simple words."  And what he was basically saying is that I had to be a little bit more 'country.'  And at first, I balked at that, because I thought, well, that's condescending.  They don't want me to split verbs and dangling participles and mispronounce words, and stuff like that.  But he was saying to me that if you're gonna get the people behind you, you've gotta speak the language that they understand.  And so, once I learned that--he said, "Once you learn that, you'll be hard to handle.  Nobody can stop you."  And so I remember the first campaign that I ran, and I would go into the public housing projects dressed like I am today, because I refused to change.  And he'd say to me, "You've gotta get into--get out of that suit, and you've gotta get into some tennis shoes or get into some boots and put on a dashiki or whatever the case would be--because you're not relating to the people."  And I found that when I ran for office the first time, maybe I was talking over the heads of the people.  And subsequently, I did moderate my presentation.  But as I got elected, I went back to my old self and people would say in Springfield [Illinois], "You're the only guy I know that can go dressed like that, and the people in the public housing projects support you."  And I said to them, "That's because they know my heart, they know me, and they don't want me coming in there talking down to them.  They want me to come in there and tell them what I'm doing for them, and what I propose to do for them."  And my wife use to say they'd call me all times of night--Saturday night late, Sunday nights.  I had to go down to the police station, bail people out.  God forbid, sometime we'd had to go to the morgue and help people get funeral plans together.  And I think in public life, people get to know you, and they don't care how you dress.  And I think we are seeing today that people prefer individuals who are both ethnic and excellent.  And so, that's the way I tried to shape my persona in public life--that I wanted to be ethnic and excellent.  And to the white establishment, it was arrogance.  And that was my undoing.
Story_ID: 57760
Speaker 1: In 1975, my first attempt at elective office was in the great 2nd Ward of Chicago [Illinois].  The ward of Dawson, the ward that was considered to be the mother ward of South Side politics.  Claude Holman was over in the great 4th Ward, and Ralph Metcalfe had just left the 3rd Ward, gone to Congress, and William Barnett was the alderman of the 2nd Ward.  I lived in the 2nd Ward.  So logically, if I was gonna run for a ward, I'd run where I live.  And the people felt that I had been working in the housing projects of Ida B. Wells, Robert Taylor Homes and Stateway Gardens, with the local advisory councils.  And they suggested to me that it was time for [William] Barnett to go and that I should run.  And I ran against him.  As a matter of fact, now-Congressman Bobby [Lee] Rush was also in the race.  And so I ran second to Barnett.  I lost to him.  And then, the second time I came back, I ran for the House [Illinois House of Representatives], and barely lost that when we had three in a district.  And of course, the third time I ran and I won.  The issues that motivated me to run in the 2nd Ward was the fact that the independent movement among blacks was emerging, and that it was a disdain for both the [Richard J.] Daley regime and the [Michael Anthony] Bilandic administration.  And subsequently I think that we were proven right.  Bobby Rush did run and win and became the alderman and defeated Barnett, and subsequently he ran for [U.S.] Congress.  So perhaps I was about ten years too early in running for that--for that seat.
Story_ID: 57761
Speaker 1: Why did you even think about running for the state legislature to begin with?  I mean, why that?  That's you could have continued running for alderman.  People don't always make that jump.
Speaker 2: The question as to why I would run for the State House [Illinois] and not run for alderman again--quite frankly, I had been involved more in state government than in local government.  I had not worked in the Chicago City Council.  I had been working in Springfield [Illinois], and, of course, in Washington, D.C. as a lobbyist.  So my interest was always state government, not local government.  But I ran for the first seat that came up.  When I decided now was the time for me to run for public office, I ran for the seat that came up first.  And some had said that, even if you lose, you will get your name out there people will know about you, and then you can run for the House.  So there was perhaps some truth in that statement, that by running the first time in a ward, I became well known.  I also got an opportunity to see what it's like to campaign in the rough, tough bowels of Chicago politics on the South Side of Chicago, in a ward that many people look to as a ward of great historical significance and political prowess.  And so then I ran in, in '76 [1976] for the House [Illinois House of Representatives], unsuccessful.  And of course '78 [1978], I did win.
Story_ID: 57762
Speaker 1: When I ran for office for the state legislature in 1976, Illinois was still under the cumulative voting.  You had three members in every House district and one senator.  And in my House district, we had Corneal A. Davis, who was the dean of the Illinois House of Representatives--a great warrior, a great man, an A.M.E. minister who had served in that capacity for probably thirty years.  We also had at that time James Y. Carter, who subsequently became the vehicle commissioner for the City of Chicago.  And we had a fellow by the name of Jenoah S. Washington, a black Republican from the 3rd Ward.  And so, when I ran for the office, that was the line-up.  And so, I was running against real pillars in the African American community.  Unbeknownst to me, one of them was from the state of North Carolina, which was J. Y. Carter, who I could say was my 'homeboy.'  But I only wanted one seat, and I didn't care whose seat it was.  I wanted to get one seat.  And so when I ran, that was my opposition.  And I was not successful.  Then the next time that I ran I was successful, and I went down to Springfield and served with Corneal A. Davis, who was my mentor.
Story_ID: 57763
Speaker 1: Can you tell me something about your relationship with Corneal Davis, the pros, the cons?
Speaker 2: When I met former representative Corneal A. Davis, who's now deceased, I was a lobbyist in Springfield [Illinois].  And many nights we would go out for dinner, I would take him out for dinner--we'd talk.  On many issues, I would lobby him and work with members of the Black Caucus.  So I had an opportunity to know him before I ran for office--an opportunity to observe him in his work in Springfield as the dean of the Illinois House [of Representatives] and, of course, the ranking black member in the Illinois House and, of course, being an AME [African Methodist Episcopal] minister.  So I had a chance to talk and observe things with him up close and personal and sometimes observe him from afar.  The good news is that I did not have to run against him a second time.  He retired.  And so that opened the opportunity for me to run for a seat that did not have an incumbent.  He was very supportive of me, encouraged me--not as much as he would have liked to because he was with the regular party, but he had always taken a very independent posture on some issues as best as one could at that time in fighting for the rights of African American people.  And you know the thing that he was most proud of was the Fair Employment Practices Commission in the State of Illinois.  And so it was almost prophetic that I would run for the seat of a civil rights pioneer--one who had fought all of his life for more public aid funding, for full economic opportunity, for the establishment of the Fair Employment Practices Commission.  So when I was elected, I was very proud--and some of the photos that you will see later--that I could go to Springfield and take the seat of this revered man of Illinois politics who had been with the late Congressman [William] Dawson and had been a real pillar in black politics in the state.  And so it was quite an honor for him to not only embrace me and support me but to give me advice.  And I think the thing that I'm most proud of is that he was able to allow his grandson that he loved dearly--who is now deceased as well, Albert Mole--to become my general counsel and to chair my Issues Committee.  And he was very proud, even to the day that he died, that Albert and I worked so closely together.  And he felt that, and he said to me once that he felt good knowing that his seat was in my hand.  And I would fight for those issues that he believed in.  And I did, for the four terms that I was there.  I fought against the [Governor James R.] Thompson administration when they eliminated the Fair Employment Practice Commission.  And I fought against him when they eliminated the private right of action that people could go directly to the courts on, on civil rights grievances and created that infamous, heinous Department on Human Rights.  I probably was the last, lone holdout.  And I said to them on the floor of the House that I stand on the legacy of a man that would turn over in his grave if I did not fight for this.  And though I was a distinct minority, and many of my colleagues left me on that issue, I just could not turn my back on his legacy.
Story_ID: 57764
Speaker 1: About Corneal Davis--some of his political foes might say he belonged to the group of state politicians who belonged with they called 'hack.'  How, how would you--
Speaker 2: Well, I would vehemently disagree that Corneal A.  Davis was a hack.  He was a Methodist minister who believed in the gospel of Jesus Christ and all of his life was a man of great prayer and was a man that fought for the needs of the people of his district.  I don't know any job that he held that was not one that he went to work.  I think he for a time may have worked in the clerk's office or some other office.  But by and large, he was a legislator and a Methodist minister and his first love was the ministry.  I don't know how they would define the term 'hack,' but I would not use that term to describe him.
Speaker 1: It was during that period--it was thought that the regular party had some black politicians in their pocket or on a string, so to speak.  And some of Davis' foes thought he was one of those.
Speaker 2: Representative Corneal Davis, like many members of the regular Democratic Party, at that time would be excoriated from time to time for positions that they did not take.  But I think, almost to the person, anyone would tell you, when it came to the issues of civil rights though he was in the party and the party was controlled by Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, the first Mayor Daley--on many occasions, he stood in opposition to the party as it relates to public aid, as it relates to civil rights.  And sometimes he got in trouble for it.  Sometimes he was a lone voice, fighting for it late at night in Springfield [Illinois].  I was there and I saw it.  And I don't know if it's a fair assessment to say that he was a political hack.  I think the record dispels that.
Speaker 1: So from your knowledge and experience, you're saying maybe that he fought the battle that sometimes others could not see.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And many times Mayor Daley would make the call to Springfield that I know of to try and get him off of an issue.  And he would resist and he paid a price for it.  They could not defeat him, but even the Congressman [William] Dawson had disagreements with him sometimes because he was led by the law that's higher than man's law.  And Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] got a Nobel [Peace] Prize for saying that.  It's call a moral law.  I'm not saying that everything he did was absolutely what I would have done; clearly not.  But it was a different time and a different era.  He was very proud of being from Tougaloo, Mississippi.  So he had stared racism squarely in the face as I had done in the state of North Carolina and we often talked about that.  And he was the one that gave me advice about what to do when I was in doubt.  And it got me in trouble with my own party.  On many occasion, the positions that I would take--and I think part of the troubles that I encountered later in my career--were directly attributable to the fact that I was strident in opposition on some issues in this state.
Story_ID: 57765
Speaker 1: What do you think your greatest achievement is?
Speaker 2: You know, people often ask me that.  And the thing I'm most proud of is that I was the chairman of the first Black Illinois Domestic Summit Conference in the State of Illinois.  I chaired that.  My colleagues in the House of Representatives, the Black Caucus asked me to put it together.  And I put that together for my colleagues in 1984 and we convened mayors and aldermen from across the state.  At that time, Representative James Taylor was in the House and he was the chairman of the Black Caucus and he asked me take the responsibility to do this and I did it.  And it was the first time in the State of Illinois that we called black elected officials from across the state to a summit in Springfield [Illinois] for two days to discuss the issues affecting all African American and people of color in this state.  And subsequently, as you know, that has been done again and again.  So I'm very proud of having chaired that and that my colleagues supported me.  I also am very proud of legislation that I've sponsored on many occasions for many things.  But the one piece that forever sticks in my mind is that I sponsored the bill that changed the composition of the Chicago Housing Authority, that allowed tenants to serve on that board.  Because I had more public housing tenants in my district than anybody else in the State of Illinois.  The other issue that I advanced which Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, who was then Senator Daley, took over was the fight to remove the sales tax on food and medicine.  I carried the battle for that in the House and it was vetoed and he picked it up in the Senate and took it as an issue.  And it led him back to win the election for state's attorney and resurrected his political career.
Speaker 1: For the record, can you give us the years of those (unclear).
Speaker 2: 1982 to 1984 were the years that these battles took place.  Both the Black Domestic Summit Conference and the fight to remove the sales tax on food and medicine which, as you know, became an issue in the gubernatorial election as well.  The thing that some would say that that I did, that may not have endeared me with the broader community--especially in the white community, Republican community--is that I chaired the investigation of a sitting governor in this state, Governor James R. Thompson, in the salmonella milk scandal when the people died in the dairy farms in the western suburbs.  And because I chaired a committee in the House, one of the few committees that had subpoena power which was the Illinois House Committee on Government Operations and had just followed-up an investigation of South African steel in the State of Illinois building.  Some say that I overreached in those investigations.
Speaker 1: So do you think forces were out to get you, as far as your own legal challenge?
Speaker 2: I think the calls that I got which told me, unequivocally, in my district office what was going to happen were prophetic.
Story_ID: 57766
Speaker 1: So I would like to know some of the issues, you ran into in your day-to-day activity in the House [Illinois House of Representatives] that you probably would not have run into had you been (unclear) another (unclear).
Speaker 2: I believe not at this time.  The strength of the Black Caucus was on the increase at the time I was there.  It was just being formulated.  We were gathering influence.  We were chairing committees.  We were getting the contributions at our fund raiser to, to-date, that you got the Art Turners of the world who came down when I had been there a term and were nurtured.  Carol [Moseley-]Braun in some of my pictures, she just got down there.  I mean, bright lawyer, U.S. Attorney's office, but really a politico out of Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  You see what I'm saying.  Dick Newhouse was there, Senator Charley Chew was there.  I mean, we was just beginning.  And so when I did this piece on this Black Domestic Summit Conference, that really gave us the respect and recognition that people were looking for.  And after that, we just took off as a caucus.
Speaker 1: But did you, as you tried to get bills through the House, that day-to-day activity.  What kinds of problems did an African American representative face?
Speaker 2: You ready?  In the House of Representatives, one of the things that I discovered upon arriving in Springfield is that you could get votes from both sides of the aisle if you worked at it.  And sometimes it required that you would have to give something to get something.  And one of the problems that the Congressional Black Caucus had when I arrived is that the Republicans, people like George Ryan and Lee Daniels would say, "We'd like to work with you guys, but you guys will never come over on the issue.  When they ring the bell back in Chicago, you stay home."  And so there was Raymond Ewell who was a State Representative at the time there with me.  And then subsequently, Art Turner came down and Carol Moseley-Braun came down and others who were individuals with academic credentials and professional careers that did not depend upon the government.  Even Jesse White was there on some issues with us at the time in the House of Representatives.  And so we began to formulate kind of a nucleus of people that would go with the Republicans on some when they didn't adversely affect us if they needed votes.  And so we were able to put together some unusual coalitions on certain bills.  Whether it's bills dealing with branch banking, bills dealing with the medical society, bills dealing with education, things that we were kind of free agents on.  And once we showed the Republicans that we would cross the aisle on some votes and stick, we were able to put together some unusual coalitions.  And I'm reminded of the Congressional Black Caucus motto, which we tried to adopt in Springfield as a black caucus, which is "No permanent friends, no permanent enemies.  Just permanent interest."  And then, of course, we had over in the Senate at the time, Senator Richard Newhouse and Senator Charles Chew, Senator Kenneth Hall, and others as well who likewise would do that and to date, you know, you have Senator Emil Jones over there who was in the House at the time, when I was there.  And so you begin to see the emergence of an independent streak among the Black Caucus.  And certain members in the Black Caucus were defeated back in Chicago by new-breed kinds of elected officials.  And so it just helped us grow.  So I would think kind of the watershed really came in the '82 [1982], '84 [1984], and you begin to see more and more independent-minded African Americans coming to the state legislature who were willing to go over and at least dialogue with the Republicans.  And when that happened of course, you know, Mayor [Jane Margaret] Byrne, Mayor [Michael Anthony] Bilandic had been defeated, Mayor [Harold] Washington had come into power, and he ushered in a whole new era in '84 [1984].  That sent down a whole new slate of leadership in the Black Caucus.
Story_ID: 57767
Speaker 1: And what was it like with [Mayor Harold] Washington now in the mayor's seat?
Speaker 2: Well, when Mayor Washington was elected, needless to say, it freed up a whole lot of African Americans to be themselves, to really be themselves, to vote on the issues and to proclaim the agenda for the African American community.  Where heretofore, it was not the primary agenda, it was what was best for the Democratic Party.
Speaker 1: Can you give us an example of an expression of that freedom?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several issues.  I think when you come to talking about funding for Cook County Hospital, you come to talk about elected representation on the Board of Education.  I think the late Representative Doug Huff [Douglas Huff Jr.], had been fighting for years of having local school districts and the party had opposed him.  And when Harold Washington came and gave it support, it became law.  Today we have local school districts as an example.  And there were some major issues among labor unions, labor-management issues that Harold Washington set the agenda on that heretofore we could not set the agenda from an African American perspective.  Criminal justice issues also were put to the forefront with this election.
Story_ID: 57768
Speaker 1: What would you like to have done before you left state politics which you didn't get--(buzzing noise)
Speaker 2: The question has often been asked, "Is there anything unfinished that I would have liked to have finished in elective life?"  And there are two things.  I had aspirations of becoming what Carol [Moseley-]Braun became.  And I often said that, and I was told later as I did some of my writings, memoirs and stuff, that I should never have articulated that as a black man, that I wanted to be the first black senator from the State of Illinois.  I saw "Ed" [Edward] Brooke, I saw what he represented in Massachusetts, and it was something that I aspired to do.  As a consolation prize, I thought that I would run mayor of the City of Chicago.  So I guess beneath all of that, I did get the opportunity to run for Congress and I lost.  But I never ran for mayor and I never ran for the United States Senate.  I would have liked to have had the opportunity to have run statewide in Illinois once.
Story_ID: 57769
Speaker 1: Can you describe what led to your political downfall, the circumstances that led--
Speaker 2: In my political life, episodes occurred that were beyond my control.  I had an office in front of the Chicago Defender at 24th [Street] and Michigan [Avenue].  And right after I finished my investigations of the [Governor James R.] Thompson administration and the [salmonella] milk scandal, the press began to investigate me for the building at 2415 South Michigan Avenue and my ownership of that building.  And the fact that I had my district office in the building and that I was paying rent on the building to my corporation.  Many had felt that that was not something that the alderman did not do.  Aldermen routinely did that in Chicago, owned buildings and had their offices in there.  And I guess in hindsight, I would say that I didn't think anything was wrong with it.  Well, obviously the courts decided that I was wrong and they were right.  And that consequently, I was convicted for that under a statute, a mail fraud statute.  One of the things that I often say to people is that I either had to be dumbest person in the world or the most arrogant person in the world because we had so many political rallies in my building and everybody in Chicago knew that I owned the building.  And it was directly across the street in front of the Chicago Defender.  So I either had to be the most arrogant person in the world or the dumbest person in the world to hold out a piece of real estate and think that it was not going to be discovered.  Subsequently, the legislature changed the law to make it clear.  And at the time that I was involved in my legal battles, the statute was not clear, that you could not do that.  And so that is all that I was involved in, all that I was convicted.  When people found it out, their hearts would bleed because the press had resurrected so many other things--El Rukn street gangs, etcetera, etcetera.  And none of it had to do with anything except a district office that I owned and I had an office in there and the State of Illinois paid two $800 checks for rent and the U.S. Attorney said that that was illegal.
Story_ID: 57770
Speaker 1: So you must have had a serious anger problem.  How did you deal with that?
Speaker 2: As most people deal with it.  You go through states of denial, you go through states of hostility and bitterness.  You go through states of deep depression and grief.  And that is the point in which I realized that I had to let it go, that I had to stop trying to protest that somehow or another the system had dealt me a bad hand.  And it was at that point when I decided to release it that I really found the freedom that I have today.  The point at which I could pray, really pray for enemies is the point at which I found my freedom.  And I was released from that fear and anger.  And so I don't go back there anymore.  I cannot get angry about that.  There's no place in my body for it because I forgave those who did whatever they did and I've long since buried it.
Speaker 1: How long were you--how long--what was your sentence and how long were you incarcerated?
Speaker 2: For--let me think this through.  Forty-eight months.
Story_ID: 57771
Speaker 1: (unclear) the African American community now, given your history and where we all are and what we've come through?
Speaker 2: My biggest concern today about public life and the black electorate is two-fold.  I see that we are being left once again at the dock and the boat is about to leave in technology.  And somehow or another, I think at that national and state level, black elected officials and people who represent people of color must demand equal representation in the technology age for our schools, for our households.  Because if we get disconnected from 21st century technology, I feel it could very well be worse than slavery.  And I see that happening.  And the only safeguard we as a community has is to make certain that the statutes are in place to protect us.  The second thing that concerns me is that along with the broader population, which is refusing to participate in politics, that the total number of registered voters is down at a time when population is going in the opposite direction.  And the total number of participants actively voting is down.  What in effect it's doing is giving a disproportionate strength to our enemies, those who do not represent our interest, those who do not embrace our agenda.  And that concerns me.  I don't know what the answer is at this point, to get increased African American minority participation in electoral politics.  But somehow, some way we must find--collectively, those of us in ministry, those of us in media, those of us in education, those of us in elective offices--a way to reconnect to our community that they see a sense of urgency in voting and selecting candidates.  I think that those are the two critical issues that confront the electorate.  And needless to say, my interest is in the spiritual man and how I can work through that to get people involved.
Story_ID: 57772
Speaker 1: State government has and has had a tremendous impact on the lives of the 11 to 12 million people in this state, more so than the Chicago City Council.  And historically African Americans were more focused on city politics than state government primarily because there were so many of us, we were 200 miles away, and they didn't see an impact in their lives.  But the strategic nature of state government as it relates to funding, that the state income tax comes back through state government.  Programs that are funded come through state government.  Not to mention the statutes that regulate the lives of men and women, boys and girls in this state are enacted at the state level, have a direct impact particularly as it relates to education, health care funding, transportation.  So there's a critical nature.  I recall, I think it's a 12 billion dollar budget.  I could be wrong, I have not monitored in the last few years.  But a tremendous impact on the quality of life of people that live in the northeastern part of Illinois.  One of the things that I was concerned about when I went to Springfield [Illinois] in terms of the awesomeness of state government--it affected the welfare payments.  And so many people up here in Chicago were dependent upon public aid and public welfare.  And people like Corneal Davis had made that the critical issue.  As we served in the legislature--a new generation of elected officials--we moved away from emphasis on protecting public aid funding and began to branch out into the broader areas of transportation, capital improvements expenditures and, of course, equal representation in education with the local school districts and things like that.  And invariably, when we talk about protecting our people in the area of civil rights, the state statutes are far more important to people than a local Chicago ordinance as it relates to civil rights.  And you have people who are appointed to commissions and agencies and boards and to the [Illinois] Supreme Court, to a great extent, is decided by the state legislature.  The state Constitution was changed in 1970 giving tremendous opportunity for people in the northeastern part of Illinois to once again shape the destiny of the state by revisiting the Constitution and changing those things that were obsolete.  And we were fortunate to have people like Cliff Kelly and others who served on the Constitutional Convention to put into place.  That Constitutional Convention changed the composition of elected representation for the next thirty years because it eliminated the cumulative voting system, gave opportunity for Pat Quinn to come along, to eliminate cumulative voting and go with "one man, one vote."  And so there's so many things in state government that are important to the lives of the people in northeastern Illinois.  And unfortunately, prior to that renaissance, that black elective renaissance early '80s and beyond, our people were not aware of the importance of state government.  Because it was, quote, so far in Springfield, unquote.
Story_ID: 57773
Speaker 1: And it was about the time that we had our first African American State Comptroller.
Speaker 2: Yes.  The first statewide elected official occurred.  Roland Burris as a [Illinois] State comptroller which later became the [Illinois] Attorney General and was very close to becoming the first black governor of this state.  Those things happened in that era.  And Dan Walker, you recall, was governor and appointed Attorney Burris to serve in his cabinet and then he subsequently ran for Comptroller.  And I think, quite frankly, it was that renaissance in state government that gave rise to Mayor [Harold] Washington's election up here in Chicago [Illinois].  I believe that.  Now the grassroot work was done in Chicago, but Mayor Washington came out of the state legislature.  Mayor Washington honed his skills as a state legislator, not as an alderman.  And some had said, had he been an alderman, that he probably never would have honed those skills and be able to put the coalition together he did to become mayor of this great city.
Story_ID: 57774
Speaker 1: I have a couple of questions.  One is, would you have any advice for people who are looking to seek reform through politics, and why do you think politics are important?
Speaker 2: Well, my position hasn't changed since when I started in 1975.  Edmund Burke's statement was true then, it's true now: that if you want a better government, good people have to stand up.  I think we're fortunate in America today that we have more African American and women and people of color qualified to seek elective office.  The one thing I would caution those seeking elective office is that A) they should make certain that they're willing to pay the price of scrutiny in their personal lives.  Number two, they should have a source of independent wealth outside of politics.  They should not depend on the government to sustain them economically or their family.  And number three, I would hope that they would at least endeavor to develop broad coalitions in their life--coalitions that reach across business and labor, reach across partisan lines.  And then they will be effective as elected officials.  You cannot go into politics today--with the complexion of our society changing rapidly, the complexion of our society getting darker, less Europeans and more people of color--and not have a broad base coalition.  You simply can't get elected.  And I would hope that they would not opt for either extreme in politics, either the left liberal extreme or the conservative extreme, because I sense that people today--it's particularly African Americans--are more well-read, they're better off economically then we once were, not where we should be, and so the issues are different.  A guy called me--a lady called me last week and asked me for my opinion on the upcoming presidential election.  And I said to her, "I have an interest and I vote this interest and my interest is first and foremost in civil rights."  And so the person who's gonna select someone for the United States Supreme Court is very important to me.  And I think in the African American community, it's important to them.  We still as African Americans must look to the federal government as our first line of defense against the evils of racism and sexism.  We must look to the federal government to protect us and that, that's unfortunate.  State government has a terrific role in our life, but we still must look to the federal government for our last line of defense against the tyranny of racism and sexism.
Story_ID: 57775
Speaker 1: Would you say that political innocence, if you will, of many African American legislators kind of hampers the growth?
Speaker 2: I don't -- there's a period of political innocence anymore because of what has happened in our society with the President of the United States, with Watergate [The Watergate Scandal], and with other elected officials in the State of Illinois.  The press is determined now that when you seek elective office, at any level, you're going to be scrutinized and monitored.  There's no good-will period, there is no period of innocence.  It's a rough business, it's a tough business, but it's necessary.  And African Americans need to continue to press on the fight for representation at all levels of government.  I think we saw in the last twenty years, an increase in African Americans in the executive branch which also can make a tremendous difference.  So while we talk about state legislators, and that's important, I think we can see a tremendous difference in the attitudes of the people of this state with Jesse White [HistoryMaker] as Secretary of State and the significance of that position and what he represents to all Illinoisans.  And it gives African Americans and people of color new hope that we can, in fact, occupy the executive as we have occupied the legislative.
Story_ID: 57776
Speaker 1: One of the things I found when I went to the legislature about political innocence is that you really didn't know who you could trust.  And you're constantly looking for someone to trust.  And I used to lament the fact to my white colleagues that as an African American, we really didn't have the mentors that we needed.  The mentors who had groomed us and shaped us and prepared us to assume these positions.  And I remember once I had a long talk with the late [Illinois State Representative] Corneal A. Davis and said to him, "Why is it that people like yourself and [William L.] Dawson and others didn't take the time to groom successors as the Irish were doing in Chicago, as the Italians were doing?"  We had no mentors.  And we essentially were learning on the fly, and unfortunately, in some cases, we were emulating our European counterparts.  And before we found out the pitfalls of that it was too late.  And that's what happens, so often, in the executive branches of government when we have great outstanding people get elected to executive positions and they think they can continue the system the same way their predecessors did.  And they end up getting investigated.  They end up having major scandals.  The rules do change when we get elected and we must be mindful of that.  And the thing that would help us if we had mentors.  And I will forever lament the fact that I didn't have a mentor, someone that I could come home to on the weekend, sit down and debrief me.  And someone that would say to me, "Go this way and don't go that way."  Or someone that would say to me, "Don't investigate a sitting governor, don't press the button, don't press the envelope too far."
Story_ID: 57777
Speaker 1: Okay, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I want my legacy to be that I fought hard for the constituents in my district.  But that I dreamed a dream that one dare dream, that I could go as far as my ability would allow me to go.  And I want my legacy to say that I did the very best that I possibly could for my constituents and for the State of Illinois.  I never looked at myself as a black legislator.  I looked at myself as an outstanding legislator and I would hope that my legacy would say that I was an outstanding legislator.
