Story_ID: 30311
Speaker 1: Okay, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers archive.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please give us your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Robert Henry Bragg, R-O-B-E-R-T, H-E-N-R-Y, B-R-A-G-G.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 11th, 1919, Jacksonville, Florida.
Speaker 1: Okay, and, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Retired, formerly teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, just give us some of the details about the teaching.
Speaker 2: Well, I was a professor at the University of California in Berkley in the Department of Material Science and Engineering, College of Engineering.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I taught there from 1969 to when I retired in '87 [1987], I guess it was.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date?  It's March the 11th, 19--2011 (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at my apartment in Emeryville, California.  It's called Watergate.  It's Number 2 Admiral Drive and this is Unit 373, and I've been here for at least twenty years.  I can't remember exactly.
Story_ID: 30312
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five, lightweight, magazine "People Magazine-ish" type question that we ask and management compels us to do this and--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --they only require a short answer.  And the first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I'm--I have foods that I don't like.  I don't like eggplant and I don't like squash probably because sometimes it was badly cooked and I didn't like them.  Friday, today, is usually my catfish day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I don't, nowadays I don't eat a lot of meat, red meat for sure, some pork, some chicken, but usually broiled.  Veggies, love 'em, greens.  I'm answering the question, I guess, (laughter) while we're at it, but mustard greens, turnip greens, black-eyed peas, all that ethnic stuff.
Speaker 1: All right, now do you have a favorite--
Speaker 2: Except possum (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  It may be hard to get it out here.  I don't know, but do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  But usually I prefer subdued colors, black, brown, beige, dark blue.  That's about all I can say.  You'll find most of my clothes--you won't find any garish--although I did have a black suit once with a red silk lining which was a hit (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I like the spring or the early fall, when it's not too cold and not too hot.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Not really, but I love to travel.  Let me put it that way.  I don't, never really go back to the same place and so in that sense, no.  But I don't want to be going some place where it's cold or too hot.  But my, my favorite for vacation is to travel some place, usually where I've never been before.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The last question--
Speaker 2: And I've been a lot of places by now, of course.
Speaker 1: Well, we're gonna get to all--most of them, I hope.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Okay.
Speaker 1: Some of them, but do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's unbecoming me, but basically it's "be cool" which is a way of saying, don't over do it, and sort of, be cool.
Story_ID: 30313
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, now, I'm gonna ask about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and your father's side.  And then we'll get them together, but we'll start with your mother's side first.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name was Lily Camille McFarland, L-I-L-Y, C-A-M-I-L-L-E, M-C-F-A-R-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  It was 1897, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: May 5th, I don't know exactly, but--
Speaker 1: Okay, around May--
Speaker 2: --I'm embarrassed about that, but I'm bad on that.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 2: To my maternal great grandmother [Rebecca Wilson] who I remember seeing as a child, who had been born a slave in Virginia, had come with, to Holly Springs, Mississippi where my grandmother [Sally Wilson] was, my mother's mother was born--no, I'm sorry.  She was born in Virginia as well in 1870.  And they came to Holly Springs, Mississippi where my mother's mother went to school, and went to Rust College in Holly Springs.  It was then called Rust University, believe it or not, although basically it was just a high school.  But she became a teacher in the public schools of Memphis, Tennessee until she married my maternal grandfather whose name was William Peter McFarland.  So that gets me to my maternal grandmother, my mother's mother.  She taught school for two or three years and then got married, started having children.  And one of those children was my mother.  And it's about 1897, I think she was born.
Speaker 1: So she taught in Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: My mother's mother taught in Memphis.
Speaker 1: What was her name?
Speaker 2: It was Sally Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the great grandmother's name was Rebecca Wilson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  She had been a slave, and I guess she was kind of like, not a house pet, but she was a seamstress.  And so she, I guess in Virginia at that time, we didn't have what eventually evolved in the South as the big cotton plantations.  It was more or less, tobacco (unclear).  But she was in the household of a physician at the time of the 1880 census.  That's where she was--I'm sorry 1870 census.  That's right after the Civil War ended.  I remember her incidentally.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My great grandmother, mean old woman (laughter).  Well, we were pretty exuberant children when we would come to live there.  And from, and so she thought--by that time she was rather old, you know, 1925 or so.  And she called us wild varmints (laughter), which was probably true.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But that was Grandma Rebecca.  I don't know if I answered your questions.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you are so far.  Now, so your grandmother taught school too.  Now, did she go to--
Speaker 1: No, my grandmother taught school.  My mother did not.
Speaker 2: Okay, I didn't--I was saying, I was asking about your grandmother.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: So your grandmother taught school in Memphis too.  You said her name was Sally Wilson.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Now, where did she go to school?
Speaker 1: She went to Holly Springs.
Speaker 2: Oh, she went to Rust School [Rust College, Holly Springs, Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Rust.  See, my great grandmother, I'm not--she might have even been illiterate for all I know.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see, okay.  I got them mixed up.  Okay, so it wasn't your--it was grandmother.
Speaker 1: No, she went to live in the household of a very prominent lawyer in Holly Springs.  In those days, people had big households and all kinds of servants.  And I think she was a cook, my great grandmother.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But she had this child--she was half white, incidentally.  So who the father was, I don't really know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, wait a minute, make sure now.  My great grandmother was not half white.  She was listed as, in some, in the census as mulatto which means that she wasn't exactly totally black, but that could have been anything in those days.  So, but my mother's mother was half white.
Speaker 2: Okay, so her father was white.
Speaker 1: Yeah, was some white man.
Speaker 2: Okay, and do you suspect it was the white--
Speaker 1: An English physician, the family lore is some English physician, but who he was and exactly, I never did find out.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  So, okay, now, so is your grand--okay, so your grandmother lived in Memphis [Tennessee].  Okay, and your mother was born in Memphis?
Speaker 1: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: She had a number of siblings, of course, and in those days, when you started having them (laughter), you just kept going.  Some of them died, some of them didn't.
Story_ID: 30314
Speaker 1: Now, who was your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather on that side was William Peter McFarland, W-I-L-L-I-A-M, P-E-T-E-R-, M-C-F-A-R-L-A-N-D, M-small C-F-A-R-L-A-N-D.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: William Peter McFarland.
Speaker 1: And what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: He was born in, he was a mail carrier.  And that was quite a big deal then.  He was born in 1855 in Hopkinsville, Kentucky.  So that meant he was born a slave, but the first records--I've done a little bit of, you know, genealogy stuff.  The first place where I pick him up in census records is the census of 1880.  He's married to a Molly White, and they have a daughter who is nine twelfths of a year old whose name is Elly [White] who we'll get back to because she wound up being a Fisk Jubilee Singer [from Fisk University, Nashville Tennessee].  But he was William Peter McFarland.  At that time, he was sort of a laborer, but eventually he became a postman, and that meant he had to have been in Republican politics at the time.  We're talking about Reconstruction [1865-1877].  And at that time, of course, that meant he had to be literate because you had to carry cash and you had to carry mail and money and what not.  And my mother [Lily Camille McFarland] remembers him as having a horse and buggy for the route that he (laughter) had.  But there're actually some records of him from the postal service.  I've looked this up and yeah, there he was.  He was an appointee like all the Reconstruction Era Republicans of that era.  And he lived until 1910.  He died in 1910.  But that made him a part of the black bourgeoisie of Memphis [Tennessee] at the time (laughter).  But let one guy die and that's it (laughter), poverty hits you.
Speaker 1: So they experienced the slide, economic slide--
Speaker 2: Quite a lot, quite a lot.  My grandmother [Sally Wilson] who had been a school teacher went to work as a companion to a rich old White woman whose brother was the head of a bank.  I often wondered how did that happen until I started checking, and I found out that her brother, her half brother because Uncle Payton, was his name, Payton Wilson, had been a porter or something in the bank.  And he, and the guy probably asked, well, Payton, do you know some woman who--I need a companion for my old maid sister.  And he recommends his sister--his half sister.  So she spent the rest of her life, working life, as a companion, first of all to a rich old White woman.  And after, when she died, the guy who never married liked her so, said, just run the house then.  So that's the way that went on.  So a grandmother, who years later when I stopped being afraid of her, I said, grandma, you had been a school teacher.  What were you doing, why were you doing that?  She said, I didn't like children (laughter).  Understand, she's got Wilson and mother, that's Camille and there's Rebecca, Virginia, William Peter, Jr., that was my uncle who half raised me, all these children, and--but, of course, she didn't really want all those children either (laughter).  I digress.
Story_ID: 30315
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's a good story.  I mean it's some insight.  So, did your mother [Lily Camille McFarland]--what did she say about growing up?  What was it like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Interesting.  She was kind of--when I said this to my sister, she really didn't like it, but my ma was kind of odd, a strange child.  She was probably kind of pampered because I remember she saying that--she had learned to play the piano, had lessons and, you know, and so forth.  But, and there was always a piano in the house, an upright.  But grandmother [Sally Wilson] would never let her play Ragtime, but the others who didn't have piano lessons could play Ragtime.  So she was destined for something better, I suppose.  But she--
Speaker 1: So she played only classical music and church music?
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a matter of fact, she eventually married--this is jumping around, but she eventually married a guy who was noted for teaching the 'Letter Carriers' band and the 'Odd Fellows' band.  Back in that era, those were big deals, fraternal orders, you know, the 'Masons' and the 'Odd Fellows' and all that.  He was very well known, taught all those jazz musicians, even played with W. C. Handy.  But mama couldn't get a gig with a church because the Baptist--you had to be able to kind of swing the music.  And mama (laughter) couldn't, mama wasn't much (laughter) of a swing musician (laughter).  So she didn't fair too well as a--she could play the organ at the Catholic church, but she couldn't play jazz at the Baptist church (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But mama got married about, I guess it had to be--I have to think about this a while, but the point I'm gonna make was that before she got married, she had gone to New York to live with her, she called big sister, you see, I told you that her father [William McFarland] had had a previous marriage before he married my grandmother [Sally Wilson].  So she had this what you call, she called her a big sister.  Her name Alene (ph.) Castles.  She had married a black lawyer named Frederick DeWitt Castles.  And he died four months later in 1899.  I happen to know this cause I was just looking at this the other day.  So, and she's like nineteen or twenty.  Well, she somehow must have gone to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] because she is said to have been part of Jubilee, Fisk Jubilee Singers.  But she wound up in New York in 1906 in a play that she was the lead, the title was 'Abyssinia' Brett Williams was one of the promoters of the, this particular play.  And so mama must have lived there for a while with Aunt Alene (ph.).  But grandma didn't like the idea of anybody being in show business.  So come back home to Memphis.  And she gets married to my father who as a Pullman porter runs on the road, lots of money and glamour in those days.  And they moved to Jacksonville, Florida.  So that's where I was born.  I hope I answered your questions (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes (unclear).
Speaker 2: I have a round-about (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah, so this is, yeah, this is really a lot of history here, Fisk Jubilee Singers and 'Abyssinia'.  So your mother had a chance to be around the cast of all those?  Did she talk about what that was like?
Speaker 2: No, she only talked about big sister, who was Aunt Alene (ph.).  I actually, I actually met her some years later.  By that time, she was long in retirement, but she must have hung around Manhattan [New York City] for quite a while because as late as 1910, she is recorded as living in, during Vaudeville in New York City.  And she married, the second time, she married a guy named Don Pedro Hudnell, never will forget it cause I would get his castoff clothes, who was, had been the secretary to the owner of the Long Island Railroad [LIRR].  And grandma--and Alene (ph.) wound up living in Long Island and in 1952, I guess it was, I had to go out to Brooklyn Poly, Brooklyn Polytechnic [Polytechnic Institute of New York City, Brooklyn] for a summer course.  And while we were in Brooklyn, we went over to visit our aunt we heard about.  And--
Speaker 1: And you say his name was Don Pedro--
Speaker 2: Hudnell, H-U-D-N-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If you Google, I don't think you'll find him (laughter).  But if you Google Alene (ph.) Castles, you will find her.  Anyway, so much digression, and you didn't stop me (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, let's go back to your mother then.  So, your mother, so she--now, she got--okay, the person she married who led the Odd Fellows band and Masons band--
Speaker 2: No, no.  My, my, yeah, that was her second husband.  My mother married twice.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30316
Speaker 1: My father was the first one.  He was Robert Henry Bragg.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I'm a junior.
Speaker 2: Oh, so this was the second husband, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he had been--his family had lived in Collierville, Tennessee which is now a part of Shelby County, Tennessee, but kind of country people.  But interestingly enough, they were all fairly technical people and a lot of them wound up as math teachers.  My father--
Speaker 2: What was your--let us just start with him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, what was his full name?  Can you spell his full name for us?
Speaker 1: His name was Robert Henry Bragg, R-O-B-E-R-T, H-E-N-R-Y, B-R-A-G-G.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were a junior then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Speaker 2: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: You know, I don't really know.
Speaker 2: Was he about the same age as your mother [Lily Camille McFarland]?
Speaker 1: No, he's about seven or eight years older.
Speaker 2: Okay, so 1890?
Speaker 1: No, no, let me see now.  And I know the date of the marriage of my great--his father [Henry Isaac Bragg] to my grandmother [Mary Waters] on that side.  That was 1892.  So it's two or three years later.  So about 1894 or thereabouts.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And where was he born?
Speaker 1: In Collierville, Tennessee, C-O-L-L-I-E-R-V-I-L-L-E, Collierville, Tennessee, and it doesn't have anything to do with cold.  The guy's name was Collier (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, Collierville--
Speaker 1: I looked that up (laughter).
Speaker 2: Is that near Memphis [Tennessee] or?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's sort of, maybe ten or fifteen minute, maybe twenty minute drive out of downtown Memphis to get to Collierville.
Speaker 2: Okay, now how far back can you trace your father's family?
Speaker 1: Not very far.  All I know is that--this is the family lore, that he and his brother, Henry--my father's father was named Henry Isaac, I-S-A-A-C, Bragg.  And he had an older brother, two or three years older, named Peter Bragg.  Henry was born about 1855 as well in slavery in Alabama some place.  And I've never been able to locate exactly where except that's it's somewhere along a river as you go from Tennessee down into, through parts of Mississippi and Alabama.  It's somewhere right near the northern border of Alabama.  Beyond that, I've never succeeded in, by going through records and stuff, finding out exactly where.  But they were born in, they were born in Alabama, but in the records that I've found, they show up in the census of 1880 on a farm in Shelby County [Alabama], the two of them as laborers or whatever, Peter and Henry [Bragg].  Peter's a little, two or three years older than Henry, but the next time anybody--the next, the census of 1890 was destroyed, as you know, U.S. census, so I don't have any intermediate records, but I've looked up things like birth and death certificates and marriage certificates, and I've found there, he had married my grandmother on that side whose name was Mary Foster.  But she had been married and had a--her maiden name was Mary Waters, W-A-T-E-R-S.  And so she had a son by a previous marriage in 1892 when they got married.  So I got that marriage certificate some place.  And they had a lot of children actually.  But Henry was a good, was a carpenter.  And he built a lot of the structures around Collierville of that era.  You know, in those days, they called people uncle as a term of endearment rather than Mister.  But Uncle Henry built a lot of stuff around there, and so he must have gotten paid fairly well because several of his children went to college, either Lane College in Jackson, Tennessee where my father [Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.]went for a while or LeMoyne [College, later called LeMoyne-Owen College] in Memphis where a couple of my--my aunt went.  And they were all technical people, good with mathematics.  They all taught mathematics, those who did teach.
Speaker 2: Okay, so Lane and Lemoyne, okay.
Story_ID: 30317
Speaker 1: Now, what prompted my father to leave Lane [College] and go on the road, I don't know, but it could have been money or whatever it was.  He did, and I don't know exactly what his route was for that matter, but all I know is that he ran on the road, which was kind of a dashing career in those days.  We're talking about the turn of the century [19th to 20th century].
Speaker 2: So you say he ran on the road, you mean he was--
Speaker 1: Railroad, Pullman Porter.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  He was a Pullman porter, okay.
Speaker 1: Pullman porters, dining car waiters, those were, you traveled and you dealt with people who had money, and so it was kind of a big deal.  But anyway, they got married and moved to Jacksonville [Florida] where--
Speaker 2: Now, oh, I just wanted to ask you before we get past this moment--
Speaker 1: Yean, okay.
Speaker 2: --is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 1: Yes and no.  You have to be kind of a detective because nobody tells you everything, and if you don't ask at the right time, you never learn.  But it turns out that some of his siblings had come to go to school in Memphis from Collierville [Tennessee].  In those days, it was a, you didn't just walk, you know, horse and buggy.  And they had roomed in a house on a street not very far from where my mother [Lily Camille McFarland] lived.  And I could just surmise that he sees this beautiful--my mother was a beautiful woman.
Story_ID: 30318
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about your father's [Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.] side of the family and his--how your parents met, yeah, how your parents met?
Speaker 2: I would guess that they met because he happened to come through that neighborhood where she [mother: Lily Camille McFarland] lived.
Speaker 1: You said it was a boarding house there?
Speaker 2: Well, there was some family that lived near where my mother lived that must have had a boarding house because some of his siblings had come there to go to LeMoyne [College, Memphis, Tennessee].  Now, why they would do that because they weren't that close to Lemoyne, I don't know.  But that's the best that I could figure out how it came about.
Speaker 1: And these days, I guess people now don't have the same culture but in those days, people didn't stay in hotels (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, no, no, no.  You went and lived with somebody's rooming houses.
Speaker 1: And it wasn't uncommon for people to advertise that their house was available for a rate or room to live in.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Well, looking back, you know, I've been-Memphis [Tennessee], a lot of those towns had city registers, you know, that a lot of stuff where everybody would, everybody would register whoever lived where.  So it didn't matter whether they were black or white, they got counted.  And so if you knew the address and what not, you could see from year to year where people were.  And I found that some of his [father] siblings had lived in this place, obviously a rooming house because they all came there, and I know some of them went to Lemoyne [College] so I just figured that he must have seen this beautiful woman there and sweet talked her (laughter).
Speaker 1: For some reason, I can't remember--if you mentioned it, I don't remember, but did you mother go to LeMoyne or where did she go?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Did she go to college?
Speaker 2: No, no, as far as I'm aware, you know, I never did know.  She went to Courtrick (ph.) Grammar School which--you'll find it in records, you know, of Memphis and what not.  But I'm not sure she went anywhere beyond the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, that seems strange since her mother [Sally Wilson] was a teacher, right?
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: And she was taking piano lessons in classical music--
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --and her mother seemed to have high--
Speaker 2: Expectations, oh, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --for her.
Speaker 2: I don't really understand it, but she never mentioned college so I would assume that she never did.  Now, whether or not she went to high school, that's another matter because LeMoyne [College] had a high school, incidentally.  And one of my--one of her younger siblings went there.  In fact, she was still in LeMoyne when we came to Memphis from Florida, so she probably went to high school, but that was, college was a little bit young.
Speaker 1: So she was young when she met your dad [Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.], she was sort of young?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was barely in her twenties.
Speaker 1: Okay, so she might have even been college age.
Speaker 2: No, I would guess, she probably didn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, is it possible that he met her while she was in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, he probably met her after she'd gone to New York because once that, once they were married (laughter), there was no going to New York.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So what probably had happened was that she'd probably finished what amounted to high school and gone to New York to--they were going to go into show business.  My Aunt Alene (ph.) was already in show business.
Speaker 1: So let me, if I interpret this right, then her mother--your grandmother [Sally Wilson] didn't want your mother really in show-biz type--
Speaker 2: They had worked up a routine and everything, and she brought her back home.
Speaker 1: But the aunt, the aunt--she went to join her big sister in New York in order to get into show business--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --to do popular stuff where her mother really didn't want her to get involved in the popular music?
Story_ID: 30319
Speaker 1: See Aunt Alene (ph.) was born to a different mother than my mother's mother.  But they had the same father [William Peter McFarland].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So big sister has--my grandmother [Sally Wilson] had less control over her.  Actually, they were almost--let me get this right now.  Alene (ph.) was born in 1880.  Grandma was born in 1870.  So she was only ten years older than her stepdaughter.  So they were almost, you know, almost contemporaries.  So big sister didn't have much control--she wasn't very much under anybody's control.  And I would, my guess is that after, at age twenty--we're backtracking, but at age twenty, she had had this marriage where the husband died within four months.  And she is now twenty years old.
Speaker 2: This is your--
Speaker 1: My Aunt Alene (ph.).
Speaker 2: Aunt Alene (ph.), okay.
Speaker 1: Somewhere in there, I guess she went to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and got into singing and got into show business.  In 1906, she was already in a, has a lead in a play.  The title of it was 'Abyssinia'(ph.), the typical blackface kind of Bert Williams stuff that went on at that--
Speaker 2: I think that's a Will Marion Cook who did the score for that.
Speaker 1: Probably, oh, okay.  And so you're familiar with the Bert Williams, Williams and [George] Walker and things like that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bert Williams and George Walker, right.
Speaker 1: Bert Williams is part of the backing of that particular thing.  It ran about forty showings in New York.  But she hung around Manhattan [New York] in show business for Vaudeville until she was thirty.  So that would be, you know, 1910 or thereabouts.  But my point is that mama [Lily Camille McFarland] must have gone to New York after she got out of school, wherever that was.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this would have been kind of a rebellion in a sense, since your mother--since your grandmother [Sally Wilson] wanted to keep her in the classical mode--
Speaker 1: She had to, if she had rebelled completely, she wouldn't have gone back and married my father (laughter).
Story_ID: 30320
Speaker 1: So she came back home.
Speaker 2: But, now, let's see.  To get the (unclear) chronology, my sister, who was two years my--I had an older sister whose name was Alberta, born, she was born in 1917.  And so they [parents: Lily Camille McFarland and Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.] must have been married about 1915 or thereabouts to get the chronology right cause not long after they were married, they started having children and, well, maybe we'll get back to that when--I hope I've answered the question.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I just wanted to straight--try to figure out (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, best I can.  I've got these dates written down somewhere, but--
Speaker 1: But your mother was back in Memphis [Tennessee] when your father met her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And he's a porter [Pullman porter] at the time?
Speaker 2: Right, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: And he's probably running down to Jacksonville [Florida].  Jacksonville is right on the sea.  At one point, he was a ship's chandler which means you--a chandler is a guy who runs a warehouse for, ships put into port and they've got to get supplies.  And there's, somebody has to run the stockroom.  So he was a ship's chandler, and that meant he had to be able to do records.
Speaker 1: Okay.  No, well, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Well, that's how he, I guess that's how he missed World War II--World War I, rather, cause he didn't serve.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So my--they tried running a restaurant for a while, but she was a good-looking woman, and men hit on her.  And he was very jealous.  So that ended that.  And they tried homesteading.  The idea was--not that he had any idea about farming, but these rural communities need supplies from town and the idea was to haul produce from the country to town and haul supplies from the, you know, that you had to buy in the store, back; make money both ways.  I don't have any recollection of that, but they finally wound up--and I don't know how this ever happened, but in lumber camp near Green Cove Springs [Florida] which is a freshwater place where the [U.S.] Navy more recently was famous for storing ships where they wouldn't rust.  But this lumber camp was a place, the kind of place where a railroad spur goes to a place where there's a supply of coal and water and stuff like that.  And along each side of this track are these little, shot--unpainted shotgun houses.  Well, you can, you know, at any point (chuckle) you can look through and see the outside cracks in the wall (laughter). No paint, in fact, it's said that I learned to read from the newspapers that was papered over these (laughter) holes in the walls (laughter).  But I have very little, dim recollections of that.  But that was the end.  I mean he had this refined lady from Memphis, has gone from being a waitress in a restaurant and homesteading and now she's in this lumber camp with a juke down at the end where the men come and the sporting women come from other towns.  And they lose all their money and go home and beat their wives (laughter) and so, so by this time, mama has four children. The babe in arms is my brother, who is still alive.  And on the pretext of taking the newest children to see her family that they had never seen, she goes to Memphis and never went back, and I don't blame her.
Speaker 1: Okay, so does your father ever come up again in your life?
Speaker 2: As far as I know the last time, the next time I see him is in a casket.  But he went on to become an organizer, a labor--longshoreman organizer in Mobile, Alabama.  Occasionally, there would be letters from around the world where he went to sea for a while, merchant seaman; sort of guy, if there's gonna be lot of excitement, he would run to it.  And my mother would run from it.  But they never did reconnect.  She wouldn't go back and he wouldn't come up.  So that was it.  And the next time I saw him was in 1939 when he died.  And they brought the body back to be buried in Tennessee.
Story_ID: 30321
Speaker 1: Okay.  But your mother remarried, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she married Alex Hunt, A-L-E-X, H-U-N-T, Alex Hunt, who was, I probably mentioned earlier, a musician and a guy who had been a bandmaster in World War I and was known around town as Fes Hunt cause he taught, as I probably mentioned, the 'Letter Carriers' band and the 'Odd Fellows' and the 'Masons', all those fraternal organizations had bands in those days for the parades.  And so, practically all the musicians around town knew him or had played for him or he had taught them.  And at one time, he played with W. C. [William Christopher] Handy even.  You'll find in one of Handy's biographies, autobiography mentioned Alex Hunt was essentially, was the brass, you know, trombone, trumpet, what not, but he could teach all of those instruments, naturally.  And she married him and he was a much nicer fellow than my father [Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.] apparently.  And they, you know, stayed together until he died.  I don't remember exactly when, but I remember going back to his funeral which was--some of the most beautiful music you ever heard was his jazz musicians playing at my stepfather's, you know, funeral.
Story_ID: 30322
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question.  When you consider, now, you got--you moved around quite a bit as a child.  When you consider your mother's [Lily Camille McFarland] and your father's [Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.] personality and their talents and their dispositions and even their looks, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: The, I probably look more like my mother than my father.  His siblings were all rather negroid, you know, dark complexioned, thick lips.  Mine aren't too thin, but, you know, they weren't caricatures, but I'd say that I look more like my mother than my father.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, she was pretty (laughter), and I wasn't handsome (laughter), but she was pretty.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what about your disposition and your talents and such?
Speaker 2: Personality, more like my mother.  As I said, my father was a rather adventuresome type as far as I can discover, who loved excitement, kind of a rolling stone obviously.  And, well, that was it.  He loved excitement and the knock on him for my mother was he was jealous.  He was, and probably with good cause because she was after all a rather beautiful woman.  And that can bring a lot of problems (laughter).  So to answer your question, as far as I'm aware, certainly, I look more like my mother's side of the family than my father's.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you think you take your mathematical gifts--
Speaker 2: From the father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As far as I'm aware, none of my mother's people ever taught mathematics.  Now, Uncle Teddy was a good plumber, but my--Uncle George was a math teacher, Aunt Minnie was a math teacher.  I think Uncle--the first boy was mechanically inclined.  So it was quite common in the--and my grandfather [Henry Isaac Bragg] was a carpenter.  They had to be able to, you know, measure, and, you know, build things.
Speaker 1: Did you get a chance to meet his side of the family, your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, I remember, I remember him.  I remember my grand--on that side.  He was, by that time an old man and retired.  We came to live, came to Memphis [Tennessee] to live around 1924  '25 [1925].  So he was still alive.  He'd been born in 1855, but retired, naturally.  And they lived in the country.  And summers I would go out and visit my grandparents [Henry Isaac Bragg and Mary Waters].  And my (laughter), my job was, after dinner, he would sit in this rocking chair, and I had to rock him and scratch his bald head until he fell asleep (laughter).  I couldn't run out to play until grandpa fell asleep (laughter).  So I hated that old man for a while (laughter).
Speaker 1: So they made you scratch his head?  That's--
Speaker 2: For what, I don't know what he, but he liked that so I would scratch his head (laughter).  And he chewed tobacco.  And unless you've ever seen, plug tobacco, and it smells sweet.  It's a nasty, filthy stuff, but it has a sweet smell.  And he would bite the chunk of it and kind of chew it and chew it, and I don't remember him spiting around anywhere, so I don't know what he did.  But he did chew tobacco.  Now, the older women did what they called dip snuff.  And you probably don't know what that is.  But what it is, is they--it's a powdered tobacco which they put in the bottom of the lip.  And so you would see a plug like that, that they would--and they would, after a while they would spit.  It's rather nasty.  And you saw things like that in other cultures like the Philippines.  They chew a red nut.  Everybody would have a red ring around their mouth (laughter).  It's kind of a narcotic, I think.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the cola nuts or something?
Speaker 2: Well, it, no, no, that's Africa.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So some, another kind of nut.
Speaker 2: Bitter nut I think it's called.  But you'd see a beautiful woman with this red (laughter), chewing this nut.  Anyway, in answer to your question, I think I take after the--looks after the McFarland side but the, basically, and also the personality.  My mother used to say that her father would say, "Agree with thine adversary quickly", which meant he was a pacifist (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, were you gonna say something else?
Speaker 2: No, I'm just rambling on.
Speaker 1: All right, okay--
Speaker 2: I could on and on and on so you'd better keep focused (laughter).
Story_ID: 30323
Speaker 1: You have good stories.  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yes and no.  I don't, I can't really put my finger on it, but I almost think I can remember when my sister [Nadine Maryann] was born.  Now, that's not really possible because I was only two years old.  But I have this dim recollection of some people coming and going in the house and I'm associating that with the birth of my younger sister, two years later.  The next recollection I have is when we were on this homestead where--now, how we got there, I don't know.  But sugarcane was grown there.  And what they would do would be to harvest this sugarcane and make a preliminary extraction of the sweet juice from the sugarcane.  And the way it was done was, they had a mill which was a couple of stones, large stones that are juxtaposed.  So, and they're rolled, and the power for rolling these mills--these stones was a mule who went around in a circle.  And he just sort of kept plodding around and rolling these stones and they would feed the stalks of cane into the stone and the drippings would collect in a barrel.  And that was eventually fermented or distilled and made into sugar.  And I can remember that you could chew this cane.  It was rather sweet, and to this day, I'm sure people do that, but not the way the sugarcane was extracted.  But apparently, they would boil this material, and there was a scum that collected off of it.  And they would put that scum in a barrel, and it would ferment and would change into alcohol and rather potent.  So the term sugar barrel high came from people who would, n'er-do-wells, would sit next to this barrel and dip this cane (laughter), this fermenting liquor to get high (laughter).  So I don't know whether that comes later or not, but I do have this image of this mule going around, powering the stones.  And the next one is when we moved to, from the lumber camp to Chicago [Illinois]--to Memphis [Tennessee] because then, just before that we're in this lumber camp, I had a pet alligator.  Apparently, out in the woods, they had killed this alligator and brought home this, his little, you know, babies.  So I had this pet alligator, have nothing, no further, nothing beyond that, but I do remember I had a pet alligator.
Speaker 1: He was a little one.
Speaker 2: Yeah, about so long, hang onto your finger you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And I remember there was a guitar player who hung out at this juke who would come by the house.  And sometimes he would play.  And then one time, he showed up, there had been a big fight, and they'd broken his (laughter) guitar.  So, beyond that, these are my earliest childhood recollections.
Story_ID: 30324
Speaker 1: Now, that raises a few--the whole of issue of homesteading I know, I know that Florida, I guess at that time wasn't developed the way it is today on a level where there are a lot of space--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --cause I know they didn't develop Miami Beach until the '20s [1920s] (unclear), so a lot of places were undeveloped--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is that true, pretty much?  Now, I didn't know, you know, when you think of homesteading, you think of out West some place, but that's the--
Speaker 2: Well, there was a lot of--you know, we're talking about the early 19--I was born in 1919.
Speaker 1: So the 19--teens?
Speaker 2: So the early teens [19-teens], you know.  And a lot of develop came much later, after World War II.  You didn't get the people going south in great numbers to retire until after World War II.  So there's quite a long time involved, you know, between--where we were, J. C. Penney had some kind of development around there.  I went back trying to find out where was this lumber camp.  And I went through Green Cove Springs [Florida] which is near there, and the best I was able to find was a picture of a, in an office of a lumber company.  And you could see an aerial photograph, and you could see where the tracks had gone into this forest.  But that particular camp had long gone.  It was just a temporary installation anyway until they would cut, you know, mine that, would finish clear cutting that.  And they would just move on and go somewhere else.  But anyway, that's--those are recollections that I have until we came to Memphis [Tennessee].  And the funny part there, when we got ready to come to Memphis to see her [Bragg's mother] parents [Sally Wilson and William Peter McFarland] and show her the new children, new boy--my brother [Johnny McFarland] is a babe in arms then, I don't remember exactly how we actually got there.  But I remember getting, on route to the train station--I don't even remember how we got, what train we got onto to.  But we went in a truck at some, my father [Robert Henry Bragg, Sr.] had borrowed from another man.  And he sat in the, he drove the car, the truck.  My mother's [Lily Camille McFarland] got this babe in arms, my brother.  And the owner and I and the other two siblings are in the bed of the truck.  (Laughter) In fact, I remember this distinctly, he was telling another fellow--so there must have been another guy there, so he's saying, "I let him driv (ph.) since he had his wife with him".  Now, I can't be any more than four or five years old, but that "driv" struck.  I knew his English was, "what does he mean "driv", he means drove, drive" (laughter).  But that's about all I remember of that particular occasion of getting to the train station.  And after that, when we got to Memphis, my mother who was--after all, she's been to New York and everything.  And so she's not exactly a country gal, she hires this guy with a horse and buggy, coach.  Now, there were plenty of automobiles, and I'm sure some of them must have been available to black people, but I guess he was so friendly and saw this woman with all these children.  And so she hires this (laughter) horse and buggy that--and, of course, I don't know any better.  I'm told that I'm sitting up there, up top with the coachman and just happy as a clam, riding out to grandma's [Sally Wilson] house (laughter).  So when we arrived there, they just fall out laughing (laughter).  [Lily] Camille [McFarland] shows up with these three children in this horse and buggy (laughter).  So that was how we arrived in Memphis and take up the odyssey (laughter).
Story_ID: 30325
Speaker 1: Okay, so what were things like in Memphis?
Speaker 2: We were living in the, at that time, the household had grandmother [Sally Wilson] who was working as this companion who normally would not be there.  Great grandmother's [Rebecca Wilson] in the house and Rebecca's in the house and Uncle Teddy is in the house, the guy who eventually became the--
Speaker 1: Plumber.
Speaker 2: Chicago plumber, yeah.  And so all of a sudden, the occupation of the house has more than doubled.
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause how many of you are there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's five all together, mama [Lily Camille McFarland], plus four children.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, can you name your brothers and sisters again?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my oldest sister was named Alberta, Pauline Alberta.  My youngest sister--she's two years older and she's dead, then me, then Nadine, Mary Ann, who is dead also, two years younger, then my brother who was nicknamed Johnny, but they finally called him McFarland so his records are as McFarland Bragg.  So there were four of us.  And there we were.
Speaker 1: Five more people in the household, yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: It was, oh, now, it's getting a little bit crowded.  It seems to me there were five rooms to this house.  It was 817 Millard (ph.) Street, I remember that.  We had a house outside, a toilet outside with running water.  But as far as I'm aware, there was no running water inside the house.  It was, there were four rooms and there was sort of an add-on kitchen.  And exactly how the bedding was distributed, I don't remember, but I know we had a living room with a piano in it and lamps, you know, with kerosene lamps.  And there was one room that was great grandmother's.  She was already old, and, you know, retired and died not much longer after that.  And, well that was it.  So, we--I'm not privy to any pow wow's, family pow wow's they had and so on.  You understand, I'm not even in elementary school.  I started elementary school there.
Story_ID: 30326
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  And what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Interesting.  Sights, we lived in a house on Mosby Street [Memphis, Tennessee], which then seemed to be in, kind of like in a depression, like a valley.  And not too far from us there was an area where there were a lot of, looked like housing projects, and they called it Spring Home Valley.  There had been a spring back there some place.  I never actually went back there.  We were just forbidden to go back there.
Speaker 1: So it was kind a rough neighborhood?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't, wasn't posh.  The street we lived on, there was a culvert that went underneath the street, from one side of the street to the other.  So it rained, the run-off would go to there, and a right of passage was to go down one side and climb through this pipe and come out the other side.  And that's when you made your bones more or less.  And I finally did do it, was scared to death, but by that time, it almost silted up, but it was a big pipe, like so.  So, but, so it was kind of this depression.  Up at the top of the hill, which at that time, it looked like a steep hill, and later going back there, it was barely, just enough for gravity to make you run down (laughter), was Dunlap Street.  And it was kind of a street that ran north, south.  Mosby ran east, west.  And that's where, you know, we landed and where I, not too far from there, several blocks was Carnes Elementary School where I went the first two or three years.  The Dunlap Street was not too far from Poplar which was a main drag that ran all the way from the Mississippi River practically out into the next state (laughter) practically.  But there's some shops not too far from where I lived.  Exactly what they were, I don't remember, but that was the environment that I, you know, lived in.  Not too far away now, there were streets like Washington, Adams, the typical names of presidents.  And there was Beale Street.  Beale Street was where the movie theaters were, the only ones available to us, black people.  And you would collect Coca-Cola bottles, and a penny a bottle and what not and for, when you got to Beale Street there were, there was one movie house that had Vaudeville, the Palace Theater.  And so you would have a movie and you would have a serial.  And there would be some Vaudeville.  Across the street was the Daisy, I think, and there was another one there.  But the thing I remember best about Beale Street was that, that was where all the hustlers and the sporting people hung out.  And almost right next door to the Palace Theater was a place called the One Minute and for a nickel, you could go in there and get a hamburger.  Now, I didn't realize until later that it was just meatloaf with lots of garlic, (laughter) but at the time that seemed like the most delicious thing imaginable.  So if you had your dime, you could go down to the--stop off in the One Minute and get your hamburger and then go next door to the Palace for a nickel and see the show.  So all the Vaudeville acts of that era, that's where they had to play cause there was no other place to play.  It's like the early '20s [1920s].  So Saturdays would be when you would go to the movies and as I say, you'd collect bottles, whatever, that's the way you'd pick up money.
Speaker 1: So this is when you're little, you're like elementary age?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm five, six years old.
Speaker 1: Five or six years old, okay.
Speaker 2: People would come through selling tamales.  And I can remember these tunes.  I don't know if you remember 'Porgy and Bess', but there's a little song, that theme, they would--I forget what the song was, but it was Porgy and Bess.  But the similar one there was, "Hot Tamale, get 'em red hot on any burgline (ph.); hot tamale, get 'em red hot coming down the line; they're two for a nickel and four for a dime, would give you more but they ain't none of mine.  Hot tamale, get 'em red" (singing)  So for (unclear) (laughter), you could get these hot tamales.
Speaker 1: Might give you more, but they ain't of mine.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) To this day, I remember that tune.
Speaker 1: Hot tamale, I know a family in Chicago [Illinois] that, whose father was from Mississippi and he'd make them all make hot tamales and they'd sell 'em in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Oh, to this day, really?
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, that must have been done in '50s [1950s]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but I know all the sisters say that their dad was from Mississippi, and he'd make them--he lived in Memphis [Tennessee] for a while, but they sold hot tamales.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And that was the first time I'd ever heard that, but that's a--
Story_ID: 30327
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, I remember that hot tamales was big, and it wasn't, then the hamburgers were big.  But I went to Carnes Elementary School, which is a few blocks away.  And my family had all gone there and been good students.  So when I arrived, it's great expectations.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: Now, was Carnes--
Speaker 1: Carnes, C-A-R-N-E-S, Carnes Elementary School.
Speaker 2: And that was just a regular elementary, it was a public elementary school?
Speaker 1: Public, yes, it's a public school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The principal's name was C. J. Neal, never forget him, cause he was known to be mean and bad.  And I lived there, I went there long enough to get into trouble one day.  So I must have been two or three grades.  The idea was that kids would play outside, but then when the rang--the bell rang, you lined up to march into school.  And whoa betide you if you talked in line.  [C.J.] Neal had this long whip and he would see some kids talking, and one day I was talking to a friend.  And he saw us, and he would tap you with that, you know, that switch--
Speaker 2: Like a buggy whip?
Speaker 1: Yeah, sort of like that.  Exactly what, I don't know but it wasn't--
Speaker 2: Kind of leather, flat (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --he didn't deal out any punishment with that but he was very dexterous and he could, you know, like a fly fisherman (laughter).  So that meant step out, go up to the office and stand outside his office until he could deal with you.  And after he got everybody in and he would come out and take you down to your school room and, well, you knew you were in for trouble cause I remember, I'm standing outside the principal's office, the other guy and myself.  And I'm just, I know it's gonna be murder.  So my sister, who by that time is a teacher's pet (laughter), comes by and sees me there and starts crying (laughter).  She knows I'm in for a good thrashing.  So in due time, he comes out, takes us down to the home room--maybe I'm in the second grade or something and brings the teacher out and wants to know are we nice kids and all that.  And I remember she didn't say a damn thing in our favor (laughter).  So, and at the time I was, my pants were being held up by suspenders.  I remember he grabs me by these suspenders and proceeds to flog me with this leather strap which has got holes in it.  It's got peace and love written on it.  So (laughter) he gives me a good beating, gives the other guy one.  It was years before I would ever wear suspenders (laughter).  Well, I didn't stay there too long.  About the only thing I remember that was unusual about that was they had some kind of a play, and my mother [Lily Camille McFarland] made a costume for me.  She was a good seamstress.  And she, when it came to making the shoes, she had paper soles so it didn't last very long.  But nevertheless, that was my first brush with the theater (laughter).  And after that, my--they converted to Catholicism because of my aunt who had, was big on--had changed over the Catholic faith.  And went over to Catholic elemen--Parochial school.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this is St. Anthony's?
Speaker 1: St. Anthony's, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30328
Speaker 1: So for the next two or three years, I was a student at St. Anthony's [School, Tennessee].  And it was kind of like a private school--that's what it was, a private school.  I don't think we paid anything, but I remember that--
Speaker 2: Now, what was the reason for your mother [Lily Camille McFarland] converting to Catholicism again?
Speaker 1: I don't really know except that my Aunt Virginia who was a very dynamic type, you know, type A personality.
Speaker 2: She just convinced the other sisters--
Speaker 1: We ought to be Catholic so--and they had an organ too.  So the white people sat on one side of the church and the black people sat on the other side.  But the students were all black and the staff was, nuns and a few black teachers as well.  One of my schoolmates was--well, two of them, they were a brother and a sister, they were children of a very prominent physician in the town, Hose, the name is Hose (ph.); had a long Cadillac.  Well, back in those days, the cars had [phone ringing].  There we go, sorry, cut it.
Speaker 2: After you, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay, we were talking about the Catholic school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was interesting.  It was kind of selective.  I don't know whether it had an outstanding record or not.  I remember that they had nuns who taught, all black children, of course.  Some of them were--there was one family that were, when they came to Chicago [Illinois], they passed [for white].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The names were McCann.  Their father had a saloon on, actually a corner of 47th and State Street in Chicago, and, you know, gray eyes and blonde hair and stuff like that.  The Hoses were there.  I remember them with the car with the long twelve cylinders or whatever it was and another guy whose father was an undertaker.  And there were us poor folks (laughter).
Speaker 1: Now, there are some McCann's on Stony Island in Chicago.  They had a daycare center and a big family and some involved in the fire (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No, they kind of disappeared cause I remember when I finally moved to Chicago, I ran into Cecelia who was the daughter who was a clerk at the--there was a department store, South Center or something like that on 47th Street at that time.  And I don't think she even wanted to recognize me so she must have been passing.  But they could, of course, with the way they looked.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're about ten years old when you start at St. Anthony's [School, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, about that.  Yeah, I wasn't there very long, two or three years.  And then I went to boarding school where my Uncle George was a math teacher on faculty of Shelby County Training School.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In Woodstock, Tennessee--no, Woodstock Training School in--maybe, I'm not sure I got it right, but anyway, the town was, the nearest town was Lucy [Tennessee], but it's, you'll see, on a current map of Shelby County, you'll find that it's all incorporated in Shelby County now.  But at that time, it was a ride to get from Memphis [Tennessee] out there to Woodstock [Tennessee].  But anyhow, my Uncle George was a math teacher there, and I guess he must have been able to, must have been paying the tuition or the room and board or got it because of his staff position cause my oldest sister [Pauline Alberta] was, lived in the girl's dorm which had steam heat and running water and everything.  And I lived in Bankrupt Hall which (laughter) which was the building that--a guy had had a store there, and he went bankrupt.
Speaker 1: So they called it bankrupt--
Speaker 2: They called it Bankrupt Hall (laughter).  And it was a big, kind of a bullpen like where the students live and the back room, my uncle and the science teacher were the male, you know, what do you call it, chaperones.  The thing had a big stove, coal fired, and I remember we'd heat the water to take baths, you know, to wash up with.  We must have been awfully gamey cause people didn't bathe too often then, at least we didn't (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's interesting cause I've discussed that with people and they don't seem to want to remember that now.  But--
Speaker 2: Well, you had to be gamey because you didn't bathe that often.
Speaker 1: --it used to be like Saturday night baths were--
Speaker 2: Once a week, you know, whether you needed it or not.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Now, was there a bathtub?
Speaker 2: It would be a--there was an outhouse out in back.  And there must have been a water tap some place because we did have--we had pitchers of water.  You know, you'd heat the water on the stove.  Sometimes we would go out and get sweet potatoes and put 'em in the, wig the fires out, down to the bottom and roast the sweet potatoes (laughter).  But that was Bankrupt Hall, and that's where, it was on--the highway ran through the campus.  We were on this side and the rest of the big school was on the other side.  And the red building, you know, those Rosenwald buildings that, you know, they were all red.  Well, that was red.  And it was kindergarten through twelve.
Speaker 1: And the Rosenwald Fund, Sears people, paid for a lot of those schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  And the principal was C. J. Rotty (ph.).  There's some kind of museum in some recognition of him, named after him.  I've been back there once.  But C. J. Rotty was the principal.  And we'd have these assemblies everyday.  Everyday, a different teacher would have charge of the morning assembly.  The students would all get together before they start.  And so the typical speech was Mr. Rotty, members of the factory and student body (laughter), you had (unclear) [invent?] a little speech (laughter).  I can hear this too, Mr. Rotty, members of the factory (laughter).  So that's where you got the Paul Lawrence Dunbar and all that stuff, you know, and indignation stories and, Antebellum stuff (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your--now, this is high school?  Is this--
Speaker 2: This is elementary through high school, the whole--all the way.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you started--
Story_ID: 30329
Speaker 1: I finished high school--elementary school there, and I spent one, I guess it must have been--cause I came to Chicago [Illinois] in the winter of '35 [1935], is that right?  Yeah.  No, no, no, '33 [1933] cause [Franklin Delano] Roosevelt had just--
Speaker 2: Right, '33 [1933].
Speaker 1: --Roosevelt had just become president.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: And I arrived in Chicago that, it was just before Christmas.  And so the school semester had just begun at Tilden where I went to school.  I had to go to summer school one summer to catch up on everything.
Speaker 2: Now, when you were coming up, were your--you seemed to be aware of a lot of things.  Were you aware of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and UNIA [Universal Negro Improvement Association] and the different--
Speaker 1: UNIA, yeah, I could, I can remember dimly the UNIA, the marches they would hit out there.  They would, Marcus Garvey was big.  NAACP, I was a Youth Council Member, you know, that was early on.  But they would have these parades and for some reason, they had these very dark costumes, black and red or something like that, the costumes that they had.
Speaker 2: Okay, this was probably Universal African Legion, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was some symbolism that went with it.  But I can remember those UNI[A] parades during that period.  It was quite common.
Speaker 2: In Memphis [Tennessee] or--
Speaker 1: Yeah--I'm sorry, no,that was Chicago.
Speaker 2: In Chicago.
Speaker 1: I never saw that in Memphis.  Memphis, the only thing I ever saw was a Veterans Day parade where guys show up with the, (unclear) with the leg of this wrapped around the (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Oh, from World War I?
Speaker 1: Yeah, World War, right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But back to your question about UNIA, Marcus Garvey was big.  The funny thing is that people very often disparaged Garvey.  In fact, I don't remember where I saw this, but somewhere somebody said, "UNIA" stands for ugliest niggers in America.  I mean that was that kind of Bourgeois attitude Garvey (laughter), who, well, proclaimed himself King and Emperor and all the, you know, regalia they would put on.  And so it had a mixed kind of response.
Speaker 2: Okay, were any of your members--members of your family involved in the UNIA at all?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The closest any of us ever came to any kind of militancy was in '35 [1935] when my Uncle Teddy was recruited to go to Africa for the Ethiopian Army.
Speaker 2: Okay, that was the Ethiopian Movement, right.  That's--
Speaker 1: But he never went.  There were some black--I told you he'd been a pilot, not a very good one, but he had an airplane, and so they were trying to recruit blacks to come and get with the [U.S.] Air Force.  Luckily, they didn't go because they would have gotten killed eventually.  But he had packed up all of his tools and everything.  He was ready to go, but the money didn't come through.  So, now, John Robinson, a few guys, Joe Muldrow (ph.) who did actually go, but by that time, it was all, practically all over.  That's where I learned about cow pies being inflammable, being flammable cause he had seen how they would--a herder would go out and take the goats and everything.  And as soon as this things would come up, they would plaster it on a wall like a pie.  And then he would, when the time come to bring the calf, the goats back in, he would take a stick and have these things on it like donuts (laughter).  You better not come back without this fuel, so that's I knew that cow pies were, you could burn like a beautiful flame, you know.  Anyway, that was Chicago [Illinois].  The only big thing that happened early on was, apart from our, you know, losing all, everything we had, was [John Herbert] Dillinger [Jr.].
Story_ID: 30330
Speaker 1: Now, let me go back a little bit.  Let's go back before we talk about [John Herbert] Dillinger [Jr.].  But I wasn't clear, like how did you wind up in Chicago, because of your uncle being there or--
Speaker 2: Poverty.
Speaker 1: Poverty, okay.
Speaker 2: Uncle George had--understand that my mother [Lily Camille McFarland] wasn't much of a breadwin-, you know, wasn't much of a wage earner.  We don't have a father.  Grandma's [Sally Wilson] got the oldest house and everybody's on her.  By that time, Uncle Teddy--Teddy's already gone to Chicago [Illinois].  So there's very little money coming in.  Mama could sew and what not, but never, she wasn't terribly aggressive.
Speaker 1: And this is the Depression, right, the Great Depression?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We'd get so parceled off.  My brother [Johnny McFarland] who was four years younger, went to live with my aggressive aunt, Virginia, who was out in North Memphis [Tennessee], and they'd just got a house in a subdivision.  And her husband is working as a mechanic in the police station.  So E.C., 'sugar lump' Jones, everybody knew him and he had a good job.  So they had a house with running water in the bathroom.  So my brother went to live there.  And my younger sister [Nadine Maryann] went to live with Aunt Rebecca who was a cousin to the other guy.  And they had a house and everything, a nice situation.  So that leaves me and my sister at home with my mother and grandma and all that as long as she lived.  Well, still my Uncle Teddy has married.  Meanwhile, he comes back in '31 [1931] or thereabouts and marries the daughter of a local dentist, Edna Mae Clark was her name who had an--the father had an office down on Beale Street.  But they didn't get any children.  And so they decided well to volunteer to help out with [Lily] Camille [McFarland] and this brood.  So that's how I--they didn't say who they wanted.  They just, we'll be glad to help.  I don't remember, I don't--wasn't privy to any of the details.  But that's how that came about.  So I guess the decision was send me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I went with all my lunches.  (Laughter) The whole neighborhood pitched in and made the lunches for me.
Speaker 1: Did you all travel by train?
Speaker 2: I went by the back of the bus (laughter), whatd'ya tal'in' about train (laughter); me by myself, and I'm going through every--we crossed the river into Arkansas and also Missouri and back through St. Louis.  I'm eating these lunches and I've got a money belt with about five dollars in it (laughter); get to the 12th Street--12th Street or 22nd Street.  Anyway, there was a bus depot there, Greyhound bus.  I'm supposed to get off at 67th or 69th and Stony Island where, but I forget.  Anyway, they--I get off there, and I do have their phone number, but it has one extra digit, and I'm not used to that.  Chicago [Illinois] is a bigger city.  But meanwhile, they realize that I missed--and they come down and pick me up.  And so there I am with all these lunches which we ate off of for two or three days actually.  That's my arrival in Chicago (laughter).
Story_ID: 30331
Speaker 1: Now, at this juncture, now, you're just becoming a teenager at this point--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --but how would you describe yourself growing up?  What were you interested in primarily and what were you like?
Speaker 2: I was bookish, read a lot.  I think I read everything in the library at Woodstock [Training School, Tennessee].  They didn't have much of a library.  But I'd read everything, 'Wild West Weeklies', "Shadow" and all that stuff.  My Aunt Virginia liked to discuss stuff like that too, but I read a lot.  And I was mechanically, you know, kind of mechanically inclined.  But I wasn't much of a--oh, I did, started learning how to tap dance.
Speaker 1: In Memphis [Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In those days, tap, you know, people--dances were tap dance.  You didn't do ballet, you did tap.  Everybody did tap.  And I could, I learned how to do, you know, few things, a few steps which I kept doing once I got to Chicago [Illinois], started taking dance lesson, and I paid for them for a while.  But I guess because I'm hopping around, I'm not making a lot of fast friends because next thing you know, I'm with another bunch of kids.  So out of all those people that I was in school with in Woodstock [Training School, Tennessee] where my aunt was the math teacher, I only remember maybe a couple of names.  You know, they were people that I knew and went on, you know; the same way at Carnes [Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee].  Like Buddy Roosevelt was the only one I remember actually.  At the Catholic school I remember, the ones that I, remember I already mentioned.  So I never made a lot of fast friends that stayed with me for years except Fat Childress was the first guy in the neighborhood to have a radio.  He was very good at electronics and stuff with crystal sets.  And Fat was very, and he could operate a movie projector and, so he somehow, I guess we wound up in the same places too later.  But the answer to your question was I never made a lot of fast friends because I was always hopping from one place to another.  And that happened even when I got to Chicago because not long after I got to Chicago, I got a job working after school in a tea room.  So the normal thing that you do after school in the playground or so, I just never did do.  I had a job, you know.  So I don't know if that answers your question, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, you liked to read and you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I wasn't much of an athlete if that's your question because I couldn't see.  I was so nearsighted that it wasn't until that I got to Chicago that people, it was realized that I really was, really needed glasses.  Now, up to that point, I had--because my name was Bragg, I would sit--alphabetically, I would be near the front of the room so I could kind of squint and see the blackboard.  But when I got to Chicago, the classes were bigger, and I wound up in the back of the room even though my name was Bragg.  And the teacher noticed I couldn't see anything.  And she had me, you know, sent a note and check this guy's glasses.  And it was discovered I didn't--well, with my first pair of glasses, I said, wow, ooh, I can--is that what they've been seeing (laughter).  No wonder I was so clumsy (laughter).  And so I wore glasses until two or three years ago when I had cataracts removed.  So if you see pictures of me, if it looks strange, it's because I'm wearing glasses.
Speaker 1: So you could see up close, but you couldn't see what's--
Speaker 2: Oh, I could see right up to my nose practically in those days, take off the glasses and right up to my nose; can't do that now.  I gotta--but, yeah, I was always bespectacled and that led to--I guess I felt I was kind of clumsy because I couldn't seem to--the typical sports that you would play like baseball and softball and so on, I couldn't see anything out in the outfield, for example, and just never saw things very well.  Things would be right on me before I could do anything.  So, the tendency is to don't do that, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But on top of that say, very soon I wound up with a job when I got to the point where I would have been doing this after school.  At Woodstock, we, you hung out, you know, and they'd played softball and what not.  It wasn't much else, and the basketball court was outdoors, didn't even have an indoor court.  And it was made with green lumber so after a while the lumber would warp.  You couldn't even dribble the ball (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, we got you in Chicago.  We have to pause here and--.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30332
Speaker 1: Okay, here we go again.  So you're in Chicago.  Now, Chicago, did it make a big impression on you?  I don't think--it's a pretty big--
Speaker 2: Well, it was big.  We had, for example, we had a radio which I hadn't had at home.  I was going to a high school which I could take the streetcar over, 47th Street over to 47th and Union--46th and Union where the Tilden Technical High School [Chicago, Illinois] is.  As I said, I went there because my uncle had recommended that I become an engineer.  And so I could either go to DuSable High School which was only a couple of blocks away or Wendell Phillips [high school] which was four or five blocks the other way or Tilden which was going that way.  So I chose Tilden.
Speaker 1: Now, what street did you live on in--
Speaker 2: We were living in the back of our store, 4641 State Street, in Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Very near the corner of 47th and State which is, there was (unclear) theater was there on the corner and there was a poolroom.  Coleman School wasn't far away.  If you ever read any of the stuff about Nella Larsen--ever heard of her?  Well, that's one of the schools that she went to (laughter), give you an idea of the type of neighborhood.  But that was Chicago, and my life consisted of, well, first of all, learning my way around, helping out in the store and very soon, my uncle [Teddy] had the practice of taking my aunt [Edna] to dinner every Sunday.  That was, after all, she worked around the house, you know, in the store and all that.  And there was a tea room that we would go to at--this lady had had a big restaurant on State Street, but during the Depression, the trade dried up and so she had this huge apartment on Michigan Avenue near the Hall Branch Library.  And she opened up with the police permission, a tea room.  And the front living room and the back dining room were both dining rooms.  And you had to go in the lobby--it was a six-flat building.  You'd buzz your way in and so I was--I became the waiter and the bus boy and the greens cleaner and the chittling tester and all that.  So that was what I did after school (laughter).  And I did that for, you know, until I finished Tilden [Technical High School, Chicago, Illinois].  And I don't know what I did for the next two years because I went to Wilson [Junior College, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Now, before we get you in Wilson, you had a story about Oscar DePriest.  Your uncle was a plumber for Oscar DePriest?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, right.  Well, when I arrived there, he was still working for Oscar DePriest.  He still had his airplane.  We would go out, you know, to the Harlem Airport where the black pilots hung out--
Story_ID: 30333
Speaker 1: Now, this is a big jump.  Your uncle leaves Memphis [Tennessee].  He wasn't living like this in Memphis so--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: --when he gets to Chicago [Illinois] as plumber.
Speaker 2: Well, he had learned the plumbing trade in reform school (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He and some other boys had stolen a car, and as joy riding; didn't mean to keep the car.  They just stole it to ride.
Speaker 1: Was this Memphis?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, in Memphis.  And he didn't rat on them.  So in those days, they had what they called a reform school which is in, out near Chattanooga, Tennessee.  And while there, he learned, went to work on a pipeline and so he learned, picked up the plumbing trade; came back to Memphis and got his license.  And for a while, very shortly after that, he--somebody he knew had moved to Chicago [Illinois] and worked in the stockyards, big money to be made.  And so initially, he worked in the stockyards, I guess.  But very soon thereafter, he went to work for Oscar DePriest, taking care of all the plumbing, all of his properties.
Speaker 1: Now, explain who Oscar DePriest is.
Speaker 2: Oscar DePriest was the first black congressman elected to the Congress after the Reconstruction in 1932.  He was a Republican, well-to-do, building contractor, but he owned a lot of real estate.  He served only one term in the Congress.  And he was succeeded by Mitchell, I think it was.  But he was from the First Congressional District in Illinois, and he was a rich--big family.  They were all high yellows.
Speaker 1: And he was famous for a haircut he called a pompadour haircut.
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah, white hair, very impressive-looking politician.
Speaker 1: Six, four [6'4"].
Speaker 2: Big man, big man.  He had a son, had a son named Bobby who went around collecting rent, which I got to know very well.  And Bobby eventually he and another guy took off, went to Brazil and got killed down there for some reason.  But anyway, my uncle [Teddy] was, he was doing very well because with the rather large number of holdings, that meant a lot of plumbing supplies had to be bought, and my uncle would buy the plumbing supplies wholesale and bill DePriest retail.  And so (laughter), you know, picking up a lot of money.  You know, he lived very--oh, (unclear) you know, tuxedos.  They would go to dances and, you know, night clubs.  And he was a handsome guy, and the women loved him, and the men liked him.  So it was great, (laughter) while it lasted.  But the Depression is coming, and already '29 [1929] is passed, you see.  We're up to 1932 or three [1933].
Speaker 1: Three [1933].
Speaker 2: And so things are getting worse, worse, worse, worse.  And so Dr. DePriest now begins to look very closely at his expenses.  And he begins to challenge all these bills.  He wants to get the wholesale price himself.  And my uncle is mad.  And he said, no.  He's hotheaded.  He quits.  So that really put us in dire straights because the flower business had gone up.  You know, who could afford flowers when they've got soup lines.  So that kind of put us in bad shape, and we were really scrambling there for a while.  But he eventually went into business with a couple of other guys, the plumbing and heating business which they stayed in until he died.
Story_ID: 30334
Speaker 1: Okay, so at Tilden Technical High School, now, did you have--were there any special teachers or favorite teachers there that you had?
Speaker 2: The only teacher I really remember at Tildon--there were two.  One I remember, I don't remember his name, but I remember him because I was--he taught a technical drawing class, and I was good at it.  And I did so well that he put it up for, you know, competition.  It didn't win a prize, but it wound up in the lobby of the school, you know, as an example.  And there, black guys weren't all that favored, I'd have to say.
Speaker 1: So they were in the minority at Tilden?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  It might be one in the class of forty.  But I remember him because he didn't really, he didn't really make any distinction.  It was good work so he put it up there.  The other guy I remember was Mr. Wood who taught mathematics.  I had, you know, algebra, advanced algebra, solid geometry.  I had all the math it takes, that took--that they had.  And I remember him because he was the guy that went that far.  Other than that, about all I remember about Tilden was that things like Tilden had--it's most famous alumnus up to that point was Ralph Metcalfe who had gone to the Olympics in 19--something.
Speaker 1: Thirty-six [1936].
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so he was a famous alumnus.  Al Loving was a black guy on this ice skating which I hadn't even seen ice skates up to that time (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, was Metcalfe there when you were there?
Speaker 2: No, he was gone.
Speaker 1: So he was in college probably.
Speaker 2: Yeah, went to Marquette [University, Milwaukee, Wisconsin], I think, but he was famous around there.  And, but Tilden always had powerhouse teams.  They were all boys, and the track team practiced--the place was so big that they could run around like an indoor track.  Henry Springs I think was there, not any of the others though, but Henry Springs I think was there.  I mentioned Julius Blakely was Henry Blakely's brother who I met later.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Henry Blakely was the husband of--
Speaker 2: He was Gwendolyn Brooks' husband.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was his fame (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, he was a writer, that was fairly well respected in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Henry, if Henry [Blakely] could have written like he talked, he would have been over the top.  He could sell you anything, incidentally.  And he could also break your hand.  He had these meat cleavers for hands.  If you shook his hand, he would crash these bones here (laughter).  But, a funny guy, brilliant, but the (laughter) thing I remember about Henry one time--who incidentally, if he's married to, you know, a Pulitzer Prize winning poet, he's not exactly out in front.  She's in front. But he was kind of tolerated in those literary circles, South side Community Art Center that was founded Margaret Burroughs.  That's where he met his wife, Gwendolyn [Brooks].  One day they're having a party or something and they mentioned somebody that he knew.  And the others expressed surprise that he knew them.  He said, "Well, I know some sissies too" (laughter).  That doesn't strike you as funny, but the way he said it was indignant of him, say well (laughter).  Well, anyway, I'm reading a book about Nella Larsen.  So all these names, the Harlem Renaissance come up, some of which I, you know, either knew about or some of them eventually you saw at the end of their careers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so were you there when the Abraham Lincoln Center was, where they had the federal writers' project over there as a, you know, what I heard was--
Speaker 2: Everybody was going to Spain to fight the-
Speaker 1: With the Basque against Franco.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, Franco.  That was big then.  The Communist were putting people out of--I mean the landlords were putting people out on the street.  The Communist was gonna put 'em back.  And so there was a, you know, that whole--if you weren't indignant about what was going on, nobody would pay any attention to you and people wouldn't respect you.  So that was quite common then.  Oh, there was one other guy, Ernest Price.  Henry had, Henry [Blakely] had become an automobile mechanic and he ran a body and fender shop.  And one of the guys he had teamed up was Ernest Price who was very, kind of an artist really, and I actually worked for them a few months, driving cars up and down a multi-story garage.  They had a place on one of the floors, and my job was to ferry the cars up and down.  I'm off the beaten path though so why don't we get back.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right.
Story_ID: 30335
Speaker 1: All right, but some of the people that you met when you got out of high school--now, you went to Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --out of high school.  And it's a two-year college.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  Wilson was, that was a fall back.  When I got out of, when I finished high school with not a bad record, but not, nothing outstanding, nobody was waiting with a big scholarship for me.  And I was admitted to the University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois] and I applied, but that's all.  It didn't come with anything but admission.  So, no money, I didn't go.  And people that I had met--and I don't remember who that was, but they were all mainly from DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] which wasn't very far away.  And so we're all going to Wilson [Junior College, Chicago, Illinois].  So we all went to Wilson.  The thing I remember there was that they all had remedial reading courses--remedial English.  But I didn't.  And I found out later that if you came there from one of the black high schools, they put you in a, automatically put you in a remedial English class.  But I came from Tilden [Technical High School], and they didn't do that to me.  Nevertheless, they had a two-year English course, and you had to--you surveyed courses.  Some, the English, the humanities, the social science, physical science, three or four of these survey courses that you had to have before you got out.  And I remember writing in this English class, writing an essay on how to wipe a lead pipe joint which I had seen my uncle [Teddy] do hundreds of times.  It's a skill that plumbers work in lead, (unclear) lead.  So when I turned this thing in, the woman said, you didn't write this.  Nice lady, loved, black kids loved her, but she said, you didn't write this.  I said, no, well, sure I did.  No, you didn't write this and she gave me a "C".  The next year, the toughest guy in the school, Mr. Doherty, I remember his name, the first day, he said, if you don't wanna work, you might as well get out right now because we're gonna work in this class.  And he lost half the enrollment (laughter), I got an "A."  So it taught me a lesson about people being nice to you because you're black.  They're being, sometimes they're patronizing, taught me a lesson.  So I preferred tough teachers.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--
Speaker 2: No bullshit.
Speaker 1: So your course of study at Tilden was, I mean at Wilson [Junior College, Chicago, Illinois] was--
Speaker 2: Pre-engineering.
Speaker 1: Pre-engineering, okay.
Speaker 2: Which meant take all the math, which I did, take all the drawing courses which is all they had, and physics and chemistry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that brings us to about 1939, I guess, right, when you finished Wilson?
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum, right.
Story_ID: 30336
Speaker 1: So what happened next?  What did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, now, to--I want to go on and finish, but I don't have any money.  And it's still not a great time.  War is just beginning to be on the horizon by, I guess, by now Hitler and--people are beginning to notice Hitler.  But not having any money, what I did was the best thing that I could think of and that is to take a few courses, engineering related at what was then the Central YMCA College in downtown Chicago.  It eventually became Roosevelt University.  But I didn't do very well at that at all.  In fact, I did poorly.  I'm not even sure I got completes cause I was working during the day for my uncle.  And I'd come home dirty, try to get clean, get on the "El", elevated, you know, and go downtown.  And I was just worn out.  So a year of that just came to nothing really.  And for another year, I just kind of knocked around.  But it, and then the War [World War II] saved me in that sense because I got a job.  I learned that the U.S. Signal, U.S. Army was paying people to go to school to learn electronics.  And if you had a math, some math background, that would help you to pick up this stuff, then they would hire you.  So I got hired into a civil service job, went to school eight hours a day, five days a week.  So all the way from the "E" equals "IR", I learned the very basics of electronics, you know, electrical circuits, resistance, capacitors, capacity, you know, (inductors?) and all that, built little sets, you know, even an HP audio oscillator which became famous for Hewlett Packard, cut my teeth on that.  And for three different cycles, every time they would have a graduation in three months, and I would get another diploma.  So finally we got to graduate level, rather to senior level electricity and magnetism, and so I had to use Maxwell's equations.  But I was equipped to do all that cause I had a lot of math and stuff beforehand.  So that was fine.  But then it turned out that in order to, when you hired into the job, they suggested that you enlist in the Reserves.  I'm not sure they told you you had to, but I'd done that.  But what that meant was, that I was already enlisted in the Reserves.  So I became a volunteer then.  At the end of this nine months of training, the guys who had families, who were married, got jobs in the Signal Corp some place.  The guys who were single got sent to active duty in the service.  So that took me to Kerns, Utah to basic training in the Air Force, three months.  And then I got sent to North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Now, this is the Army Air Corp at this point, right?
Speaker 2: Army Air Corp, that's right.  The Air Force doesn't exist then.  It's the Army Air Corp.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's an interesting thread here with your uncle being involved with the pilots in Chicago and the Ethiopian mission of Robinson and--did you know, Dale White and--
Speaker 2: No, I knew Johnny Robinson, I mean who he was because I had met him and Joe Muldrow and a few of those.  Janet Harmon, I think, was one of the females who hung out around them.  There was a few women.
Speaker 1: You know, Bessie Coleman is famous in--
Speaker 2: I don't think I ever met her.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, you know, they would, sort of hung out.  And so I knew them, and they were really fascinated by all this.  As I say, they, that was light planes.  See, he had bought his own planes.  And when he fell on such hard times, the hanger rent ate it up.  He had to sign it over to them (laughter).
Speaker 1: Wait a minute.  Let's go back to Utah.  You went out to Utah.  Now, what was it like going to Utah?
Speaker 2: Utah was Mormon country.  On route to the basic training, they would call you up and I think we went through Fort Sheridan, Fort Custer as an induction center.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) in Michigan?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Fort Custer.  And the classification, you know, they give you all kinds of tests and put you in uniform.  Then you're put on the ship and go, sent off, so nothing very unusual happened there except that an artist that I ran into later was a barracks chief.  And the thing I remember was, he was the great crap shooter.  And guys would come in with money and (laughter), they'd get them out on the floor of the barracks and shooting these craps.  And I knew him from having met him through Margaret Burroughs, I guess.  I had met her already.  So (laughter), this guy, they'd come in there.  Either they'd break him or he'd break them.  But other than that, nothing very unusual happened at Fort Custer.  So in due time, I was sent off to, a shipment of three or four of us, on a Pullman to Utah, and the Pullman porters just treated us like kings.  I mean, after all, there weren't that many black people in, riding Pullman's at that time.  So (laughter) other than that, there was nothing eventful about it.  At Kerns, [Utah], I wound up in one of these training centers where you've got like fifteen hundred soldiers at one time in different barracks.  You know, a squadron would have fifty, maybe fifty men.  And you all were trained together.  There was a sergeant who was white who would take you around, that was your training leader.  But the rest of us are in this one barracks together.  When KP time came, everybody went on, fifty guys went on KP and the mess hall would served fifteen hundred people at a setting.  And I remember that because the food was so bad that it was just terrible.  And then one day, I ran into an old friend from Chicago who was in the permanent party there up in Station Hospital.  So he said, look, don't--next time you go on KP, just let me know.  So he would call down to the mess hall and say, send Private Bragg up here.  He's got to have this shot because he's got syphilis (laughter).  So off I would go and wouldn't come back.  So, so that got me out of KP (laughter).  Otherwise, my career there was undistinguished (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Story_ID: 30337
Speaker 1: Got on a train, and they finally finished, you know, finished your basic training.  And I remember we were put on a car, one, you know, railroad car.  In those days, military had preference, you know, preference on (unclear).  And so they would just set you off to the side if for some reason, they had something that had to go through there, they would put you off side and maybe come back in four or five hours and had to hook you up.  So I remember we were put off in Osawatomie, Kansas.  Now, Osawatomie was the birth place of John Brown, the abolitionist.  And when the time came to have lunch, of course, the next thing--you know, as soon as we're there, the soldiers wanna go find some liquor and women if they could find any (laughter).  This is, now, Kansas, but it's not up North.  It's Kansas.  So the time came to have lunch--there was a white guy in charge of this group.  So there's one place in town where you, had a restaurant.  And I remember the guy said, well, either they're gonna feed them or, you know, or else.  So we must have integrated that restaurant at that time because I can remember black people on the outside looking in to see these black guys in there eating.  So it taught me another lesson about crackers.  Sometimes, you know, they're not all necessarily--I don't know what he thought, but these were soldiers and they were gonna eat.  So, down we went to Seymour Johnson Field in North Carolina where I spent, you know, another five or six months.
Speaker 2: What happened down there?  Now, this is North Carolina--
Speaker 1: Well, we're down South, and wound up in an Aviation Squadron which is another name for a labor gang.  And I'm getting my, you know--the thing I noticed was that we had the olive drab uniforms that the Army was issuing.  Now, there were blue jeans that the old, regular Army had had years before, and mostly they were just put on to prisoners.  So some of these guys were actually being forced to turn in the olive drabs and put on blue jeans.  So to this day, I wouldn't wear blue jeans.  I mean that was just how I felt about that particular issue.  But I wound up in the supply room by virtue of, you know, being picked from my Army classification test.  And that meant learning the Army regulations and, but the meantime, I had applied for Army Specialized Training Program.  And when, which is go to college in uniform.  And I discovered that I had been called up several times, but not let go because the officer in charge of the detachment, of the company, squadron, said I was necessary for the good of the, functioning of the unit, and so he could always turn that down.  And I found out about it and confronted him, and he said, well, if you can get all of our records caught up and so forth, the next time you get--if you get called again, I'll let you go, which he did, and I went.  And so, basically Seymour Johnson Field down in Goldsboro, North Carolina which is--I think there's an insane asylum there, which is--it was then.  That was its claim to fame.  But other than that, it was just a, you know, a country town.
Speaker 2: Okay, you're allowed then to go to--
Speaker 1: ASTP [Army Specialized Training Program].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: ASTP, and they sent you to Rhode Island?
Speaker 1: Yeah, went to, you know, Rhode Island State College.  They had a unit there, and it must have been five or six hundred of us all together.  There were four black guys.  It's interesting (laughter), they took over this whole men's dorm.  After all, there's six hundred guys.  That's a lot of men, but on either end there were two man quarters.  There were four of us black guys.  Someone out of all these six hundred men, I wound up with a black roommate, and Whitney Young who was another one, was at the other end.  So us four guys wound up accidently together (laughter), either ends of this dorm.  And it turned out that Whitney Young eventually became the secretary of the Urban League, outstanding athlete and very personable guy, quite an interesting guy.  But he eventually wound up in the 92nd Division and became an officer and so on.  But anyway, nothing terrible eventful happened except that we met, by virtue of Whitney knowing everybody, you know, and being a big frat man and stuff, we met people in Boston [Massachusetts], and we would go there on passes.  And that was nice, and so I enjoyed that.  But in four, in three month's time, the Army killed the program.  My classmates who were practically all, they were all white.  My particular group had about fifteen guys in it, advanced level.  And they all went to Fort Monmouth to the Signal Corp and I went to Camp Lee, Virginia to quartermaster corp, where they were dumping all kinds of misfits and--not misfits necessarily, but people that are out of terminated programs.  They didn't know what to do with them, including a lot of guys from Keesler Field, Mississippi who were cadets.  They had aspirations to fly planes, but the Army wasn't gonna make any more black pilots by then.  At least whatever, whatever was in the pipeline was fine, but they weren't letting it go on.  So this is the fittest, the most fit group of men I've ever been around, including guys from the Second Calvary, who were, you know, great physical specimens.  But there we were all at, we were all out of the 9th Company, out of the 9th regimen in quartermaster corp, yeah, we hung out there doing basic training again.
Speaker 2: Okay, we have to pause here a second.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 30338
Speaker 1: Yeah, tell us about the test score.  There was an incident with the test score.
Speaker 2: Now, there're a couple.  One was Army General Classification Test.  Is that the one you have reference to?
Speaker 1: I think so.  Now, we were joined by Hattie Carwell (ph.).  And she asked the question when we were breaking.  So I don't know if that's it or not.  But tell us about that one.  Tell us about the best one, the best test score story (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, the one in, the one that was ironic is that, when I went through the Army General Classification Test which is kind of an intelligence test, I scored like 137.  Well, you only needed about 110 to be eligible for Officers Candidate School.  So that's ironic because nobody thought to send me to Officers Candidate School at the time, and nobody paid--well, I was black.  To put it bluntly, that was it.  The, that's the one case where the magni-, you know, the size of the test came up.  When it came to the Army Specialized Training Program, I don't know what the limits were, but I was well over, you know, well over the minimum for that.  Now, as far as the test scores were concerned, the only other place where the number didn't really become important was later on when I made a switch of careers, career objectives, I took a lot of intelligence, you know, aptitude and attitude tests because I was concerned that I wasn't too happy with what I was doing, what I was learning.  And so, well, the thing to do was to go to a psychologist and tell them tell you what you ought to be doing.  So they had an Institute for Psychological Services, and I took a lot of apt tests, you know, tell me whether or not you like this.  And it turned out that at the end of the tests, a big battery of tests, the interviewer tells you what it all means.  And they said, well, you could do physics or chemistry or engineering or any of those things.  You're much better at things than people, and they more or less told me exactly what I already knew, that I could do all of that and it was a question of-- you had to pick one.  In other words, you had to eventually (unclear), but I found out later that I must have scored very, very high on that test because I kept getting asked, well, who is this black guy with this fantastic score?  Nobody ever told me what it was.  But apparently word had gotten around that I had scored very, very high on this.  But as I say, I never--well, it was just one of those things.  But I digress again.  I guess we'd got to where I was at, had gone to Rhode Island State College which is now Rhode Island University, Kingston, Rhode Island, us four black guys there.  We went through, had a great time going back and forth to Boston [Massachusetts] and what not.  And then down to Seymour Johnson Field [Air Force Base], working to get the units, records and so forth in order.  And--no, that's backwards, but we had gotten back to Camp Lee, now Fort Lee, Virginia where all of these misfits in one company.  (Unclear) Don Barksdale who became a famous athlete here in Oakland [California] was one of the soldiers there, one of the few guys I remember from that place.  But I wound up in the, and they finally decided what to do with us.  A lot of them were veterans from North Africa and a lot of them were guys were Keesler Field [Mississippi] who had found out they were never gonna be pilots in the U. S. Army cause they washed out the rest of the program, and put us through basic training again and went through, taught in the Quarter Master Laundry School [Camp Lee, Virginia]--first I attended the Quarter Master Laundry course, and then I taught in the school.  And then I was put in charge of one of the units and sent overseas as, by that time, I'm a Technical Sergeant.  I'd gone from Private to Technical Sergeant and (unclear).
Story_ID: 30339
Speaker 1: Now, you were telling me something I didn't know that the washing machines that they used, the Navy's washing machines, they were on trucks.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you could roll 'em around--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a tractor.  It's like a trailer on four wheels which hooks up to a--actually, it's on--anyway, you have a truck that pulls it like you see tractor trailers.  On this thing is mounted a motor generator set.  Gas tanks, of course, run the motor and a boiler which makes hot water and steam.  That's on one end.  On the other end, there are two washers and I guess there're two dryers.  But anyway, they're all automated, all electrically driven by this motor generator set.  So, and it's function is to provide laundry facilities for whatever purpose, typically either a field--a hospital or a military installation where in places like, well, soldiers being in the line for a long time, they get pretty dirty and filthy.  And so they would come and discard all their old clothes and take baths and what not and be issued new clothes and so on.  And somebody had to clean all this.  And so they had these laundry units to do that.  And I was in charge of one of those.  But I never was assigned to that function.  I was always assigned to either a field hospital or a general hospital.  Now, the field hospitals are maybe two three hundred beds.  General hospitals have maybe, you know, a thousand beds or more and much bigger staff.  I had one interesting experience with the field hospital which our first assignment, and I'm skipping over a lot of details of how we get there and what not, but eventually assigned to this field hospital where there's a lot of fighting going on down in Manila [Philippines].  We're not too far away.  And usually when there's a big battle, the hospital would augment its staff with specialists.  There may be a surgical team that they don't do anything but go where it's gonna be a big battle and do surgery.  So they could go here and there and not necessarily any one place.  And so the hospital is augmented by all these extra units including the laundry unit that we had.  Well, each unit has a number, but when you show up there like that, you're more or less part of the gang, part of the--now, as the guy in charge of my unit, I have to censor their mail when it goes through.  No, I'm--that's not quite it, but the point is that they'd set up a shower for men to take a shower.  And after we arrived there, there's another stall that's set up there with our number on it.  So what that meant is, you guys only shower here and don't shower over there.  But up to that point, we had no problems.  So why would they suddenly put up this shower, Jim Crow us in the shower.  So one of our men had already gone over for a shower, and he wrote a letter that went to the hospital censor.  And he comes to me and complains about this letter.  And I go, yeah, yeah, it was.  So the only courageous thing I ever did in my whole life was I confronted the Colonel in charge of the hospital about this discriminatory practice that was totally unnecessary.  And his name was Colonel (Lynch?), I remember.  He was from Missouri too.  He was a cracker, I mean, you know.  And I told him that I couldn't see any point.  We're over there, supposed to be fighting for democracy.  Why Jim Crow the shower?  There wasn't any problem in the first place.  Well, it turned out that a medical administrator from Massachusetts had thought we ought to have this shower up there.  Well, it came down.  But I was, I was prepared then to be sent back, not for (laughter) off to purgatory (laughter).  In fact, one of the few courageous things I ever did (laughter), but I'm proud of it.
Story_ID: 30340
Speaker 1: Eventually--I still was a sergeant, and my unit performed so well, you know, did what we were doing so well, that it turned out that the [U.S.] Army decided to change the table of organization, which meant that you authorize so many of this and so many of, so many sergeants, so many corporals, so many privates.  And now instead of having a sergeant in charge, you had an officer in charge, gonna do the same thing I'd been doing.  But now he's an officer.  So there was a guy in the Sixth Army headquarters who had charge of these units.  That was part of his responsibility as a staff man.  So, knew him, he comes down, every so often he would come down and see how things are.  And he says, well, you know, they've got--they've changed this table of organization, and we're putting up sergeant so and so and so how about you?  I said, well, sure I can do it.  So, okay, well, what you need to do is to apply for direct commission.  They'll appoint a board, and you know.  So in due time, the papers come down to the hospital staff and the colonel has to appoint a board to examine me for my, whether or not I'm qualified to be an officer.  So that was really funny cause I'm studying like hell to get up on the Army regulations and everything.  And I go into this meeting where these medical officers are gonna examine my fitness to become an officer.  And one of them is noted to be a nasty cracker from Alabama or somewhere.  But here's the drill.  Sergeant Bragg, do you know so and so?  Yes, I know him.  Well, how about so and so, do you know him?  Yeah, I know him (laughter).  Two or three like, and then anybody got anymore questions?  No.  Well, thank you very much (laughter).  That's how I got a direct commission.
Speaker 2: So they gave you a direct commission--
Speaker 1: Never went off to candidate school or anything like that.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: In due time, down comes an order from [General Douglas] MacArthur's headquarters as of such and such a time, swear him in.  He went from Sergeant Bragg to Lieutenant Bragg, just like that (laughter).  Now, some people call those battlefield commissions, but it's the same idea.  It's a direct commission from--for the convenience of the Army, it makes sense not to put you through all that.  They need an officer to do that.  So, so I had this officer, this offer, this order from McArthur himself (laughter).  So that's how I became an officer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30341
Speaker 1: Now, you had a story about in '43 [1943], we need to hear about the convoy you were part of in '43 [1943].  Now, this is before, I guess, you're an officer, right?
Speaker 2: Well, no.  Once I became an officer, that--about the same time, not long after that--I guess we were actually preparing to invade Japan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And getting supplies and what not and while we're doing this, I'm sworn in as a second lieutenant.  And, but then Japan surrendered.  So now instead of going to invade, we had to go in to occupy.  And we don't have any winter clothes or anything.  But it's the winter.  It's cold in Japan by that time.  But I remember they put us in a--no, no, I'm sorry.  That's the wrong story.  Back up.  The convoy was when we went from the Philippines to--from New Guinea to the Philippines.  That was when we were in this big convoy which was as far as you could see was cargo ships, the very kind of--vessels lined up like soldiers with the [U.S.] Navy escorts going around, horns are going off and everything.  But they're watching out for submarines.  And that's how I went from New Guinea to the Philippines, where we landed in Lingayen Gulf and expecting a hail of bullets and everybody when we got off.  Instead when we put on these landing crafts and we walked down off the beach just like [General Douglas] McArthur, but there were Philippinos there saying, "can I carry your bag, sir?"  So (laughter).  So that's how we invaded the Phil-.  They were (laughter) still fighting though, but (unclear)
Speaker 1: You're coming off of a pill box, you know, and--
Speaker 2: Not too far away.
Speaker 1: And then they're asking to carry your bags.
Speaker 2: That night we're in this camp and the Japanese--the only time I was anywhere near any gunfire was a Japanese plane came over and they were shooting at it.  So everybody's afraid, but it's flying high, just a nuisance, just keep you awake at night.  But anyway (laughter) that was my invasion experience.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you go on to--did you go on to Japan itself?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  We, from--once, we spent quite a long time on the Philippines attached to the field hospital mainly.  The only thing unusual about that was a typhoon which blew so hard that I remember we were--this rice patty we were on, it was three or four feet deep.  Luckily, we had put our beds on platforms, our cots on platforms.  But it was quite an experience.  The wind was blowing so hard, the rain is, the water is going like this rather than like this, but other than that, we visited towns like Baguio which is up in the North.  It's a beautiful resort part of the Philippines; ran into some black kids who were offspring of the Ninth or Tenth Calvary.  We called them Spookapinos cause they were (laughter)--well, they were kind of kinky haired.  They were Philippinos, but--
Speaker 1: They were offspring's of the Ninth and Tenth Calvary--
Speaker 2: Had been there years before.
Speaker 1: --that were there during the Spanish-American [1898] War.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, yeah, they were still there.  So, in fact, sometimes people would slough off on them and we would kind of jump in to try to help them, but we ran into them.
Speaker 1: How were they treated there?
Speaker 2: Oddity.  It was mixed.  They weren't exactly the most popular.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, so saw those.
Speaker 1: Did they have a name for themselves?
Speaker 2: I don't remember; didn't know 'em that well.  Now, there were some Philippinos who looked like Africans.  They were called Igorots who were very primitive, and everybody was embarrassed about them.  But they lived up in the hills.  They looked like Africans to me.  But anyway, that was the Philippines.
Story_ID: 30342
Speaker 1: Japan was, in the occupation, we wound up there without any winter clothing.  By this time, I'm an officer, and I'm in a state room now rather than on the deck side.  I'm in a state room.  And there's a guy who comes and got China (laughter), table clothes and China (laughter)stuff like that, and I enjoyed that.  It was nice after being a soldier so long.  We get to Sasebo [Japan] where we were put ashore, and we're on a LST, for landing ship tank, is what it's called.  And all our trucks and stuff are on there.  And our detachment commander goes ashore to look the lay of the land over and see where we're gonna go and all that.  And he gets drunk and when he comes back, he is so drunk, he can't even come up the side of the boat.  So they had to let a hoist over, hoisted him up (laughter).  But anyway, that was, we went ashore at Sasebo [Japan], and we stayed there for, I don't know how many months.  But that was our job to be in the occupation.  And it's a seafaring town.  And while we were there, the Atom Bomb [1945] goes off, but I didn't know a thing about it.  I know I'd heard about it.  People were taking trucks to go down there and see Hiroshima or Nagasaki [Japan].  I never did go, like a damn fool.
Speaker 2: That probably happened before you even got there, I guess?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I didn't--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, you're right, you're right because that's what precipitated the surrender.
Speaker 2: Right.  So it was still big--
Speaker 1: Oh, it was still in shambles.  But people had gone down there, but I could have gone, but I just never did.
Speaker 2: Yeah, did anybody know that, about fallout and that sort of thing?
Speaker 1: No, no, nobody knew anything about that.
Speaker 2: So they didn't know about radioactivity?
Speaker 1: No, I certainly didn't have no ideas about anything like that, didn't know anything about radio activity.
Story_ID: 30343
Speaker 1: Okay, now there was a case, it was a murder case, right, that--
Speaker 2: Yeah, that happened while I was in--
Speaker 1: Fukuoka.
Speaker 2: --Fukuoka.
Speaker 1: Am I moving too fast?
Speaker 2: No, no, it's fine, it's fine.  There's a lot of--we were, we had moved into a camp.  The CB's had built a camp, Kobe, Fukuoka is next door.  So Kobe, Fukuoka, you know, sister cities like.  But this camp had these Quonset huts.  And so we were in this big compound.  And the soldiers, the surrounding areas were mostly off limits, which meant that a lot of gambling and prostitution and so forth.  But the soldiers would go over there naturally, and weren't supposed to go there, but the signs are posted, and they don't do it.  But one of my men went over there, and this guy-- must have been a Korean, had a little bar, maybe with two stools.  And they drank some of his sake and wouldn't pay him.  So they leave without paying and he decides he wants to collect his money.  So they run down the alley, and the next thing you know, the man is lying on the ground there, and he's dead.  Well, they come and arrest--the Japanese girls bring this cops in there to--the Japanese police with the, I guess the CIA [Central Intelligence Agency], CID [U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command], arrest two of my men for murder.  Now, as the unit commander, I'm in charge of this unit, it's my job to bring all charges against my people.  Nobody does that.  I have to do it.  So before I would take their word for it, I go and investigate.  So it takes me over into this red light district and there are Japanese pimps and prostitutes and so forth and guys in jail.  And it was all--and the story evolves that the CID comes up with a piece of rock that you cold pick up off the ground and proposes this as the murder weapon.  And well frankly, it looked like a railroad job to me.
Speaker 1: Now, how did the Korean gentleman die?  How did they--
Speaker 2: He died with a cut in his throat.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I figured, now, maybe they actually did kill him.  But they didn't have any proof.  That wasn't proof enough for me.
Speaker 1: But they suggested a rock was used to kill him?
Speaker 2: It was, that's what they produced.  They never produced a knife or anything.  And chances are--these guys were kind of rough so chances are they had a knife with them.  They never produced any weapon like that.  And I refused to press any charges about that.  And I remember that cut off any path to promotion that I might have had because I refused to do that.  And the colonel in charge of the battalions, well, "Bragg", if I have to do it--, you know.  So I didn't.  But the other cases--
Speaker 1: Okay, so did they overrule you or anything or did they just let it go?
Speaker 2: I don't know what ever happened because I moved out of there before that--but they had another case that was kind of, a little bit--was not quite as fatal, was a big fight at a cathouse where I was moved to another unit now.  And these are strange guys to me.  I don't know them.  But one of them gets, several of them get arrested for a big fight at a cathouse in Fukuoka, I guess it was.  What had happened was that they had moved from one town to the next.  When they were in this town, they were the lords of the master, and they were the biggest customers in this cathouse.  So when they moved to another town not too far away, they could get a truck and still go over there.  But in the meantime some new soldiers had moved over in here.  And they think they're gonna run this place.  So, and I'm interviewing one of the participants.  His name was--I forget his name now, but anyway the point is that I asked him what happened.  Well, apparently, he had gone there and had gotten there early and had gotten drunk and fell asleep.  But when he woke up, these two sides were confronting each other.  His name was Tin Can.  That was his name, Tin Can (laughter).  Tin Can says, "well, my father told me if there's gonna be a fight, get in a lick first."  So he pops the (laughter) (unclear), guy closest to him, precipitates the fight (laughter), and some shooting went on.  I think one of the girls--it never got, I don't think anybody was killed but it was a big fracas.  But the point was, nice guy, but his father said, well, if you're gonna be in a fight, get in your lick first, and so he did.  Not much else happened after that in Japan.  I was, wound up in charge of a refrigeration trucking company.  One company of about ten vans would haul produce from the rail head, from the docks to different units, fresh fruit, meat and (unclear) and so I was in charge of that for several months.  And then I got the call to go home.
Story_ID: 30344
Speaker 1: Okay, so did you come back home through the West Coast area?
Speaker 2: Through Seattle [Washington].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The only thing I remember about that is that I enjoyed the train ride all across the country, very, very pleasant; went to Fort Sheridan [Illinois] and was mobilized out and back home and went back to school.
Speaker 1: Now, you're got the GI bill [Servicemen's' Readjustment Act of 1944] now to go back to school to finish and (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The GI bill was something I hadn't believed was true.  I'd saved money, being, you know, fairly well paid by that time, and I could--didn't have any expenses, so I just saved money.  But the GI bill had made it possible for people, guys to go to college.  It was a big, it was one of the best things [U.S.] Congress ever did cause it made middle class out of guys who were poor but had no prospects of anything.  So all the schools were just chock full of people that they couldn't accommodate them.  And IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] was no exception, but I went there because it had run this electronics program that I'd been in before, and I liked the way they did things.  So when I went to, come back to school, I decided, well, IIT is right there.  So I enrolled, but by that time, so late, I wound up with evening classes.  And this went on for a year.  But I changed my major because of the experience I'd had with electrical engineering--electronics.  I said, well, I don't want to be a plumber.  I want to be an electrical engineer.  So I signed up for that curriculum and I'm following that.  But at the end of a year, I'm really not very satisfied because it seemed as if as soon as it gets down to where something is really interesting, the guy would say well, we can't go any further on this because it's beyond the scope of this course.  And, well, I didn't really like that.  So, well, I'm not going this way but once so I'd better find out, you know, maybe somebody will tell me what I ought to do.  So I took some, a big battery of aptitude and attitude tests.  And they told me exactly what I already knew, that I could do physics and chemistry or engineering at the university level.  I think the guy even said teach, but I don't remember having a piece of paper that said that.  But anyway, I already knew that.  So I went out and switched over to physics.  Now, this is the second career choice, set me back another year.  But I did that because I'd enjoyed physics more than anything else that I'd had while in school.  And I figured I could always teach high school physics if push came to shove.  And so I might as well shoot for that and take what I have to, but go for what I'd like to have.  And I didn't know a single physicist, black physicist, and I only met one white one (laughter).  That was the guy who was teaching physics at the community college.  But I liked it, and so just a load fell off of my shoulders, and I just never did regret it.  But it added another year, of course, and so I graduated with a bachelor's degree and a minor in mathematics in '49 [1949].  And--
Speaker 1: This is from IIT?
Speaker 2: IIT, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, but now comes the question, I don't know anything about graduate, I don't know anything about graduate school.  Nobody said anything.  I had very little counseling, but I would say that the one thing that I missed was a lot of, the kind of counseling that would have been much more helpful, way--much earlier.  But, you know, you just don't know.  But I did know that the other guys, the white guys in my class were all gonna go on to graduate school.  So I applied too.
Story_ID: 30345
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  So, this is 1949 and you graduate from the Illinois Institute of Technology?
Speaker 2: Right, don't have a job.  Nobody's hiring anybody really, and certainly not hiring any black physicists with only a bachelor's degree.  So what are you gonna do?  And I took--I interviewed for jobs.  I took the [U.S.]Post Office exam.  I took the social workers exam because my wife [Violet] had been a social worker, and actually, I almost flunked that thing, even with the veterans points (laughter), the social worker's.  But I passed the Post Office workers, Post Office job, got a regular appointment and started working at the Post Office, learned the scheme and all that.  And I'd barely got started there when the department chairman at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] called me and told that--although, I had applied late for a fellowship, a scholarship, assistantship, that I hadn't gotten one, but somebody had turned them down; would I still be interested.  And so I almost ruptured his eardrum telling him, yeah.  So in a matter of two or three weeks after I started at the Post Office, I resigned.  They couldn't believe I was resigning that good job--
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's supposed to be a good job.
Speaker 2: I got it made.  I'm regular, I don't mean I'm not a substitute.  I'm regular, and I haven't even learned to throw the scheme yet (laughter).  So, no, I'm sorry, thank you, but I'm gone.  So I went back and started graduate school.  And I remember they want you to hook up with an advisor.  Well, it turned out that at that time--this is 1949, by now nuclear physics is king, not electronics, not semi-conductors, but nuclear physics.  It's king and everybody wants to do nuclear, including me.  But at IIT which is not a first-rate research university; it's a more or less engineering school, there's one faculty member who's doing nuclear physics.  And everybody wants to work with him.  So the chairman says, well, look, Bragg, you know, Professor--whatever his name was, [William E.] Bennett, who incidentally was a good guy, has got all the students he can handle.  But why don't you do some theoretical physics because some of this you're gonna have to know anyway when you go to do nuclear physics.  So why don't you work with Professor [Francis] Yost who was the theoretical physicist, teaching those classes.  So that's how I happened to wind up working with Francis Yost who was my thesis advisor.  And what he did was to set me the task of doing a review of quantum mechanical scattering theories.  And the reason was that if you're gonna study all the results of nuclear physics experiments at that time, that's the theory that you use.  So you're gonna have to learn it anyway, and my job was to survey everything that had been written up to that time on that subject.  It wasn't original, but it was--I learned about scattering theories.  And I remember (laughter) you had to arrive in, you had to be in phase in order to come out on time.  So in order to get around to the course in quantum mechanics, it turned out I had to wait another year or something like--or half year.  So they said, why don't you do this?  Take the course in independent study, take my notes, and that's what I did.  I taught myself quantum mechanics reading his notes.  And he said I had the best course in quantum mechanics that they'd had at that school by following his--work out all the problems and once a week, I would discuss it with him.  And so that's how I was able to get the background to do the, you know, the dissertation that I wrote.  And I remember (laughter), at that time, the average typist who would type theses and what not was very good, but they didn't have all these Greek symbols which was very common (laughter).  So I remember going over to this woman's house, laboriously lettering in alphas and betas and gammas and deltas, and omegas and psis and all that stuff (unclear), you know, omega, you know (unclear), all those Greek symbols which you'd commonly use, but she didn't have any of those fonts on her typewriter.  So I decided well, I'll never do a theoretical thesis again because if I have to do this (laughter).  But for years after that, they used that as, they would give the students this thesis to read up on to get brought up to speed on nuclear physics.  But that, what that did was to give me a thesis title, quantum mechanical scattering theories.  And the point, the importance of that is that when I went to look for a job now--by this time, my son is just born, or being born--
Story_ID: 30346
Speaker 1: So, we're talking about how you met your wife [Violet]
Speaker 2: Morris (Caldwell?) was an electrician.  They were plumbers and heaters so it's obvious that they're all in this building trades together.  And he had this niece that he thought I ought to meet.  So that's how I met her through her uncle who was my uncle's [Uncle Teddy] colleague and he rented some space for their same, office.  And I knew her, but we didn't get married until after the War [WWII] when I came back, and got married in '47 [1947].  And so that's how I met my wife.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you knew her before the War?
Speaker 2: She was, she was--I knew her before going off, and she had gone to IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], what's it?  Louis Institute on the west side.  Before IIT combined with the Armor College of Engineering, and there were two different campuses.  And the trustees decided to combine them into one big institute.  So that's how IIT got formed, and she had gone to Louis Institute and they'd just changed over when she graduated.  So she had her degree long before I had mine.
Speaker 1: So she was into technology too?
Speaker 2: No, she was a home ec [home economics] major (laughter) but never--they held a job for her at DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] where she had gone to school until she graduated to teach home ec [home economics].  But she couldn't stand the rather unruly girls (laughter).  So she took a job in social work, a (cut pay?).  Her mother had been a stenographer for the, these private social work agencies; interesting woman.  She had worked for the Violet, some or other, first black lawyer in Chicago, female lawyer.  But her mother was, knew about social work so that's how she got it.  But I met her through her uncle.
Story_ID: 30347
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But we were, a child is coming along, and I decided, well, I've still got a little GI money left, not much, but I still got some money left, but I'd better find out if this degree is worth anything because, after all, she's [Bragg's wife Violet] gonna be not working anymore.  So that's why I decided to look for a job with a master's degree, not continue, which it was a big mistake.  But anyway, it happened, and I'm trying to find a job.  So I'm interviewing and although I had interviewed at the bachelor's level to no avail really; in fact, you know, don't call us, we'll call you.  Or, you know, we had a black employee once.  I remember stuff like that.  You remember so and so?  I even had a pity file, you might say (laughter) at one time of all the places I had tried and nobody would do anything.  But the next time around, coming up to the master's degree, I--the thesis is on file and the application's in the personnel office.  And people come around looking for employees.  And I'd interviewed with General Electric and very favorably, they hired me.  But the job was in Hanford, Washington State, Hanford Works and heavy security.  This is 1951.  McCarthyism is running the show.  So you got to pass a security clearance before you come there.  They're not gonna have you come there and then somebody discover you're a spy or something.  Well, it turns out that that long list of subversive organizations on there, I had been a member of one of them.
Speaker 1: Which one was it?
Speaker 2: United Negro and Allied Veterans of America, you probably never heard of it.  But the reason why I had joined it was, when I got out of the service, the American Legion was Jim Crowed, and I wasn't about to go and deliberately join a Jim Crow veterans organization, whereas UNAVA [United Negro and Allied Veterans of America] is what it was called, was not.  Well, I don't remember--I think about the only thing I was ever involved in was a protest with--Senator [Theodore] Bilbo had called black people niggers on the floor of the [U.S.] Congress.
Speaker 1: Theodore Bilbo, yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, we were out to defeat Bilbo and I was involved in that in some way.  But that's the only radical thing I think I--they were all radicals, of course, but that was enough to deny me the security clearance.  They came around, checked everything, never found anything, of course.  But the fact of having been a member of that organization--what they would do would be not to say that you're okay, but say, we don't know that you're okay.  So in other words, you'd be out there in limbo.  You don't know what's happened.
Speaker 1: Now, this is, when I listen to this, I'm kind of suspicious in some ways that, you know, the Democratic Party, I mean [Joseph] McCarthy was a Democrat--
Speaker 2: No, McCarthy was a Republican.
Speaker 1: Oh, was he?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Bilbo's a Democrat now--
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bilbo's a Democrat.
Speaker 1: --a Dixicrat, in those days (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what happened was that the Dixicrats, the Republicans changed over--I forget which election it was, but the guys who are now Republicans used to all be Democrats.
Speaker 1: Yeah, back in '68 [1968], I think (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was fairly current.  But, so that the, thinking of the party of Lincoln, nah, un-un (laughter).  That's been totally (unclear) (laughter).  But the point was that, I've got a job, but they don't call me to go to work.  So I'm getting a little bit antsy and I decided well, I'd better do something to get--otherwise, it's gonna be out of my pocket.  So, and another thing that happened was I--the department chairman said, Bragg, you know, these things can drag on.  I would suggest you look for another job.  You may think you've got a job, but you never know when--you can always change if they come across.  So I just abandoned that particular GE [General Electric] job, nuclear job and started looking for a job, period.  In the meantime, I had a friend who worked in the employment service, and I said, Dick--his name was Dick Cross, Dick, I need a job, any kind of job.  I'm not looking for a professional job.  I'm gonna get one of those, but right now I just need something to get some money in my pocket.  So he said, I'll send you on this job.  You won't like it, but they will hire you.  That's how I wound up as, an electroplater.  The name of the company was Dover [Electroplating Company] on the Northwest side, I guess it was.  And I was a common laborer.  They didn't ask me anything and I didn't tell 'em anything.  And so I worked there for a few months.
Speaker 1: That's 1951?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Well, tell me this.  I know at one point you met Percy Julian.  It didn't result in a job or anything, but--
Speaker 2: No, that happened while I was looking for a job.  My advisor [Francis Yost] who didn't know much about black people, but everybody knew who Percy Julian was, said, well, you know, you've got--you're a strange beast.  In fact, you probably should have gone to Canada or something to get a PhD. because that's the way it was then.  It was easier to get it.  A lot of black guys who became famous scientists went to Canada, like Toronto or some place like that; said, but nevertheless, you should talk to some black guy who's made it just to give you encouragement, not looking for--he was a chemist after all.  So he wouldn't have had a job for me anyway.  So he wrote to Percy Julian, asked him if he would just talk to me.  And Julian probably thinking that here's another white guy who's throwing this black problem off on him, says, well, I'll talk to him, but I don't have a job for him.  Well, that infuriated [Francis] Yost because he didn't ask him for a job.  So he probably shouldn't have taken issue with it, but that was--it kind of soured me on Percy Julian but I realized later, you know, that after all he's one famous black guy.  And everybody who's got a black guy who's in science, whatever it is, is looking for him to be the father figure.  So that's what happened.  So at the time, I thought it was a rather unpleasant experience.  I just--it turned me against him for while, but over time I realized that he got probably dozens of those.  And so he couldn't hire everybody anyway.
Story_ID: 30348
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1951, you're working for Dover Electroplating Company [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: And you've not told them what you really can do--
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Then you have to return to work for the U.S. Postal Service.
Speaker 2: Right.  What happened was that, an accident happened at Dover and the result of the whole thing was I wound up in the chem lab--I finally had to, you know, tell them that--I decided to quit because that was too dangerous.  I wasn't gonna do anything that dangerous.  I didn't need the money that bad.  But I wound up in the chem lab for a while, but I decided that I'd better take a job where I could interview during the day.  So I tried to get a job working at the post office at night.  So that's what I did.  And now I'm not a regular (laughter).  I don't have my regular appointment any more.  I'm a temporary.  But not very long after that I got this offer to interview at the Research Laboratory of the Portland Cement Association [Skokie, Illinois].  And that was because the guy who was gonna be my--became my boss had then, had seen some work by a famous physical chemist, P. P. Dubai who everybody would know who he is, having to do with light scattering through polymers.  You have a polymer, and it's got an internal structure, and atoms arranged in certain ways, and you shine light into it, and the light comes out, and depending on how these atoms are arranged inside, that light would go out in different ways.  So it was light scattering.  Well, I had done a thesis on particle scattering, neutron, proton scattering.  Well, he didn't really know the difference, so scattering was scattering as far as he was concerned.  So that got his eye.  So on the strength of that, I don't know a thing about light scattering (laughter), they invited me to come out and interview.  And they liked me.  And--
Speaker 1: To Portland, all the way out to Portland?
Speaker 2: Well, no, no, it was Skokie, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay, so their office is in Skokie, Illinois?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a nice suburb, out in the meadow there.  You know a lot of cows.  I mean they could get out there and hit golf balls it was so big, great setting, but all devoted to concrete.  But I went out, and I liked the people.  My immediate boss was nice.  His boss was very nice.  His boss was nice and his boss was nice.  And as a result of all those interviews, I remember this very distinctly, when I finally got to the vice president in charge of research--now, I'm just right out of college.  That would never have happened before.  I didn't know that, but he wanted to know--I'm expecting some very erudite questions and what not.  He asked me how would you feel about eating lunch in the company cafeteria?  I said if I have to, if I can't eat there, I don't wanna be here [phone ringing].  That's my brother, sorry.  So he asked me how would I feel about eating lunch in the company cafeteria.  They had a--it was so remote at the time.  This big shopping center you find out there in Skokie [Illinois] now didn't exist at that time.  It's a great, you know, big piece of land that they had bought when it was cheap.  And there was very little out there so people would go out.  When they were building the place--they built the power plant first in the wintertime.  And so everybody, all the black guys that worked on it ate their lunch out in the power plant like the white guys did.  Well, when they finally built the lab itself and had the company cafeteria which was underwritten by the company, the white guys moved in but the black guys never did.  So they had no experience whatsoever of black guys eating in the company cafeteria.  So he wanted to know how would I feel about it.  Alan Bates, I remember his name now.  So I told him, well, if I had to do that, I don't wanna be here.  So he didn't say anything.  But at lunch time, he came down to eat lunch with us; didn't have to write any memos, didn't have to say anything at all.  But he came down and had lunch with us.  So that did away with all the questions about whether or not, you know, the black guy and the--so I integrated the lunch room (laughter); didn't know it at the time.  I thought the vice president always asked people, you know, if they (laughter).  But that was my introduction to the (unclear).
Story_ID: 30349
Speaker 1: I didn't know a thing about that field, and I didn't know much, I got--my immediate boss was a nice fellow from Mississippi who had gone to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and had a PhD in physical chemistry.  And he set me a job on, while I'm learning my way around, he gave me a job to, which involved using a gaseous diffusion pump, making a vacuum.  The idea was that there is a material that is used as a desiccant which means it sucks up water out of the air.  And the reason for the study was that at one time, he had recommended that they replace a technique they had been using that would suck the water out of the cement which does have water in the pores, substitute this powder, this magnesium perchlorate.  Well, it turns out that it hadn't really thoroughly been investigated.  So the idea was now to do what he should have done before.  They had made changes, but now they're not certain about the changes.  Things don't seem to be working out anymore.  So he set up this experiment where we're gonna develop these physical properties of this substance.  And so once they got the thing going I took it over.  So every day I had to come in, take some dry ice, put it in a bag and pound it and fill the diffusion pump.  And I would pump out a vacuum and add a little water to the thing and it would weigh a little more.  And in a result of that, I discovered two hydrates of magnesium perchlorate, the only real discovery I ever made (laughter), chemical discovery I ever made.  Nobody cares, but and eventually, that was just sort of a side just to keep me busy.  Meantime, he really was interested in the light scattering because his idea was cement is kind of like a polymer, it's like a--you wouldn't think that, but if you make it in thin enough pieces, you can actually shine light through it.  You won't lighten up any buildings, but light will come through.  So, in the meantime, he was the new man on the block, new brain, you might say, new, modern guy.  Eventually, we're gonna get x-ray diffraction equipment, but in the meantime, let's do some light scattering experiments.  So he put me to work designing a light scattering apparatus which we should have bought.  But I eventually designed a light scattering apparatus which we built in the shop and actually managed to do some light scattering through hydrated cement, really thin pieces.  So it can be done.  And I learned things that I later understood, but didn't understand then.  But the point was that, it got me there because of scattering.  He didn't realize that I didn't know anything about light scattering, but I learned, you know, once I got there, of course.  But the ultimate objective was to get into x-ray diffraction and small angle scattering which is, again, all scattering experiments are like this.  You have a material which has got some internal arrangement of atoms in it.  And you shine some kind of a beam of particles, light or electrons or whatever, and you see what comes out the other side.  And based on your theory of interaction between these particles, you deduce from the way things come out what's inside the box.  So basically, that's what scattering, all scatterings, light, neutron, protons, high-energy physic, it doesn't matter.  It's all--
Speaker 2: So, is it a way of analyzing the material then? That's what you're doing really?
Speaker 1: That's the easiest--I'll give you an example that's famous by George Gamow.  Let's say you have, you're a custom's inspector and a bail of cotton comes in.  And it's got some contraband rifles inside.  But you don't wanna tear the bail aside.  What you wanna know is there any kind of heavy stuff in there.  So you take out your gun and shoot and if some of the bullets come back.  Well, it ain't all cotton (laughter).  So you get the (laughter) basic idea.  That's what scattering is all about.  It's how the--you can't see in there, but you know from the way the interaction occurs what has to be the case or you hope you know enough about the total interaction to do that.  So that was what I had been learning about, neutron--the scattering of neutrons and protons by particles when I did my thesis.  So I'm back to where I was before, but now I'm going into the x-ray case.  So they sent me off to Brooklyn Poly [Polytechnic Institute of New York University, Brooklyn] to a summer school to cut my teeth on that.  And that's the first time I learned about Bragg's Law, believe it or not (laughter).  That was in 1952, I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30350
Speaker 1: And we came back.  We got x-ray equipment. I set up the lab, developed procedures for analyzing cementaceous (ph.) materials.  I'm learning, God knows I'm, night and day just learning new things.  And once I learned how to do a lot of the analyses I gave classes to the staff, you know, to how to use it and what not.  And in the meantime, I realized I didn't know enough.  So I started going back to night school.  And lucky enough, I finally took a course--the first thing I did was to take a course in x-ray diffraction which I had only partially learned at Brooklyn Poly [Polytechnic Institute of New York University, Brooklyn].  And the guy who was teaching the courses was at the Armor Research-, was at the Foundation at the same time.  And he taught these adjunct courses at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois].  And I did so well in his class, he said, well, why don't you, you know, go on and get your PhD.  I hadn't thought about it up to that point.  So he encouraged me to go on to get my PhD. and I took all the courses, you know, took courses from him and really became knowledgeable about x-ray diffraction.  In the meantime, I began to have problems with my immediate boss who was a nice guy, but he didn't need to be supervising me anymore.  What I was doing, he didn't know anything about or very little.  And after a while, some of that advice you just don't need.  It's not gonna lead anywhere.  And at the time, I'm too young to be diplomatic enough.  So one day, we have a big confrontation.  And he says, "Bragg, you know, if you weren't colored, I would suggest you look for another job."  It was the best thing he ever said cause I did and I changed.  But before that had happened, I'd had one experience which was, in studying this, becoming aware of the background of what the lab had been doing, I'd, you know, read everything they'd done and all the ancillary stuff was out there, and in the meantime, I'm learning things about atomic structure and crystal structure from crystallography.  So I become aware of clay minerals and, you know, stuff like that, stuff that, in a way, it's like synthetic minerals.  Cement was like synthetic minerals.  Well, I began to realize that, you know, just about everything they've been doing, I can explain with an envelope and a pencil, I could work just about everything out just like that.  So this particular Christmas holiday, I just sat down and started working things out, and the next thing I know, I said, wow, this is--that's when I realized I was a scientist.  Up to that point, I knew I was okay.  I could do things, but I didn't know I could do, I could be creative.  And as a result of that when my vacation ended and I went back, I went into my boss, and I'm just excited with this.  I'm on fire practically about what I'd learned, and it just fell on--he almost was hostile.  And, of course, eventually I realized why.  If I could do all that, well, you know, what did that say about him?  So, but he picked a few flaws, which was good.  But my feeling is if it's 99 percent true, concentrate on that and don't worry about the 10 percent.  But he was 10 percent man, which is good for--you know, you need those guys too.  But after he was so negative, I said, well, do you mind if I talk to Mr. Powers, who was his boss.  He said, yeah, go ahead.  Well, Powers wasn't nearly as upset as he was (laughter).  And a matter of fact, he changed the illustrations.  He was getting ready to go over to Sweden to give a talk.  On the basis of what I had done, he changed all of his illustrations.  Well, after that, the relationship was never quite the same anymore.  Well, one thing led to another, and he suggested I look for another job.  They, I found another job, and they discovered I was gonna leave, he was happy, but his boss wasn't because they weren't gonna be able to replace me as cheaply as I was being paid.  So, you know, they made me an offer to stay which I got angry then because they could have paid me that before.  So I depended on you to look out for me, and now you tell me--I didn't say all that, but that's the way I felt.
Speaker 2: Now, this is 1950?
Speaker 1: '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: '56 [1956], okay, we're already to '56 [1956].  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: I started in '51 [1951] and I was there about five years, '56 [1956].
Speaker 2: Okay, well, we have to pause again for a second.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 30351
Speaker 1: I remembered what Hattie was talking about, about the test.
Speaker 2: Oh, what was the test story then?
Speaker 1: It wasn't the one I gave you.  It was, it goes back earlier.  When I left the Seymour Johnson Field [Air Force Base] to go to ASTP [Army Specialized Training Program], first they put you through a classification testing to see where to send you.
Speaker 2: This is back in World War II, right?
Speaker 1: World War II, yeah.
Speaker 2: We're taking a jump back.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 1: So they sent me to AT and T College in Greensboro, North Carolina [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University] where they had a unit whose job it was to process these applicants for, black applicants to go to Army Specialized Training Program.  So I took a bunch of tests there.  And after the tests, the only time I ever made a chick on brains was the girl who was working in the office there said I had the highest score of anybody who ever came through there.  She wondered (laughter) what does this guy look like (laughter)?  So the only time I ever made out on brains was (laughter)--I think that's what she was talking about.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I had made the highest overall score and the second highest math score that anybody who had ever come through there.  So that said quite a lot about--
Speaker 2: And they tested everybody, right?
Speaker 1: Well, it was applicants to go to college in uniform, so it meant that they've already kind of scooped off the top of the distribution in uniform.  And so I had outscored everybody (laughter).  Anyway, so, that's what she meant I think.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30352
Speaker 1: Okay.  So 1956, and you left Portland Cement [Association]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, went to work at the, what was then the Armour Research Foundation [Chicago, Illinois].  Eventually, very soon, it was IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology] Research Institute.  And I was in the solid states physics division.  And I'd been hired in there because the guy who became my thesis advisor was a diffraction man in charge of--well, he was their expert on x-ray diffraction.  And I had been, he had seen me in class--in fact, that's how I happened to get the job.  I had taken his course, and he said, well, why don't you come and work with us.  So, when I started looking for jobs on the recommendation of my boss at Portland Cement Association [Skokie, Illinois], they hired me at the foundation.  And so that's, I joined this Solid States Physics section.  And there, they, their job, their function is to do contract research, mainly for military.  Wright-Patterson Air Force Base was our main customer by far.  So you got familiar with Wright-Pat pretty quickly.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this--
Speaker 2: And you worked on research contracts for the military.  Typically, a contract would last two years.  And so, you would spend maybe half a year or so, become and expert and maybe you got another year to year and a half to get something done, whereupon you changed to do something else.  But I did very well at that, and got involved with very interesting programs.  But the big thing about it was I was on the IIT campus and I could go across within a block or so and attend classes and that way finish up all my coursework for the PhD.  And then the foundation--by that time, they're constantly giving me more money.  I'm doing very well, and, of course, their lifeblood is contracts and I'm helping out on that.  But I'm not getting my PhD.  So I'm becoming very dissatisfied and I'm about ready to quit and just get it done.  So what they did was to give me a grant to finish up my PhD. right there on the [Armour Research ]Foundation, which I did.  And that was 1960 when I got--the next year I left to go to California.
Story_ID: 30353
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your dissertation about?
Speaker 2: It was on--I'm trying to remember the title.  But what it had to do with was a distinction between the kinematical and dynamical theories of diffraction.  The--explain what that means, in the kinematical theory, the analogy is this: when you describe, say how a body moves from one place to another, you don't say what the forces are.  You just say how it went from here to there.  So a typical example in algebra would be, S equals one half G, T square [S=1/2GT2] , the, falling due to gravity.  But it doesn't say what gravity is.  But that's the kinematical theory.  The dynamical theory is F equals MA, no--apply a force and acceleration occurs.  And in particular, what it meant was, in the case of x-ray diffraction, you have a crystal.  The crystal consists of atoms which arrange in a periodic way, tri-per--in fact, tri-periodic.  Every so often, the same thing repeats itself in three different directions, in three--and so, that's a crystal.  And now if you solve Maxwell's equations in this periodic medium, then that's what the dynamical theory is all about.  And so I had to learn the dynamical theory to do that.  My instructor never taught me, my advisor never taught me that.  But there was a famous physicist, [Jerrold R.] Zacharias whose book was almost unreadable.  And one of the big challenges of my, triumphs of my career was I could Zacharias's (laughter).  And what I did was to do a study of the diffraction effects from nearly perfect single crystals of silicon.  Silicon was still not the big--this was 1959 or so.  Silicon was just becoming realized as gonna be to save humanity.
Speaker 1: Silicon is necessary for--
Speaker 2: Silicon.
Speaker 1: Yes, necessary for--
Speaker 2: It's a semi-conductor device, chips, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But at that time, germanium was more common.  I was in solid states physics section, mind you, and we're concerned with electronics, you know, mainly electrical, but sometimes optical properties.  And sometimes, thermophysical properties, you know, how heat passes through 'em and so on.  But these different properties, except magnetic.  That was another section, magnetic recording that did that.  But that was the section I was in and people were beginning to study the perfection of--you had to grow silicon very, very perfect in order to be able to use it in these devices.  Now, you can do it very routinely, but then it was a big deal.  And so we, what I did was to learn how to characterize the structure of, defect structure, little mistakes that they're throwing in, of silicon single crystals, using x-ray diffraction.  That's what the thesis was all about.  So, in retrospect, it wasn't very good, but it got me the PhD. and I learned a whole lot, more than ever went into the thesis, incidentally.
Speaker 1: Why do you say it wasn't very good?
Story_ID: 30354
Speaker 1: Well, now, I would say that as doctoral dissertations go, it didn't say very much.  I don't think so.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But in order to do it, I had to understand Zacharias' book (laughter), and his famous quote was--somebody said, the book was very short.  And he said, well, I'd had more time, I would have made it even shorter.  So every comma--I mean I probably never even found a single comma out of place in the whole book which is--I'm telling you, that's quite an achievement.  And you really had to know your physics very well because in physics, it's quite common to do approximations that you don't even mention.  For example, if you're talking about an exponential function, E to the IX [EiX], whatever.  Well, you can write that as an infinite series of terms.  But if "x" is small, then you could approximate the first two.  And so basically, when you're doing physics or writing physics papers, you say well, let "x" be small and then you don't explain it because everybody has learned how to do that before.  But in Zach's [Jerrold R. Zacharias] case, he wouldn't even tell you that (laughter).  So you figure it out for yourself.  So the big triumph was I learned how to use a microfocus x-ray equipment.  They had built one, but didn't know how to work it, and I made it work.  I used it to the study the diffraction by nearly perfect silicone single crystals and wrote a dissertation on that, how the transition from the, from dynamical through kinematical, it turns out that one, more or less, moves segues slowly into another depending upon the perameter that you could choose and the one that you could choose is the wavelength of x-rays.  So I learned how to use the x-ray source and vary the x-ray wavelengths in order to do the study.  So in that sense, it wasn't too bad really.  But I got a big raise just because I made the equipment work (laughter).
Speaker 2: So basically, they were basically acknowledging that you know more than they do so this--
Speaker 1: Well, yeah, they--
Speaker 2: --in this particular, you know--
Speaker 1: --they had an industrial contract.  There weren't many.  Most of their money came from government contracts.  In fact, we had a regular proposal mill that the people would write the proposals--respond to what you call RFQ's, RFP's, request for quote or request for proposals.  And these things were constantly coming in from the government.  The government is constantly procuring stuff.  And so they would come in and depending upon what it looked like, they would send it over to chemistry or physics or biology or whatever, metallurgy.  And I remember, this one, of course, had been sold to an industrial outfit without that kind of quote.  But nobody really knew how to, what to do with it, and they were concerned because the reports weren't coming out and stuff like that.  So I kind of killed two birds with one stone.  So, I kind of made my bones that way, and I wound up as a group leader which meant I had to go out and hunt up my own money (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I'd be going back and forth to Wright-Pat [Wright-Patterson Air Force Base] and, you know, get on a plane and fly down there and go around the government agencies and peddle, you know, the one, two-page pre-proposals.  And here's what we've got.  What do you need and stuff like that.  And I'd go down to Washington [D.C.], and I'd go to Air Force Cambridge Research Labs [Bedford, Massachusetts] and then I would come back.  So it was a big loop like that, salesman, you know, and it was okay, but the trouble was that every time you got going good on something, you didn't have enough money to put all the manpower you needed on that particular problem.  That was why I enjoyed going to Lockheed [Lockheed Martin Corporation] in 1961.
Story_ID: 30355
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll talk about it.  Okay, so you come out to Lockheed Aircraft in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Lockheed Missiles and Space Company [California] then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that came about because the guy who had taken over the metallurgy department in the material sciences laboratory which consisted on metallurgy and chemistry and I forget what else.  But anyway, he had--Ed Burke, he had been to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] and had been to Alcoa [Alcoa Aluminum] and what not.  He was a good metallurgist.  But when he inherited the job, they had an x-ray diffraction laboratory, but the guy who was in charge of it wasn't very good at it.  He was okay, but not really good.  And he knew good from bad because he had, at Yale University, he had worked for a good crystallographer.  So he wrote a letter to my thesis advisor and asked, to try to see if he was interested in a job.  And Lee [Dr. Leonid V. Azaroff], of course, wasn't interested, and he was going to the University of Connecticut [Storrs, Mansfield, Connecticut] where he became a full professor.  But he said, Pete, why don't you go out to California?  It's nice out there, you know.  If you don't like it, well, fine, you know.  So I had no idea.  I thought at that time, people who had went out to California and got good jobs weren't very talented.  If they, some of the--the money they were getting from what we were used to, God if they pay them that, what can they be (laughter).  So, go out to California in the wintertime.  It's cold in Chicago [Illinois].  I've got my overcoat and gloves and scarf and all that, hat; get out to the San Francisco [California] Airport, and the sun's shining, and drive to get--rent a car and go down to Palo Alto [California] and drive up Page Mill Road and the flowers are blooming, and get up to the lab, it's sitting out in a meadow.  And, you know, God knows, what, this is beautiful; get to the lab and they take me around.  They're glad to see me.  I'm Dr. Bragg now.  They don't know that I ain't been doctor that long (laughter), but give a seminar on what I've been doing, they all of them very impressed.  The housing is great, all these Eichler [by Joseph Eichler] homes and everything that you can buy and very little in the way of residential discrimination and so on.  So the bottom line was, I went back and told my wife [Violet], pack up, we're leaving (laughter) or words to that effect, you know.  So it was a good move for me.  I wound up in the department.  And very soon, I solved some problems that had come up in the laboratory that they hadn't been able to solve.  And it's unfortunate that the kid who was working there, that I came in over was Chinese and somehow I guess he felt he lost face cause he got sick.  And he transferred out.  But it wasn't that.  I never said anything derogatory about him.  He just wasn't really that knowledgeable.  He was okay, but not really that good.  But I wound up--and so they hired another guy to replace him.  And not long after that we had a lot of, several students who were work-study graduate students, went to Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] and worked part time at the lab there.  And so he didn't know what to do so with these guys.  And so I formed a group under me with these doctoral students at Stamford who worked with me and then took classes at Stamford.  And so that was the way that started, and eventually, when that guy became the director of the materials research laboratory, I became the manager of the metallurgy department.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is Burke, the guy--
Speaker 2: Ed Burke, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Ed Burke became the Material Sciences Lab.  Morris Steinman who had been there went to the corporate headquarters.  So that was how that thing went, and so that worked out.  By that time, they had adopted the terminology that some of the major, old research labs like IBM [International Business Machines, Armonk, New York] and Bell Labs [Murray Hill, New Jersey] and so on, they had members of the lab and senior members of the lab.  So there're mrl's and smrl's.  (Laughter) So I became a smrl, s-m-r-l (laughter) (unclear).  But smrl's had secretaries and some didn't.  (Laughter) And I had a secretary, ran the department.  So it was a, they gave you a name and a little more money.  But the structure never really did change (laughter).  But that was fine, and I did that for five years.
Story_ID: 30356
Speaker 1: Now, there's, you get involved in community life here too when you--this time, I mean your wife [Violet] and your two--you have two children that came--
Speaker 2: Yeah, two children, right.
Speaker 1: And I read here that your wife got involved in the Jack and Jill program and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Then you became the president of the Palo Alto chapter of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I got involved in that.  That was some, you know, I'd been involved in the youth council back in Chicago [Illinois].  So naturally, I gravitated to that.  And also, Palo Alto [California] is a very liberal town, university town.  Stanford's [University] right there.  So almost everybody was involved in something like that.  So it was kind of, you know, almost unavoidable to do that.  And I, you know, went through various offices in the chapter and eventually became the president.  And--
Speaker 1: Was there a lot to do in Palo Alto for--
Speaker 2: Not a lot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: There wasn't very much you could do.  It was a lot of noise, but the big thing that the Palo Alto chapter did was raise money cause they, we would--every time they'd have the annual meetings Palo Alto would just outshine everybody because they'd raise all--all these white, you know, white liberals would raise a lot of money.  And so Palo Alto was big for that reason.
Speaker 1: Did you--
Speaker 2: Had a big membership too, but there really wasn't very much you could do.  For one thing, not very many people, black people even lived in Palo Alto.  East Palo Alto is over in the San Mateo County, a different county even.  It was across the railroad tracks.  So where, you know, where we could help out with programs there, we did, of course.  But the main thing the chapter did was to raise money.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A lot of, you know, noise, but mainly it raised money.
Speaker 1: So were you following the civil rights movement in--
Speaker 2: Now?
Speaker 1: No, in those days in '61 [1961]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The Birmingham [Alabama] thing was starting to--
Speaker 2: Well, like the Selma [March from Selma to Montgomery, Alabama] march and all that, we'd have these meetings and we would get students who were gonna go down and protest and march and we would fund them, you know.  But mainly we were raising money that supported the national effort.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and Roy Wilkins is national chairman of the NAACP?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, and Whitney Young was the Urban League guy, and CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] and SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] and all those things were going on.  And we were, you know, we were involved in all of that.  The--Leroy Lucas, he was a dentist, was part of the chapter, myself.  But anyway, the point was that, yeah, I got involved in the NAACP and even, we would have guys like Cecil Williams [Methodist minister] come down and give talks at meetings.
Speaker 1: He was from the AME church in LA (Los Angeles)?
Speaker 2: No, this is Glide Memorial Church in San Francisco.
Speaker 1: Oh, Glide, right, in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: He's a, oh, man, he's an iconic figure.  The guy would come by your house for dinner and you wouldn't have a word to say (laughter).  He would dominate everything (laughter).  Oh, God.
Speaker 1: Blythe Memorial, right, in San Francisco.
Speaker 2: Woo, you would have to catch your breath (laughter).  But that was interesting, and the only time I was ever audited for income tax was I made a big contribution while I was president.  We had some kind of demonstration and a march or something, and I put up, you know, money that more than, out of the ordinary.  It wasn't that big, but it caught the auditor's eyes.  And so I was audited, and luckily I had actually made the contribution that I said I had made and had the check everything.  And it took the wind out of the guy's sales (laughter) because he thought he had me dead to right (laughter).  What could he say?
Story_ID: 30357
Speaker 1: Okay, so now meanwhile, in the laboratory, you're studying the properties of carbon?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was very interesting.  And it came about in this way.  When we, when I got there, the big program--and that was what I liked about it.  I didn't like the military aspects of the missiles, but Lockheed Missiles and Space Company [California].  So it was involved in both, you see.  I could always absolve myself of some blame by just thinking of, about space (laughter).  To tell you the truth, I never really sweated it that much.  But when I arrived there, the big program was the ballistic missile program.  And one of the big programs with that is reentry.  When you fire missiles into space and when it comes, when it reenters, ordinarily it would burn up because the aerodynamic heating would be such that it's going so fast, you know, faster than the speed of sound.  And once it enters the earth's atmosphere, it just catches--you know, ordinary materials would burn up.  And to this day, perhaps you read about the shuttle and the tiles coming off and burning through and burning up and all that.  Well, a lot of work went into finding materials, hopefully, passive, which meant it would just do--they would not burn up so badly.  And the material that does that better than any other is carbon.  So that led to a lot of research on carbon.  Union Carbide [Corporation], carbon producing companies which produce electrodes for manufacturing steel and all that, they also had projects to manufacture carbon for the space program, you know, the program.  But the government was paying for all of that.  They didn't do any of that on their own money because it wasn't that big a market.  Once you built something, it wasn't--you didn't do hundreds of tons.  You'd just do a few, you know.  But a whole lot of manpower went into research on these materials.  And so we had people around there who were studying the thermo-physical properties and the reentry properties and the tinsel properties and all that.  And I loved that because I could do all kinds of physics, you know, in addition to what I was doing in characterizing the material.  All that relates back to structure.  So not long after I got there, I got involved in the reentry materials program.  And there was a conference in Japan that occurred in '62 [1962], I guess it was, that they sent me to because some of it had to do with carbon materials.  And also there was a chemical company in--I forget which town it was, but off of the beaten path of the conference, that (unclear) that made a material called glassy carbon which seemed to have very novel properties that might be useful in our reentry vehicles.  So I made a side trip to this town in Japan where they, you know, put on the big dog and gave me this sales pitch (laughter), brought some of it back, little pieces, you know.  And it turned out that it really was no good for that purpose at all, thermo shock, you know.  If you heat something very quickly, and it expands very quickly, it'll fly apart unless it's strong enough.  So it didn't have that thermo-shock resistance.
Speaker 1: So it wouldn't burn, but it would fly apart?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just fly apart.  But in the meantime, because it was secret, we couldn't tell the Japanese, couldn't tell them what we wanted to do, and so it meant we had to reinvent the wheel.  So we had a big program reinventing how to make glassy carbon.  And I have a lamp back there in my room that's, the bowl of it is glassy carbon.  But we never did get a patent on it because--well, I don't know what the reason was except that somehow we had licenses, let people have licenses to produce it, but we never patented it.  But anyway, that's how I got into carbon.
Story_ID: 30358
Speaker 1: And the thing that stuck with me was that, having been involved in electronic, electrical properties of materials back at IIT [Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois], I'm naturally curious about all kinds of things.  Now, it turns out that there's one simple distinction between metals and non-metals or conductors and semi-conductors.  If you take a metal and you measure its resistance with an ohmmeter and now you chill it, the resistance goes down becomes more conductive.  If you take a semi-conductor and do the same thing, its resistance goes up.  In fact, that's the basic, property why, semi-conductors become good devices just because of that property which you can change chemically and so on.  But carbon was a special case.  So I remember going to the laboratory one day with a piece of this glassy carbon and there was somebody there, had some, a beaker with some liquid nitrogen I guess, whatever it was.  I dunked it in the liquid nitrogen and instead of the resistance going down, it went up.  Now, carbon wasn't supposed to do that.  So that really got my curiosity.  Well, we weren't being paid to study that.  So that didn't go anywhere, but when I finally got an offer to go to teach at [University of California] Berkley, that's one of the things that I got into.  But before that I had one interesting experience there and that was that because I was, had these graduate students who were part-time employees, some of them going to school at Stanford [University, Palo Alto California], one of them was an Argentine guy and a visitor came there from the metallurgy division of the Atomic Energy Commission in Argentina, who came to my house for a house party one time, Salvatore (ph.).  And he liked me and he said, why don't you come and visit us?  I said, well, why don't you invite me?  So one thing led to another, and I got invited to go down to Argentina for several months to, visiting, you know, scholar and consultant and give some lectures and work around the lab and what not, which I did.  And that was 1966.  And I made some very interesting acquaintances there, one of whom I recruited--who eventually took my job when I left Lockheed [Missiles and Space Company] (laughter).  But that was quite an interesting experience.  I'm being paid fully by the Argentine government, and the lab is letting me go and paying my salary at home.  So I, I'm not out of pocket anything and was able to take my wife [Violet] and we went through, you know, stopped off in Peru and Brazil and so on.  It was nice.  So that was the career at Lockheed Missiles and Space Company, and I don't really regret any of that.  It was very educational.  But in the meantime, I beginning to get inquiries about--universities are beginning to get pressure from students about having minority faculty.  And I remember getting an inquiry from the University of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And I went out there, actually, Sallquist (ph.) was the guy who was hiring.  But I didn't really like Pittsburgh.  Pittsburgh was too-why should I leave Palo Alto [California] to go to Pittsburgh.  It wasn't that attractive to me.
Story_ID: 30359
Speaker 1: Okay, well, tell us about your--now, you had a friend down there, John Poindexter, that it was from the Army that you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'd known him in the military and quarter master (unclear), he was a quarter master battalion in World War II when I was in the Philippines.
Speaker 1: So he was in Argentina when you went there?
Speaker 2: Well, he went back to school, at NYU [New York University] and went to Argentina to get away from racial prejudice which was gonna be the big deal.  And he, you know, took a lot of courses in language and trade and what not, foreign trade.  So when I got to Argentina, I had many contacts by, you know, Christmas cards and what not.  And he was, you know, he was teaching me to play chess at one time.  But anyway, when I found that he was there, he had this language school in Buenos Aires [Argentina], and so we struck up a friendship again.  And he had married an Argentine woman and had a child.  But his notion that Argentina was free of racial prejudice had radically changed.  And now he had very unrealistic and inaccurate visions of how racial prejudice had gone in the United States.  He thought, he was romanticizing the states when it really wasn't that good.  And so, this is 1966, mind you.  So, but, you know, you couldn't very well beat him over the head with it, but as I say, he had very sweet notions (laughter) about how things were.  And I'm going around giving speeches on the civil rights movement (laughter).  I mean, you know, when people would find out that I had been active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and all, and so I remember going to Bariloche [Argentina], for example, which is a beautiful resort town on the border between Argentina and Chili.  And they had a research institute there.  That's how I happened to go there, but one time they had me on the local radio station talking about the civil rights movement and stuff like that which was very interesting.  But they did have a coup while I was there and the military overthrew the civilian government.  For two or three days, nothing happened.  Everybody, nobody would go out, but in a very short time things were more or less back to normal.  And the coup went on.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember Salvato (ph.) saying that the way to find out what was going on was to--there were two newspapers, 'La Nacion' and 'La Prensa', the nation of the press.  And you find out what they're saying and just go the opposite, and then you know what's gonna happen (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is 1966.  Now,--
Story_ID: 30360
Speaker 1: And I came back to Palo Alto [California] and there until '69 [1969] when offers got around to the point where I couldn't refuse the one at [University of California] Berkley.  And I knew some of the faculty at Berkley anyway.  And one of them, I had hired as a consultant.
Speaker 2: Okay, so what kind of offer did they make you?
Speaker 1: Actually, they offered me a full professorship, and also a joint appointment at the Lawrence Berkley [National] Laboratory.  At that time, it was the Lawrence Radiation Laboratory, but it got changed later.  But what that meant was I had two salaries, one on the campus for nine months and then on the--and simultaneously, so physically I didn't--it didn't make any difference.  But I had two hats, and I paid my graduate students out of my stipend from the radiation, the grad lab and my own salary came from two places, one there and the other from the university.  So between them, I actually made money.  I made, got a raise when I went to--I don't remember the dollars.  But I do remember that I didn't suffer financially by virtue of the fact of having two salaries.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.
Speaker 1: And, of course, you know, travel budget and things like that.
Speaker 2: Now, the University of California at Berkley is a research institution--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: A lot of people don't know that and so it's good to say that.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: So your job was to teach, but more importantly to conduct research.
Speaker 1: Both.
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: That's why you were with the Lawrence Berkley Lab.  It was run for the Department of Energy by the University of California.  And a large number of the technical fac-, chemistry department and physics department, engineering, all had joint appointments at the lab.  So that was how a lot of research got done that was military related, but distantly.  In other words, we were not so much involved with hardware.  That went on at Livermore [Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory] out in the valley.  Livermore was the bomb, you know, bomb squad, you know, not that bad, but basically, more technology oriented.  And so the Lawrence Berkley Lab did work you could publish.  At Livermore, usually you couldn't.
Speaker 2: It was top secret.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so the secrecy.
Speaker 2: Okay, so were you the first, were you the--you had to be one of the earliest black people, I guess, hired for--
Speaker 1: At that department, I was the black presence in the college of engineering the whole time I was there, unfortunately.  (phone ringing) That's probably Hattie.  [pause].  The, when I arrived there in 1969, there was a big furor.  Of course, hire black faculty, hire black faculty.  But most of them were in the humanities and social sciences.  I think I was the only--at that time, I think there was a guy over in architecture, I think, Ken Simons, who eventually left and went to Africa.  There was a black guy in law school whose brother was a famous mathematician, but he was in the law school.  And I think there was a guy in botany.  But that was it.  All the rest were in the social sciences.  They hadn't even hired Harry Edwards then, but they had this experimental department, African American studies that had a coordinator and what not.  And so all the black people on campus, whatever their association was would also swarm around this black studies group.  So, but to answer your question about my groundbreaking experience, as far as I know, there might have been a black guy at one time in engineering years before I got there, before World War II.  I think there was, but from 1969 to 1987, I was the black presence in the college of engineering.  And nobody went out of--as far as I could tell, nobody went out of their way to make it any different.  We did get Lucius Walker came over from Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] one time to give us a talk.  But I don't think, I don't think there was much of an effort to do anything about it either.
Story_ID: 30361
Speaker 1: So do you think that maybe--I know the students and perhaps even faculty probably lobbied for an African American studies department and some of the other positions on the campus, do you think that the sciences just kind of flew under the radar where people didn't really--
Speaker 2: Part of it is the, the production of--part of it.  I don't' know about the whole thing, but at that time, not a lot of black people had made it a point to do anything in science because where were they going to get a job.  Now, I had swum against the stream, more or less, by doing what I had done.  And luckily enough to get hired at Lockheed [Missiles and Space Company] where I could gain some notoriety and publish a little bit, you know, and hire guys.  But I was rare.  Most of the guys that I ran into later are products--came about twenty years after I already had a PhD.  So what happened was that there was only one guy I can remember who was reasonably prominent was Warren Henry who they had hired actually.  Warren Henry had been at the University of Chicago, got his PhD. there, had worked around, had worked for the Naval Research Lab [Washington D.C.], done some very important work in magnetism and they had hired him in electronic materials lab at Lockheed.  In fact, he was there when I got there.  In fact, they made it a point for him to talk with me as part of the persuasion to get me to join.  But Warren was very rare.  I mean at that time, there just weren't very many blacks who had PhD's in anything.  And they mostly were at, you might find one at MIT [Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or something like that, but they weren't--there just weren't many.  And so when you went around--and also the other thing is, the typical black guy who had got an advanced degree in science never got a chance to do anything about it.  So he would go to a historically black school and head up a department, but he never got a chance to do anymore research.  So they weren't gonna, and at a research institution, they're not gonna hire somebody who doesn't appear to be doing research, you see.  So,--
Story_ID: 30362
Speaker 1: As a research scientist, does that seem like a sad proposition to you to go and teach really without ever really doing any research?
Speaker 2: I never--I wouldn't wanna do that.  Something happened to me once when I was at the Portland Cement Association [Skokie, Illinois], before I even got my PhD.  I got a call, a letter from the president of Prairie View A and M [Prairie View Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas] in Texas asking me to come down and head up the physics department or whatever it was.  So any way, come down there.  And I thought, well, why would--I had never heard, I knew where Prairie View was because I'd heard about, you know.  But I had had no correspondence with them whatsoever.  So I wrote back and said, well, I don't know.  I've never been there.  I expected them to invite me down and talk.  No word comes back until just before the fall semester finished, comes telling me, saying, "show up or else you don't have a job".  Well, I hadn't (laughter), hadn't even interviewed.  (Laughter).  So, I checked with the school, I said, where would they learn about me in the first place.  So the chairman of the physics department said, well, you know, they're looking for a black with a PhD, but I told them you don't have a PhD yet, but you're PhD material.  So that's how they found out about me.  But the point was that, that was the attitude that they had.  You'd be a one-man department, and eventually, I did go and visit Prairie View A and M when I spent a year as a detaille at the Department of Energy office in Washington, you know, as a bureaucrat, and my job--one other part of my job was to go around to historically black schools and see who was doing any research they could safely spend money on and call it research.  And so I visited all the schools that had engineering departments, about four, five or six of them.  And I, of course, visited Prairie View A and M at the time, and I ran into a black guy there who had lots of equipment, but never had any time to do anything.  I mean he was just a one-man department, and there's no way that you could get very much done.  And so it, it's like that was the--if you were in the humanities or the social sciences you could still do things.  But you gotta have equipment and you gotta have graduate students if you're going to do hard sciences.  In fact, you really need graduate students in social sciences, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's better.
Speaker 2: --the old pioneers like W.E.B. Dubois and E. Franklin Frazier and those guys could kind of, you know, make out with--
Speaker 1: They say that Benjamin [Arthur] Quarles would write for days and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, right, right, but that was, they were rare birds, indeed, and they'd get Guggenheim's [Fellowships] and stuff like that.  You had to have time off to go and do something, but to answer your question, it's gotta be rough.  If you would like to do research, you almost had to wind up--well, a guy like, for example, Elmer [Samuel] Imes, he was the second black to get a PhD. in physics in this country, University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] before the, around the turn of the century, early 1900s.  He got it at Michigan, University of Michigan and became a part of the Harlem Renaissance [1920s/1930s], you know--because he was, had come from a big family, a good family, you know, in terms of well known, Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] and had all the credentials and what not, he eventually had to go back to Fisk.  And he founded the physics, you know, made a real physics department out of it, which wasn't much to start with then.  But he was rare, and I don't think he got very much done.  He didn't last too long either.  But it just was very, very hard to do that because you didn't have graduate students and you didn't have the facilities for doing it.
Story_ID: 30363
Speaker 1: Okay, but here you are.  You're at the University of California at Berkley, and you've got--you had graduate students and you had a budget and everything so you're in a rare position for those days, I guess, as research scientist who's African American.  So what happened?  What were some of the major accomplishments at U-C [University of California] Berkley?
Speaker 2: My major accomplishment was when I became the department chair and we threw a party in the lobby of the Hearst Mining building (laughter).  No, it is true, but when I--
Speaker 1: Well, that's quite a thing though.  You became the department chair.  What year was that?
Speaker 2: It was '78 [1978]--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: '78 [1978] to '81 [1981], I have three years.  And prior to that, of course, I had gone on sabbatical to--I had, three months I spent at Howard University [Washington D.C.] of all places.  I don't remember exactly when, but Percy [A.] Pierre who had been a visitor to our college of engineering who was a dean of engineering at Howard [University] had met me at Berkley and said, why don't you come and spend some time with us.  So I took three months a quarter--we still had the quarter system, and went and spent it with the college of engineering at Howard University just because I had never been around that many blacks with PhD's before, in fact, practically none who had engineering or science PhDs.  So that was a very enlightening experience and led to me being appointed on a couple of national committees and things like that.  So that was very interesting.  But that was--and the other thing, of course, is that I did, I never had a lot of graduate students.  I think the largest I ever had was about six.  What I was doing turned out to be stuff that had been bind over to some extent.  And so over time, I didn't get lavish budgets.  Also, the kind of student I needed for the kind of thing I needed to do, had to have a strong physics background.  And a lot of students who would come to our department were good, but didn't--weren't very strong in physics.  So that kind of put the limitation on the kind of student that I could, to get the kind of student that I wanted.  I started, when I joined the, I guess the major thing was they had a big push on to get black faculty.  And the idea was if you can find an outstanding black who can cut the mustard, don't worry about having money to hire him.  We'll fund you.  And so it turns out that I had already hired--when I was at Lockheed [Missiles and Space Company], hired some of the faculty of the department to consult to my group.  So I was well known to them and respected by them, of course.  And so when this thing came up, these guys were well, we've got the right candidate.  So that's how I got invited to come over, and give a talk and be, you know, looked over and all that and hired.  And so the question--and nobody's really asking me what I wanted to do when I came there.  What I did was to go and interview--it's interesting.  I don't recall ever filling out an application form to go to Berkley.  I remember going to the department, you know, and talking to the secretary and asking a few questions.  But at the end of the interview process and all that comes a letter from the chancellor saying we'd like you to come and teach at such and such a salary and blah, blah, blah, just like that.  The only time I ever had to look and fill out forms for a job was the first one.  The rest of them came to me.
Story_ID: 30364
Speaker 1: But the question was, what do you do when you get there?  And I, more or less up to me to decide what I wanted to do.  And there were two things I was interested in.  One was carbon materials because I'd, remember I'd mentioned this curiosity about why carbon acts, seemed to act like a semi-conductor, and the second one was, eutectic solidification.  And what that is, is if you take a material which consists of two components that ordinarily can separate out, you can see A and B, at just the right composition, it will merge into one.  And you can't tell the difference.  So that it's sort of like, I can't think of a--well, one way to look at it, it's not exactly right, but take oil and vinegar.  If you take oil and vinegar and shake it up, your oil will just be dispersed.  But if you let it sit a while, the water will sink down to the bottom and the oil will just rise to the top.  But it's not quite that analogy, but it turns out that some materials, when you heat them up to a certain temperature, it becomes uniform, but when you lower the temperature, it splits into A and B.  And so if you freeze this material in a certain way, it's called uni-directional, in one direction, A and B come out next to each other like little plates.  Now, it turns out that we had had an expert on eutectic solidification at Lockheed [Missiles and Space Company].  And I was intrigued by that because they were making fan blades for aircraft engines out of materials made in this way.  So for a while I decided I'd like to look into that and do some things with eutectic solidification.  And so we did--and I had a couple of graduate students who worked on that and published some papers.  But I finally realized that the aircraft manufacturers had far more people, far better at that than I was ever gonna be.  But, besides, I didn't have any output.  You know, I wasn't making fan blades or whatever.  So I gave that up and went totally on carbon.  And in the carbon material, the big question that had come down--I mean there are all kinds of technological questions about how carbon is made and how you make electrodes for melting steel or electrodes for making aluminum, you know, all--the carbon can be made in an infinite variety of way from anything that's got carbon in it.  You can take wood or leaves or grass or anything, petroleum, all these things, properly treated can convert to elemental carbon.  Everything else goes off, volatilizes.  And so the question is once it becomes all carbon, now if you heat it again at higher temperatures even, in an atmosphere where it won't oxidize and burn off, its structure will change and eventually it will become graphite.  And so the bugging, you know, the basic question was, what is the process, the mechanism of graphitization?  What happens structurally for atoms, once they have become just plain carbon atoms and nothing else, why do they arrange themselves in a certain special way that we recognize as graphite.  That's what your lead pencil is made out of, incidentally.
Speaker 2: Not lead.
Speaker 1: It's not lead.  It's graphite (laughter).  So I became interested in the mechanism of graphitization and the rest of my career, I had to do--to this day, had to do with that.  Now, I understand much more, naturally, but most of my graduate students worked with some aspect of that.  Now, they did other things.  One of my best students, just two or three years ago retired from Pratt & Whitney [East Hartford, Connecticutt].  He went there based on what he had done with graphite and carbons.  But he wound up in, the expert on coatings on engines.  If the engine burns hot enough, it'll oxidize and you lose the engine.  So you have to have protective coatings for that.  And he just published a book on that, and now he's a professor Rensselaer Polytechnic [Institute, Troy, New York].  But all of my students had to learn x-ray diffraction.  And most of them, after they decided to get out of the solidification business, which is good, it's interesting, did some nice things.  I even had a post-doc from Germany come over and work with me on that, but everybody had to work on carbon materials.  So it led to one of the most--if you were to ask me what were the significant things that I did scientifically--you were going to ask me that (laughter)?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes, right, right.
Story_ID: 30365
Speaker 1: Okay, I'll start at the beginning--at the end and work back (laughter).  As a result of going to lots of conferences and, you know, and doing lots of studies, we would design furnaces that would heat temperatures so hot that you would look in there and it would--you know why a light bulb is white?  It's because the temperature is so hot that it, it's like,--black body radiation it's called.  But it's white, it looks white.  Well, these temperatures would be up at those, we'd have furnaces built to heat materials up to those temperatures and then drop them through a chute into a quest chamber and back to room temperature, we'd study the structural changes.  So fascinating stuff, you know, and experimentally demanding.  But all centered around how, what happens when you take this chunk of asphalt or whatever, start heating it and after a while, it--no matter what you do, it will arrange its atoms in a certain way.  And then if you keep heating it, after a while, it'll look just like graphite you got out of a mine someplace.  So that structure is very, very fundamental.  It is now called, the single layer is called graphene, one of the hottest in science right now, solid state physics, but single layers.  We're talking about hundreds of layers or thousands of layers, but anyway, that was the attack that eventually took, and that was--I continued to do that until I retired.  And after that I actually continued to work with a Japanese colleague.  To this day, we are working on a problem.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I saw on television recently--
Speaker 1: Graphene?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were--I think it was 'Nova Science Now'.  They were showing how graphite would look (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Looks like hexagonal rings, looks like honeycombs and what not?
Speaker 2: Um-hum, um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, that's that basic structure, very important, very important.  Along the way--
Speaker 2: It's nanotechnology, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.  It turns out that you can take scotch tape and take a piece of graphite and take it off layer by layer like that.  But that's not gonna build a--you can't build a device that way.  But what happened was, in--as a result of lots and lots of work and then [phone ringing].  Now, that's probably Hattie. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: Okay, well, I decided most of the experiments had been done where you take this disordered junk, pitch out of the furnace, you know, that residue after everything else is boiled off.  You made gasoline and the pitch is left.  Now you heat that.  It converts to graphite.  In that case, what you're doing is taking disorder and going to order.  Why not reverse the process?  In other words, start it with order and bust it up and make it disordered.  Maybe you'll learn something that way.  And the reasons for, the reason behind that thinking was that most of the progress that led to the invention of the transistor and things like that was to get material as pure as you can and deliberately just tickle it, just stick in a little bit of something and see what happens.  That you can follow.  But if you just swamp it, you know, just swamp it, well, you don't know what happened.  It's too many things going on.  So clean it up, clean up the problem as much as you can, and then just perturb it.  And so I said, well, now, wait a minute.  Everybody else has been doing this thing that way, by annealing.  Why don't we just take plain old graphite and beat the shit out of it?  Pardon me (laughter).  Well, I don't mean it deliberately, but the question is--and I'm sure you're gonna edit that out, well, okay.  I learned from metallurgist, they said, well, what can you do to a material?  Well, you can heat it and you could beat it (laughter).  Well, of course, you could also alloy it too, you know, make it be--melt it, dump in some more stuff.  Now, you can make resistors that way, semi-conductors, make a big vat of silicone and pour in some [knock]--you're gonna have to let her in.
Story_ID: 30366
Speaker 1: All right, okay.  We're talking about some of your activities at the University of California at Berkley, and with graphite.  That's what we were talking about or probably the graphite, and I think we pretty much--
Speaker 2: Well, there's one thing I need to say about that is, what it did was to lead to the issue, the creative part was to say, instead of heating materials annealing them so that they become more ordered than regular, start them very regular and make them irregular by some means.  Now, in the semi-conductor research, usually what they do would be to take say pure silicone and add a little bit of phosphorus or boron or something like that to change the electrical properties.  But that means adding one element to another element.  Well, carbon won't do that.  So how do you dope carbon with carbon?  Well, you can heat it or you can beat it.  And so what I did was say, well, one way to do that is to take it and just, instead of beating it, you put it in a ball mill and grind it.  And so at that time, I set my graduate student to work to do that, and it made a nice thesis, but it wasn't very satisfactory.  And I had a visiting scientist from Nigeria, J. B. Aladekomo, who was the chairman of the physics department, he wanted to spend some time in Berkley and learn x-ray diffractions.
Speaker 1: Could you say his name slower?  (laughter)
Speaker 2: Oh, it's Johnson B. Bardele, B-A-R-D-E-L-E, Aladekomo, A-L-A-D-E-K-O-M-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was from the Obafemi Awolowo University in Ile-Ife, Nigeria.
Speaker 1: Awolowo, yeah.
Speaker 2: OAU, and it used to be the University of Ile-Ife.  But I had met them earlier in visiting there, and so he wanted to come and spend some time.  So he came and spent a sabbatical year with me at [University of California] Berkley, and he said, well, I, you know, I wanna learn the diffraction.  So I said, well, why don't we do this?  Take all these samples that this graduate student had done and re-measure them.  Really, now I'm gonna get involved.  Prior to that I just, more or less showed him, but let him do his thing.  But now I said, now, let's really do it right cause I don't trust these results.  And that son-of a gun, I'm telling you.  He really did a job.  And as a result of that, we came with pretty much a good idea of what was going on the other way around.  And so the--and so the genius of it was, the creative part was, to decide to do what was very common in the semi-conductor industry and that is take a pure substance and then perturb it just a little bit and see what happens.  And keep doing it, and after a while you begin to see how all these things are compounded.  And that led me to say, well, now, once you see that, then you start, well, maybe somebody's done the right experiment already.  We just don't know about it.  So I need to go back to the literature and study again.  Sure, enough some guys at the Harwell Research [Harwell, Oxfordshire] thing in England had done an experiment with neutrons, put a piece of graphite in the reactor and just let it bombard with neutrons and it swells.  And you take it out every so often and see how it's swollen, measure that, do it as a function of temperature and out comes pretty much the right story.  And to a large extent, we are just about there, coming back down.  I'm working with a Japanese colleague in--he used to be at the Musashi Institute of Technology in Japan.  Now, it's Tokyo City College.  But we, you know, go back and forth with email.  And we've been doing some experiments where we had some specially prepared graphite made by Pfizer Chemical.  For example, it enabled us to hone right in on certain aspects of the problem that are still undone.  But I consider that my epitaph.  So, I'm still doing it though.  We're still-
Story_ID: 30367
Speaker 1: meanwhile, during my career there, I spent a year in Washington [D.C.] with the Department of Energy as a detailee which mean I was a bureaucrat and I traveled around the country to all the historically black schools that had engineering or science, any kind of science-related activity.  I'm active in the societies and became a member of the advisory committee of the American Carbon Society, so all that's in my--
Speaker 2: Okay, so the travel to the black colleges, it was an attempt to try to make sure that they were on the cutting edge of what was going on?
Speaker 1: To see who you could put your money with and it wouldn't get wasted.  See the group that I was with at Germantown [Maryland] in the Department of Energy was the, it was a material science laboratory, I guess.  But it funded probably about half of all the materials research that was done in America.  I mean that was how big the budget was.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you were going to inspect to make sure that they could handle a contract--
Speaker 1: They asked me, because I was black--they put me in charge of about fifteen or twenty million dollars worth of--and this is about twenty years ago now.  They gave me a budget--and one of the lesser divisions.  But in the meantime said, we can't, we've only got so much travel money, but we got money for you to travel.  So what we'd like you to do is to go around and find out where can we put some money because we're under pressure to give money for basic research, but we don't wanna give money that won't get spent well.  So that meant that you had to go and look and see.  And what it turned out was that unfortunately, usually, historically black schools had not had the money or the requirement to do, certainly not physics or not materials research.  I think the only place where we found that it wouldn't make, wouldn't hurt anything was AU [Atlanta University]--
Speaker 2: (Unclear) [does not have mic on].
Speaker 1: Yeah, they had some really good people there, and they were really doing some research.  And they had, already had some money too.  Now a lot of places got money that was there because they were black, but nobody expected a lot to come out of that.  And if this sounds derogatory, forgive me Lord, cause I don't mean that, but the plain fact was that if you don't have the graduate students and you don't have the facilities, and you don't have the budget for it, you can't really do much research.  And that's just what it comes down to.
Speaker 2: Now, here's an ethical dilemma I heard about earlier in the week.  I knew it existed before, but there are corporations that actually will pay for research to be done to fulfill an obligation, say to the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] or some other governmental regulatory agency.  But they really don't want a good outcome.  They don't really want the truth anyway.  So they will find somebody who can't do it because it buys them time--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Well, I've never--
Speaker 2: --to (unclear) the product.
Speaker 1: I can't say that I've seen that happen, but it sounds cynical enough that it could very well be true.  Now, what I did find was there would be, there were places where they would make an attempt, for example, Jackson State [University, Jackson, Mississippi], Jim Perkins came in there from Pitt [University of Pittsburgh], and he was all fired up.  And what he made the faculty do was to go out and get contracts to help pay half of their salaries.  He doubled the size of the chemistry faculty.  He was a chemist.  So Jackson State had a very thriving program, but even so, the problem is, if you don't have the graduate students, if you've got to do it all yourself, you just cannot get much done.  Everything that's done--easy has already been done.  So, and also, just to stay abreast of everything with cutting-edge technology [mic sound]--don't tell me I've been talking and nobody's listening (laughter).
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: So I'll be forgiven for that, whatever, that gaff that I just made.
Speaker 2: You're all right.
Story_ID: 30368
Speaker 1: But as I said, the experience I had at Prairie View [A&M University] was more or less what I saw elsewhere, that you probably had people who had good degrees, talking about the major, the head, top black fa-, but never had a chance to really stretch out after that.  So if you--and the same thing happened in Africa, incidentally.  When I went to Nigeria, I found that, I spent a--Fulbright [Fellowship], I had a year, academic Fulbright that I spent with the same guy who had come to work with me.  I went back to his university and worked with him.  But what they had put an option of material science in the physics department because it made it look like technology.  And the problem they had with African students, and it may still be--well, maybe not so important, but if you could spend four years and get an engineering degree and come out and get a job and buy a Mercedes, why should you go and get a PhD.  Nobody there would understand that.  He's the dummy of the class and he's a got a Mercedes, and you're going, talking about a PhD. and what you gonna do so (laughter).  So they're trying to make it look like, you know, it's applied.  So that's, so they had an oppor--still have it, incidentally.  But they face the same problem of no culture of scholarship in those fields and also no real outlet.  And it's only in fairly recent times that schools like Florida A and M [Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University, Tallahassee, Florida], , I think Hampton's [Hampton University, Hampton, Virginia] got a--Keith Jackson is the chairman of physics.  No? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Keith is now chairman of physics at Morgan [State University, Washington D.C.].
Speaker 2: Morgan, okay, not Hampton, right, yeah. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  He was at [Florida] A and M.
Speaker 1: Well, he went to Florida A and M with Joe Jackson. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  He was vice president for research at Florida A and M.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, yeah, so there're a few places like that that managed to squeeze in some scholarship very often though on black money so that in spite of everything, coming through the door that the Department of Energy was talking about, I had to be very, very circumspect about making recommendations because once you did that and they put the money there and it'd come to no good end, that's even worse, you see.  But as I say, like AU [Atlanta University], I funded guys like--I forget his name now, but anyway they really had good degrees and doing good work.  But not many.  At Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas], they had good intentions.  Southern [University] in Baton Rouge, Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama] had very applied programs, very--making mud pies almost, at that time now.  Things may have changed.  See, we're talking about twenty years ago.  So hopefully, things have changed to a large extent, and the guys I mentioned, for example, Keith Jackson, who is now the Chairman of physics at Morgan [State University] was here at the Lawrence-Berkley Lab for a while.  He was really, you know, I knew him very well.  And Joe Johnson at Florida A and M had a very good problem in, I guess it was atmospheric physics or something like that, but working a lot with gases and what not.  But, and there was a guy that, an African guy from Mali who was at Southern University in Baton Rouge which got some good programs, bringing along young black students to major in, you know, in physics.  So some of that's coming on, and I'm not really abreast of that so what I'm saying is not the current gospel truth.  I merely talking about what I had seen in (unclear).
Story_ID: 30369
Speaker 1: But I had other experiences.  As I say, I traveled a lot.  I would go to conferences every-- every other year there would be a conference on carbon in this country some place, typically a university.  And in alternate years, there would be a conference in England or France or Germany, and then Japan finally got into it.  So it enabled me to travel abroad a lot and typically, I would get there.  And when the conference ended, I would start my vacation on site and rent a car and drive around the country, come back two months--two weeks later and then take up my job and then come back home.  So that way, it enabled me to see all those countries, you know, fairly well.  And I had a sabbatical, I had three months in Bordeaux [France] and then another six months at Bordeaux.  I did three months at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], as I mentioned.  Incidentally, one of the sabbaticals, when I was at Bordeaux, Hattie Carwell (ph.), the president of the National Technical Association now was an inspector with the nuclear, the International Nuclear or whatever it is.  She went around inspecting nuclear instillations.
Speaker 2: The Nuclear Regulatory Commission?
Speaker 1: No, not, but it was International Nuclear Agency or something like that.  The most famous now, the guy that was being put up for president of Egypt was the head of that organization.  But anyway, the point is that people like that would show up occasionally in France.  Hattie came by to visit me one time I was in Bordeaux.  So it was, you know, quite a nice experience all told.  That came to, in 1987, I guess, yeah, I was sixty-seven, I think, I retired.  And I think later when I got the Fulbright I went to OAU [Obafemi Awolowo University, Ile-Ife, Nigeria] for a year.  That was very interesting.  They had a coup while I was there, a revo-
Speaker 2: This is where now?
Speaker 1: That was in Ife, Nigeria.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It's the ancestral home of the Yorubas [Yoruba people, West Africa]
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  That's right.
Speaker 1: And my friend was the chairman of physics, and I had a house, and, you know, a yard and a boy and all that.  They had an election that was declared void by the military, killed the guy who won it, [Moshood Kashimawo Olawale] Abiola.  It was a bad mess.  My brother had just come over to visit me, and when he arrived, I said, help me pack because we've got to leave (laughter).  But anyway, it enabled me to do all that.  And I came--also, that was after, several years after I retired.  Then I spent six months at the Argonne National Laboratory on the AP, advance photons, APS, advance photons source.  What it is, it's a big ring of, almost as big around as a city block--more than that, with electrons running around in this ring.  And every so often they would, it would--as they come around they radiate energy in the x-ray range.  So it's become a source of x-ray energy, synchrotron source is what it's called.  It's one down at Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] now which was kind of an early one and they gradually, you know, made it better and better and better.  But that was in connection with Howard University [Washington D.C.].  Walter Low who's a physics professor there had hired me to help out on his beam line that he was constructing there at the AP office.  So that was a very interesting experience.  And about the only other thing--of course, there's plenty that we left out.  But I even taught a course in a community college, Berkley at Oakland here, Merritt Community College [Oakland, California].  And that was a rather disappointing experience because I found that only two or three of the students came in with strong enough background, for some reason, I don't know why that was.  But it was--
Story_ID: 30370
Speaker 1: Well, that's a question that's raised a lot like how come black students are not as prepared for the sciences?
Speaker 2: There are two good reasons that I think.  One, we ran into, in [University of California] Berkley when I first went there that I became aware of, really aware of the problem.  In the college of engineering, recruiters now are coming in looking for black graduates.  So (unclear) you know, to be black was great.  And we weren't prepared, we didn't have students to sell them, to put them out.  So a guy named Somaton (ph.) in the one of the departments there, maybe civil, a white guy, got the idea, well, why don't we find out--well, two things.  They very quickly became aware, obvious that student who came in very often had been valedictorians in their own school, but had never really been challenged.  You know, they were smart, never did really learn to study, never really had to study.  And so when they came to Berkley, already valedictorians, everybody there is a valedictorian somewhere.  And they're all used to humping it.  So now, brother comes in and he's used to, you know, sliding, and in two or three months, he's on probation because he hasn't been studying.  And so the way they found this out was to run a test, to take math as a--everybody had to take math so you could study the study habits of students.  And they found that for every hour of seat time in the classroom, you needed about two hours of study outside to do ordinary work and have a nice college life.  Well, the white students did that.  So it means if you had a fifteen unit course, thirty hours of work outside would be enough to take you through college.  You could still have a job.  But the white students did it.  The Asian students did more than that.  So they all got--the white students got C's, the Asians got A's, the brothers got D's cause they did half that.  Once they found out what the problem was, well, they could correct it.  Then they began to get, just like everybody else.  So that was a very important learning experience that the black schools and often in black neighborhoods don't really challenge the students to do, to be excellent.  And so they come away, and they don't realize when they run into trouble, they're too embarrassed to look for help.  They could come out of it.  They have all kinds of counseling services and so on, but if you don't go and, you know, use those, then, of course, you're stuck.  So if you ask me what the problem used to be at least, that was what it was, that the students really didn't get challenged.  And when they finally found out what to do and began to make these facilities available, then, of course, things improved, and--
Story_ID: 30371
Speaker 1: Now, you were at some point in charge of the Black Engineering and Science Students Association [BESSA]?
Speaker 2: I was the faculty sponsor and was the first one--I'm sure they still have it, but it was created when I joined the faculty there.  I was the faculty sponsor until I left.
Speaker 1: Okay, and--
Speaker 2: BESSA, it was called, B-E-S-S-A.
Speaker 1: And you helped found the Northern California Council of Black Professional Engineers?
Speaker 2: Yeah, now, that is disputed by some, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: They say that you had nothing to do with it or something (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm not in the picture of the founding fathers, but I just happened not to be there that day (laughter).  But, incidentally, Hattie's been president several times of that organization, but that was started about the same time I came to [University of California] Berkley, around '69 [1969] or '70 [1970].  And just about all the--by that time there aren't very many black engineers around.  Most of them are senior and most of them have had to get professional engineers' licenses because nobody would hire them like at, you know, IBM or whatever.  So they had to go out and contract for themselves which meant they had to be professional engineers.  And that's why it had the--when they founded it, they made it professional engineers.  In order to be an officer, you had to be a professional engineer.  It was later, they changed that because after a while it became clear that the average engineer is not a professional engineer.  He doesn't license.  He works for a large company somewhere, don't need it, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, but when the first group was formed, I never made a fuss about it because I didn't--it didn't make any difference to me as long as--I didn't wanna be president of anything, you know (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, but just this time period, 1970, all black professionals were forming professional organizations, I guess, because of the need to do so.  The police, the black police associations were forms, the teachers, everybody.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, everybody, yeah, everywhere you looked, it was a lot of pride.  But the problem is there wasn't a big reservoir left over from the people who had had several years of experience.  That was the problem, that all of a sudden there's this big need, but there aren't enough people to fill it.  And so it took a while for people to go to school and, you know, get the requisite training and what not.  So a lot of that has, you know, been rectified.  And now it's not--I don't think it's true at Berkley, but it's fairly common for blacks to have faculty positions in all kinds of, you know, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut], Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey], you name it.
Speaker 1: Don't you think it increases the visibility of certain professions when they are black organizations--
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --blacks organized around it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, in fact, that was part of the protest in the first place.  You'd like to see somebody who looks like me, you know.  So one of the funny things that happened, and this apropos of nothing, but I used to be part of the Policy Advisory Board of the African American--Black Studies at Berkley before it became an organized department when Bill Banks was the first chair.  But Alex Haley came to visit us one time.  And so I remember we were sitting around this faculty meeting, rather, you know, committee meeting, and so he was introduced and he was to speak, you know, two or three minutes.  And he spoke for a half an hour.  We wouldn't let him stop (laughter).  He hadn't even finished the book yet, but it was so fascinating that we just wouldn't let him stop.  So he came, you know, he came and spent a, visiting professor, whatever it was.  And Tom Berkly, you would know nothing about him, but he used to be the publisher of the 'Oakland Post', black newspaper, and I'm sorry to say, kind of a right winger; had--he was there on the board though.  And, of course, he represented a point of view.  But my recollection of him was that, boy, this guy is kind of negative, you know what I mean (laughter).
Speaker 1: He didn't like Alex Haley very much?
Speaker 2: Luckily, he's dead and gone so whatever I say is not gonna hurt him one way or the other and he can't hurt me (laughter).
Story_ID: 30372
Speaker 1: That's true.  So, oh, now, I didn't ask you.  Now, in '66 [1966], you were divorced?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so--
Speaker 2: Well, we--the divorce didn't become final until '70 [1970], but we separated in '66 [1966], and in '70 [1970], we actually were formally divorced.
Speaker 1: Did you ex-wife stay out here in this area or did she--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, she lives in Palo Alto [California] to this day.  She got the house and the children.  And I got the bills (laughter).  No, it wasn't, it was amicable.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and--
Speaker 2: We're still friends.  You know, she's still alive.  She's now a couple of years younger than I am.  She was the one I said her father [McDonald] was a cop and he was a captain's man for awhile, but later he became a Catholic because you had to become a Catholic to get promoted to sergeant or captain or lieutenant in Chicago [Illinois].  So when he found that out, well, he converted to Catholicism (laughter).  So McDonald, next thing you know, he was around there with those CYO [Catholic Youth Organization] tickets, selling (laughter).  But he made it to sergeant, and if he hadn't died earlier, he probably would have gone higher, but nice guy.  I really liked him.
Speaker 1: Now, it says here also that you brought your Uncle Teddy and Aunt Edna to come to live with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he had a stroke.  He was a kind of hyper guy as you can imagine, a real high-powered.  But high blood pressure.  The guy who would pick up the salt shaker and before he even tasted the food, would start shaking salt on it.  Well, that's a disaster recipe.  And eventually he had strokes and so that led to his retirement and they came out here to live with me, and eventually, they both, you know, passed away in this area.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, is there any major thing that you'd differently if you could?
Speaker 2: First thing I would do, I would have stayed at Central YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] or bused.  When I look at people who are my peers, I had one friend who was in rags practically, clean but raggedy, washing dishes and what not, who made it through and the next two years--leaving Wilson [College, Chicago, Illinois].  I could have stayed there.  I mean I could have somehow toughed it out, I think, but I didn't.  And when I got into the Army, I could have easily have been an officer right off the bat.  Why wait three years?  I probably could have been a colonel.  Not that I wanted all those, you know, those--that grandiose stuff.  But the point is that, if you've got talent and you don't put it to use, it just goes to waste.  So I would have toughed it out.  Now, the downside, of course, is that I probably would have wound up in something that wasn't what I really liked (laughter).  So I'm not sure all that advice is good advice, but if I would say one thing is I would that my whole career--by the time I got around to something, I could have done it years earlier.  So in that sense, I was always a late bloomer.  So if there would be one piece of advice, and I try to give it to anybody who will listen, nieces and nephews or whatever, get it while you're young, don't think you've got to have this, that or the other.  Nothing is more important than to get your education.  And pick something that you really like because then you'll work hard at it, and it's not--and it's fun.  If you don't, if you've got to get up in the morning and you feel, oh, I hate this job, Jesus; find some reason to go and get the bowling team or something like that, well, (laughter) you're in the wrong job.
Story_ID: 30373
Speaker 1: Yeah, you said an interesting thing off camera, you said that you had been a busboy at the Palmer House [Hotel, Chicago, Illinois] at some point.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But you say you made a scholarly endeavor out of it.
Speaker 2: Well, it was because, as I say, my attitude with whatever I did was, I wanted to know more about it.  And so I'm at the Palmer House, which at that time, you're talking about 1935, you know, '39 [1939], '40 [1940], right around there.  One of the customers who had come into the tea room that I had worked as a combination doorman, busboy and dishwasher and so on, got me a job as a busboy at the Palmer House.  So now, I mean the Palmer House did so well that some of those guys only worked three days a week, they made so much money--in the [Great] Depression [1930s].  But the room I worked in was the empire room which was the sadditty (ph.) room with the string ensemble and people were, you know, kind of cool.  But the waiters are kind of laid back.  You know, they're, they're making pretty good money.  And so I'm, naturally, I'm curious about well, how do you get to do this and well, what do you do and I just wanted to learn.  So it didn't really matter what you were doing.  I always felt like you ought to try to find out as much as you could about it.  And so luckily I got away from there so I didn't dig in my spurs, but that was quite an experience.  As a matter of fact, the Palmer House at that time had several rooms.  The empire room was one with the jazz, with the jazzy, with the great entertainment.  People like Lena Horne might come through there or something like that.  But the empire room--but the victorian room was essentially that, was kind of, you know, sedate, string ensemble.  It played violin, piano and viola and cello.  And (laughter) I had one interesting experience there which taught me a lesson.  I'm the busboy, mind you, and the busboy's job is to haul the dishes back and forth to the kitchen, help the waiter in those respects, clean off the table.  But he dare'nt wait on the customers.  That's what the waiter does.  So you don't mess with the customer, but if the customer needs something like he wants a pack of cigarettes, well, you run out and get it.  So there was this very distinguished looking couple.  The man was very straight, had a nice clipped mustache, and the woman was classically dressed, you know, but they're old.  And so when they finished their meal, he whips out a sack of tobacco and proceeds to roll a cigarette.  I can't resist ask him (laughter), what's he doing (laughter)?  I mean I should have gotten fired for that.  But it just struck me.  Here we're in the Palmer House, in the Victorian Room.  Obviously, he can afford to get a pack of cigarettes.  Why is he rolling a cigarette?  He said, well, when I was a young man I was in the calvary.  And I learned to roll my own cigarettes, and I like to taste of them.  So I don't see any reason in buying a cigarette I don't like.  It taught me a lesson.  If you got enough money, you don't have to put on the airs for anybody.  Do what you feel like doing.  I'm not sure I always followed that, but (laughter) that's a good lesson you ought to learn.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was my career at the Palmer House.
Story_ID: 30374
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at U-C [University of California] Berkeley, you're involved in a lot of committees and nationally, a lot of activities.  You were on the advisory committee of the National Science Foundation.  On the campus, you were faculty assistant to the vice chancellor.
Speaker 2: That was interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, they're all, but the--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) Okay.
Speaker 2: --the best committee--I was on several committees of the NSF [National Science Foundation].  One was the materials research, MRAC, Materials Research Advisory Committee which advised on the all the materials research that the foundation funded in the country.  So I got to know who got the money, wherever it was.  There were very few other places they could have gone to get research money except through that committee--that division.  So that was, I spent several years on that committee.  And another time I was, and this was through Percy Pierre at Howard [University, Washington D.C.], I was on the committee on the--it had to do with research in space.  I forget the name of the acronym, but the idea was that a lot of things were promised, that if you could just do these research in space, why, it would be much better.  So, the question was a lot of times they would, these experiments were thrown onto a mission when they had a space someplace.  And whoever happened to have something ready, they would just throw it on there whether it had any preliminary write up or not.  So the essence of what the committee found was that if you're gonna do com-, you know, space research, do some ground-based experiments first so that you know what to look for and you can tell whether or not something changed.  For all you know, it didn't really make any (unclear).  Quite often it didn't.  So that was a very interesting committee, and I got onto that as a result of being at Howard when Percy Pierre recommended me to go on there.  But that was, those were interesting things.
Story_ID: 30375
Speaker 1: And the work with the faculty assistant to the chancellor, now that was after I had come back from the DOE [Department of Energy] and so on.  And I had my chairmanship of the department.  It was a job that was created to advise the chancellor on hiring and promotion, and the idea was that academic departments were reluctant to hire black people or Chinese or Mexicans or whatever at that time.  We're talking about the late '80s [1980s], middle '80s [1980s].  If they could find a reason not to do it, they wouldn't.  So the question is well, how do you somehow--you can't dictate to a faculty like [University of California] Berkeley.  They're too powerful, but you can kind of intervene a little bit.  And so the chancellor who had himself been the faculty member in the law school and the vice chancellor who was in botany, they created this office, half time, faculty assistant.  And this job was to just essentially ride herd on whatever went through there.  Sooner or later it had to come through that office to get up or go back down, involving promotion or hiring.  And so you're kind of like a watchdog.  You don't have any power except recommendation.  So in that way--and I had a budget, half a million dollars or something like that.  And I could help a faculty member who needed to go to a conference and back, you know, to do things like that.  But we developed, over time, several programs having to do with how do you control access and how do you avoid, you know, patronage, not patronage, but cronyism.  And the idea is that usually when you have a faculty position, it's quite often possible to load the thing up so that you plan it exactly for one person, write everything so that only that person will be appropriate and so they automatically get the job.  So that was one thing that you had to guard against.  The other thing is that well, you dismiss somebody without really saying why doesn't this person fit.  So over time, a number of regulations were evolved that the departments hated because it made them sort of shape up.  But what it did was to put some real muscle into the hiring and promotion process.  So in that job, I was able to--and we developed some ancillary programs like we--by we, I mean most of this had been done before I even got there; people like Bill Shack, Holly Wilson, who were, you know, in the humanities and social sciences.  But we had a chancellor's minority fellowship program where we would have fellowships for people who normally never did get fellowships for one reason or another.  They were quite common in the humanities and the social sciences, but in engineering, an engineer typically when he finished his PhD., got a job.  Nobody, didn't need to go to any more training.  But in the humanities and the social sciences, people usually almost had to have written a book or written a book out of their dissertation before they even got hired.  And so quite often, they never got the chance to go beyond their dissertation.  So what we did then was to create this program whereby we could bring them in, assign them, you know, give them to a department and let them sort of kick around and tone, you know, just sort to steep, season; give them a leg up when the time came to hire.  So that was one of the programs I thought was very good.  I didn't create this stuff.  I just helped to administer it.  But during my time in the chancellor's office, that was basically what I did.  And so, you know, reading ads, you know, for example, in the typical department, you have to have--every five years, every year you update your five-year plan.  And depending upon how things are going, some of the work that you're teaching may be so obsolete you need to discontinue it, get in some new stuff.  So that means you gotta put in some new stuff or add some new faculty or retrain some old faculty.  So your requirements are anticipated way ahead.  You don't just, all of a sudden you need something different.  So what that means is that at the appropriate time when the dean allocates positions, now you can--you are authorized to hire.  So now you got to write the ad to hire, post the notice that the job's available.  And you've got to say what it is--in other words, you can't just say, well, what we're gonna do is hire Joe Smith's brother (laughter).  You have to say the kind of person you want and it had to be totally open.  And that would create a lot of problem because departments usually would like to see who's out there, and they try to grab off the--even if it wasn't aimed at specifically their own kind, still they would like to have the freedom to pick and choose.  But we, there was one other program that was available--had always been available and which was called the Targets of Opportunity Program.  What that is, is let's say a department, a meteor arises, and this son-of-a-bitch is gonna get the Nobel Prize for sure.  Well, you'd just as soon he got his Nobel Prize while he's with your department as with somebody else's.  So if he's available, hire him now.  Don't wait until you need him.  Get him now.  So that was always available.  In other words, departments could always, if a telling enough case arose, hire somebody and stock pile them.  So that was called the Targ---so it was always there.  And so what the chancellor said, well, since this program is already there, why don't we just use it to hire black people.  And some of the black faculty who are there now were hired that way.  I won't give any names, but that's how some of them came--some of them didn't get hired.  For example, Margaret Wilkerson never did get hired.  She got hired in the english department but they always had her adjunct, never would give her a faculty position.  So she basically left and went to National Endowment for the Arts which I don't blame her, you know; too late.  I mean they try to--but anyway, those were interesting times in the chancellor's office.  I enjoyed it, didn't have any power, but a lot of influence.  So you could do little things to help people that never got out and you never said anything and you didn't, and shouldn't.
Story_ID: 30376
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you were also, you've been named Professor Emeritus at University of California at Berkley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who are some of the, can you tell me like who are some of the student maybe and other faculty that impressed you the most since you--I don't wanna get you in big trouble, but--
Speaker 2: Well, the only students that I saw--I saw all kinds of students, but most of them I never saw again.  The best student I ever had was named Sudhanu Bows (ph.) who is now retired from Pratt & Whitney.  He got his PhD, came over from India.  He was already, had a little experience, but he got his PhD from me went to work for Pratt-Whitney and retired from there.  And now he's a professor at Rensselaer Polytechnic [Institute, Troy, New York], just had a book come out.  Dennis Baker was another student who was very good.  He's retired from Lockheed [Missiles and Space Company] by now.  Those are two of my better ones.  Rahm Sucsino (ph.) was, he went to Silicon Valley, but he wound up as some kind of an entrepreneur.  He was a very, you know, money--he was the kind of guy who knew how to get money; great singer too, but very bright.  Those are three of my best students that I had.  I had other students, but they weren't with me that long.  For example, Bill Harris who was an engineer.  There was another guy, Terry, I forget, Terry, what his name was.  He went to Hewlett Packard [Palo Alto, California], but they were sophomores.  They never went beyond the first undergraduate degree.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you're a member also of the National Society of Black Physicists and--
Speaker 2: I probably am.  I'm not sure I paid my dues last year, but--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 30377
Speaker 1: --there are two awards that I'm proudest of.  One of them is that I'm a fellow of that society [National Society of Black Physicists], and I got a plaque on the wall in my next room in there.  And I also got the Berkley citation which is from the University of California saying outstanding service and all that stuff.  So those were both, well, those were two award--I've got a lot of, you know, awards of various kinds that they had to award somebody something (laughter) so they gave me one.
Speaker 2: Okay, now, are you still attending the Christmas party at the Hearst-Mining building?
Speaker 1: No, but that was, that was one of the innovations that I jokingly said I was proudest of.  But what it was, the Hearst Memorial Mining building was donated to the University of California by Phoebe Apperson Hearst who was, William Randolph Hearst's mother.  She was a refined lady that married this rough diamond--George Hearst was a mining engineer, and he made his money by locating claims and take a part of the ownership rather than the money.  But she then donated this--there's a Hearst gym, there's a Hearst mining building, all kinds of Hearst--Hearst Avenue to go up to campus.  So she is a revered person because of some, you know, her money.  Well, this building was built at a time when mining was big in California.  They used to have three hundred mining students in there, mining engineers.  I mean that was just that big.  It's a classic building on the campus, still pretty much the same the way it was a hundred years ago.  And the lobby has got a huge, you know, it's a big lobby with balconies around and everything.  And when I became chairman, I said, you know, we ought to have a Christmas party in this lobby (laughter).  So I don't know if they have that custom still, but while I was there, every year we would have some of the, one of the people who had to be out in the field with trucks, bring in a great, big Christmas tree like, you know, at the Capitol [Washington D.C.], the thing would practically reach up to the ceiling.  And then we would solicit talent from the students, and surprisingly, when you get graduate students, and we had about a hundred graduate students from all over the world, you know they've got a lot of different talents, singing, dancing, their own music, and also the ethnic foods; great, great things.  So that was my (laughter), one of the innovations that I'm responsible for.
Story_ID: 30378
Speaker 1: Okay.  We always ask this question too.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I guess the good life, just, just to have the same kind of life that's available if you do it, if you work for it, as anybody else.  What I see now is that minorities in general and working-class people in general are right now catching hell.  It doesn't make any difference whether Obama [President Barack Obama] is president or not.  President Obama is fine, and he is, you know, black and all that.  But if you pay any attention to what's going on nationally, it's not just black people or minority people, but the middle class, period, is catching hell, and it will catch more hell because somehow the notion has got around that because of the current economic crisis what we have to do is to squeeze the middle class more.  And when you do that the people on the bottom get squeezed down even more.  So, even though a rising tide lifts all boats, it ain't rising (laughter).  So I'd just like to see black people be able to advance based on the efforts that they can--you know, what they can bring to the table.  And, in general, not be demonized because, you know, notice ideas about preexisting conditions.  I'm not suggesting that all of the problems are racial discrimination, but I don't have any illusion that it's all gone away.  And so what I'd like to see, as much of that is done away as possible, but also as much hustle is done on our side.  For example, I would like to see--give an example.  When a black guy became the president of the American Chemical Society about twenty or 30 years ago, 'Ebony Magazine' didn't even run a story on it.  I don't know what they ran, but I wrote a letter to them, said, well, what do you mean?  This guy is the greatest, biggest professional scientific organization in the world and he's the president.  And you don't have anything to say about it?  Eventually, they ran some kind of a story, but that was the mentality.  If you were in show business or you were doing something that was, you know, flipity, why that was big.  And that was where 'Ebony [Magazine]' made its money, on dreams, you know, and fantasy.  So, and I'm not suggesting we shouldn't have those magazines.  They were very good, and they eventually got around to running stories.  But I guess they just didn't sell enough copies, and that's distressing to me.  I don't know if I answered your question, but--
Story_ID: 30379
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's an answer to it.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, you stated before, I guess, what you think your scientific legacy is.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I knew you were gonna ask that, and I wish I could say what I think it is.  And I really don't know because if you look at what I know I've done, it's no George Washington Carver or no--I didn't set up a blood bank, none of that, you know, great stuff.  What I did was make incremental improvements on what was going on.  And I think my biggest talent was not that I was all that original, but that when the problem came up, I could cut the mustard.  And that's certainly not particularly grandiose.  So I don't know.  I would like to say, like Justice [Thurgood] Marshall said, he did the best he could with what he had.  But I'm not even sure I did that (laughter).  But I don't know.  The things that I did wound up, a lot of them wound up in literature.  Some of them did not.  Some of them were just outstanding, but later turned out to be "so what", you know.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this.  You're in a position to really answer questions a lot of us cannot.  And one of those questions, you can probably provide a better answer than I can about where do you see physics going in the next five years?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not in a position to answer that cause I, I probably didn't tell you but I'm totally obsolete.  So the answer is, I don't know.  And I don't have any idea because in order to do that you have to be current.  And even then, you can't predict.  For example, a few years back, Bucky Balls was the big, was the molecule of the year, and got the Nobel Prize.
Speaker 1: Bucky Balls, (unclear).
Speaker 2: Bucky Balls is a carbon molecule.  It's got sixty atoms in it, and it was first noticed in the stellar, if you'd take a spectrograph and take a, shine it at the sky and look at the--there's a lot of stuff out there.  You may think it's a vacuum, but it's a lot of stuff out there.  And one of the things was identified was this weird molecule, that it turned out had to have sixty atoms in it.  Well, it turned out you could synthesize that.  And some guys at Rice University did that.  And they'd make up, what it is, you just make up a chamber full of carbon gas and get it real hot and shoot some of it out it out.  And some of it arranged itself in sixty atom balls.  And there were other balls that are similar to that, but the large number--large molecules like that.  Well, Bucky Balls was here all, the cure all for everything.  But it's not today.
Speaker 1: What did they think they could do with this?
Speaker 2: Well, it did everything that was possible.  At first you had to work out the structure.  Then you had to condense it into crystals.  They first, we're talking about individual molecules.  Then you had to put them together in crystals, and all that got worked out.  But it was a substance waiting for an application.  Well, Bucky Balls has long since become passe.  Nobody, nobody bothers, even mentions Bucky Balls anymore.  Now, it's graphene.  That has more possibilities.  But already graphene is not a new phenomenon.  I mean it's several years old by now in terms of the big flourish, meetings with, you know, thousands of people hanging around waiting to see what else has been done on it.  But like so many things, the, you never know what's going to turn out to be useful right off the bat.  I mentioned the story about the department chairman saying the last good story, last good paper on Halls was written by--the Hall Effect was written by [Edwin] Hall.  Well, it turned out that it's a common everyday thing now.  Everybody knows how to do the Hall effect because it's useful in studying the transport of electrons through matter.  So, in the same way, take optics.  When I was at IITRI [Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute] in Chicago, we had an optics section in the physics division.  Even we had a nuclear reactor, and incidentally, I did some work there.  But the optics people--we're talking about nineteen, up to 1960, '61 [1961], they brought over an expert on optics from the Imperial College in London, [Narinder Singh] Kapany was his name, Indian guy, with beard, the whole thing, who was an expert on fiber optics.  You draw these glasses and make a long fiber and you could shine light down the fiber, and, you know, and it would go around corners, and you--but the applications for fiber optics were very mundane.  Endoscopy, for example.  If you wanna look down in your stomach, you could run this glass, this fiber down into your stomach and then look at one end and look at your stomach on the other end.  Well, they (unclear) have that.  But to send messages overseas to replace electric wires, nobody ever thought of that at all.  And in 1961, that whole section resigned from the foundation and went to California to set up optics technology, and still the optics application, the electronic application, the communications had not come up.  But people over time learned to make lengths of optical fiber that was miles practically, single file, whereas before, you know, they could barely get one this long.  But you keep making it purer and purer and (unclear) [cleared?] and do things.  So I think to make predictions about what's gonna happen, except in the very short run is a dangerous game and usually you'll fail.
Story_ID: 30380
Speaker 1: Tell us about your family.  Tell us about your family or what are they doing now?
Speaker 2: You mean my immediate family?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: My son passed, two or three years ago, complications of having to do with self dialyzing.  He had--his kidneys had failed.  And he had been on dialysis.  First he got a transplant.  That lasted for thirteen years and that failed and he never did get another one.  And rather than go and sit up and get hooked up to a machine where you, the blood is filtered, there's another way you can essentially rinse the--it's called, I forget the term for the dialysis.  But anyway, you dialyze yourself.  But over time you develop infections and sooner or later, you get bugs that kill you.  So two or three years ago, on December 7th, he passed away.  He had been in the electronics game.  He had gotten--he had a job at Hewlett Packard [Palo Alto, California] in the corporate TV studio.  Then he went on the road as a rock musician which didn't work too well.  And his last working years, he spent at Skyline College in the San Francisco area as a media specialist.  He became fairly good with computers and things back, you know, in the early days like that.  So, but after a while he gave up the music entirely.  But eventually, it killed him.  My daughter wasn't much of a scholar.  She lives with her mother [Violet (Carwell?)] now who has long since retired from Santa Clara County Welfare, Children's Department, her mother.  She had been supervisor when she retired at Santa Clara County.  And so my daughter lives with her.  She'd been working at various things around Palo Alto, including, at one time she drove a bus around the Stanford [University, Palo Alto, California] campus.  So we're not that numerous.  We didn't have a lot of, no more--we only had two children.  And so now we're down to where we are now.  My brother [Johnny McFarland Bragg] is still alive.  He has called me.  We talk a little bit every day.  He lives in Phoenix [Arizona], retired from the Chicago Water Department, I guess.  He was an inspector when he retired.  And he lives in Phoenix with his wife and she was a retired school teacher at Altgeld Gardens, some place out there in the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  She had a degree in accounting, counseling (unclear).  He has several children, in fact, five children, I think.  Now, let's see, who else in my family?
Story_ID: 30381
Speaker 1: Well, you had several calls when we started and people were checking up on you, and you said your brother [Johnny McFarland Bragg] was gonna call, and he did eventually.  But others called up too and I was surprised to hear you answer with the name Pete.  Is there a story behind that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there is.  As a child, I'm told that I imitated a comic strip character named 'Rawhide Pete'.  And when I got older, I just changed it to Pete.  So that's how that came about.  Now, I've never even seen--I don't recall seeing those comic strips, but that's the way that came about.  And it's very simple.  It's got nothing to do with Peter or anything like that.  But--
Speaker 1: So your family knows you as Pete?
Speaker 2: Yeah, people who know me know Pete.  But I, you know, I get mail addressed to Pete Bragg or Dr. Pete Bragg or Peter Bragg or, but usually when I see that I know they don't really know me (laughter).  I mean my family would not do that.  They would say Robert.  But, so you can tell when somebody is selling something on the phone and if they get familiar, well, no.  But, well, it's, you know, it's just convenient.  Well, no, that's about all I need to say about that.
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother see you become a successful physicist before--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much.  I had already come to teach in Berkeley [California] when she died.  She had, I told you she had been married to Alex Hunt, but when he died, and all the children had moved to California, older sister who has passed and the younger sister who's son is one of the nephews that I mentioned there, she moved out here because there was nobody left out there really to, that she was that close to.  So she moved to California and spent her last years here in Berkeley.  And she said she was an antique because she was past seventy-five, I think it was (laughter).
Speaker 1: And today, you're ninety-one?
Speaker 2: Ninety one.
Speaker 1: Ninety one, okay.
Speaker 2: And as [James Hubert] "Eubie" Blake said, if I'd known I was gonna live this long, I would have taken better care of myself (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, is there anything else we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I don't think--I'm sure if you scratch beneath the surface, I'd have another tale, but I've probably hit the high spots on most of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, thank you very much for sharing time with us, and the last question is similar to legacy, but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: A nice guy who tried to be helpful.  That'd be enough.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 30382
Speaker 1: (PHOTOS) (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  I'm ready.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the upper left, that tallest guy in that upper left there is me, and seated there is my older sister, Alberta.  And then Nadine and then my brother.  And I was just about to leave Memphis to go to Chicago.  Further to the, over to the right is--I'm back home on furlough.  The guy with the glasses on is me, and the other guy, that handsome guy is my brother. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, we're almost there.  Okay. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 2: How about this one?
Speaker 1: That was me at some point, probably--is that natural foliage in the background?
Speaker 2: Yes, hills and--
Speaker 1: I don't know where that is, frankly. (OFF CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Is that Brazil or Argentina or--
Speaker 2: No, no, that's not--
Speaker 1: Looks like it might be around here.  The typography of this--
Speaker 2: Could be around here some place, but--
Speaker 1: How about this one here?
Speaker 2: That's in Africa.  And that's--I'm surprised Hattie is not on that one. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  No, I'm in the other one.
Speaker 1: University of Awolowo.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that--the guy in the very center was my host.  That's J. B. Aladekomo--
Speaker 1: In the blue?
Speaker 2: --Dr., yeah.  Right next to him, that lady is his wife.  And the fat guy next to him is me, and I think--I don't know who these other people are, but we're in Ife then. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION):
Speaker 1: No, I think that we, we're probably at a house party or something. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  He had a big party for you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, let's see, is this--
Speaker 2: That's, yeah-- (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  That's when you were a Fulbright (unclear) at Ife.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Marion is on that picture.
Speaker 2: Yeah, somewhere in there. (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  That's at the University of Elora (unclear). (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Which one is it?
Speaker 1: That's the one right here.  And this is you?
Speaker 2: No, that's Harry Morrison and he's a physics professor at Berkley.  He was there for a time when I was there.  And the guy, that's Warren Henry, who I told you was one of the most outstanding visitors we ever had.
Speaker 1: In the red?
Speaker 2: No, the white, up, yeah, that's Warren Henry.  I'm in the red (laughter).
Speaker 1: And this was taken Karlsruhe, Germany.
Speaker 2: This one here?
Speaker 1: No, above that, Karlsruhe.  That's Pfitzer (ph.), the guy up to the upper left, Professor Pfitzer, and the guy at the bottom is named Ruzowski (ph.), and we're at the University of Karlsruhe in Germany.
Speaker 2: This is, I guess I'm hooded some student there at Berkeley.
Speaker 1: Down here, I'm addressing some kind of a convocation at, on the campus-- (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  That's at Stamford.
Speaker 2: Oh, is that Stamford, okay.
Speaker 1: And these people, that's a meeting of the American Ceramics Society.  I don't know who that guy was, but at one time, I was active in that.  And these people here are me--
Speaker 2: The bottom, down here or--
Speaker 1: I don't know who these graduate--these students are, but, yeah, here's my brother.  That's me, my sister and that's my--I don't know who that is.  I guess that's, it looks like Martin's son, but I don't think he was there.  Anyway, that's, this about takes me from the cradle to the grave.  That guy over there with me in full regalia was at my 80th [birthday].  Hattie was, arranged that for me.  And I appeared--
Speaker 2: Right here in the regalia, that's you? (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Yep, that's him.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: All right. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  I have a matching outfit.  The people of Ife gave that to him and he gave me the (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Ife is the birth place of mankind.
Speaker 2: That's right. (OFF-CAMERA FEMALE VOICE):  Are we done?
Speaker 1: I think so.  Thank you very much.
