Story_ID: 596992
Speaker 1: I'm Denise Gines, the interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and Mrs. Bailey [Anna Bailey] is an observer. Could you please state your name and spell it for me please?
Speaker 2: William H. "Bob" Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], W-I-L-L-I-A-M, the letter H, B-O-B, B-A-I-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: And what does the H stand for?
Speaker 2: Henry
Speaker 1: Okay. And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: February 14, 1927.
Speaker 1: Okay. And where were you born?
Speaker 2: I was born in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Now tell me what your former occupation was?
Speaker 2: Well, it depends on what period of time you're talking about. I had quite a varied occupation. I was a singer, an entertainer, I was a real estate broker, I was a television producer and director and actor and announcer, I was on radio as a disc jockey.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: So you had many hats (laughter). All right. What is the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: The location where this interview is taking place?
Speaker 2: Well, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Where are we her- where are we now?
Speaker 2: We're in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 1: Okay. And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is April 5th, 19--oh, 2007.
Story_ID: 596993
Speaker 1: I'm going to ask you what I call People magazine-ish type questions, okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color would be beige.
Speaker 1: All right. And what about what you like to eat. What's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: That's a good question, I'm such a variable eater that I would say probably fish, seafood of various types.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year would be August and that's because--no, I have a better favorite, which would be February. I have a birthday and anniversary in that particular month so two very important factors come to surface. February 14th, which is my birthday and February 16th, which is my wedding anniversary.
Speaker 1: Okay. So actually February--winter would be your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Yes, that would be my most favorite time of the year.
Speaker 1: All right. Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I'm very variable on my choices. Sometimes I like--in the wintertime I like the Caribbean and in the summertime I like San Diego [California] and the beach. If I would--probably reduce that down to one place (background noise) I'd say San Diego.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, do you have a favorite phrase? Tell me what your favorite phrase is.
Speaker 1: Favorite?
Speaker 2: Phrase. A favorite phrase. You told me earlier that education is the what?
Speaker 1: Oh, my favorite phrase.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter). Education is the light that blinds ignorance.
Story_ID: 596994
Speaker 1: Now, tell me your mother's name. We're going to start talking about your ancestry first, okay. Tell me your mother's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My mother's name was Margaret [Margaret Williams Bailey].
Speaker 1: Margaret.
Speaker 2: And her maiden name was Williams.
Speaker 1: Okay. Do you know where she was born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Do you remember what year?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: And what about her parents? Do you know what her parents' names were?
Speaker 2: No, I don't--just my grandmother and grandfather on her side. I don't know their names.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what about your father? What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: John Bailey, his middle name was Henry also.
Speaker 1: And where was your father born?
Speaker 2: Cedartown, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when he was born or the date he was born?
Speaker 2: I believe it was 1980 [sic.].
Speaker 1: Nineteen eighteen [1918]?
Speaker 2: No, 1880. I'm sorry (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Eighteen eighty [1880], 1880. Okay. Now do you know anything about his parents?
Speaker 2: Only my grandmother, his mother, I was five or six when she passed. I used to brush her hair, she had long pretty hair, and I remember I used to brush her hair and she loved to have me that close to her, but that's the only fond memories I have--it's the only memories I have period of her as such. She was a very quiet, beautiful woman. I have a picture of her which I'll show you later.
Speaker 1: Did you--do you know anything about her parents?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: You said she had long hair was she Indian [Native American] or was she mixed?
Speaker 2: I know she was mixed, I don't know if she was mixed with Indian or with white, but she definitely had a mixture. My father, you could see the reflection of her mixed parenting coming out in him.
Speaker 1: Okay. And your grandmother she too was--lived in Cedartown, Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. All right. Do you remember visiting her at all as a child?
Speaker 2: No, I don't (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No.
Story_ID: 596995
Speaker 1: All right, let's talk about your mother [Margaret Williams Bailey]. Can you tell me how much education your mother had?
Speaker 2: She finished, I think, the tenth grade.
Speaker 1: And what, what kind of work did she do?
Speaker 2: She was a housewife. She--my father [John Bailey] didn't allow her to do what the equality black women during those days did, housework, but he didn't allow it. He wanted her to stay home with us--with the kids. So that was out, so she was really a housewife.
Speaker 1: Did your mother talk to you about her growing up about growing up in Birmingham? Did she talk to you about how she grew up? Did she live on a farm? Did they live in the city?
Speaker 2: No, she lived in the city in Birmingham, Alabama which is where my aunts migrated from Georgia to Birmingham that's where she grew up. I never had much information or background on any of the incidents that occurred in her life in Birmingham. During those days when the older folks started talking about history they shooed the kids out of the room, "Get out of the room boy." And the conversations were varied from the relationships that they had and I think something to do with the family tree and maybe all of the time it wasn't something that they wanted us to hear (laughter).
Story_ID: 596996
Speaker 1: Is there a story about how your mother [Margaret Williams Bailey] and father [John Bailey] met?
Speaker 2: Well, my father was working and my auntie, which was my mother's sister, were working for a family in Cedartown [Georgia], and my father didn't have a girlfriend so my auntie thought she'd fix it up with my mother and him, and she put them together and they stayed together until they both passed.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) All right. And how long were they married? How many years were they married?
Speaker 2: My recollection is when my mother passed they had been married for something like forty some odd years.
Speaker 1: Okay. So your mother and father met in Birmingham [Alabama] or Cedartown?
Speaker 2: Cedartown, I believe (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. And when they got married where did they live?
Speaker 2: They lived in Birmingham.
Story_ID: 596997
Speaker 1: So tell me the story about how your family got to Detroit [Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Well, my father [John Bailey] wanted to leave the South for obvious reasons, and my mother's sister had already relocated in Detroit and had married successfully there and her husband was working at Ford Motor Company [Dearborn, Michigan] at the time. My mother [Margaret Williams Bailey] let my auntie know that they wanted to come north and whether or not there was any possibility that my father could get employed at Fords. And that became a reality, they migrated to Detroit and he went to work for Ford Motor Company and that was for a few years. Ford had a layoff and my father was let go from the workforce. But we had a cousin in Cleveland [Ohio] that was working for a dairy and he was the, I guess the head man of the African Americans that was there. I'm going to interchange the word--the phrase African American for black on occasion because during this period of time black was more popular than African American. In fact, we've gone through three or four changes and I might refer in the particular era that I'm talking about or what we would describe as that period.
Speaker 1: Okay, well in that period we're talking about 1927, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah '28 [1928], '29 [1929] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Twenty-nine [1929], '29 [1929]. So we were Negroes back then.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter).
Speaker 2: In fact that was a step up for the Negroes or colored people. It was colored people--
Speaker 1: Oh, we may have been colored, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you left one out (laughter). So anyway, he--a job opened up at the dairy where he was employed and then a management position and he asked my father if he'd be interested coming to Cleveland to take the job, which he jumped at the opportunity. So that's how we got to Cleveland. I was about five or six years old at that particular time. And my father not only held that job, but his job was bedding down and watering the horses, it was horse driven milk wagon at that particular time. His job was to bed them down and to feed them and he captured another job, a part time job while he was working a full time job for--Telling Belle Vernon [Telling Belle Vernon Company, Cleveland, Ohio] was the name of the company, and it was a very productive move for the family 'cause it put us together with our cousins, the Malones [ph.], and that's where I find most of my memories of growing up with the family would be in Cleveland not Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I had relatives in Detroit, quite a few relatives in Detroit, but at that time Detroit and Cleveland was very well locked in to the automobile industry and I think that the families themselves interchanged opportunities between Detroit and Cleveland. If one was laid off in one city and the other city had offerings of job possibilities they sorted them out and offered them to other parts of the family to keep the economics of the general family intact.
Speaker 1: Well, that was a good strategy (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, it was an interplay.
Story_ID: 596998
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your, your mother [Margaret Williams Bailey]. What was your relationship like with your mother?
Speaker 2: Very close, my mother was a very sweet woman and she was very enterprising. She could take five dollars and make it last for the whole week for four people (laughter). She was very caring, and all I remember of her is that she cared so much for the children, my sister and myself, and I think that if there would be anything I could say about her is that she was a bright provider of happiness for all of, all of us in the house including my father [John Bailey], she kept him in line, but we kind of rotated around her and her attention. She gave everybody special attention and then the general family attention. So she was something else, something different.
Speaker 1: Was she the disciplinarian in your house? Was she the disciplinarian in your house?
Speaker 2: Well, she would go so far and then if it would look like she was not getting a response, she would turn it over to my father who was a strict disciplinarian, and usually I would try to make up with mama rather than to having go to daddy. Daddy was not like the [U.S.] Supreme Court and when he said something he backed it up with a paddle. So, I guess you could call her a disciplinarian, but she was the first level of appeal, but he was the last level and the, actually the one that would put the meat to the paddle if it was necessary.
Story_ID: 596999
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your relationship with your father [John Bailey].
Speaker 2: Well, daddy was a very quiet man, very committed to his family and economically he worked like two jobs almost all the time I can remember. So I didn't get a chance to spend the kind of time with him that I would liked to have had because he was working all of the time, and when he wasn't working two jobs we were involved in a complex where they gave us--the family an apartment for him to do maintenance, and it was a twelve unit apartment building so we became the custodians for the building and he spent his waking hours taking care of the apartment, and he still was working at Telling Belle Vernon [Telling Belle Vernon Company, Cleveland, Ohio]. So I never really--I never had a chance to go fishing with my father or to do some of the things that father and son do, but he always led by example of living a clean life, a committed life to his family. And an understanding person, you could always go to him and talk. He found time to listen to your problems and to offer suggestions. He didn't have a lot of education but he had a lot of mother's wit and a lot of character and I think I respect him more for that than anything. He gave me a good role model to follow.
Speaker 1: Tell me about--
Speaker 2: I got off a little bit when I started talking about him.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay. Well is there anything else you'd like to say about your dad?
Speaker 2: Well, I get touched when I talk about him 'cause he was a very good man, and like I say I would loved to have spent more time with him on a father and son level, but the time that I did spend with him was quality time and I still miss him.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that you were able to do with him? You said you weren't able to go fishing, but in that little quality time what were some of the things you did together?
Speaker 2: Play checkers, tic tac toe (laughter), and the rest of it was showing me how to do certain things. He was in the maintenance div- maintenance operation at the apartment building, he showed me how to do a little plumbing and a little electricity and a little this and a little of that. So I could be of some value to him and to the family. That's mostly the time that I spent with him was doing those kinds of things. Teaching me how to be the man of the house, he would tell me when he wanted me to do something.
Story_ID: 597000
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about the neighborhood in which you grew up. Tell me who lived in the neighborhood and the types of occupations that the people that lived in the neighborhood had.
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up most of my time in Cleveland [Ohio], other than the apartments that we were living in. We finally were invited to put an application in at the first public housing unit that had went up in Cleveland, the Outhwaite Homes.
Speaker 1: Say the name of it again.
Speaker 2: FHA housing [Federal Housing Administration].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called it public housing at the time. That was when Roosevelt [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt] became the love of the poor people, and we moved into the projects they called them at the time, and it was a very different kind of housing than what public housing is today. You had to qualify, you had to have good credit, you had to have good character and get someone to speak for you. Usually you'd pass the white people you were working for, somebody to write a letter to say you were a good colored man and had good credit. That was the basic thing and it was a very clean environment. People like the mayor of Cleveland, Carl Stokes, was a play buddy of mine and [HistoryMaker] Louis Stokes who became a congressman was a playmate, and Marty Wilson [ph.] the first black CPA [certified public accountant] in the State of Ohio was a running mate. We had a different kind of relationship in the projects coming up than what you have today. There was no dope or no fights, we had good counselors that worked with us and sports and glee clubs, which I was a part of and it was a very good environment. I think most of us that were growing up around that same time ended up doing something of value because we had good counselors and good motivation and for the most part good working parents.
Speaker 1: Were the parents--both parents in the household of your friends as well?
Speaker 2: Yes, there was much more of a parental relationship than there is today. There was still a lot of care for the family. The unit was very important not much money, not much wealth, but love and attention and in those days it was a practice. They say it takes a village to raise a child, in those days if somebody--if Louis' mother [Louise Stone Stokes] saw me doing something she'd tell me to stop, I better stop to keep her from calling and telling my mother [Margaret Williams Bailey] that I was doing something wrong. Everybody kind of looked out for each other and it was a much different relationship than what we have today unfortunately.
Story_ID: 597001
Speaker 1: Now, describe your, your neighborhood where you lived in the projects [Outhwaite Homes, Cleveland, Ohio], because you were raised right in the beginning of the, of the Depression [Great Depression]. Did you feel or did your family feel the effects of the Depression? I mean, I know you said your family didn't have much money but did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, this was after the--yeah, this was after the Depression.
Speaker 1: Oh, you moved to the project after?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the Depression was not as--it was coming out on the other side of economic development beginning to happen. You had WPA [Works Progress Administration; Work Projects Administration] coming into place and other kinds of federal programs that was alleviating the effect of the recession by that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay by the time you moved into the projects. But the era in twent- say '29 [1929], '30 [1930], '32 [1932].
Speaker 2: Thirty-three [1933] is when--'33 [1933], '34 [1934], '35 [1935] is when we were in the projects.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the neighborhood was, as I said we were living in public housing which was the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It was--you're talking about two or three hundred units and it was a community that we felt economically pretty much in same brackets because they had certain prerequisites on how much income you could have before you'd have to move out of the projects.
Speaker 1: Did you have to make a certain amount to move into the projects?
Speaker 2: Yes, you had to make a certain amount but not to exceed a certain amount (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Exceed a certain amount, okay.
Speaker 2: So you were kind of put in a position where after you advance yourself you've got to be put out in the streets (laughter). So that kind of prompted some storytelling on behalf of a lot of the tenants. They didn't report their income correctly but when they found out that you were cheating they would evict you. They were very strict on it, but I think that it was a necessity for that point in time in order to keep the philosophy of the public housing program intact.
Story_ID: 597002
Speaker 1: We were talking about you living in public housing. What was the makeup of the people who lived there?
Speaker 2: They were--it was all-black that lived in the project [Outhwaite Homes, Cleveland, Ohio] at the time, and it was a community that was primarily built around the same economic income brackets because of the situation that the public housing prerequisite called for. I think you could say they weren't middle class, they weren't poor, they were kind of in between as far as income was concerned between poor and, and I was speaking about economically because the people didn't know they were poor. I never knew I was poor until somebody told me I was poor and that was the social worker that would come to check you out (laughter). But we had a very structured lifestyle in the projects. We had the public Outhwaite center [Portland Outhwaite Recreation Center, Cleveland, Ohio], which was the community center where we would play basketball and did other kinds of sports, and during those days we participated in ice skating which was something that was different. We had an ice skating area, we had a baseball area, a baseball field and we played football in the wintertime, baseball in the summertime, so there were a lot of activities that kept you pretty much off the streets or getting into mischief. And the directors of the public outreach center were very helpful and role models for all of the boys especially, and for the girls too. They had activities for the girls and then they had cross activities where we would do things together. So it was a very well structured social and family relationship. The programs were very definitive and very supportive of a way of life that was away from the kind of structure I had had prior to that time. Most of the people that moved into public housing were good, homebodies they just were not making a lot of money. But you made do, your family made do and we were happy together, and you got a present at Christmastime, the holidays to be together and to have a party. You were happy because you had a lot of love and love took the place of having the wealth that you would have liked to have had. But you never really thought about that. I think as you get older you think about that, when you're younger there are other things that are more important to you than the bank account.
Story_ID: 597003
Speaker 1: Tell me about the, the merchants that lived--that owned the stores in your neighborhood. Who are the people who owned businesses, were there any black businesses at all?
Speaker 2: Yes, there were black businesses in Cleveland [Ohio], and there was a mixture of black owned businesses and Jewish owned businesses. Most of the black owned businesses were purchased from Jews that were in the immediate neighborhood. In fact, it was a Jewish neighborhood before the public housing came in and the housing around the projects [Outhwaite Homes, Cleveland, Ohio] was eventually sold into businesses in the commercial area, it was sold to black groups. And we had--during those days you had segregated commercial practices and they had night clubs and restaurants, cleaning establishments. General types of businesses that were owned by blacks who did very well, and of course the number business, which was proliferating most poor areas (laughter), they were the ones who made the big money in the community and usually put some money back in the community to do scholarships and if a family got burned out or something they would do certain community type gestures to rectify their gangster activities (laughter).
Speaker 1: So these were black number runners? Is that what you're saying? Black number runners?
Speaker 2: Black number runners yeah. They had certain districts. I don't know if there was--we had gangsters that were in charge of the black income number playing. It wasn't a white backed organization, they were black and they had the same kind of gangster relationships that the white community had. They would shoot each other up and carry on. It was a, it was a situation where they emulated the population as it's called for and that sometimes was very drastic. But we had a man by the name of Benny Mason, and he was the number banker and had a nightclub and had a farm [Benny Mason's Farm, Solon, Ohio]. He would have some of the youngsters come out every year in the summertime when school was out to work the farm, stay off the streets. So there were ways where they reciprocated with the community for the economics that they were taking out of it. But everybody played the numbers and when somebody would hit (laughter) in the neighborhood everybody would hear about it, "So and So hit for fifty dollars," which was a lot of money at that time. But the number business also employed a lot of people that would not have been working otherwise. So it was a, it was a different time, we had different kinds of economic and social conditions that I think turns you into the kind of person that a lot of us turned out to be and that's productive, because we did see our own people doing things that were productive and were positive.
Story_ID: 597004
Speaker 1: Now, tell me about your elementary school. What elementary school did you go to?
Speaker 2: I went to Bolton Elementary School [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And do you remember any of the teachers that might have encouraged you or someone that kept you on track while you were in, in elementary school?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember anybody at Bolton.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember one of my good friends, Reverend McKinney [Samuel McKinney], who is--turned out to be a very outstanding minister in Seattle, Washington. And he and I were good friends at Bolton, and in fact went all through school together, even went to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] together but that's another story.
Speaker 1: Okay, so in elementary school, Bolton Elementary, did you go from elementary school straight into high school or was there a middle school or junior high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Junior high school.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Kennard.
Speaker 1: Kennard?
Speaker 2: Kennard Junior High School [Cleveland, Ohio], that's where--I still have one friend--it looks as though I have one friend from Bolton and another friend from junior high school, but these are people that I've known for sixty, sixty-five years.
Speaker 1: Who is your friend from Kennard?
Speaker 2: Her name is Mary Louise Grey [Mary Louise Williams], and it was Mary Louise Randolph when she was there, and she used to help me with my homework. But it was right across the street--it was right in the middle of the public housing units [Outhwaite Homes, Cleveland, Ohio] and I think of all of the junior high schools that I could have gone to, I enjoyed myself at Kennard because there were teachers there that inspired you. I couldn't remember the names now, but I do remember the conditions of the educational system there and it was to prepare you for senior high school and later for prepare you to go to college.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They started that early with us in junior high school preparing us to go to senior high school and then on to college.
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I was a pretty good student. I recognized, because of the encouragement I received at home, that education was going to be a major issue for my adult life, but I was also very into the social part of the school. So I kind of split myself between the academic and the social efforts of school all the way through junior high school and in high school [Central High School, Cleveland, Ohio].
Story_ID: 597005
Speaker 1: Tell me about the social part of it. You said you were academic--you worked on your academics and the social part through high school [Central High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. Tell me how did you participate?
Speaker 2: Well, I participated in the governmental side of the school. I was always a part of being the vice president of the class or the treasurer of the class or something of the class. I kept myself involved in the administration of the school as well as the academic portion for myself, and ever since I can remember I was a singer, and I used to sing in junior high school, and they had a little choir and I was a part of the choir. So I participated in the social areas of the class discussions. I was always with my hand up, sometimes wrong (laughter), but I enjoyed school, I enjoyed the camaraderie all through school. So junior high afforded me the opportunity to grow with people in the actual community that the school grew from. In those days you did school outside of school, working together to get your homework right for the next day, and we used to have all different kinds of relationships that bred camaraderie that I enjoyed very much, and that had a tendency I think to implant in my personality the relationship of comrades one to the other and to be able to bring people together for mutual benefits. And all of that came out of my relationships at Kennard [Kennard Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] really.
Speaker 1: So Kennard was a junior high school that was set in the projects [Outhwaite Homes, Cleveland, Ohio] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In the community, right in the projects yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Well, tell me about the teachers at Kennard were they both black and white?
Speaker 2: All I remember really individually about the teachers is that they were very committed to have us learn our ABCs if you will. There was a different type of commitment, they weren't--we had a lot of respect for the teachers. In fact, if the teachers would bring your parents in to school you're in trouble, deep, deep trouble. The parents usually always backed up the teachers because the teachers were committed to the students. It was kind of a different relationship than what I see happening today for the most part. Teachers were committed to teaching as opposed to it being a job as such. I don't think the economic value to teaching was as important as it is today. I think the commitment to educate was the primary concern of teachers during that period of time. I feel that this was inspirational to most of us that were in the school and that we studied together after school. And later on related ourselves to choosing the proper high school that we wanted to go to as a result of our studies at Kennard.
Story_ID: 597006
Speaker 1: Okay, did you have a choice of high school that you would go to?
Speaker 2: Yes, usually it was two high schools that you had a choice to go to. Some, some would go to Central High School [Cleveland, Ohio], which was the--and the other was Fairmont High School [sic.].
Speaker 1: So which high school did you, you attend (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Central.
Speaker 1: Central. And why did you pick Central to go to?
Speaker 2: Most of my friends went to Central and that's really what influenced me more than anything else. My sister had gone there too come to think of it earlier so there was a relationship there.
Speaker 1: Okay. So tell me about Central High School.
Speaker 2: Central High School was the next level of teaching commitment and they were very strict on us at Central. There were integrated student body and they had some whites who were in Central, not a great deal maybe 2 or 3 percent and some Orientals [East Asian] in the school. So when you talk about integrated schools that's all I knew in Cleveland coming up forty or fifty years ago.
Speaker 1: So but you said your elementary school was all-black [Bolton Elementary School, Cleveland, Ohio], was Kinnar- was Kennard [Kennard Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] integrated?
Speaker 2: No, Kennard was just about all-black too.
Speaker 1: It was all-black, okay, so this is your first encounter with white students in school?
Speaker 2: Right as such, yes.
Speaker 1: Now, I asked you earlier but the teachers at Kennard were black or white or both?
Speaker 2: They were both.
Speaker 1: Okay. And what about at Central?
Speaker 2: Both.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, at Central I think it was more white than black and that's where I remember a teacher called Mrs. Waterman [ph.] and she was very inspirational to me. She was the music teacher and she inspired me musically to learn to read music and to deal with the operatic side of music. We had a course then called music appreciation and it was a class where you were learned the classics. They would play the classics for you, so that you became familiar with different levels of music than just the pop music that was being played at the time. Some of the things that transpired at Central were so different than what we have in schools today and I keep saying that, I'm not putting the schools today down, because I've got one named after me [William H. Bailey Middle School, Las Vegas, Nevada] (laughter). But there was such a difference between the mode of attention that was given to certain subject areas which no longer is a part of the academic program. History was a big part of academic studies at that time and you had to know who you were or what the country was all about, the history of the country. You don't get--there is not even history classes in schools today and I find that the roundness of the different subjects that you study in school during that period of time was so much more academically sound and characteristically profound than what we have in the school systems today.
Story_ID: 597007
Speaker 1: Music was really your focus at that time. When did you know that you were really musical or when did you begin your love for, for music?
Speaker 2: When I was in junior high school [Kennard Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio] really (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In junior high school is when it started?
Speaker 2: Yes, and one of the things that I was very instrumental and personally involved in was a glee club that was a part of the Portland Outhwaite center activities [Portland Outhwaite Recreation Center, Cleveland, Ohio], and I sang in the glee club. It was an organization that was comprised of young and older people. I guess actually from seventeen--sixteen or seventeen to thirty-five or forty and we would sing mostly spirituals and perform at some of the other areas, community areas of public housing and any of the Portland Outhwaite center activities we would appear. And we went to churches that were out of the area and did quite a, quite a bit of presentations all around. I was very instrumental in supporting the tenor area of the glee club singers. I enjoyed singing in the church.
Speaker 1: What church did you attend?
Speaker 2: East, East Mount Zion [East Mount Zion Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Reverend Hall [Ernest Hall], I remember his name.
Speaker 1: And that was a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Baptist church, foot stomping Baptist church (laughter), yeah. I found that my sister was a singer and she sang in the choir and chorus and I think that sort of inspired me to get involved in the singing activities but I was pretty good too.
Speaker 1: Your sister, what is her name?
Speaker 2: Francine [ph.].
Speaker 1: Francine. And she's older than you?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was the baby of the family.
Speaker 1: Did you just have one sister?
Speaker 2: I had three sisters, but two of them passed.
Speaker 1: Well tell me your other sisters--about your other sisters.
Speaker 2: About my sister.
Speaker 1: Uh-huh, what were their names?
Speaker 2: Ruth [Ruth Bailey] was one and Carol [ph.] was the other. I never remembered Carol; I think Carol passed before I was born. Ruth was a paraplegic and she was the next in line to my sister, my sister was next to me and I was the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay, now your family is musical. Don't you have cousins [Pearl Bailey and Bill Bailey] who are also musical?
Speaker 2: Not in the same way, musical group wise but not individually. Everybody's tried to sing, we all went to church and we all sang spirituals, and two of my cousins were in the church choir but I think most of the pertinent talent for singing was in my family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My immediate family.
Speaker 1: You and your sister, Francine.
Speaker 2: And my sister and my mother [Margaret Williams Bailey] used to sing duets.
Speaker 1: Oh your mother sang also?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and they were pretty good at it and all of the family occasions they would sing and do a medley of numbers. So they, they kind of gave me the inspiration to carry my singing as far as it would take me, which it took me quite a distance.
Speaker 1: With you learning classical music and opera, was spirituals the only music that you sang at this time?
Speaker 2: No, we learned two or three foreign language songs in music appreciation and in our music class--our vocal classes we learned classics as well as--really we didn't do many spirituals in the school. In high school [Central High School, Cleveland, Ohio] we did mostly classics and pop tunes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was another level of instruction musically than what you even approach to have today.
Story_ID: 597008
Speaker 1: So now you're in, in high school [Central High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and music is taking a lot of your time, were you focused on going to college?
Speaker 2: On what?
Speaker 1: Going to college.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, that was, that was not discussed, it was which college are you going to and are you going to keep your grades up so you will be accepted. You had to keep your grades up 'cause you had to look for a scholarship 'cause your people didn't have the money to send you. But that's another reason that I kept academically sound because I had to depend on being able to get a scholarship to go to college, my family didn't have the money otherwise to send me. At that time the colleges in Cleveland [Ohio] weren't too particular about you being in attendance there. So most of us were looking to go to black colleges [HBCUs] because that's where most of the instructors had finished that we were being counseled by in high school.
Speaker 1: So how did you decide which school you would go to? How many schools did you apply to?
Speaker 2: Well, I actually applied to West Virginia State [West Virginia State College; West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], to Ohio State [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], to Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. And Morehouse popped up because my counselor was an ex-Morehouse man and he was an attorney and he had some long juice and had been a counselor at the public housing, POC center [Portland Outhwaite Recreation Center, Cleveland, Ohio] for myself. That's how that became a reality at Morehouse.
Speaker 1: Did you know what you would major in in college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well my scholarship was in music.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So that's what I had to work with and as far as my scholarship was concerned. But you still had to have your academic record at three point [grade point average] to get in a scholarship position at Morehouse at that time.
Speaker 1: So you received a music scholarship to go to Morehouse, would this be the first time that you would go away from home?
Speaker 2: Yes that was--well no I worked in my senior year in the summertime, I worked on the B and C dining car [ph.] as a--I'm trying to think of what they called us. We were busboys that's what we were, and we worked in the dining car and I worked one summer there. So I stayed in Detroit [Michigan] with some of my relatives. We would stay overnight and then come back home. We would go to Toledo [Ohio], was one of the stops and then back to Cleveland. So that was really the first time I was away from home. The summer before I went to Morehouse.
Story_ID: 597009
Speaker 1: So now when you leave and go to Atlanta [Georgia], I know that you got a music scholarship, but was that going to be what you--your desire, what was your desire to become (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, like I said the counselor that provided the assistance to get me into Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was a lawyer, and that was what I really wanted to do with my life is become a lawyer like him, but I took the music scholarship because that's what was offered and that's what I could make (laughter). But anticipation was to become a lawyer and later even at that day he had encouraged me to be good student so that I could take international law 'cause it was a great future in that. The world was changing and that was a position that I could take anywhere in the world 'cause there was a need for international lawyers and international law became a mandate in the free world at that particular time.
Story_ID: 597010
Speaker 1: So, tell me about your first year at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]. Did your scholarship cover everything that you needed or was it just for books?
Speaker 2: It covered everything except your play money, your social activities but it covered room and board and actually your class dollars.
Speaker 1: So how did you earn money for your play money as you call it?
Speaker 2: Well, actually what we used to do is that I finally took a job on the weekends singing in a little small club there. But prior to that time before they started putting kind of a pressure on the family, every month they would send whatever they could afford. My sister was working at that time and away from home and had gotten married and she was sending me five dollars and six dollars which would last me for the month. That was in the first year, and economics were not the thing you had three squares a day and on the weekends you had two squares on Saturday and three squares on Sunday. So you really didn't need a lot of money to do most of the things that were available for you. Atlanta [Georgia] was very good to Morehouse when at that time there were always invitations to go to church functions, to go to social functions in the town. A lot of the organizations would open their doors to you. So it was a community affair between Morehouse and Spelman [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] of course. But we made it--the roommates when one didn't have the other one did have and we had a camaraderie that supported the lack of anyone of us having enough to sustain our social habits (laughter) for the ensuing thirty days until we got our next little pittance from home.
Speaker 1: How did you avoid the draft 'cause the war [World War II, WWII] was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, what happened is if you were in college you had two ways of 4-F. If you were in college or if you had some sort of disability, and being in college you automatically had a deferment from the force. The war was just about over and that's how I got out of going to the [U.S. military] service.
Story_ID: 597011
Speaker 1: You said the first year your family sent you money and you and your friends took care of each other. But you mentioned that you performed in a local nightclub; do you remember what club it was?
Speaker 2: I've been trying to think of the name of that club, I did a couple of other interviews and I cannot think of the name of the club to save my life (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Tell me what happened while you were singing at the club?
Speaker 2: Well, I started working on the weekends and did pretty well. Then I stopped because it was getting into my school work on Sundays. Then I went back a year later, started back again and it became the hangout for all the college kids on the weekend. So I'm singing one night and I see these two white guys come into the club. It had been pretty much a black audience. Every now and then you'd see a few whites coming in looking for usually some kind of action, so they were kind of suspect when they came in and I noticed the two were different, they weren't boisterous, they were really classy guys, and I got a message from the manager that they wanted to see me when I got through with my set. So I wondered, I said, "Are these two gay guys, what's going on?" (Laughter) "Tell me something before I go to the table." Anyway I went over after the set and they introduced themselves. One looked familiar to me, but I couldn't place him until he told me who he was. It was Benny Goodman and the fellow with him was John Hammond. I didn't know Hammond, but I knew Benny Goodman 'cause I remembered where I saw him when he told me who he was. I used to see him at the theater, the RKO Palace [RKO Palace Theatre], in Cleveland [Ohio] and anyway they asked me a few questions about my background and what I was doing in school so on and so forth. Then John Hammond asked me point blank would I be interested in singing with Count Basie, and now I really think there is something screwy going on 'cause Count Basie was the band at the time along with Duke Ellington. And so I said I'll play along with this and see where it leads me. I told them, "Yes, I would like to sing with Count Basie, sounds like a very good offer." They said, "Okay, let us have your telephone number and we'll be in touch with you," after we talked for a while. So I gave them the telephone number of the pay phone in the dormitory [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and that was the last I saw of them that evening. So I didn't give it much credence 'cause I thought they were really blowing off with the exception of the fact that I didn't know John Hammond was who he was at the time a very famous talent scout. But I knew that Benny Goodman was a big band leader, so there was some credibility there, but I thought they still was just having some fun with me.
Story_ID: 597012
Speaker 1: About three weeks later I get a call down the hallway that, "Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], there's a call for you from New York [New York]." I got very excited 'cause the only people I know in New York would be them. Everybody I know was either down south or they are in Cleveland [Ohio] or Detroit [Michigan]. So I went to answer the phone and John Hammond was on the other end and he identified himself and he asked me when could I come to New York to do an audition for Basie. So now I'm beginning to get excited so that I think this thing sounds like it's serious. It was around Christmas vacation time, so I said, "Well, I'm planning on going home for my Christmas vacation." He said, "Why don't you go home and then we'll fly you from Cleveland to New York. You can do the audition and we'll fly you back to Atlanta [Georgia] in time for school." So I said, "Okay, it sounds like a deal." Well I'm very excited now about this thing, the fact that you're going to sing with Count Basie that's something you dream about but it doesn't really happen. So I went home and I told the family what the agenda was, and my dad [John Bailey] was very upset because this did not ring any bells with him. The only thing he was interested in was me being a lawyer 'cause that's what the family had talked to me about for years, at least three or four years anyway. Finally I told him that what I would do if I got the job was stay on it for a couple of years and save my money and then go back to school. They flew me to New York and I did the audition for Basie in the meantime I was nervous about getting on the airplane. It was the first time I had been on an airplane because going back and forth to Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was on the train and the airlines at that particular time was new for everybody and it was very cute--the stewardess at that time was very accommodating and the difference between the stewardess welcoming you on the plane and the conductor walk you--getting ready to change you over to the segregated car going down to Morehouse was two different worlds altogether. So anyway I did the audition for Basie, he liked what I was singing and what I was doing and offered me the job. So I told him that I would have to finish school that semester and then I would be able to join the band. So that's what happened and I stayed with him for three years travelling all around the country and out of the country.
Speaker 2: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then we get into another story.
Story_ID: 597013
Speaker 1: First of all, this is in what year? How many years had you been at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] was this your second year?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a sophomore.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You finished your sophomore year.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So we're talking about 1945?
Speaker 2: Forty-five [1945].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now who was the president of Morehouse when you were there?
Speaker 2: Benny Mays [Benjamin Mays].
Speaker 1: And tell me what your impressions were of, of Mays (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Benny Mays was a charismatic leader. He was inspirational, he was committed, he was, he was a black god is what he was (laughter) to all the Morehouse men, and when you did very well academically or you do something outstanding you had the opportunity of walking the campus with him. He walked the campus every morning and students who were on their job would have the privilege of walking the campus with him. And I affectionately became involved with him as a historian and as a leader. There was nobody like him at home and he was just a charismatic man and he was a very interested when I told that my pursuit was for international law and he thought that was an excellent idea. He was very disappointed that I was going to sing with Basie [Count Basie]. He said that I would be of much more value to not only myself but to the race. He was a very racially inspired man and he taught us that you serve your community at all times, give something back. Otherwise what you have accomplished becomes void. He was just, he was something else.
Speaker 1: Who were some of your fellow classmates while you were at Morehouse?
Speaker 2: Eddie Hall, Ernest Robinson, Sam McKinney [Samuel McKinney], John Roberts [ph.], William Bouch- Bouchard [ph.], Tiny Robinson [ph.], that's all the names I can remember.
Speaker 1: You remember (laughter). Was Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] there while you were there? Martin Luther King, was he a classmate (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Martin was in school, we were in the glee club [Morehouse College Glee Club] together and we sang together. I was with the quartet for a while, Martin sang with the quartet, but Martin was a city student and we didn't socialize too much because he was in the church pretty much and we were on campus doing our own thing. Always city students have kind of a different attitude than the campus students.
Speaker 1: What do you mean (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well, they have access to a lot more of everything because they are at home than what we have on campus, where we have much more strict regulations that we have to go by and we have to be in at a certain hour. You don't have to do that when you are a city student because you're at home. But Martin was very smart and was destined to do something. We use to go by the church sometime and sing and every now and then we'd go by on a Sunday morning and have breakfast at his house, some of the members of the glee club. So he was very warm and like I said you can kind of tell in a (unclear) that some people have--that you know are going to do something or be something but you don't put your finger on it. But he, he was different and very smart. He didn't sing as good as I could sing, but he was smarter than I was (laughter).
Story_ID: 597014
Speaker 1: Now, another thing that you mentioned was about travelling from Cleveland [Ohio] to Atlanta [Georgia] and riding the trains. Tell me about your experiences riding the trains back and forth and segregation at that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, you were, you were okay on the train as far as the coach that you would be sitting in, whatever seat assignment that you had that's where you were between Cleveland and Cincinnati [Ohio]. When you got into Cincinnati you are ready to go down south and the segregated pattern took place and they put you in the car behind the engine where all the soot and sparks go (laughter) and that's where you changed trains. So it was very uncomfortable from Cincinnati to Atlanta, but you made do and you do the best you can and that's where we kind of bonded with our fellow Morehouse men [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] or those who were going to other schools in Atlanta, Clark [Clark College; Clark Atlanta University], Morris Brown [Morris Brown College] and Spelman [Spelman College]. But it was Jim Crow from Cincinnati on to Atlanta. And it was not--it wasn't comfortable but you made do.
Speaker 1: So, okay, in your second year--
Speaker 2: A funny thing I might tell you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We (laughter), when we left Cleveland the, the homeboys had boxes of chicken, (laughter) briskets and macaroni and cheese and the mothers wanted you to have something to eat when you got hungry because we didn't have much money to buy anything off of the trays that were coming through the various cars. So the boys with the money were laughing at us because we had these baskets, these picnic baskets, and after we got out about five of six hours that chicken started smelling good (laughter) and macaroni and cheese. So most of us who had the picnic baskets laughed and said, "Well you laughed at us now you want to get into our picnic baskets," but we shared it but it just goes to show you that the home base is always the most, I think congenial when it comes to seeing to it that you have some of kind food for your stomach.
Story_ID: 597015
Speaker 1: So now, in 1945 you finished your sophomore year [at Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and you go off to play with Basie [Count Basie]. Now you said they, they flew you to New York [New York] first?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. And you told me that the flight attendants, or the stewardess as they were called, then were very cordial. How was your first flight, how did you enjoy your first flight ride on an airplane to New York?
Speaker 2: Well I was nervous my first flight because I--something that you read about but taking off going up in the air is a kind of a thing that challenges your common sense. How do you stay in the air once you get off the ground? But it's like anything else, it was a challenge other people were doing it, it must be all right.
Speaker 1: And when you got to New York what was your opinion of New York when you first got there?
Speaker 2: Well, my first trip to New York of course was the audition that I did with Basie, and I went up in the RCA Building [30 Rockefeller Plaza] to the fifty-seventh floor, which was something else that I had never done before, been that far up off the ground. So it was all very interesting and very challenging. New York itself was the big apple and my first residency there was at the hotel--the, oh goodness.
Speaker 1: Theresa?
Speaker 2: The Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa, New York, New York], exactly right, and that was the first time that I had seen a hotel of this magnitude. We had hotels in Atlanta [Georgia], but it wasn't the same as the Theresa Hotel, Theresa was something and then you see all the guys dressed and the ladies dressed. To me it was formal, but it was just everyday dress in Harlem [New York, New York] at that particular time. So I was extremely impressed and on my first day there, I had met some of the people from the band when I came to do the audition and I saw them at the bar and I was so glad to see them. But I had on my college duffels and baggy shirt and I was as far out of base (laughter) as you could be, because everybody was sharp, dressed to kill. Anyway I was taken by Henry Snodgrass, who was the manager of the band at that time, who told me that I was going to have to get some different clothes and that I would be in a star position and I had to get used to dressing a different way and I was really too young to be in the bar anyway. So they put their arms around me in the band and Basie was a good man to work for.
Story_ID: 597016
Speaker 1: So we started the first trip, went on the Chitlin' Circuit.
Speaker 2: What, what is the Chitlin' Circuit (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter) It's a circuit of restaurants that are in black areas in Detroit [Michigan], Buffalo [New York], Chicago [Illinois], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and New York [New York] and it's all theaters in black areas and black artists and that's where they get the name the Chitlin' Circuit (laughter).
Speaker 2: But you played two types of venues, you played the Chitlin' Circuit, but you also played the RKO- (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We also played out of the white houses. Yeah, usually in a town like Chicago you had the Oriental [Oriental Theatre] and the Chicago Theatre as well as the Royal Theatre [sic. Regal Theater]. Royal Theater was a Chitlin' Circuit, the Oriental was the general population, and the Chicago was really a comedic house that featured more comics than musical entertainment. We played the Waldorf; we played a lot of the class houses, which is one of the reasons that they wanted me as a vocalist. Jimmy Rushing did the blues and the swing things and we had a female vocalist, and she and I did the pop tunes that Sinatra [Frank Sinatra] was doing and other people for these class houses where the blues didn't go over too well. But on the Chitlin' Circuit, Jimmy Rushing was the man. I did a variety of tunes and never anything that was blues because Jimmy was the senior vocalist for the band and that was his backyard and the girl singers changed from time to time. But I was very good on the theater routes and the white nightclubs. So I had a very good run and I was very happy with the band as it was, and two years rolled around before I knew it.
Speaker 2: What were some of those songs that you sang?
Speaker 1: 'Danny Boy' was my--was one of my specialties, and 'Worst Blues I Ever Had' [sic. 'Big Feeling Blues'], there's so many songs.
Speaker 2: So those were the Perry Como and the Sinatra type songs?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now tell me about Basie [Count Basie]. What was your relationship like with him and what kind of person was he?
Speaker 1: Basie was very good to me, very patient, very supportive. I was a greenhorn, as green as you could be, and he kind of looked after me, he forewarned me about certain things, staying away from dope and watching myself with the women. He was a good man, he let me have money when I would run short, 'cause I was going crazy the first year (laughter). He was good for me to be with him my first trip in the world of work, where you could make an easy mistake and get into things that you did not have any value to. So I think that all and all I could have gotten into a lot of trouble if I hadn't gotten with a person that gave me the kind of relationship that Basie did. I'm very fortunate.
Story_ID: 597017
Speaker 1: So Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], you are now in the Count Basie band as a vocalist, and you're a young man and you are playing the Chitlin' Circuit going from place to place all over the world, all over the country, there is a lot of room to get in trouble. Was Count Basie a major influence in your life at that point as far a mentor was concerned?
Speaker 2: Yes, he played a very significant role in my life and my growth, both personally as well as professionally and musically. He was very patient with me and he recognized that my experience was somewhat limited as far as life is concerned right out of school [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia], and he would pull me aside and give me little words of wisdom from time to time. And I appreciated his interest in me so much, so I'll always remember he got me sort of on the straight and narrow. During those days it was easy to get involved in drugs and different things that were available, especially in the field of entertainment. He would tell me what to stay away from and what would happen to me if I didn't stay away from (laughter). So he really made a contribution to me that I'll always remember him for.
Speaker 1: What were some of the things that he told you that you could share? What were some of the pieces of advice he gave you?
Speaker 2: Well, he would tell me that the drug habit is going to get me not only out of kilter with the band, but I was going to the penitentiary, and that was probably the most influential part of his advice. He also kept me on the straight and narrow as far as women were concerned, and that I would be approached but to keep my cool (laughter), and not make any false promises that I couldn't live up to. He participated with my financial wellbeing, advising me to save a little money for the off periods that the band would have from time to time. So his influence in different aspects of my life was very much appreciated and very stimulating to my growth.
Speaker 1: What kind of person was, was William Basie off the bandstand in general? What personality was he like?
Speaker 2: Kind, benevolent, just an all around man's man and down home, down home boy. He I think probably enjoyed the personal relationship with the band members as well as he enjoyed the musical interpretation that they offered to his style of music. He was a great guy off stage; in fact he was very consistent between off stage and on stage. He was the same guy on stage as he was off stage--
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He had no big head, very--he was a quiet man too. You would expect with the kind of shouting that the band did, that he would be a little verbose but he wasn't, very, very quiet. All I can think of is that he was a great guy.
Story_ID: 597018
Speaker 1: Who were some of the other prominent band members at that point that you might want to mention that were in the band when you were there? Who were some of the other band members of note?
Speaker 2: Oh, Harry Edison, "Sweets" [Harry "Sweets" Edison], Clark Terry, Harry Dean [ph.], Jack Washington, goodness, you caught me off guard.
Speaker 1: That's okay, an all-star band, all-star band.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Paul Gonsalves, Buddy Tate, Freddie Green, Dicky Wells, those are the most formidable that come to my mind right off the bat.
Speaker 1: Now, at that point there were two bands out on the road, there was the Basie band and also the Ellington band was still out at that time too, right? Was Duke's band still working then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Duke [Duke Ellington] was, Duke was the sophisticated band and the Basie [Count Basie] was the swinging band. Duke could swing but he didn't swing like our band did, but he had all the sophisticated numbers, and of course a lot of Duke's books were written by himself, whereas Basie brought in various different writers that wanted to explore the Basie band's swing and it was a different kind of sound. We never played opposite them as we did some bands, because it was just a different type of approach to the music of the day. Like I said, a lot of the music that Duke played was composed by himself or Billy Strayhorn, and that brought about a completely different entry into the music business at that particular time. I later did an interview with Duke and it was wonderful to hear how he was inspired and doing various types of music and various different compositions; religious as well as jazz as well as swing as well as gospel. He was a, he was a tremendous guy, as well as Basie. He was probably my second choice of band, if I would have left Basie that's where I would have wanted to go.
Story_ID: 597019
Speaker 1: What was life like on the road at that point for, for the band [Count Basie's band]--for you and the band? What was a daily, daily life, rehearsals and travelling what was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, we travelled pretty good. We travelled both by train and by bus depending on the distance that we had to travel and the amount of time between engagements. It was fun on the road. All the guys were very entertaining and I think we looked out for each other. It was a brotherly relationship as well as a professional relationship in the band. The bus was the primary transport vehicle at that particular time and it was difficult because it was very discriminatory nationally at that time. So sometimes we would have to go quite a distance between locations and we'd have to stop and have our road manager, who was white, get the food for us and bring it on the bus, sandwiches and short orders so to speak. So there were inconveniences as far as housing was concerned in some towns where there were not accommodations that were set up for African Americans or sufficient homes who offered rooms to the travelling musicians at the time. But all in all we made out, and I think the love we had for each other made up for the inequities that we were subject to. But it was a tiring thing. Sometimes you'd go out on a thirty day month, you might play twenty-three, twenty-four engagements so you play a town and leave that night and head to the next town, perform leave that night and it might be four or five nights before you had a day off to sort of relax and get your game together. But that was the life and that was a part of what you had to deal with to be in the business. You made the best of it and we had a lot of fun together and in most towns where we played people were very nice, very good to you because they were glad to have you in their town and that made it a lot easier to absorb the negatives that you were exposed to.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask you, were audiences more receptive to musicians--was there a climate where the musician was more respected back in those days you think, being a musician?
Speaker 2: Well musicians--(cough) pardon me, musicians of different bands were treated with different levels of respect. Fortunately Basie [Count Basie] was considered high strata in the music business and he attracted personally a different clientele than say Dizzy did. No disrespect to Dizzy Gillespie, but they drew different type crowds both personally and from an audience point of view. I think that the music of the day was something that simulated a community when you came into it. You don't have that same thing going on today. Everything now is concerts, then we played theaters and we played nightclubs. Well there are no nightclubs and there are no theaters, so the whole industry shifted when the theaters started closing and the nightclubs started closing and it started graduating into the concert philosophy and it changed the whole tenor of the industry. You find yourself doing a different type of musical presentation than what we knew working the theaters--the RKO [RKO Pictures, Inc.] and the Loews Theatres [Loews Cineplex Entertainment Corporation] across the country. That was a big market for the band. I know that out of a year's time we may play two months of one nighters, the other times we were playing in theaters and nightclubs across the country. So it was a different situation then than what it is today.
Story_ID: 597020
Speaker 1: You mentioned Dizzy Gillespie, did you know him personally?
Speaker 2: Did I know Dizzy?
Speaker 1: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah I knew Dizzy well, and I had Dizzy out here in Las Vegas [Nevada], twenty-five to thirty years ago (laughter).
Speaker 1: What kind of man was Dizzy Gillespie?
Speaker 2: Diz was, (cough) pardon me, Diz was a very animated, interesting individual and very articulate and very sharp. Everybody thought Diz was on drugs then, Diz never touched any drugs, he was as clean as the driven snow but he carried that ambiance because it went with the type of music that he was exploring and he was a showman. But very warm and again very sharp and I think very well educated. He used the tenor of the time of change to illustrate that there was another type of music, another approach to music and I think that it had a lot of potential. It offered a different approach to the music business as we knew it through the Basie band [Count Basie], and the Duke Ellington band, and the Skitch Henderson and Benny Goodman. That was another era of music.
Story_ID: 597021
Speaker 1: How did Count Basie feel about the progression, because there is a great video out of Thelonious Monk playing in the studio and Basie is watching him play the piano? This is out and available for everybody to see, Basie is watching Monk play the piano, and it's been told that Monk got mad and said, "Why is he staring at me," and, "The next time he's playing somewhere I'm going to go stare at him." How Basie feel about the progression of Monk's music and bebop in general?
Speaker 2: Basie was pretty open to the progression of different types of music. He never--I never heard him down any type of music. He and Diz [Dizzy Gillespie] used to do comedy together and his opinion of the new music was that you better get on board because something new is happening and you need to expand your capabilities to be able to accept a new concepts or it will leave you behind. He never of course tried to be a bebop musician (laughter), but I never heard him put them down. He was always open to any new approach that was a legitimate musical entry into the business itself.
Speaker 1: So how many years were you in the Basie band?
Speaker 2: I was there three years.
Speaker 1: Three years, so between '47 [1947] and about '50 [1950] something like that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah.
Story_ID: 597022
Speaker 1: Now at the same time you were able to get your degree also, right, from Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]? At the same time your, your law degree, business law degree from Morehouse at the same--during that time period or did you leave earlier?
Speaker 2: Yeah, forty- '45 [1945] through '48 [1948], and then '48 [1948] through '50 [1950]. I left Morehouse and went with Basie [Count Basie], that was the connecting point, which changed the whole (laughter), the whole line of anticipation of my education at that time. But the thought of having an opportunity of being with the Basie band was tantamount to the greatest offer of my life.
Speaker 1: So you're there with Basie for about three years and you mentioned that things were starting to change as far as the musical presentation at theaters and things and around 1950 the band had to break up and disband what was going on--what happened with the band?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the band was losing money. It became more expensive than the income would allow to stay on the road and with a band that big, we had twenty pieces, and travelling by train or by bus was becoming more expensive than the locations. Like I indicated earlier the whole mode of presentation was changing. The theaters were closing out live entertainment; the nightclubs were closing so a lot of the venues that normally represented the income of the music of that particular time began to close. And as they closed out there was no place to work. So he broke the band up and went for six pieces and Jimmy Rushing, and they went from piano to start playing organ. People don't realize that he was a great organ player as well as a piano player, and he did very well for a given period of time and then he had to have is big band back. So he reinstituted the band. I don't know exactly what year it was, but it was in the '50s [1950s], early '50s [1950s], and that's when he brought Joe Williams to the band. He couldn't pay Jimmy Rushing what Jimmy was asking, so he listened for someone else and he was recommended to--for Joe Williams out of Chicago [Illinois] at the time, and Joe joined the band and it's history after that.
Story_ID: 597023
Speaker 1: So in 1950 the band is, the band is disbanding, he's going to take, he's going to downsize the band, and I guess a lot of folks don't know that Jimmy Rushing's nickname was Mr. Five by Five.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right. Is that what they called him, Mr. Five by Five? 'Cause they said he was five feet wide and five feet tall, right?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) And that's about what he was too.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so at this point now what does, what does Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] do at this point? The band is breaking up, the gigs are over for you so what are you going to do now?
Speaker 2: Well, I said I'm going to do my single. So I was offered a spot at Small's Paradise in Harlem, New York [New York] and it was a very good shot for me. It was my first single and having been with Basie [Count Basie] I had a pretty good following. So they offered me a very nice proposition for four, four weeks. So I went in with--Baron Wilson was the emcee and producer at that time at Small's Paradise and Norma Miller was the dance captain, actually choreographer, and had the line of girls there. So this was when I first broke into my own act and I stayed at Small's for about sixteen weeks, I guess.
Speaker 1: Small's Paradise one of the most famous jazz clubs ever and especially in 19--it's around 1950 right? Around '50 [1950] or so was is--when this was occurring?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Is this around 1950?
Speaker 2: Yes, when I went into Small's Paradise, correct.
Speaker 1: That's a very famous jazz club. So 1950, now bebop is really coming on strong now, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah bebop is--well Mr. B was, he joined with Dizzy [Dizzy Gillespie] really.
Speaker 1: Mr. B is Billy Eckstine, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly, and Charlie Parker and Diz were playing on 52nd Street and B joined with them and then put his own band together. Bebop was becoming the mode of the day and it was being accepted by a young group of people across the country. That's what inspired the bebop--Charlie Parker was a great influence and Diz was a great influence. They provided the musical leadership that really inspired young people. Some in the wrong direction of drugs, because Charlie Parker did involve himself with drugs it gave the wrong message to a lot of the youngsters in the music business at that time. They took the opinion that if they wanted to play like Charlie Parker or like Diz they would have to be on drugs.
Speaker 1: And some of these young people you're talking about--at that point Miles Davis was a young, was a young person in the band, right?
Speaker 2: Miles was in Chicago [Illinois] doing his own thing and he got caught up in that same era of drugs, but Miles was probably the most trained and educated musician of all of them. He had been to music conservatories and played music correctly. They used to talk about the three--Diz would have the exploding jaws when he would play trumpet, but Miles never used that technique, he used the correct technique and used his tongue and his chops as opposed to his jaws, eliminating the necessity for backing air for the explosion of the trumpet. Miles used his diaphragm, which is the correct way of doing it. But they were good friends too. Miles was an inspiration and even his music today has a certain attractiveness to it, the same as Duke [Duke Ellington] has an ongoing attractiveness to his music. Some people are good for the moment, others establish a basis of greatness that perpetuates itself over the years and whenever you hear it, it sounds as good as it did when it was first originated.
Story_ID: 597024
Speaker 1: So Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] is at the Small's Paradise [New York, New York]. It was supposed to be four weeks but it was sixteen weeks to begin with--to end up, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so a sixteen week run and you're there so what do you decide to do when that's over? Do you say, well okay this is what I'm going to continue to do or what do you do?
Speaker 2: Well, actually what happened is I got a call from John Hammond who had been my benefactor in getting into the Basie band [Count Basie], and he indicated that they were looking for a singer of my type for a show that was going to be put on in Hollywood [Los Angeles, California] at the Las Palmas Theatre, and the name of the play was 'Sugar Hill,' and would I be interested in the juvenile role if they offered it to me. So I said what does it pay and the pay sounded okay. So anyway I did the audition and I made it. They gave me the opportunity to appear with the 'Sugar Hill' production. So I went to Los Angeles [California] and I spent ten months there with the show.
Speaker 1: And what was the show about, what was 'Sugar Hill' about, what was 'Sugar Hill' about? Was it just a stage play, was it a--
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'Sugar Hill' was a musical comedy and it was about an older and a younger man becoming involved, in the times of the day really, and the father was trying to get the youngster married off so he could get out of the house. And it ended up whereas the father ended up getting married as opposed to the son and that was all wrapped up in musical comedy.
Story_ID: 597025
Speaker 1: It showed normal life and not the caricature of black people through white eyes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So New York [New York] wasn't quite ready for that?
Speaker 2: And we didn't get a theater, so the show ['Sugar Hill'] closed--the lease at the Las Palmas Theatre [Los Angeles, California] was running out and it had been anticipated that we would be in New York on Broadway by that time. After being able to get a theater, the Las Palmas lease pushed us in the streets, so the show closed unfortunately and most of the principals were doing other kinds of things at the time, so nobody went without work. I stayed for a while and did a few things in Los Angeles [California] at a couple of the nightclubs there and finally I got call from--I got a letter really from my fiancee, who is presently my wife [Anna Bailey].
Speaker 1: Now you, now you met her sometime between, between Basie's band [Count Basie] and this time period, right? You met her between that time? You met your fiancee between the band closing, the band disbanding--Basie band breaking up and coming to California, somewhere in between that you met her?
Speaker 2: I met her--well no, actually I met her in the Basie band.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I didn't mention that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But that was one of the highlights of my being with Basie, 'cause I met her. The band was playing at the aquarium at the time on Broadway in New York. She was at the Zanzibar [Cafe Zanzibar, New York, New York] dancing (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now, what was she doing at the Zanzibar?
Speaker 2: Right, and you see the girls used to come over and catch a set on their breaks between shows--
Speaker 1: Was she a dancer? Was she a dancer?
Speaker 2: She's a dancer, yeah and that's how I met her, and I later met her again when we were on the road. We were playing Cincinnati [Ohio] and she was playing in Kentucky, which is right across the river.
Speaker 1: Covington, Kentucky.
Speaker 2: Covington yeah, and we had a chance to renew our friendship. Then when the band broke up, I had an opportunity in New York to formulate my relationship and it became pretty serious. The fact of the matter is when I was invited to go to Los Angeles to do the show that was the only thing that was kind of making me a little hesitant, was to leave her and go to Los Angeles for the period of time that the contract was for a year. Anyway I stayed in California a little bit longer than I should have after the show closed. So I got a package one day that said in essence, "Bye and I'll see you later." It wasn't those words but that's what it meant. She sent my engagement ring back and we had been saving a little bit for our first year. I got the bank book, so she put me down. This was a very crucial point in my life. I had to make a big decision either to stay in Los Angeles or to go back to New York. I went back to New York (laughter) and we got back together.
Story_ID: 597026
Speaker 1: That's the reason you left, you left L.A. [Los Angeles, California] and went back to New York [New York] 'cause you wanted to be close to your fiancee [Anna Bailey], who had put you down as you said. So you had to go and try to get her back.
Speaker 2: And I was successful in doing that and it kind of turned my head around to do some other kinds of things. I worked the mountains for a while. In order to work the mountains you had to do some Yiddish. So I learned quite a few foreign language tunes, some in French, some in Yiddish, some in Italian sort of rounded off. I was trying to be a young Arthur Lee Simpkins, and Arthur had shared with me the key to getting into the Jewish nightclub route was to sing some Yiddish songs and some foreign language songs. So I took some extra singing lessons there and dealt with that, and I got a job with a club called the 845 club [Club 845] in the Bronx [New York], and they had a very good show and they needed a master of ceremony and I felt I could qualify for that since I had been in the show and a pretty good singer. No problem with putting the show together. I worked there for, oh I guess about three months and then I got a call for a show that was opening at the La Vie En Rose [New York, New York], the 'Phil Moore Flock' ['Phil Moore's Flock'], and it was comprised of seven different acts and we all supported the other ones. So when you were on stage you had six people supporting you whatever your talent was. Bunny Briggs, Dolores Harper were two of the formidable participants it was the seven--
Speaker 1: So this was about 1951, '52 [1952] somewhere around there?
Speaker 2: This is '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Fifty-two [1952], '53 [1953], somewhere around in there.
Story_ID: 597027
Speaker 1: Now, somewhere in this period you also went to, you went to radio and television school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was--that happened when I was with 'Phil Moore's Flock.' We got together with the bass player, Leonard Gaskin, and we used to talk about the transition of the music business and the fact that bebop had kind of taken over and that the other entry into the music business really was the Detroit style of music which came into being really out of Detroit [Michigan]. And you know what I'm talking about.
Speaker 1: The Motown sound [Motown Records].
Speaker 2: Motown sound started happening and we figured we better get into something that was going to be on the upside of the progress of the industry or we'd be left behind. Leonard was from the same school that I was from, the Basie [Count Basie] school. He never played with Basie, but he was playing in that era of music development. We talked about a new industry that was going to take a formidable place in the music business with all of the clubs closing and the theaters closing, so we looked at television. Television is on the horizon and now is the time to get in on the ground floor. We did an investigation to find out how we could get into the industry and of course the first approach was to get training and find out exactly what level we might qualify to participate in. So then we saw an ad in the paper from SRT, School of Radio and Television [New York, New York] and they were offering a course in television production and direction. So we made an inquiry into the school and it was expensive but it covered all the areas that were necessary to prepare us for an entry level into the industry. It was new then and everybody was scuffling to find out exactly what the industry was comprised of and how to get involved in it. So we went to school, they accepted us in, we were the only two brothers in the class of about forty and it was a nine month course. We went, played with the 'Phil Moore Flock' at night and went to school during the day. We did very well and both of us graduated in the top 5 percent of this class. We had a mock display that we had to produce for graduation and we each--and the class had to write a show that was exemplary of entertainment, news and interview shows. The show I wrote on the evolution of jazz won the opportunity of being the presentation for the graduation class. Some of the Basie band boys were in town, we did a fantastic show and graduated top of the class.
Story_ID: 597028
Speaker 1: How was ABC involved with this? Did they give you a scholarship to go to school [School of Radio and Television, New York, New York] or?
Speaker 2: ABC?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: After we finished and graduated the next step was to try and get into the industry. ABC, NBC and CBS were all involved in the initial efforts to get into the TV race so to speak. We had an appointment--I had an appointment with ABC and with CBS. I made the appointment, which had been set up by our instructor. Very cordial, very nice interview but, "No openings at this particular time. Of course we'll call you if something comes up." That was ABC, we had two appointments with CBS. I had one at the CBS national and the local CBS station. I was again entertained with, "I read your resume and it's very interesting and we need the kind of talent that you have, but we don't have any availabilities now, but we'll keep you in mind and if something comes up we'll be in touch with you." So then I said well one of the things that I had forgotten is that show business has as much discrimination as anything else when you come off the stage. And I got a little bitter, but I followed up with my appointment at CBS the local outlet in New York [New York], same thing only a little different twist to it that you had to be in the union. So how do you get into the union, they don't let African Americans into the union. He said, "Well have you had any experience with 16mm camera work?" "Yeah, I've had experience with it, it's right in my resume there." "Well, do you have a first class telephone operator's license?" I just happened to have a third class, but not a first class so that shut me out of there. That was the same story, a number of different efforts to get a television show on at that particular time.
Speaker 1: Who was Flora Dugan or Dungan? Flora Dungan, Flora Dungan? She was an accountant for Channel 13 [KTNV-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada], Flora Dungan?
Speaker 2: Oh Flora Dungan.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, who was she?
Speaker 2: She was one of the outstanding women in this town in Las Vegas [Nevada]. She was an accountant with Channel 13 at the time. That's a long time after the period we're talking about.
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll come back to that then.
Speaker 2: Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) We'll come back.
Story_ID: 597029
Speaker 1: So now you're trying to find a job in television. You're highly qualified, you're top 5 percent of your class [at the School of Radio and Television, New York, New York], and you can't--and you're getting these pacified interviews where basically they're saying nice but no job, and you put two and two together and said you know what maybe it's that old thing happening again, is that what you said?
Speaker 2: I said it's the same thing as the general job opportunity market, different industry same problem.
Speaker 1: And now you're married, right? You have a wife [Anna Bailey] by now, right are you married yet?
Speaker 2: No, we're not married yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute, yes we are, we are married then. We got married when I--where was I working? At the 845 [Club 845, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, we got married in '51 [1951]. So I was intensely interested in making my fortune (laughter), no kids at that time but we were married. She was working at the, she was working at the Zanzibar [Cafe Zanzibar, New York, New York], then she went to the club down in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York], which led to another relationship that we had later on. I think after the transition from 'Phil Moore Flock' ['Phil Moore's Flock'], we went to do a production ['Tropi Can Can'] with Clarence Robinson who was a foremost producer at that time.
Speaker 1: Around '55 [1955], huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, '54 [1954], fifty- '53 [1953] or '54 [1954]. We worked two or three gigs with Clarence then we went to the club in Buffalo [New York], a production stayed there for a couple of months and Clarence was going back and forth to New York [New York] working on a new potential job. And that's how the Las Vegas [Nevada] job came up. He was given the opportunity to produce a show for this new hotel that was opening in Las Vegas which was going to be an interracial hotel.
Speaker 1: The first one, right?
Speaker 2: First one yeah. Vegas was (makes noise), was some kind of town at that time. So Clarence did get the contract to produce the show for the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] show open in May of '55 [1955] and that started a whole new chapter.
Story_ID: 597030
Speaker 1: So Clarence Robinson has this, has this opportunity to come to Las Vegas [Nevada] and work at the Moulin Rouge.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so he needs, he needs people to come do this show for him. So does he offer you the job, you and your wife?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I was the co-producer of the show in Buffalo [New York], and he put me in charge of the show while he went ahead and started rehearsals for the Las Vegas production. He went in rehearsal in New York [New York]; I stayed in Buffalo and kept the show going there to fill out the contract. They rehearsed in New York up until actually four weeks before the opening of the show. Then they went to Las Vegas, I still was in Buffalo with the show there. We had two more weeks to do, which I closed the show down there. Clarence was in Las Vegas rehearsing there so I had two weeks off to get myself together and get out to Las Vegas for my own rehearsal. We had a brand new show, the Tropicana revue ['Tropi Can Can'], and it was probably one of the most challenging shows of that period in time. It was a colossal production really.
Speaker 1: So did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I closed the show down in Buffalo and flew--and drove out to Las Vegas.
Speaker 1: Did your wife go with you?
Speaker 2: No, she was rehearsing with Clarence. She went to New York for the rehearsal and then later on to Las Vegas. She was there while I was still in Buffalo.
Speaker 1: Was this an official move out of New York for you or was this something you thought was going to be just go do the show and come back?
Speaker 2: Well, we thought--we had an eight week contract where I had anticipated at that time--we weren't doing much; in fact I wasn't doing anything with a television show. It was in my suitcase and that's where it stayed for a while. Anna [Anna Bailey] was with Clarence, I came out by myself to join them once they got to Las Vegas in '55 [1955]. I got there two week before the opening and we opened in May of '55 [1955] to a standing room only, and the Moulin Rouge Hotel was probably one of the most beautiful hotels that they had in Vegas at that particular time. They were following the separate but equal concept but it really was a beautiful hotel. There was nothing like it in the country that was black oriented. You must remember that all across the country there were African American hotels. The white hotels didn't want you anymore in New York than they did in Las Vegas. It's just that you had the Theresa Hotel [Hotel Theresa] and other hotels in New York and in Detroit [Michigan] the Gotham [Gotham Hotel] and other hotels, in Chicago [Illinois] the Pershing [Pershing Hotel], and there were hotels that were designed for patronage from the African American community nationally. But they weren't on the same par as the Hiltons [Hilton Hotels and Resorts] and those types of hotels, whereas the Moulin Rouge was comparable to anything that was on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], it just was in a different area of town. But the hotel itself and the appointments of the hotel were beautiful, just absolutely beautiful.
Story_ID: 597031
Speaker 1: So you're now out here in Vegas. Ha- had you been to Vegas before with the Basie band had you been to Vegas before?
Speaker 2: No, Basie [Count Basie] had played here after I left the band, but I never played Las Vegas [Nevada].
Speaker 1: So what did you think when you got here?
Speaker 2: Well, I had been pre-warned about what was transpiring in Vegas. When I first got here my entry into the town was going down D Street, which is one of the main streets going into the area called the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], which was the black area--black residential area and suddenly there was no pavement, (laughter) it was an all dirt road and outhouses, and I couldn't grasp it, then suddenly you got into a subdivision called Berkley Square [Las Vegas, Nevada]. All brand new three and four bedroom houses, very attractive, and another sub division called Cadillac Arms [Las Vegas, Nevada], which had been primarily built to house the people who were coming into the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada]. The Moulin Rouge had attracted people from all across the country as far as the employees were concerned. The waiters and the show people from different parts of the country where they had good living accommodations. So in order to maintain the people coming in to town they had to have something for them to sleep--a nice place for them to sleep and to live. There were no such accommodations, so this was a part of the housing relationship that the hotel had with this community.
Speaker 1: So it was still--had the Jim Crow thing going on to a certain point even in Las Vegas?
Speaker 2: Jim Crow with a capitol J.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was the Mississippi of the West. There were two primary areas at that time, well three, Fremont Street, which was where the cowboys went then you had the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], which is where the movie stars went, then you had Jackson Avenue where the African Americans went. So you had three areas in the town that were theatrical areas or gaming areas so to speak. We introduced at the hotel a new concept altogether, because it was an interracial hotel. It did not prohibit anyone, because of their color or ethnicity, entrance into the hotel. So we had whites and blacks having plenty of fun.
Story_ID: 597032
Speaker 1: Now during this time Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], there's a lot--there are quite a few black famous stars in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada]. I'm sure Sammy Davis, Jr. was starting to get started and Dinah Washington, these people had the same racism--had to be victim to the same Jim Crow policy?
Speaker 2: If you were black, you were black.
Speaker 1: It didn't matter who you were?
Speaker 2: Exactly, they played the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada], but they stayed on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: So when they got done at night they had to go all the way to the Westside in order to sleep?
Speaker 2: They had to come to the Westside for everything, unless they were eating in their dressing room and they went in through the employees' entrance. In some cases they had to dress in trailers that were pulled up behind the hotels for temporary dressing rooms when they had black artists playing.
Speaker 1: I recall Dinah Washington saying she wasn't going to get in the trailer at one time. I heard a story--are you aware of that story?
Speaker 2: Dinah Washington talked so bad about--she did a radio interview with me, by this time I was in radio and television in Las Vegas. We skipped over that.
Speaker 1: We'll come back to it.
Speaker 2: She did a radio (laughter) interview with me that was so bad. You had the little beeps, there was nothing but--the interview was beeps (laughter).
Story_ID: 597033
Speaker 1: So you're at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] now, you're a performer and you're also the emcee of the, of the show ['Tropi Can Can'], Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey]?
Speaker 2: I was the emcee, the production, singer and the co-producer.
Speaker 1: You did it all?
Speaker 2: Did all of it.
Speaker 1: Now you say opening night was packed to a white audience pretty much, on opening night?
Speaker 2: Well it was a mixed audience, but usually about 80 percent white.
Speaker 1: Who was opening night--who were the performers on opening night, do you recall that night the headliners?
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: Let me give you a couple of names that I--that we have. How about Benny Carter was he there--was he on the show? Benny Carter? Benny Carter?
Speaker 2: Benny Carter was in the band.
Speaker 1: Okay, the Hines brothers?
Speaker 2: Hines, Hines and Dad.
Speaker 1: So there were little boys then, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Wow, so Gregory [Gregory Hines] and Maurice [HistoryMaker Maurice Hines, Jr.] and their father.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Chick Hines [Maurice Hines, Sr.], but they called them Hines, Hines and Dad.
Speaker 1: And Stumpy--Stump and Stumpy [James "Stump" Cross and Harold J. Cromer]?
Speaker 2: Stump and Stumpy was a comic group.
Speaker 1: So you had a whole show. You had a band, you had a dance act, you had a comedy act.
Speaker 2: And Randy [ph.]--oh what was the name of the singing group--The Platters.
Speaker 1: The Platters.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were hot at the time.
Speaker 1: So, you have a whole--back in those days if anybody went to a show it was a real show.
Speaker 2: And we had fourteen girls and seven boys.
Speaker 1: Dancing?
Speaker 2: It was a whale of a show, fantastic show.
Story_ID: 597034
Speaker 1: So now this show ['Tropi Can Can'] is running and you're doing things at the hotel, you're being the producer of the show, but at the same time you're developing your other profession, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, a young lady by the name of [HistoryMaker] Alice Key that was here at the hotel, we got together one evening talking about what we could do to stimulate more local business to come to the hotel. Most of the business the hotel was getting was the same as the Strip hotels [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] were getting as tourists were coming into town, especially on the weekends. So we wanted to build midweek days up, and we got to talking about various marketing ideas and Alice mentioned a television show. She had talked to Hank Greenspun, who was the owner of the, Channel 8 [KLAS-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada] at the time, and discussed the possibility in the future of a black television show and what he thought about it. Anyway it was kind of, according to Alice, it was kind of a throw away conversation she wanted to try him out, and he responded so they both forgot it until we started talking then she remembered the conversation and indicated maybe we should go to Hank and talk about the television show. I said, "I just happen to have a television show all prepared, written, shot list and the whole bit," and she said, "You do?" And then I started telling her about my background in television and radio and my inability to be able to get it on in any of the towns that I had approached television stations. She said, "You've gotten it written up?" So I had a professional package that was first class and I showed it to her. Anyway long story short, made an appointment with Hank Greenspun to talk about the show. The hotel was going to sponsor the show for so many weeks and--if we could get in on. Hank read the first part of the narrative of the show bought it hook, line and sinker. He said, "I like it let's do it." So finally and at last I'm getting a television show ['Talk of the Town'].
Speaker 1: And it's sponsored by the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 2: Initially sponsored by the Moulin Rouge.
Speaker 1: Who was behind the Moulin Rouge, who were some of the benefactors or the owners of this hotel, 'cause they had to be pretty forward thinking people also?
Speaker 2: Rubin [Louis Rubin] and Bisno [Alexander Bisno], one was a restaurateur, Rubin, construction man was Bisno. They were the owners--the initial owners of the property. The PR [public relations] man at that time was Martin Black, and he sold the advertising sponsorship to Bisno, who was running the business area of the hotel and thought it was a great marketing idea to encourage a midweek attendance. So that's how the sponsorship came about. The entourage that went to talk with Hank was Martin Black representing the hotel, Alice and myself. Alice took the lead as far as explaining the narrative of the show and I took the technical end, explaining what we do and how we would do it. We looked up and we were on television.
Story_ID: 597035
Speaker 1: So you're the producer, 'cause you have a very, at this point, you have a very good background in television. What was [HistoryMaker] Alice Key's role in the television show ['Talk of the Town']?
Speaker 2: Alice, (cough) Alice did two things, Alice helped identify the interviewees that were on the show and she was the interviewer. We both were interviewers, but she was most formidable and she knew a lot of the entertainers as well as I did. Most of the entertainers that were playing here I had worked with, with Count Basie's band. So I knew a lot of the people and she knew most of them that came to California.
Speaker 1: Because she was once a chorus girl, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so we made a good partnership. We worked very well together and the show was an immediate hit. Hank [Hank Greenspun] got some calls that some of the sponsors were threatening to come off the air unless they took us off, they didn't want to see the N word coming into their homes on television. So Hank told them to take your advertising to the television station down the street. Of course, the catch to that was he had the only television station in town (laughter). So if you wanted to catch television the hour that we were on you either cut your television off or you looked at it, and it was a good show.
Story_ID: 597036
Speaker 1: So there were, there were some doors opening for you now. You're at the hotel and you have this TV show ['Talk of the Town'], so now you're becoming a man about town in Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] now, a celebrity.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the television show ran well, and a fellow by the name of Jimmy Gay was offered a radio show as a result of the television breaking into the industry. Jimmy didn't feel capable of doing the radio show and recommended that the radio manager contact me, I might be interested. He gave me a call and I just, I just couldn't believe what was happening. All this time I've been trying to get into the industry and all of a sudden I'm not only into television, but now here's somebody offering me an opportunity in radio. So I went and spoke with the manager, he offered me the spot for doing two hours a day, five days a week and was going to pay for it. I would have taken it if he could give me the time. They were going to put--one of the hang ups was they were going to put an engineer on my two hours and that was going to add extra money in the payment of the show. I just happened to have a third class license, so I told him I knew how to work everything in the control room, I had a third class operating license, which is all that is required.
Speaker 1: So you can run your own board.
Speaker 2: And he offered me the job right at that minute. So I looked up and I had the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada], I had a radio show and a television show. So I said this is going to be home for me.
Speaker 1: So is Mrs. Bailey [Anna Bailey] happier with you now that you've got all of these three jobs going on? Things are pretty good because you've been married about two or three years now, right at this point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, (cough) I had been married for four years.
Story_ID: 597037
Speaker 1: What happened to the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] in this time period? I mean, following--as your show is going on now and--the Moulin Rouge ran for how long--how long was it up and running?
Speaker 2: The show ['Talk of the Town']?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was a thirteen week contract initially. The hotel closed in the middle of that contract.
Speaker 1: The actual hotel closed that fast, it was only opened for--
Speaker 2: Well, see the television show didn't go on until maybe, maybe June or July.
Speaker 1: Plus--six months into it.
Speaker 2: The hotel stayed opened six months, but the television show didn't start at the same time the hotel opened. It started two or three months after the hotel was opened when they tried to start stimulating business on the weekday nights.
Speaker 1: That's a pretty quick turnaround for a hotel to open and close what happened?
Speaker 2: There are many different opinions as to what transpired. I don't know which one of them is the truth. I do know that we closed to standing room only. I know that it was rumored that a lot of the money was crossing the tables and going out the back door. Others have said the short term notes that were brought about in the initial construction of the hotel were brought to bear and there were just all kinds of stories, which of those stories is true is hard to tell because during those days a lot of the money that was coming in town was coming from the underworld and we know that. We also know that we were taking business away from the hotels on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] and that's a fact.
Speaker 1: Also the artists were probably playing at your hotel; big artists were playing at the Moulin Rouge like Dinah Washington and people like that playing there also, right? Dinah Washington played and big acts were starting to play at the Moulin Rouge, you had big name people playing there, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, we had big name people playing there, yes. Lionel Hampton played there.
Speaker 1: Les Brown.
Speaker 2: Les Brown, when we closed to standing room only when Les Brown came in. We did, I think, two nights and the show closed. It was a, it was a travesty.
Story_ID: 597038
Speaker 1: So the hotel [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] closes, but you're still on the radio and television though, still. You still (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: So now what have you decided to do?
Speaker 2: Hank [Hank Greenspun] told me--I think we got--I think about six weeks left in the thirteen week contract--he indicated that the station would pick up and absorb the cost of the show ['Talk of the Town'] and keep it on if we could get some sponsors. Alice [HistoryMaker Alice Key] went to work and got four of the casino owners on Jackson Avenue, the black casino owners, to pick up the tab and that was the first time that had happened on a radio or TV show.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the names of these four black casino owners? We were some of these--who were some of these black casino owners? Who were they?
Speaker 2: Andy Bruner with Andy's Liquor Store [Las Vegas, Nevada], Uvalde Caperton from the Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada], Earl Thurman from the--oh goodness me, another one of the nightclubs [Town Tavern, Las Vegas, Nevada] and--(laughter) these were so many years ago.
Speaker 1: So, they sponsored the TV show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they paid for the final thirteen wee- final six or seven weeks it was, and (cough) this was an unusual occurrence to get black sponsors that were paying that kind of money for a television show. They had been buying some time on the radio show but the comparison of prices for the spots was totally different. Radio was, I think at that time, something like seven dollars a week for five days, thirty second spots whereas television was something like fifty dollars a week.
Speaker 1: Much different now isn't it?
Speaker 2: Exactly, so and that was for one show of course, (unclear), a sixty second spot. But it worked out very well. Alice was very responsible for keeping the paid sponsors on line, but we weren't making any money out of the television show. We were just getting enough money to keep--to stay on the air and this finally took its toll on Alice and she couldn't get the kind of appointment in the white hotels that she was trying to obtain. So she moved back to Los Angeles [California] and left the show here with me.
Speaker 1: So you continued to do the show as the host?
Speaker 2: Well, I wasn't going anywhere because I had been trying to get a television show since I came out of television school [School of Radio and Television, New York, New York], and I finally had one. I wasn't making any money on it, but I was getting paid for the radio show. I figured that period of time would transpire and that I would turn it into some money, but what was most interesting was the fact that I had a show that I could experiment with, it was my television show. I had tried so hard across the country the preceding three or four years to get a show, so I wasn't going to walk out on this one, and that led into a number of other things, which finally encouraged me to stay in Las Vegas [Nevada].
Story_ID: 597039
Speaker 1: So you're here for thirteen weeks, the show ['Talk of the Town']--[HistoryMaker] Alice Key leaves because she was a little frustrated you said, and you stayed to continue your brainchild because it was your brainchild, so you stayed with your show. You kind of went down with the ship as they say; you were going to stay here with it.
Speaker 2: I kept the ship afloat (laughter).
Speaker 1: Right, so now when the show ended, the show ended after thirteen weeks?
Speaker 2: The thirteen weeks went into an indefinite period of time. What happened is, I started to get other institutional responses that took the brothers off of the hook so to speak, some stayed. The Town Tavern [Las Vegas, Nevada] is the one I was trying to think of for sponsoring. But after Alice left and the thirteen weeks were concluding, I had to get more sponsors so I was able to keep two of the black sponsors and I got a sponsorship from Pepsi-Cola [PepsiCo] and I got one from, I think Budweiser [Anheuser-Busch Companies]. So I was able to start expanding the support base of the show at the same time I'm getting very good write ups as far as the quality of the show was concerned and I became accepted as a television personality in the town.
Speaker 1: Are you still doing any singing at all now? Is there any show business things like singing going on for you still? During this time period are you singing at all?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was singing on the--not in the nightclubs, but on the television show.
Speaker 1: Okay, on your own show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I did a couple of club dates, but they were club dates on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada] supporting the sponsorship of the club. The Cotton Club [Las Vegas, Nevada] put a small show in there and then the Town Tavern, I became the manager of the entertainment at the Town Tavern for about a year and I did some singing there.
Speaker 1: So you allowed your two areas of expertise to kind of play off of each other. You were able to help the sponsors because now they can have someone that sang with Count Basie in their club, who also has a radio show and a television show. So it worked out all across the board?
Speaker 2: It all worked together.
Speaker 1: What year was this about?
Speaker 2: Well, this was from '55 [1955] to '59 [1959].
Story_ID: 597040
Speaker 1: So now all of this is going on and are you considering staying--I will now stay in Las Vegas [Nevada] or did you say it's time to go back somewhere else what happened exactly to make you really stay here?
Speaker 2: No, as indicated I was so elated that I had a show ['Talk of the Town'] and saw the potential of what the show could be that I decided to stay here. In the meantime, Anna [Bailey's wife, Anna Bailey] was going with shows that were playing in Las Vegas at that time, Larry Steele and his 'Smart Affairs' played the Dunes [Dunes Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada], and she worked there and then went on the road with him for a while and then she went with Pearl Bailey for a while.
Speaker 1: Your cousin, your cousin, right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Cousin Pearl. (Laughter) We never proved that we were cousins, but we said we were cousins, and I stayed here in Las Vegas and developed side income sources so that I could maintain my television show and the radio show. I decided to get into the politics of the area, so I made up my mind that I was going to stay and make a contribution, that's the bottom line. That realization came in about 1956, '57 [1957], a year or two after the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada] opened and then I stayed and made up my mind that the only change that comes about is when the leadership stretches itself to the point of making demands for the rights that they are due. There had been some civil rights movement in the area, but not to the extent that it was necessary to let the town know there was going to be a different mode of living for African Americans here in Las Vegas.
Story_ID: 597041
Speaker 1: Now, explain your association with Dr. West [Charles West].
Speaker 2: Dr. West was a mentor of mine and he was the first professional black in the state and the first doctor in Las Vegas [Nevada]. I knew Dr. West from back east, he used to come to Atlantic City [New Jersey] quite a bit, and would come to the shows and he was a striking character. Everybody knew him from across the country. He was the pivot for everybody that came in town that was going to stay here, the professional people, and he provided comfort in his home to a lot of the entertainers that came on the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] and wanted to have an afternoon away from the places where they were living, which weren't too nice in some instances. So everybody would go to Dr. West's house and you might see anybody there at any time of day, and he opened his home and his heart to people coming in and out of town. He was a wonderful man.
Speaker 1: And he encouraged you to stay and do good things around here? He encouraged you to stay and do things in the community? Politics wise? I mean, in regards to politics was he influential in you doing politics and getting involved did he encourage you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well he became very involved. Initially he didn't want to, but I encouraged him in the fact that he was the only professional man at that particular time that had the stature to be able to be recognized as a serious threat. He had invited Dr. McMillan [James B. McMillan] to come out from Detroit [Michigan] and start practicing dentistry here. That happened actually at the Moulin Rouge [Moulin Rouge Hotel, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Dr. McMillan was in the [U.S. military] service then and was going to come out in six to seven months. And this was--he came out during the Moulin Rouge period, but he came back after the Moulin Rouge closed and he was released from the service. He became a part of the movement, the political structure that was necessary to start moving this town forward into the 20th century. The two performed the initial significant steps, I think, in creating the civil right movement that occurred here in Las Vegas. That's not to say that the people who were living here and those that were involved with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had not made efforts to move the city toward a more reasonable living condition and working condition than what they had. But they didn't have leadership that was of the same stature as Dr. West and Dr. McMillan.
Story_ID: 597042
Speaker 1: In 1956, around the age of twenty-nine or so you get appointed to be chairman of the local urban renewal advisory committee [Urban Renewal Advisory Commission], what was that about?
Speaker 2: Well, the urban renewal advisory committee made recommendations and advice as to the restructuring of the community that was subject to economic disasters, I would call it the poorest section of town. The urban renewal was a federal program that would come in and check with--a feasibility study that had to be taken to show the economic potential of an area and how urban renewal program funds could lift that area to where it would become a tax revenue base and clean up the area generally. It was in most cities, most urban cities more so than the small cities, but a lot of it was to bring money in to really structure highways and streets that would lock off African American areas and that was the underlying purpose that the urban renewal--it wasn't what it was supposed to be. The advisory committee was a requirement by the federal government to make that area eligible for funds to come in to help restore the economic viability of a given area.
Speaker 1: So basically freeways and stuff start coming through black neighborhoods?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well a lot of the places used those freeways to block off black areas from the white areas and that was up to the advisory committee to thwart those efforts and I played somewhat a significant role in the one here.
Speaker 1: So, you are still on television at this time too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm still on TV.
Speaker 1: So now you have a forum to talk about all this stuff. You have a show ['Talk of the Town'] to discuss it, you have a radio and a television show, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So you are able to talk about things now not just entertainment, now you have some other areas is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well you couldn't be here without becoming a part of the political potential. Then you've got to remember again and go back, at Morehouse [Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia]--and Mays [Benjamin Mays] taught you one thing, that you have to give back to your community and you have to provide leadership where necessary.
Speaker 1: That's Ralph Mays [sic.].
Speaker 2: Don't thwart your responsibilities and that was indoctrinated in me, and I hadn't had the opportunity of working with the community at that level until I decided to make myself a resident here in Las Vegas [Nevada]. In New York [New York] and the time I spent there and on the road I was enthralled with show business nothing else. But here I had a chance to become a resident and a part of the community and through my interview shows it became quite apparent that I had a role that I could play in bringing about a more workable community than what we found ourselves living in.
Story_ID: 597043
Speaker 1: So you were there, you're on this board [Urban Renewal Advisory Commission] and about 1957 or so you moved to KTNV [KTNV-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada], Channel, Channel 13?
Speaker 2: In '67 [1967]?
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], 19--
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], yeah, when I went to K show TV.
Speaker 1: And it was the same kind of show--was it the same show or did you do a new show?
Speaker 2: No, the same kind of show--theatrical show and I had children dance--not children but young people dance in the show.
Speaker 1: Kind of like 'Soul Train'?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I did just about anything I wanted to do 'cause I could get sponsorship for it, and they didn't have to pay me they brokered the time to me. I would bring in so many sponsors that they would give me 50 percent of whatever the sponsorship was. So I could do it as well as I could at that time the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] had a lot of brokering of time, which they don't anymore.
Story_ID: 597044
Speaker 1: So you, your--you had your show on Channel 13 [KTNV-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada], and at this point you were a Republican but, you changed parties to work for Grant Sawyer?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was a very significant period of time here. You had Jack Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in Washington [D.C.], that was supporting the Civil Rights Movement, and Grant Sawyer came out of a little town in Nevada and suit up for leadership in developing a state that would recognize all of its citizens and provide opportunities to do the same. He was inspirational and we had a long talk and I became very supportive of him and in order to work for him at the level that I wanted to and that he wanted me to, I had to change parties--
Speaker 1: And to be a Democrat.
Speaker 2: Exactly, so I changed parties to a Democrat, and as luck would have it he won the election and we all worked for him, and he made the first public statement, the public policy of the state to provide equal opportunity and accommodation and employment and public service to all citizens of the State of Nevada.
Story_ID: 597045
Speaker 1: Now it seems very interesting that because, as you were doing this you still had politics. You had been on television and radio, had a great entertainment career, but after he [Grant Sawyer] became governor you left for two years to go manage Cousin Pearl's [Pearl Bailey] road show?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in '59 [1959], Pearl had a problem at the Flamingo Hotel [The Fabulous Flamingo; Flamingo Las Vegas Hotel and Casino, Las Vegas, Nevada]. She fell and hurt herself and was in a wheelchair. She had a year's engagements that was logged up and Pearl handled normally her own business on the road, but she didn't have that many responsibilities in the past, but the year that was coming up her itinerary was very full and it was going to be extremely demanding of her time. With the accident it was impossible for her to address the business needs that would be required to do the show. So she asked me--actually what happened, she told Anna [Bailey's wife, Anna Bailey] to have--Anna was dancing with her on the show at the time. She told Anna to, "Tell Bob [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] to come out, I want to talk with him." I thought because of her being in a wheelchair she was going to cut her act short and let me sing two or three songs to fill out the show. So I got myself all ready to go out and meet her and we knew each other from her appearing with Basie [Count Basie] two or three times, so we had a relationship and Anna had been working for her for a while. So we had a good, strong relationship. So I'm getting my throat all ready and say (vocalizes), 'cause I know I'm going to make it. So we go out to the show and it's closing and it's after the show and she sends somebody for me to come to the dressing room. So I go to the dressing room, I say this is it, I know she's going to ask me how many songs do I want to sing. So she says, "I want you to do something for me to help me out." I say here it comes, "What do you want me to do Pearl?" "I want you to be my road manager." (Laughter) I say, "What do you want?" She says, "I want you to be my road manager; I need you to come out on the road and help me take care of the business of the show. You did such a great job with Clarence Robinson, I know you'll do a good job for me and I need your help." So this number one is a disappointment of what she wants me to do, number two I'm involved with radio and television and various different committees that I'm on. So I say, "Well, let me think about it Pearl, let me see if I can get myself together." Anyway long story short I made the decision to go with her for a year and I cut off all of my relationships and left everything where I could come back and regenerate my position in the community and I went with Pearl for two years.
Speaker 1: So you stopped the show--the radio show and the TV show.
Speaker 2: Stopped the radio show, television show, the PR [public relations] work that I was doing, the urban renewal advisory committee [Urban Renewal Advisory Commission] everything I was involved in.
Speaker 1: And went back to show business for a minute.
Speaker 2: Went back to show business. But I had never been a road manager. I had managed the show ['Tropi Can Can'] with Clarence Robinson, but it was nothing as big as entertainment with Pearl. But I had the business background and I'd been thoroughly trained from my little time I spent at the house, so I was ready, I had the capability of doing it and it worked out.
Speaker 1: Plus you had seen how it goes being in the Basie band years ago. You saw how a road manager had to be, you saw that with your own eyes, you lived it.
Speaker 2: Exactly, so I had the experience of seeing what it entailed in the job, it was a matter of applying myself to do it.
Story_ID: 597046
Speaker 1: So you did that for a few years, you came back and there's a big story about a big confrontation about the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] here and a protest there's a big story about that. Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: In 1960, you were about thirty-three years old?
Speaker 2: That was the proposed march on the Strip?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: We had talked to a number of the hotels through the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] about the lack of public accommodations and the various discriminatory practices, and that they should re- rectify it and discovered--in a manner where people coming into town that were African American can feel comfortable in staying in a hotel, this is for public accommodation. The talk was cheap, promises were made but they weren't kept. So it was decided that something had to be done, so I just suggested that what we would have to do would be something dramatic. At that particular time every third picture going out on the press service was a picture of Las Vegas [Nevada], something was going on in Las Vegas. So I indicated to them I could do the press releases sufficient to get across the country if we come up with something dramatic. The only thing dramatic that was happening in the country was marching, so why not propose a march. It was decided that would be the way to go. Dr. West [Charles West] was the chairman of the political committee that we had and it was very strong. What was it? The--I forget the name of it now, but it was a political committee very strong, bipartisan, and the NAACP handling the civil rights issue. It was decided that we would have a march and the next thing was to decide when to do it. A big fight was coming up with Floyd Patterson and--oh goodness, Sonny--
Speaker 1: Liston?
Speaker 2: Sonny Liston. In fact, it was a championship fight and back then, as well as now, whenever a big fight comes up people come from all over the country and really just take the city over. Well that's big bucks [dollars] for the hotels, so we planned to do it on that day and we would stop all of the traffic coming in and out of the town. This created problems like you can't believe. The hotels threatened the workers, the black workers that if they didn't stop it they would get fired. McMillan's [James B. McMillan] life was threatened and that if he didn't turn this situation around he wouldn't see the light of day. Oh, it was hell to pay, and we took a very strong stand, collective stand that we were going to go through with it regardless of what conditions or threats that came down. The religious community kind of got nervous a little bit, especially when you say they're going to cut all the jobs out. But we weathered the storm and I called the governor [Grant Sawyer]. At this time I was the chairman of the state equal rights commission [Nevada Equal Rights Commission] and I called the governor and informed of him of what was transpiring and that the march was set. Hank Greenspun in the meantime called me and said, "Let's get a meeting together and see if we can head this thing off." Hank was instrumental in pulling together the representation of the Strip hotels to sit in for a meeting at a level that they could make commitments. It was my job to get to Mac and Dr. West and to get a committee representing the black community to sit in at the hearing, and that would be sufficient strength to represent the will of the people. So we proposed a meeting and set the criteria for acceptance of dissipating the march.
Story_ID: 597047
Speaker 1: The day came after the whole town was boiling and tensions--and we set up the meeting for that morning. I picked the governor [Grant Sawyer] up, who was coming in from New York, and we sat down at the Moulin Rouge Hotel [Las Vegas, Nevada]. Mac [James B. McMillan] laid out the conditions that the black community would expect in order to stop the march. The conditions were not out of context, they were to open up the public accommodations immediately, so that people could stay wherever they wanted to stay. Employment in areas that heretofore had not been accepting African American applications, dealers, cocktail waitresses, front door greeters, car hops, desk clerks--
Speaker 2: Not just janitors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) All the front, front of the hotel workers. We had already the maids and the porters the back of the hotel personnel. So they agreed to all the conditions, but wanted time to deal with those that were covered by the union. Some of those jobs, the waiters jobs and a few of the other positions, were controlled by the various union, but public accommodations were immediately opened, which meant that they could stay in the hotel, enjoy the shows, the food what have you, the obvious things. So the march was called off, and it's a good thing it was because we were nervous that the people weren't going to turn around and not be there to march. What we did is we had a group that we knew were going to be present, go out to the convention center [Las Vegas Convention Center, Las Vegas, Nevada] and wait for our signal to march one way or the other. We also had called and gotten a response from the--what's the name of the group from San Francisco [California]? The--
Speaker 2: The Panthers [sic.]?
Speaker 1: The Panthers, we let it be known that the Panthers were ready to come in and support us, if Jamal [ph.] came in from back east and that was in evidence. So long story short, it opened the doors and that's started the equal opportunity program that we presently enjoy.
Speaker 2: That's why Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] is the way it is today.
Story_ID: 597048
Speaker 1: Now, moving forward just a little bit, you were very involved in the politics, you went back to Channel 8 [KLAS-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada] in about '61 [1961] to do another talk show, around '61 [1961] or so, then you do something very significant you opened up a club, Sugar Hill club [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 2: Yeah, well how that happened is my sister--my dad [John Bailey] wanted to come out to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] and live. My mother [Margaret Williams Bailey] had passed and he wanted to be together. She had a really responsible position in Cleveland [Ohio], the likes of which I could not get for her here, because it was no establishments that needed her area of talent. So I asked her what did she want to do, she said, "I want a liquor store." So I said, "Okay, I'll build you a building and build you a liquor store." So I did that and it was nightclub and a liquor store everything was a combination at that time out here. You get one license and you could sell on and off sells. So that's how Sugar Hill came to be and we had that for twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: It's said that--it's been told that Johnny Carson would hang out in there when he was in town and Louis Armstrong would play the trumpet--he'd come in and play. People would come in and hang out in your club.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well actually what would happen is anytime during a certain period, you go to establishments that are integrated, but the soul comes out and you want to know where the cornbread and grits are.
Speaker 1: Right (laughter).
Speaker 2: And we had the cornbread and grits at Sugar Hill. We used to have jam sessions and everybody would come from the Strip [Las Vegas Strip, Las Vegas, Nevada] over to Sugar Hill. Johnnie Ray would come over, oh everybody. Most of the entertainers that were related to jazz would come over and play, and I had a number of different people on my television show ['Talk of the Town'] that would come out. I kept that television show for marketing arm and that had a lot to do with making Sugar Hill as popular as it was. Johnny Carson that's who I was thinking about that was his favorite spot. He used to send all kinds of people over there. We would say, "Well, how did you hear about us?" "Johnny Carson told us to make sure we came by."
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So he would come in and play the drums sometime?
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: So, it stayed opened until the neighborhood started changing, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well the dope came in and it was a very serious period of time, where dope dealers would come in and just really inundate your business. Stand outside and sell to stopped cars and it was something. The police weren't as forceful as they should have been (background noise).
Speaker 1: It's okay.
Speaker 2: They could have done a little more to help than what they did. But the feeling usually is as long as they can keep dope in a certain area, they can control that area and let it flourish there so it won't get into other areas, and it only became a pertinent thing when it started getting into the white area as well as in the black area.
Speaker 1: Then the War on Drugs became--
Speaker 2: Then it became a war on drugs, but it got so bad that one day my security guard had to leave because he said he was going to shoot somebody or somebody would shoot him, 'cause they were disrespecting him and selling dope all up under him. They even got to my bartenders, they were paying the bartender to turn his back while he would be making sales in the club. So I thought about this, my sister and my wife [Anna Bailey] running the business really when I wasn't there and the security guards being paid off more money than what I was paying them to turn their back, so I said I'm just going to close the place. And I told them one day to put the lock on it and that's what we did.
Story_ID: 597049
Speaker 1: For the next years you did several things. You opened up the Pan-African Auditorium in the West Owens [Avenue] shopping center, you turned that into the Pan-African Auditorium, it seated about five thousand people, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was--it came up--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] came to me and asked me help them get a spot for an event that they had coming up, and because I was the chairman for the equal rights commission [Nevada Equal Rights Commission] they thought I would carry enough weight to get the room that they wanted, which I did and got the room for them, but then I thought why should they have to have use to get a room that's a public room that's for rent. In the meantime, I had taken over the ownership of Golden West Shopping Center [Nucleus Plaza, Las Vegas, Nevada] and I lost a major tenant in the EOB [Economic Opportunity Board of Clark County], so I had thousands of square feet available for some sort of development. So I thought why should we have to go and ask somebody for accommodations, build our own and that's how the Pan-Afro Auditorium came in. I built an auditorium in that space and called it Pan-Afro Auditorium because at that time a lot of the African nations were getting their independence, and on top of the building I flew all the free African nation flags and it was quite, quite an auditorium.
Story_ID: 597050
Speaker 1: So you had the auditorium [Pan-Afro Auditorium, Las Vegas, Nevada] and you built it for a place, for people to go for themselves. Is it still there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's no longer there, what happened to the auditorium?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a long story. When I took the shopping center [Golden West Shopping Center; Nucleus Plaza, Las Vegas, Nevada] over, I did a projection that indicated that in two years or in one year I would need a second amount of financing. At that particular time it was difficult in Las Vegas [Nevada] for blacks to get commercial loans, anything but for a Cadillac--you could get a loan for a Cadillac, but not for development of business. Anyway, I got the commitment for my second round of financing based on my performance, I would be okay for a period of time, I would be all right. So I have a lot of money to put into it initially, and it had been destroy- partially destroyed by one of the riots that we had here. When I got to the place where I needed the financing, the committed institution turned around on me. I later found out why, but anyway I'll get to that. I didn't make my second round financing, which meant that I was going to have to get more working capital. I had a problem in developing that position, so I said I'll do something that will develop sufficient income to where it would meet the debt service of the shopping center generally, and because of the experience that I had with trying to get a room for the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], the auditorium became the reality that was going to support the entire debt service of the shopping center. Bottom line was I lost the shopping center. They turned around on me. There was a group that was waiting to take over the second--a group of young blacks--I wish I had time to really go through this entire story it's, it's really something.
Story_ID: 597051
Speaker 1: At any rate, I built the auditorium to hold the various affairs that would be coming up in the community. One of the things that's a fright to people that hold you in bondage is to have a condition where you can bring people together to talk with them. The churches could only hold, that were in the area, could only hold at one given time maybe two hundred, three hundred people at the most. An auditorium had the capability of holding five thousand people became a threat to the people who thought that it could be used in a negative manner.
Speaker 2: Especially a non-religious facility.
Speaker 1: Exactly, and it was during a period of time where the system here was trying to keep the African American community intact. So this became a threat, which had something to do with my not getting that second round of financing. One of the conditions, I'm given to understand, that was placed upon the group that was waiting to take the shopping center [Golden West Shopping Center; Nucleus Plaza, Las Vegas, Nevada] over was that they not tear the auditorium down, but replace the auditorium with public service businesses. So the first thing they did when they took it over was that they dismantled the auditorium and made service, a community service center out of the auditorium. The auditorium was totally broken down. And I had a club in there that was the first club of its type on the Westside [West Las Vegas, Las Vegas, Nevada], and they still haven't developed a club in that area that equaled the class and the quality of the Mau Mau Room [ph.] that I built as part of the Pan-Afro Auditorium [Las Vegas, Nevada]. So it was just a very disappointing period of my life here in Las Vegas [Nevada] to see that go down. I was constantly trying to promote black ownership in business and to become economically sound. Other areas have done it, you've got Chinatown [Las Vegas, Nevada], you've got Italian town, you've got Thai town, there is no reason why blacks couldn't do it, and having been indentured in Atlanta [Georgia] to see what blacks can do when they put their money together. I brought that same philosophy together with me when I came to Vegas, indentured development of ideas that could be utilized to provide employment, security and certainly an inspiration to youngsters in the community to become business people and to become the masters of their economic fate.
Speaker 2: And that was very ironic too because that was 1965 a lot of changes were going on during that year. Malcolm [Malcolm X] had been killed that year--assassinated, and there had been a lot of things going on, the voting rights act [Voting Rights Act of 1965] was passed. It would seem that would be--you would have a lot of support for what you were trying to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well that's what I thought too but it's a funny thing about people who have been indentured in slavery have a tendency to carry the philosophy of the plantation away from the plantation. I don't want to get into that--
Speaker 2: I understand (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because I'm very strongly opinionated that--
Speaker 2: We're going to leave you some room for that toward the end. We're going to let you talk a little bit but we want to stay on the chronological order right now but we'll let you talk about that because we want to hear what you have to say about some of those things.
Speaker 1: Well, it's called slave mentality, but that's another subject all of its own.
Story_ID: 597052
Speaker 1: Now, in '65 [1965] to '71 [1971] you became a newscaster--an actual newscaster here in town on Channel 13 [KTNV-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So were you an anchor person or reporter? What did you do?
Speaker 2: No, I had my own news show, 'Recapping Comment' [ph.]. We recapped preceding events of the week and then give a cap on analyzing the philosophy of whatever stories we would pinpoint, and that was one of the shows. I had two shows, one was the news the other was the entertainment show that I did interviews with the various entertainers in town.
Speaker 1: This is amazing Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] because you--all this time, now you've been an entertainer, you still have the show business side of you, which is still running through your veins obviously, you're providing--you're into real estate development now doing things, you're doing television shows then you decide to go to the University of Nevada, Las Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada] for real estate and land law.
Speaker 2: Well, I was doing a lot of community work and one of things that came to my attention was I was doing a lot of things, but I ain't making much money and it wasn't important at the time but I started thinking about my kids and their future, and I said I better start making some money and how can I incorporate things that I'm doing, still be productive for the community and make a honest dollar for myself.
Speaker 1: Yeah, because you're in your early forties now, you are going into your early forties, thirty-nine, forty years old.
Speaker 2: Oh, my age?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that time (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: So how old were your children? How old were your children at this point and how many children did you have?
Speaker 2: You're talking about Johnny [John Bailey], who was five years old, and Kim [Kimberly Bailey Tureaud] was three, there's two years difference in them. Anyway I decided that the place I wanted to go was in the real estate field. So I went out to UNLV and took a class in real estate and got my brokers' license and opened up a real estate office.
Story_ID: 597053
Speaker 1: So, this is amazing now you've got--you've been a singer with Count Basie orchestra, now you're a real estate broker in Las Vegas, Nevada.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you think about this whole line and how all of this happened? You've been a TV person, all your dreams that you've--everything you've set out to do you've managed to make happen. What was Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] thinking about at that time?
Speaker 2: What else?
Speaker 1: What were you thinking about because you've done everything? You've done--you had--at this point you are still a young man in your early forties--
Speaker 2: Well, real estate got me involved in the economics of the city, and I began to find out very seriously that the next battle that we had to fight was not civil rights but economic empowerment, and I found out by trying to practice different proposals for clients that the banking industry was very unfriendly to the application of African Americans for economic development. As a result of that, I said the next battle, I'll leave the civil rights battle, that's pretty much indentured and we have leadership there, and provide some leadership in economic empowerment 'cause that's the next step. We got into the hotel, now we've got to figure out how to the pay and get out. So I went to a senior senator at that time, Alan Bible, who was the head of the small business select committee [U.S. Senate Select Committee on Small Business; U.S. Senate Select Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship] in Washington [D.C.], and asked for some assistance in developing a program for SBA [U.S. Small Business Administration]. It just so happened that the [U.S.] Department of Commerce was organizing a program that addressed the economic needs of minorities across the country, the Office of Minority Business Enterprise [Minority Business Development Agency]. He put me in touch with the director at commerce who invited me to come back and attend a preparation school that he was going to enact in the forthcoming political year. So I had opened my big mouth to the senator about how bad situations were, so I pretty much had to accept the offer to come back to Washington and to go to school at Howard University for a preparation during the OMBE program. I did that and came back--I think that was eight weeks. I believe. I came back to Las Vegas and opened up the first minority business development center here in the State of Nevada.
Speaker 1: And what year would that have been?
Speaker 2: That was 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Nevada Economic Development Company.
Story_ID: 597054
Speaker 1: And with that, at the same time you also initiated Manpower Services also, right?
Speaker 2: Well, that was preceding this. I did the Manpower Service right after I got the shopping center [Golden West Shopping Center; Nucleus Plaza, Las Vegas, Nevada] and then that was (laughter)--there were two things I did while I was in the shopping center, had the manpower center, which developed jobs for African American in the system and training. We worked a proposal with the U.S. Department of Labor to give us a apprenticeship program and they gave us so many slots that we could offer to the businesses that were hiring minorities and pay half their salaries for a given period of time. That was the carrot to get them into the job structure. We had problems with the unions, but we overruled some of those problems by indicating that we would go to the labor department if they didn't acquiesce to working with some sort of a program for our people. So that was the manpower program, I did that for a year or two and we got someone to take that over in the Department of Employment Security [Nevada Department of Employment Security; Nevada Department of Employment, Training and Rehabilitation]. I also during that period of time developed the telecommunications school that--the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] at that period of time was insisting that more minorities be included in the telecommunications industry. Having had such a bad time myself getting into it I was energized to help develop this program and so I developed a telecommunications class at the economic opportunity board. The fact of the matter is two of my students have been at Channel 8 [KLAS-TV, Las Vegas, Nevada] for thirty-five years and they came out of this class.
Speaker 1: Who are they? Who are they? Who are your two students?
Speaker 2: Couldn't think of the names if you killed me, but they put me in the walk of fame at Channel 8 and the two black students came at the graduation and thanked me for opening this school and their representation of that effort for that period of time. I can't think of their names now.
Speaker 1: Was the school based upon the same format of the school you went to in New York [School of Radio and Television, New York, New York]? Did you kind of do the same program, set up the curriculum the same way?
Speaker 2: It was in the same spirit and the same basic format, but a little different because the times had changed between the time I went to school and the time I put on a school. For instance, when I was going to school they didn't have any tape, they had kinescope to capture the elements of the show. They had tape when I put on my school. The technical aspects of the industry had changed dire- and with the change of technical support the labor area of support had changed. You didn't use dolly pushes, which you used originally. There are a number of different things that changed around. So what I did was I brought in people to do certain modules that were updated from the time that I had been in television school.
Speaker 1: Forward thinking.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now was this program free to a person that wanted to go into it? Was it a free school for the people to go to? Was the school free?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the school was free, it was paid for by the Economic Opportunity Board [Economic Opportunity Board of Clark County], actually the U.S. Department of Labor.
Speaker 1: So this all happened around '71 [1971], '72 [1972] in that area, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 597055
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the next few years you continue to be involved in, in various things. Now, you're moving up, you know, through your forties and we're going into the '80s [1980s] now, we're going to move into the '80s [1980s] and a lot of things happened then. One that is significant is you receive your doctorate of humane letters from National University [San Diego, California], tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I'd been with NEDCO [Nevada Economic Development Company] since '72 [1972], and we had developed over $350 million worth of finance generation for minorities in the area, and this was thought to be impossible. When accounting came out and it certified our claims, I was invited to be the graduation speaker for the National University M.B.A. graduation class, and this had never been done in the history of National University. They had minorities speak to the undergraduate class, but never to the M.B.A. graduating class. So I was honored there and given my honorary doctorate and my honorary membership with the alumnus association.
Story_ID: 597056
Speaker 1: You've been now in Las Vegas [Nevada] at that point well over twenty years now, or close to, what, thirty years. At that point you had been in Vegas about thirty years (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, right.
Speaker 1: --and you had seen the thing change from, from Mississippi of the West to a chance now where things were happening for blacks in this town. What was going on with your entertainment aspirations? Were you still kind of having the urge to sing or do anything at that point or had you just kind of put it down at that point?
Speaker 2: No, I was pretty much an audience rather than a participant. I didn't find that there was any room for an old ballad singer (laughter). So I participated by working with some of the young people, but not personally involving myself anymore.
Speaker 1: As you noticed Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], as the economic situation got better for blacks in Las Vegas, did you notice a decline in maybe the culture, like say for instance jazz, did you notice a decline of those kinds of things happen at the same time or was it a--or did it progress also with economic development?
Speaker 2: Well, I think that jazz became an entity of yesteryear with an emphasis on its place in the real music development of this country. As such it became an entity at the universities to carry it on as opposed to leaving it up to musicians in the nightclubs. Jazz today is a subject in the music development of most universities that have any forward thinking curriculum. And I think that this is good because it establishes jazz as an entity to be recognized as a contributor to the music environment of this country, and it's praised all over the world for its origination in this country as one of the musical offerings that this country has to the international music community.
Speaker 1: Why do you think in places--with that being said--and I agree 100 percent--with that being said, why do you think there is such a lack of it in places like Las Vegas? There isn't a lot of jazz in Las Vegas. Why do you think that is?
Speaker 2: It just hasn't had--we had some jazz going for a while. We had a jazz society going for a while, a lack of musicians. When music went into recording and tape, it cut out a lot of the live musicians. We at one time had the most outstanding group of musicians in the country right here in Las Vegas. But once the conditions were changed where they used tape in the shows and just keep a band--I think the musicians made a deal where they would have so many stand by musicians depending on the number of musicians that were used in the transcribing of the tape. So all of the sources of our jazz left town and jazz became an oddity here, rather than a part of the jazz community.
Speaker 1: I understand.
Speaker 2: There was no more community and it's a big loss 'cause we all used to enjoy each other, and we got a case man at the union that used to play every week and play all the charts--the big charts to come in through various different bands. But jazz today is an entity and the universities in very few cities that have still committed to keep jazz alive.
Story_ID: 597057
Speaker 1: So as you move, as you move through and you were doing economic development and you're seeing this change happen, we moved through the '80s [1980s], you did some very good things in the '80s [1980s], and you're moving to the '90s [1990s]. In 1991, you were fifty-four [sic.] years old and President George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], and that would have been George Bush, Sr., appointed you as deputy director of something, tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, I was still with NEDCO [Nevada Economic Development Company] at the time and they Office of Minority Business Enterprise became the Minority Business Development Agency, and they were kind of in trouble for leadership at the national level, and I had been giving national conferences here for about five years at that time and was pretty known in the minority business circles across the country. The conference that I put on was the Cadillac of the conferences for minority business. I got a call one day from one of my senators--my congressman rather, to come and talk with her. I hustled over not knowing what she wanted, I figured I'd been raising hell about getting openings for the--some of the minority business clients and she was going to put the hammer on me. So I went prepared with statistics and everything to show what a good job we were doing. She asked me would I be--after we went through the pleasantries, would I be interested in a presidential appointment to the [U.S.] Department of Commerce. With no preparation and hit me with this a presidential appointment. So I said, "What is it?" "They need an associate director for the minority business development center in Washington [D.C.]." "Let me think about it." So I--by the time I picked myself up--this came out of the clear blue sky, I had no idea whatsoever. So I came home and I talked it over with Anna [Bailey's Wife, Anna Bailey] and asked her what she thought about it, and she said, "It's like show business. You're going away from home again." So I said, "Well, let me get a little further into it." So I made inquiries as to what the job (unclear). The director of the agency called me and encouraged me to come, that he needed me to help him with his new program and that they were putting forth, a $60 million budget and I would be in charge of doing a number of different things. Anyway, I accepted and went to Washington to meet with personnel because I still wasn't in yet, and they took me over the coals, and at this particular time they were pressing Bush to make sure that his appointments were clean because they had quite a bit of problems with the [U.S.] Secret Service, with people coming in and had little goodies hidden in their background. So long story short after a period of time of investigation, and they go all the way back to elementary school, they gave me the okay. I went back to Washington to the White House and accepted the appointment and came home. Got my bags packed and went to Washington.
Story_ID: 597058
Speaker 1: Bob Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey] now getting a presidential appointment. Did you actually meet, met George Bush, Sr. [President George Herbert Walker Bush] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I did. There was at the executive corps a number of different appointees coming to Washington [D.C.] to start at the same time, and the president welcomed you to Washington and they were not only from--a couple more from the [U.S.] Department of Commerce, but they were from the various different presidential appointments to the various departments, executive departments in government. They give you a pen and plaque and a handshake.
Speaker 1: And an office?
Speaker 2: Yeah, a big office, not a whole lot of money, but a big office. I had an office that you could put a small church in it at the Department of Commerce. They give you all the tools to work with, good secretaries and what have you.
Speaker 1: So you actually lived in Washington during this time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I had to live in Washington. I lived in Washington for almost four years.
Speaker 1: And you just came back and forth with your wife or did she come to Washington with you? Mrs. Bailey [Anna Bailey] come--
Speaker 2: No, we had just--we had closed Sugar Hill [Las Vegas, Nevada] and we had found another location and was rebuilding a building on the location to open a club called the Baby Grand [Baby Grand Nightclub, Las Vegas, Nevada]. The Baby Grand was 90 percent finished when I got the presidential appointment. So it was decided that she would be able to take care of the club with me gone to Washington, everybody thought it was the right thing to do. So that's, (laughter) that's what she did.
Speaker 1: So, did Baby Grand get opened? Did it open?
Speaker 2: It opened while I was in Washington.
Speaker 1: How long did it stay open? How long was it open?
Speaker 2: I guess a year, a year and a half.
Speaker 1: And it was a jazz club? It was a jazz club?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So what new--what things did you learn, because at this point, Mr. Bailey you're--at this point you're like sixty-four years old when most people are trying to sit down and stop working, you're just beginning to work? So what did you learn did you learn more about politics on the executive level being in Washington? Did you learn a lot more at that point?
Speaker 2: Well, you got involved at a different level of politics. You get involved in international politics, and your thinking is elevated to the benefit of countries as opposed to the benefit of cities and states and counties. Some of the philosophies are the same, but your decisions have a much greater bearing on a greater number of people when you are dealing at the Washington level. For instance, one of the things that I found out very quickly was that politics is not only a game, but it's one that you have to be very reverent of because you're always under scrutiny--you're constantly under scrutiny. You have to be careful of who you talk to, what you have to say, where you go. You don't know when it's going to come back and hit you in the face, and local politics while it's somewhat the same, it's not as cruel, and I use that word advisedly, but it's not as cruel in national politics. When they come after you in national politics, they come after you with a spike (laughter) not a pen point. And I was able to do things there in Washington that I wasn't able to do here in Las Vegas [Nevada]. To accomplish a much wider range of help to minority entrepreneurs than I could with even the national program I was running from here. I still couldn't provide the same kind of input and assistance and support that I could in Washington, so that made a difference in my political understanding of the job to done--
Story_ID: 597059
Speaker 1: You came back about 1995, you came back, right? To Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], somewhere around there? Ninety-five [1995], '96 [1996]?
Speaker 2: No, I came back to Vegas in '94 [1994].
Speaker 1: Okay. Now it seems very--almost a theme here, as you had been mentored by Count Basie now you had the credentials to mentor young people in business, minority businesses. You were doing the same thing that was happening in the band the only thing you were doing it through big dollars now. Is it safe to say that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I guess you could say that (laughter).
Speaker 1: I also noticed that, you said out of the blue a few times, things happened out of the blue. It seems like that has been the theme for your life, the Basie band deal came out of the blue, the TV show ['Talk of the Town'] came out of the blue, the presidential appointment came out of the blue, have you ever thought about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well something else that came out of the blue was my trip to the Middle East.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about that and what year was that?
Speaker 2: That was in '92 [1992], this was right after Desert Storm [Operation Desert Storm]. You'll probably remember that there were a number of different trips that were being made by the secretary of commerce, Mosbacher [Robert Mosbacher], carrying a lot of the big manufacturers and the big international companies to Kuwait to get those big contracts that we build Kuwait, but there were none of us going over in those planes. So I came up with the brilliant idea of having a minority group go over to Desert Storm and get some of the contracts. And to my surprise the secretary of commerce endorsed the idea; he thought it was a good idea. So I went to our director of MBDA [Minority Business Development Agency] and said, "Let's put this on and get some of the brothers some work from some of these big contracts." So they bought into the idea and turned me to Fred Volcansek [Fred W. Volcansek, Sr.], who was the head of basic industries at the [U.S.] Department of Commerce, and who had extensive experience in taking groups to the Middle East. So we set it up which took us a year to put it together, but we put it together and I took thirty minority entrepreneurs over to the Emirates [United Arab Emirates], Bahrain, Abu Dhabi [United Arab Emirates], Kuwait all throughout the Middle East. We got $30 million worth of contracts on that trip and that was, of course one of the highlights of my participation in commerce.
Speaker 1: How did you like being in the Middle East, how did you enjoy it when you saw the Middle East? What did you think, how did you like the Middle East?
Speaker 2: Hm?
Speaker 1: How did you like the Middle East?
Speaker 2: Oh, I found it very charitable to us. One of the things that we had to change around, it was minority business development center and the program was a minority business program. They don't know what you're talking about when you say minority business, to them it's small business or big business, there are no minorities. So we had to stop staying minority business because it was awkward to explain that in this country. You had to have a minority and a special dispensation to address the needs of a certain portion of the population. So we just called ourselves small business people of color.
Speaker 1: They--and they understood that to a certain point.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 597060
Speaker 1: You came back and you became the president of the National Association of Minority Business [sic. National Association of Minority Businesses] here in town [Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 2: Yeah, what happened is that after Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush] was not reelected all of the appointees were released, go back home (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) You get to go back now.
Speaker 2: Take your butt back home. So anyway I was home maybe a month and I got a call from the national minority business association. They wanted me to act as the director of the program, which I accepted, it was a very good offer and it had an opportunity to enforce some of the programs that I had tried to start at the MBDA [Minority Business Development Agency] but because of government relations was unable to do the same as you can in the private sector. So I accepted it and it was going very well, but it was a position that you needed to be in Washington [D.C.] to really fulfill. I was flying back and forth so often until I ate up my whole budget with flight time, and it was becoming too demanding of my time getting back and forth on the airlines, appearing before the various committees, going to the agencies, opening up opportunities. So I had to--it was a mutual agreement we had to give it up.
Story_ID: 597061
Speaker 1: So you moved through and you, and you--in 1999, you and your wife [Anna Bailey] were honored for outstanding citizens and services to the state. They gave you a big honor here in the State of Nevada. And as we move into the 21st century something really special happened in 2005, the William H. "Bob" Bailey middle school [William H. Bailey Middle School, Las Vegas, Nevada]. Tell us about that Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey].
Speaker 2: Well I--NEDCO [Nevada Economic Development Company] had given me a life award for the work that I had done in the minority business here for a number of years, and a number of things that I'd contributed to, and one of the speakers was a member of the board of education and indicated that they are giving schools on behalf of outstanding people in the community. I had been recognized by a group in the town called the First 100, which identified 100 of the supposedly most outstanding contributors to the community for over the past one hundred years, and I was one of those chosen. Most of the new schools were being named after people that were in that First 100. So I was chosen to be a candidate for the school, which I didn't think I would get. I didn't even put that much thought into it to tell you the truth. Like I said, usually they go to people with money, or somebody is going to give some ground, and the people in that First 100 designation were way my seniors as far as status and money is concerned. So all I had going was my contributions, but the letters that I received supporting my candidacy were very gratifying from governors, from senators, working people across the community. It went before the committee and they okayed it and put it before the board and the board okayed it, so I got a school.
Speaker 1: So where is the school located?
Speaker 2: Carey [Avenue] and Hollywood [Boulevard], it's a middle school and it houses 1,400 kids and it's a beautiful plant.
Speaker 1: Do you go visit every now and then, do you go see the kids up there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I go and spend some time with them and sign autographs and take pictures and pass out certificates at graduation time with the principal.
Speaker 1: And have you sung up there before, have you ever sung a song for them up there? Have you ever sung for them at the school?
Speaker 2: Sing?
Speaker 1: Yeah, have you ever sung at the school?
Speaker 2: No, my singing days are kind of behind me. I was singing in church for a while.
Story_ID: 597062
Speaker 1: I want to ask you, how do you feel about the way, the way that you lived your life? And what's really important to you now?
Speaker 2: To continue to be able to make a contribution to the community in which you live. You never stop giving of yourself. Sometimes that's all you have left, is to give and pass on whatever expertise you've acquired and then don't let it die, and I think it's important that we remember that the young people are looking for leadership and if you don't provide it and share what you've acquired with them then your life hasn't been worthwhile.
Story_ID: 597063
Speaker 1: What would you say to those who wanted to go into a career say in show business or in the private sector in business, what would your advice be to these people?
Speaker 2: Be conscientious, work hard and have some honor about your integrity.
Speaker 1: Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], what are your hopes and aspirations for the African American community?
Speaker 2: My hope?
Speaker 1: Yeah, your aspirations for the African American community in the future? What do you hope for African Americans in the future?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I'm an advocate of course of education and I think education is the light that blinds ignorance and I think we should keep that light burning. We are a country that believes in credentials. It doesn't mean that you can't be successful without a college degree, but it means you are more likely to be successful if you have a college degree and education is the light that blinds ignorance.
Story_ID: 597064
Speaker 1: Now, when you look back at your life, Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey], what stands out the most when you look back at your life? When you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you? When you look over your life and the past up to now, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: (Pause) The ability to contribute, at every level that I've been able to pass on some of myself and my expertise. That's the value of an individual and that's where I--you'll pardon the expression, but that's where I get my kicks, is giving and being a part of doing for others. I actually derive satisfaction from that.
Speaker 1: So you would say that one of the most important values for you, you say is contribution, is one of the most important values of a person?
Speaker 2: The most important contribution?
Speaker 1: Or values for a person, what is the most important values?
Speaker 2: Mine or what I?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yours that you feel important, what's the most important value of a person you think, that we should develop?
Speaker 2: Honesty.
Story_ID: 597065
Speaker 1: How do you want to be remembered? What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: (Pause) That's a good question, and I have to think about that. I think probably the legacy that I leave is work hard and be truthful to yourself first, be of value to some person and some things that are of value. That's a very hard question to answer because so many things pop into my mind that it's difficult to reduce it down to one sentence of what you want to be remembered for. It's hard to say.
Story_ID: 597066
Speaker 1: What's the one message that you want to leave to young people and to children and those that are growing, even young adults, what's the message that you really want to leave that's very important that they get besides their education? Is there anything else? You said education being important. Was there another message you want to give?
Speaker 2: (Pause) Remember the value of family is the most important institution that you can contribute to.
Speaker 1: Well this has been a great interview. I really want to thank you for your time and how you've really been so candid and open in sharing with us. We really want to thank you for this interview and you being so gracious to us.
Story_ID: 597067
Speaker 1: That (cough) is a photograph of the show the 'Rounders Club,' and you will notice in the foreground a picture is being drawn. We have everything going on at the same time. I'm doing interviews at the bar and it's a living room setting.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Tell us about this one again, Mr. Bailey [HistoryMaker William "Bob" Bailey].
Speaker 2: That was when I was at radio KENO [KENO Radio, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, tell us about this one please.
Speaker 2: That's Sidney Poitier, Bill Cosby and George Foreman in the movie 'Let's Do It Again.'
Speaker 1: And what were you doing in that movie? You were a (unclear)?
Speaker 2: I had a bit part.
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us who it is now.
Speaker 2: Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], Jerry Spencer [ph.], Anna Bailey, Judge Robert Green [ph.], one other, I can't think of the other one's names.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Your wife is in there too, right?
Speaker 2: My wife, Anna.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): One more time for the camera who is that?
Speaker 2: Governor Kenny Guinn.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. And again for the camera who is that?
Speaker 2: Barbara Franklin, secretary of commerce, U.S.
Speaker 1: And what is that?
Speaker 2: That's the award presented to me on the evening of the dedication of the school [William H. Bailey Middle School, Las Vegas, Nevada].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay. That's you and Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson]?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's myself and Jesse Jackson, Reverend Jesse Jackson.
Speaker 2: One more, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Myself, Governor Guinn, Bill Cosby, Amos Baker [ph.], president of the Frederick Douglass educational foundation [Frederick Douglass Foundation, Inc., Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Okay, (unclear) more please.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of myself with staff from the sales and production department and radio KENO.
Speaker 2: That's myself and Ambassador Andrew Young [HistoryMaker Andrew Young].
