Story_ID: 4183
Speaker 1: My name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer.  And Rachel Brown and Regina Mayben (ph.) are the observers.  And this location, this interview is taking place at 3502 Narragansett Avenue in Annapolis, Maryland.  And today's date is Thursday, June 4th, 2004.  So, Mr. Brown, if you would, just please for the record, please tell us your name, your full name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Well, I am Philip L. Brown, P-H-I-L-I-P, one "L", middle initial L, and the last name B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us your middle name and spell it?
Speaker 2: My middle name is Lorenzo, L-O-R-E-N-Z-O.
Speaker 1: And could you also tell us your date of birth and the location of your birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on January the 16th, nineteen hundred and nine [1909] in Annapolis, Maryland.
Story_ID: 4184
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, now, you mean my favorite food as of this time?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: As of this time.  Well, I'm limited somewhat in my diet now because of my seemingly digestive problems.  So mainly I eat the standard diet like vegetables and poultry or fish, a little bit of meat.  But it's, yeah, a general diet, not a special one.
Speaker 1: But what's your favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorite, now, see, my favorites I can't eat any more.
Speaker 1: Well, that's okay.  So what was your favorite?
Speaker 2: Well, my favorites were candied sweet potatoes and white potatoes, chicken, of course, and crab cakes.  My wife is a special-specialist at that, and that's about it.  Chicken and so on.  And, of course, for breakfast, your standard bacon and eggs or bacon and ham sausage, that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of the year is really summer.  Now, I don't like hot weather, but then, yeah, I, I like that and enjoy it much better than I do the time when we're shut in.  So summer's really my best time.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Hawaii, Honolulu.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: Do I have one?  Favorite phrase or saying?  I can't--Hmmm--one doesn't come to me right now.  I guess I have--I think it comes to me when the need arises.
Story_ID: 4185
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your mother, starting with what her name was, where she was born and where she grew up and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was Julia Ann Dorsey.  And she grew up in the Calvert County [Maryland] near, I think the Anne Arundel County line.  I don't know much about her family.  It was quite a Dorsey family, and several of 'em moved here [Annapolis, Maryland] later on in the 1890s and made homes, homes for themselves.  But they--there were several of them, and she had sisters and that sort of thing, and I didn't get too much from her, except for the fact that where she lived it wasn't close to the school and she got very little formal education, very little.  She actually, in signing her name, she actually drew it rather than signing it.  But she was a great mother.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about--how would you describe her?
Speaker 2: Well, let me see, how would I describe Mama.  She, she, she was nice.  She left the bad things, all the things, the unpleasant things to do, she left that for my father [William Henry Brown] to do, you know, those, those kinds of things.  And we, we had a nice family life.  She was at home all the time.  She didn't go out.  And so she was there when we got up in the morning and had our nice breakfast, went to school, came home for lunch, she was there when we came. After school, about four o'clock, there was a snack.  And I appreciated that, and I realize now more perhaps than I ever did before how important it is to have a mother who's at home.  So I don't remember being too affectionate so far as hugging and kissing is concerned, but she took very good of us.  There were actually thirteen in the family; ten grew up to adulthood, and I'm, by the way, I'm the baby of the family, and the last one, (Unclear) living.
Speaker 1: Um--.
Speaker 2: She, and, of course, she passed before my father.  She was about, around, I guess late seventies or eighty years of age when she passed.
Speaker 1: Did she ever share any stories with you about her growing up?
Speaker 2: No, here, there again, she didn't--I don't know.  I don't know whether it was that I wouldn't listen or whether she didn't have the patience--well, she was busy all the time, doing something and she wasn't a very--she wasn't a very outgoing person.  And so at home, she did what, the things were--that needed to be done for children, you know, all that.  But that--it wasn't a whole lot of, let's say pawing over.
Story_ID: 4186
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about your father, starting with his name, and where he grew up and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: His name was William Henry Brown.  And as far as I know, he grew up in that same area in the northern part of Calvert County [Maryland].  And I don't know anything about how he and my mother [Julia Ann Dorsey] met.  But in the 1890s, he moved his family.  Then I think maybe there were maybe four or five children.  They moved from Calvert to Annapolis and set up home for him here.  That was in the late 1890s.  He worked for the Naval Academy.  At that time, there was a, and still is, a demand for colored people as maybe maintenance people, building and grounds.  And he used to tell us about he, his work was in Bancroft Hall, and that was midshipmen's dormitory, and at that time, and I think maybe it still is, the largest one in existence.  And that one building housed 4,000-plus midshipmen.  And he said his job was to mop the corridor floor, marble floors you know.  So they had to be done every day.  And that was his first job when he came to Annapolis [Maryland].
Speaker 1: And did he ever share any stories with you about growing up?
Speaker 2: No, he--and he wasn't a talkative one.  He--I'll say this right now, my mother used to sometimes lose patience with him--apparently, he wasn't doing something that she wanted done.  And she said he always had a nose stuck in a book.  He, he said, he actually, for his--as far as his formal education was concerned, it would amount to about third grade.  But he was a prolific reader.  And he read and read, and he could, he could handle himself maybe with a college graduate, with general things now, no specific areas.  But he had general knowledge.  He, he read books.  He subscribed to magazines.  I remember the "Liberty" and "Saturday Evening Post" and the local papers, the [Annapolis] "Evening Capital".  I have, by the way, in the collection that he left, receipts from the local paper, going back to nine hundred and eight [1908], I believe.  So he, he was that type of person.  So he didn't have time for a whole lot of talk.
Story_ID: 4187
Speaker 1: What can you tell me about your maternal grandparents, starting with their name?
Speaker 2: Didn't know any.  I know his [father, William Henry Brown] his mother's name was Elizabeth Randall, and that's all I know.  I don't even know a thing about his father.  And my mother, I don't know, I did--I remember vaguely two or three of her sisters who lived in Baltimore, but I don't know a thing about any grandparents.  See, I was the last one.  And by the time I came along, they were, all had died.  So I didn't know--but I do know, as I say, his mother was Mrs. Elizabeth Randall.
Speaker 1: And how far back can you trace your ancestors?  Do you know if you came from free people or if you ancestors were slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestors?
Speaker 2: I don't know a thing about that.  Now, my father, as far as we knew he was, I mean he was a loner.  We--I didn't know a thing.  And see, one of, the bad thing is that when you're young, you don't realize.  And I could have found out a lot of things about him, where he lived, something about his life as a boy, I don't know a thing about it. But, now, of course, I realize that I could have--although I would have had to pry it out of him because--and get him away from those books, because he just didn't have time for things like that.  And he read, and did that sort of thing.  He was an avid church per-, person.  And oh, we'll come to that perhaps a little later.
Story_ID: 4188
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I remember in the church, I remember my mother [Julia Ann Dorsey], of course, took me to church with her at an early age.  And I can remember going there when--and by the way, we went three times a day, and so I went to that eight o'clock service, and I remember going in there, and we'd sit down.  And I'd, (mimes nodding off to sleep) and the next time I, I knew what was going on, we were singing "Praise God from whom."  And I, I remember that particular because I used to, I, well, I slept through that whole thing.  But they took me, of course, because there were no--well, there were other boys and other brothers and sisters maybe, but they were not large enough or for some reason she just took, and took us all along.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about, like special occasions in your house growing up.  What was Christmas like?  What were, Thanksgiving like?  What were special occasions like in your house?
Speaker 2: Well, as far as Christmas, you know, by the time it got down to me--thirteen persons [of whom he was the youngest child], the now--novelty (chuckle) had definitely worn off.  We observed it.  I remember I got a toy of some kind, and, but I don't--frankly, I don't remember a Christmas tree, I believe by that time.  So they'd given that up.  But we did observe Christmastime, and I did get some little toy to--and I told-- I was told little stories about Santa Claus, that sort of thing.  But again, I'll say this, my father [William Henry Brown] didn't have much time for that sort of thing, and I'll say, again, by that time, he, he was tired of, you know, playing Santa Claus (laughter).
Speaker 1: And can you tell us a little bit about what daily life was like in your house?
Speaker 2: Yes, we, my father got up first.  First, in the house, it was a house, at that time, although it was, it was a fairly new house, that we bought, and but it didn't--it had no electricity, no inside water and that sort of thing.  So actually, I remember the lamp lights and all.  And we had that for a time.  Of course, as we, time, time went on, my father added the, these newer things.  But as far as a routine day or usual day was, he got up.  And then he usually, I guess he called us, and we knew it was time to start the day.  And we learned early on that we didn't fool around at that time.  When he said it was time to get up, we started making some noise like we were getting up.  So we got--now, if it was during school time, of course, my mother came in and, and fixed breakfast and got us ready to go to school.  And I walked to the Stanton School, which you saw a picture of which is about, oh, maybe a country--maybe a mile from our house.  We went there to school, and came home for lunch, and so during--Now, that was our weekday.  Now, on Saturday, and by the way, my father operated a grocery store.  So Saturday was a big day for him and the children.  And as we became large enough we had some little, along the way, duty to perform in the store.  And so as time went on, I learned to wait on the store.  But in those early years it was simply that we got up, and during the school time of the year, we went to school.  Now, during the summer and days when school wasn't in, I reckon we still got up around that.  And we simply played around in the community with other children and we grew up that way.
Speaker 1: Could you please give us the names of you siblings, including their birth order, including yourself.
Speaker 2: Starting at the top, of course?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: Well, now, Eugenia was my first, was the first born.  It was Eugenia; then it was William, then it was Amelia and then maybe there was Aaron and then there was James, then there was Joseph, then there was Mary; then there was Alexander and Thomas and then me.  And I, but that was the order in which we were born.  Now, most times, of course, when we were not more than--in fact, when I was growing up, just my one sister, my youngest one, she was still home and two brothers.  So there were four of us there.  So, in our home, we had a six-room home, I mean, bedroom, I mean--not six bedrooms, three bedrooms; mother and father and the, and the girls on the--sister in the middle room, and we boys occupied the other room.
Story_ID: 4189
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about your community, like what was the name of your street, and can you describe your community or your block.
Speaker 2: Well, it was Spa Road, it was just outside of the city limits.  And it was just a, it was a colored community.  The main drag, main street through there and a couple of side streets.  And it was just ordinary, ordinary people.  Some of 'em worked at stores, and driving trucks, or wagons to start with.  Some worked in the Naval Academy.  Of course, the, the women, a lot of 'em did domestic work.  And I think some of them worked in the Naval Academy because inside the academy they had quarters for some of the, the officers.  And they, the officers had maids, of course.  So some of them worked there.  And then the laundry in the academy gave employment to quite a few.  But it was just an ordinary colored family, that's all, in a little world onto ourselves.
Speaker 1: Mr. Brown, can you tell me what sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Come again, I didn't quite--?
Speaker 1: What sights, sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: You mean something that I would recall or something I would see now?
Speaker 1: Right, and it reminds you of growing up.  It reminds you of your childhood.
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you what now, as soon as I--when I see little, little boy, when I see little boys and watching them in their activities today, then I stop sometime and think somehow and think, now, we didn't, we didn't do that--we were, we were doing 'this.'  And as far as smell is concerned, well, it's just--because we had, my father was, he, he liked food--flowers, I mean not the kind that you'd have to do a whole lot of caring for, but we had rose bushes and he planted some other bushes and all, but I remember that and the smell of honeysuckle, honeysuckle.  One reason why I remember that particularly was in one place where we were living, we had horses, we, we had wagons to do our work with.  And at the pump was a little watering trough, a little half, half a bucket, you know, a bucket cut in half.  And that was a watering spot for the horse.  So there was a honeysuckle bush right in the back of it, and we, we used to, not eat 'em, but suck on 'em, and it was good.  So I was pulling on the honeysuckle one day, and it was so hard to break some time, but it broke, and I sat right in that tub of water (laughter).  And I yelled for my mother to come out there and get me out.  And I remember that very well.  And that was when I was about maybe three or four or five, yeah, five years old.
Speaker 1: And what sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, sounds, sounds, sounds.  I remember particularly the twelve o'clock whistle there in Annapolis.  It was, I don't know where it was, whether it was up at the fire station or where it was, but there was a whistle that went off at 12:00 o'clock every day.  And I'd hear every so--that reminds me.  And then you'd see the people, and the activities, people coming, fellows who drove wagons or did other work, coming home for lunch and going on back in the--it sort of reminded me of that particular period.
Speaker 1: And do you have any other memories of growing up that you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, now, actually, it was just like any other boy.
Story_ID: 4190
Speaker 1: Tell me the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary?
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was Stanton Elementary School.  And my first teacher was Miss Lucy Briscoe.  So to us, she was Miss Lucy.  I remember her very well, how she took each one of us in the corner and taught us how to read to her and all.  And I grew up there from the, well, from then on up, and as I got larger, well, I remember the--of course, some of the subjects, but then for boys there at one time, they started a program in woodwork, which they called manual training.  We started in the fifth grade.  For what reason, why the county was liberal enough to give that to us, and we had that manual training two or three days a week.  And the girls went to home economics.  So we had that.  Now, and I learned, I believe, to--I learned how to use tools and it stayed with me because a lot of things here in this house, I did myself.  I did all the painting out there, outside from a ladder, and I learned to do these lights and all and painting--wallpapering.  And I, I just learned to use my hands then, and I, I've learned--I kept that and perhaps increased that skill so far as working with tools.  And it stayed right with me.  And I got my tool box out there now, and that's one thing I miss today.  I can't get, fix this thing or make something like I used to do then.  So I remember that particularly, went down into the basement of the school--oh, when I say, basement, it was a cellar where the furnace was.  And one end was a furnace room and the other end of it was where we had, three--they had given us some woodworking benches.  And then we had this subland, and it was, it was sort of like that cause once we got away from the classroom, we had more freedom to move around, and we had a lot of--we enjoyed the man who was teaching it to us and all.  And I remember that quite well.
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about what type of child you were around this time, around the elementary school years?  What type of child were you?
Speaker 2: What kind of a child was I? (Chuckle)  Well, let me--I was, I was a quiet child.  And that stuck with me because at that time, there was that saying that "children should be seen and not heard."  And my father [William Henry Brown], well, we were not--we weren't, we weren't encouraged to, to talk a whole bit.  He got home from the store around eight or nine o'clock, and came home and--of course, the kitchen was the center, you know, and he'd come in.  And then he'd and most times, and we, we, we went to our room upstairs or somewhere else, and so--.
Speaker 1: Did you have dreams and aspirations as a young child?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, actually, I liked, I liked sports, and I played--in, in the summertime, we had our evening baseball game, me and the fellows in the, in the community.  And I played football in school right on through.  And, but frankly, I remember my father, it was a certain (unclear), and I remember and him asking one of the boys, one of the larger boys, "Did it ever occur to you what you want to be when you grow up?"  And I remember that.  And we, one of my brothers, one of them, we thought that was kind of comical or something.  He went, "Did it ever occur to you--" but he, he was thinking.  (Unclear) You know, what is that, and by that time, it hadn't occurred to either one of us.  When you're, when you're--well, when I was seven or eight or nine, ten, whatever it was, I saw the world through the eyes of that age, and you wasn't thinking about--you, you would look at some person who was grown, and you just didn't, and you didn't realize that that person one time was a little person like you.  So I, I, I surely, I, I ended up going, you know, leaning towards--well, maybe it's a little ahead of the story, but at that time, I don't remember any kind of, kind of work that I felt I would like.  I liked fooling with, with my brother, with the automobile, that sort of a thing.  I liked to, he used fix it, and I used to help him along with that.  And so maybe I had a little leaning toward that.
Story_ID: 4191
Speaker 1: Earlier you talked a little bit about going to church, your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What were some of your experiences like at church?  What was church like for you and your family?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, for a youngster, you know, it's a lot of things you'd rather be doing, but, but we believed that--we became used to that at an early age.  And I'm sure, very shortly after I was born, I'm sure my mother took me in her arms and, and from that point on, we went three times a day.  We had morning service, Sunday school, in the middle of the day, and then eight o'clock service.  And, of course, and I remember we had--I remember sometimes we had plays or this (unclear) a Cantata, things like that and there were groups sometimes coming around to, some singers.  I remember one man and his wife used to come here and show religious movies.  I remember that, and we used to like--and in the summertime, we had a little yard.  We had little festivals so to speak, very, on a very small scale.  We had those and we played out in the yard, but, well, that, that was it generally.  And as time went on, I grew and then in different grades in, in the church, and then finally, well, I was at the age where I, when I graduated, of course, from high school, and then I went all the way to--boy, that's ahead of the story a little too, but, as far as my church life was concerned, it wasn't any question about it.  During the week, you were going to day school and Sunday, you were going to Sunday school.  Well, that wasn't, that wasn't debatable at all.  It was understood.  You had your Sunday clothes, you had your school clothes, you had your play school--play clothes after school.
Story_ID: 4192
Speaker 1: What were the junior high school years like for you?  Who were some of your friends?  What were some of the things you were interested in at that time in your life.
Speaker 2: Well, one of the things about it, we didn't have a junior high school--.
Speaker 1: Well, the early teen years.
Speaker 2: Oh, well, well, the system then was, for colored children was seven and four, seven years of elementary and four years of high school.  So that way, went eleven years.  So actually, I went from first to seventh grade in the elementary part of the building [Stanton School].  I told you we shared it with the high school.  And then the high school used about four, maybe four rooms of it. The building had twelve rooms to it, eight brick rooms and then sort of an attic, and which was converted into four classrooms.
Speaker 1: During that time in your life though, say, you know, twelve, thirteen, fourteen years old, who were some of your friends?  What were some of the things that you enjoyed doing?  How did you spend your time?
Speaker 2: Well, friends were mainly, well, not mainly either--of course, we had those friends in the neighborhood.  Some of 'em who didn't, who didn't go to school or they dropped out of school.  And these were the friends that we, we played with on, off-school days.  And, then, of course, we became, I became friendly with the, those that I met in school.  Well, mainly they were children who lived, we said, we say in town.  So I, I met them and knew them during the school season, and then I mean, I associated with them quite a bit, but most of my social activities around that age was right there in my community.
Speaker 1: What kinds of things did you like doing?
Speaker 2: Well, I told you, we played baseball for one thing.  And some of the boys disobeyed their parents' warning not to go over in the creek and go swimming.  So I, I didn't take any liking to water.  I never did that, but we had our baseball game every day.  And we had football.  We, we rolled hoops, see, you wouldn't understand that.  You rolled hoops and shot, played marbles.
Speaker 1: What's rolled hoops, what's that?
Speaker 2: A hoop off of--a hoop is the metal part of some kind of wheel, the metal part.  And no, nothing, it was just the metal part.  And you'd take a stick and you'd roll.  And that was, that was great fun.  And that, and I said, we played baseball and then, and I can't think of anything else.
Story_ID: 4193
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers and who were some of the people who were influencing you at this time in your life?
Speaker 2: My, of course, our first grade teachers [Lucy Briscoe, at the Stanton School] always has a great, a lasting effect on you, I guess.  Then I went in--I remember, of course, just about all of them, with one exception, all of 'em were, were women.  And that's one thing, the boys didn't have--and I think that's been something that has gone on through the years, a lot of, most of the teachers are females.  And the boys don't have a chance to come in contact with a male teacher sometimes all the way through elementary school.  Well, I did come across one in the fifth grade.  He was a--a Mr. Butler, and he taught us in the fifth grade.  But he wasn't--too impressive, He wasn't too much.  He, but after all he was our teacher, and he made us behave, and we got through the fifth grade and got through the sixth grade.  And the seventh, we came back to female teachers again.
Story_ID: 4194
Speaker 1: And at this time in your life, were you thinking about what you wanted to do with your life or, you know, what you'd like to do yet? Had that--?
Speaker 2: No, no.  As I think back, I--I thought of myself--well, I, I was a boy.  That was a stage of my life, and I said, when the world to me wasn't very large.  This whole community was our, was our world so to speak.  And I just, we couldn't see far enough ahead.  And I guess children today can, but I didn't see far enough ahead to see myself grown up and working and all that.  I just didn't do it.
Speaker 1: What were the high school years like for you?  Who were some of your friends, some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: Very small [Stanton] high school [in Annapolis].  In fact, when I graduated, graduated, there were only about eighty students.  So these again, were, boys and girls, most of them from in town, in town, and I saw them only during school time.  And the--of course, in town was where I, I can't, let me see, where the action was for us, the movie and that sort of thing.  So I was permitted to and we were permitted to go to the movie maybe once in a--mainly on the weekend.  And, and at the high school age, we, we could have little parties, and, you know, and that sort of thing, as I said, the movies or occasionally, a dance, somebody would sponsor a dance, and we could go to that.  And, of course, my father and all, my father didn't, wasn't too fond of the dances and things like that.  But after all, we were children, and we were growing up.  So he didn't, actually for me, he didn't bother me too much about, you know, what I was doing.  I knew this, I would--well, I'd, when I was coming back at a decent, you knew what a decent hour, I knew what a decent hour was, so I came back at that.  So I, I knew this, and I learned this from watching the experiences of my older brothers, that whatever he told you to do, you should go ahead and do it.  So I did that.  So there were restrictions as to, or limits to what you could do and all that.  We'd go to a movie and as I said, to a dance, home at, at his time, and that was that.  And we stuck to that much.  But I didn't give him any trouble.
Story_ID: 4195
Speaker 1: During the high school years, tell me a little bit about what type of student you were, what type of young man you were during your high school years?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, we got in--I got into [Stanton] high school [Annapolis, Maryland] maybe a little, a year earlier than most kids did because our elementary school went to just seventh grade.  And the high, the elementary school for white kids went to the eighth grade.  They had a grammar, they called grammar school.  So actually, my public school education consisted of just those eleven years.  So, now, we're saying, beginning with high school--what was your question again?
Speaker 1: What kind of student were you?  What kind of young man were you, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: I never, well, let me say that I never made the honor roll.  Now, that comes a lot there, I never made honor roll.  And I don't know why, my favorite subject, maybe was science.  And that was when they did this--Well, one, unfortunate thing as far as I was concerned, that happened to my family, was that [sister] Mary was ahead of us [the three youngest boys in the family].  And see, Mary was a girl, and, you know, girls in school, you know how they are, they, they studied.  One college professor said, this girl, said, she wrote everything the professor said, and so when he came in, he said, good morning, class.  And she wrote that down (laughter).  So, now, I wasn't as studious as I should have been because I--there again, I didn't see the sense of it.  I mean it's algebra and this and what's the sense of that?  And I guess maybe, that may have been the fault of the teacher or it may have been the fault of my not being able to understand clearly.  But it wasn't made real enough.  It wasn't associated enough with real life.  So I, you say what--I wasn't, I was a "C" student, let me put it that way.  And I, and I'll tell you what, I--of course, my father [William Henry Brown] was always telling us about Mary.  Mary had did this and Mary had all A's and B's and we stood--stood a constant diet of that.  But I, I worked and I did well enough to keep him off of me.  And he checked the report cards and all, and, and we knew it was gonna be a check on it.  And he, he was in the, in the PTA, when they had it, and he was, in fact, the president of PTA.  It didn't--see, it was small.  Teachers knew your parents, parents knew the teachers.  So I, I was really worked a real--and why I studied as much as I did was I didn't want to come in with a, with a "D" in our house.  So, and then I, occasionally he would check to see if--he asked me, I remember--and some time when I was high school, I would come and relieve him [at their store] because Mary had gone away to school.  And then in school time I was only, his only relief, so he'd go there, and stay until, what, about three o'clock and I'd come home.  But I, now, in that course of time between say three and six or seven when I would go--we'd be there be together, he would check.  He'd say, "Now, what's, what's your lesson?"  Oh, and by the way, while I was there, I was studying when there were no customers.  And he'd say, what is--and this was in history, "What is, what's your history lesson for tomorrow?"  And I opened the history book, (unclear) wasn't in school then, and he asked me a couple of questions on it.  Now, (chuckle) I'm ashamed to admit this, but and I told him what the yesterday's lesson was.  So we had already discussed that day.  And I was smart on this question, and so gave him,  what, Alexander the Great and all those guys, you know.  So, but--well, I did that.  I, maybe I did some other things that weren't acceptable too, but after all, I was just a kid.  I was just a boy.  So anyhow, but what I wanted to say, he was interested in it, no question about it.  He was interested and then he wanted to--I mean all along, and he knew, and like before me, several of my brothers and sisters had been to school.  And I would say one of them, Eugenia, went to Hampton Institute in 1901.  Now, he sent all three of his first children, consecutively to Hampton.  And how on earth he did it, the reason I don't know.  But Eugenia went to Hampton, and William, the second went there, and then  Dee [Amelia], all three of them went to Hampton Institute for--they'd go just for one, you didn't graduate or anything.  You went there, and they taught the girls homemaking and the boys trades.  And the funny thing about it, my brother said he took, for--of all things, he took blacksmithing.  And he said, he never struck a day's, (chuckle) a day's work at it in his life.  He just was (unclear).  So anyhow, but my father was interested, interested in schools.  And he not preached it to the children, to the adult, but he, he lived it through, through an example for them.  He did that.
Story_ID: 4196
Speaker 1: When you were in high school, were you thinking about going to college?  What were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: Well, in a way I wanted to--and I don't know why, but just to be, continue to go to school, I wanted to go to Morgan College because Morgan College--by the way in football--in high school, we had a pretty good football team, and I liked football.
Speaker 1: Did you play on the team?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, oh, I have a plaque there by the way.  I played with a group from, Hall of Fame, from Bowie [Normal School, later Bowie State University].  And well, anyhow, this was in [Stanton] high school [Annapolis, Maryland], and I played as much as I could.  Of course, I had to help some in the store, but my father [William Henry Brown] usually would let me go for when we had practices and all.  So we played football, and that sort of thing.  And I guess I liked that more than any other part of, of high school.  But anyhow, I made the grades and finally, in the usual four years, well, I graduated, graduated from high school.  And then he, as far as college is concerned, he, he told me, he said, "Well--", and I don't know if I ever told him that I'd like to go to Morgan, but he said that actually, that's why--and he was getting to be up in age now, and he had to be looking out for his old age.  And he said he could only afford for me to go to Bowie, which was a state school.  All you had to pay was--and I remember, it was only ten dollars a month.  You didn't pay any tuition.  That was for your board and lodging, ten dollars a month.  And I remember to enter, it was a fee of twenty-seven dollars, and that was room advance, a month for lodging.  It was ten dollars for something else, and it was a fee for something else.  Well, it was around twenty seven dollars to get in.  And then ten, ten dollars per month, yeah.  So she would (unclear) boy, your son can go Bowie and then stay home.  So I went to Bowie and, and again, I, I didn't, I was going and things.  I had no idea I was gonna--I was gonna be a teacher.  And to be, but I was going, continuing to go to school.  And another thing, (unclear) at that point you're a little anxious to get away from home.  And so I went to Bowie, and again, and, and I didn't get on any honor rolls, though I made enough grades and did well enough to graduate in those two years.
Speaker 1: What were your experiences like at Bowie?
Speaker 2: Well, boarding school is an experience in itself, right, boarding school.  You learn a lot more than English and history and stuff like that.  You learn a lot more.  And we were boys together.  We--they had just built a new--building, and the first level was the administration building and classrooms.  And the top floor was a large long room, like--not rooms, but sort of a barracks.  And we had one long room, and we had bunk beds, and that was where we, that was our living quarters.  So I just--going to, to a boarding school, getting in with the other fellows and having what we called bull sessions.  You get together and discuss everything, you know.  And I enjoyed that part of it, and, of course, the first part of my, when I went there that fall, I, I guess I got homesick.  Well, I used to go home--you could get special permission to go home on the weekend, and I went maybe several times.  But after a while, they didn't see me anymore till the next holiday, maybe then.  In senior year, I guess, I--when did I go home?  I went back home I know Christmas, maybe, maybe Thanksgiving.  I guess it was Thanksgiving and Christmas and maybe Easter holiday.  We had two years there, and I enjoyed it for that life and (unclear) say the association with the boys --of course I couldn't say association with the girls because we didn't get close to them.  We did, we went to the dining room together and we sat in the, at the same tables, but when we had assemblies, the boys sat on one side and the girls on the other.  And right, and it just happened that between the boys' building and girls' building was a, was road.  So on this side and over there was off limits for us.  So we couldn't go over there.  And they had to come over here to go to classes because the classrooms are over here, and the dining hall, but that's the way it was.  And we had, and, oh, let me see, we had about thirty boys, and maybe there were ninety students, maybe, in the whole school.  And when say this, it started off because some towns didn't have colored high schools, it started off with a high school department too.  But by the time I got there, they were gradually doing away with that.  So by the time I got there, they had gotten down to junior and seniors.  And, of course, the next year they discontinued the juniors and so on, so I guess the year after I left, it became solely a normal school [teachers' school] , two years.  That was 1928.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the things you enjoyed doing while you were in college?
Speaker 2: Well, I enjoyed playing the, playing football, and we, we had our little social hour for us maybe once a week, maybe on a Saturday, where we had a chance to look at least look at the girls.  And, oh, and they had chorus.  I, I liked to sing, and I was a member of the, in the choir, and we used to go out some time and sing at other places and all.  And that again, of course, that again, that was a mixed choir, boys and girls.  And anytime that there was any--activity, where boys and girls got together, of course, the boys particularly, always joined that sort of thing.  But I enjoyed that, and, and--I don't remember anything else that stood out--they were very strict in that regard.  I mean the principal, and then he, he had a--his wife, she was the matron, you know, I mean she was, she was rich, and she--she did her job, well, she did her job.  When we had the dances, and you were supposed to be apart, and she saw to it that you stayed apart in your dance, it was no cheek-to-cheek (laughter).
Story_ID: 4197
Speaker 1: When you graduated from Bowie, where did you get your first teaching job?
Speaker 2: Oh, it, during the senior year, we had interviews with the, I guess the [Maryland] state supervisor of public schools.  He would come and talk with us and tell us about some of the do's and don'ts and give us some idea of what is going on.  Like now, actually, Bowie prepared prospective teachers for the State of Maryland, and most of the schools were one and two--most were one-room schools, then there a few two-room, few, you know, a few two-room school.  And now, Annapolis had a graded school.  And that, a lot of campuses didn't have a graded school, didn't have that many students.  So in other words, I applied, applied in, to Anne Arundel County for an appointment.  And, of course, they assigned me during that fall, and the vacancy was, this school, of all places was where--you heard my wife [Rachel Hall Brown] talking about going--where she went to school, well, I taught in the school, and not in the building, but the school to which she had gone.  Her family lived right in there.
Speaker 1: What was the name of that?
Speaker 2: Marley Neck. And I knew her, I taught her brother and sisters before I knew her cause I stayed in that community for a little while because I didn't have transportation to get back and forth.  So I lived with a family, and see, I was up there from Monday to Friday.  Monday to Friday, she was in  Vaulmer going to school.  Friday, I'd come home.  She would come home.  And Monday, then she was gone--I didn't meet her then.  So I knew her brother and sisters before I knew her.  So then I was, I was assigned to that school, and then later on I moved to another.  And then when she graduated in 1930, and she was assigned to a school, it just so happened she was assigned to the same school that I was assigned to.  And that's when we--.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of that school?
Speaker 2: Skidmore, S-K-I-D, that was the picture I showed, S-K-I-D-M-O-R-E.  Now, that's an area just as you approach the May Bridge.  Now, you, of course, it was a little community there.  It was called Skidmore.  And all the little communities had their own school.  So we, we worked there for a while, and then, of course, when we got married, they had these rules about a man and his wife can't teach in the same school.  So they moved her to another school.
Speaker 1: And what year was that?
Speaker 2: In nineteen--well, we worked there in 1930, but then we, we got married in '32 [1932].  Well, it was quite known by, and we didn't try to hide it.  After all, I was a young man, single, and she was a young lady, single.  (Unclear) So and her, her parents, I'd been there, they approve of me.  So we went, always went to movies and places after school.  And, of course, during school time, we had sense enough to confine it to school business, strictly.  And so, but they--but the funny thing, in the white schools, right in Annapolis, and the high school had a white principal and the principal and his wife worked right in that school.  But anyhow, we were separated then.  And then, oh, I--let me tell you (unclear).  And that's pretty, tell you how we are, we were, Miss Jones, who was our supervisor, told me that "The two of you, if you're going together, you can't work in the same school."  You see how we thought.  If you two of you working together, couldn't work in the same school.  So you'd have to move on (unclear).  I said, "Well, Miss Jones--that was her name, I said, in September we're gonna be married.  And so, well, then married people can't work in the same school." So anyhow, so anyhow, we, we got married that fall, nineteen thirty--1932 and lived forever happy.  "He lived happily ever after." (laughter)
Speaker 1: Before you all were married, you went to Morgan [State University] in the 1930s--.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: --After you were married.
Speaker 2: After we were, it was some time we were married because you see, we had that--we were getting a lower salary, plus the fact that our schools just went to April--to, to the middle of May.  And our schools shut down.  Therefore, unpaid vacation.  We didn't get paid any more till October.  So while we wanted to go to summer school in those early years and would have gone, we couldn't afford it.  So for those few years, I, we, we just struggled to try to stay alive during the summer, and we didn't go to school.  And then we got married, and then after four years, I believe Philip Junior was, or safer to say maybe four years, as he was born later (unclear).  But we did was, and I don't remember what year it was, we had our credits sent to Morgan, and we entered as part-time students.  And we went in the evenings, they had evening schools, certain evenings that were held at Mor--at Douglass High School.  So we went there for some of 'em.  We went in the summer, and, of course, the state regulation was to renew your certificate, in order to keep it valid, you had to once every three years anyhow.  But I'm saying we went sometimes--and we had the time, but we just didn't have the money.  So it was a long time between the time that we, we started there, and we didn't graduate until 1947, but the two of us did graduate in 1947.
Story_ID: 4198
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about what happened in 1938 when you all sued the Anne Arundel Board of Education?
Speaker 2: Well, after we'd been in this system for a while, we, we began to notice and realize that, that the white teachers were being paid more than we were being paid.  You know, and by the way, we're organizing around them.  They had their teachers', Anne Arundel County Teachers Association, which we, we couldn't join.  So we organized our own, the Colored Teachers Association of Anne Arundel County.  So we used to have our meeting, and we talked about different things.  And this was quite often the fact that, a topic, that we were being paid less.  And so we began agitate some for equal pay.  And they ignored it.  So we finally decided that the only way we're gonna get them to equalize it was to go to court.  And the NAACP had become interested in it.  And (sneeze), sorry.  And they had tried, they carried--they tried to get two other cases to go to court in Montgomery County, and Calvert County, but in each case, they settled out of court.  So we had a person who was willing, one Walter Mills, who was a person to represent the teachers, and Thurgood Marshall came here to Annapolis.  And worked out the case, and went to court, first to the state and then to the county.  And we were successful.  And they went to the county and an injunction was issued to force the county to cease that difference.  So now, it actually happened in 1940 during the time they were going to court and so on.  But in 1940 (cough) excuse me, they had--.
Speaker 1: Carey, pause for a second.
Speaker 2: So, Mr. Brown, was there a huge disparity in the salaries between the white teachers and the black teachers in Anne Arundel County?
Speaker 1: Well, yes, but then they were paid on a, a yearly basis.  And we were paid by the month.  And, but still when you figured out, worked it out even by the month, there was, they were substantially higher, more highly paid than we were.  And so, it amounted--actually, when they worked it out, they were getting, they were getting around fourteen hundred a month maybe and I was getting maybe nine.  It was just about that much difference.
Speaker 2: And once the, the salaries were equalized, what impact did that have on your, your family life?
Speaker 1: Well, let's see that in, in '40 [1940] and, of course, we'd been married then for some time.  We were, we were still, I guess, renting a house, but certainly, it helped us a lot because--then, too, around the same time, they not only, they equalized the salaries, but they equalized the school year.  So then we were getting paid ten months.  And it's easier to live when you're not getting paid two months than it is when you're not getting paid three or four.  So that helped us a lot.  And we, we did do better, but I had--and most of the teachers, and men particularly, had little summer jobs that they did.  And you've heard maybe of Carrs beach and Sparrows Beach, you ever hear--? Are you old enough to--? Well, anyhow, they're right near here.  And men, you see, that was at a time when amusements and places like that were not plentiful for, for colored.  So we, we did good business, very good business, both of them did.  So I worked at Sparrows Beach in the summer, I guess for about twenty years.
Speaker 2: What did you do there?
Speaker 1: Well, I'll tell you, and one, my main job was I was an entrance--and you had to pay a fee to come in.  So most of the time, that's where I worked, at the entrance.
Story_ID: 4199
Speaker 1: You and your wife [Rachel Hall Brown] decided to further your education after you had gotten master's degrees from Morgan.
Speaker 2: After we had gotten our bachelors.
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, your bachelors degrees from Morgan [State University].
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 1: Your BS degrees.  Why didn't you go to school in Maryland?  Why did you go to school out of state?
Speaker 2: Well, at that time, of course, this was right in the middle of the segregation period, the separate, but so-called equal, and Morgan didn't have a graduate program, neither did Bowie, and so we should have been able to go to the University of Maryland, but they didn't--they had that all-white policy.  And so they, they did not accept colored students.  So they, they did this though, they set up some of a, an out-of-state program by which they paid us some--and which was supposed to be the difference in what we would have paid at the University of Maryland, and what it cost to go to the other one.  In other words, it wasn't supposed to cost us any money, but when you take, in terms of the distance we drove to New York--and we got, by the way, the school offered some extension classes here in Washington.
Speaker 1: What school?
Speaker 2: New York U[niversity], and so, and that was the main reason we were out there--went there because those, those programs, those subjects were available by extension from New York.  But that was in, in Washington, and we, we went there for quite a while.  I don't remember how many course we took, but there was a, a requirement at the school that you had to have, file there, so many credits on campus.  I don't know if that's still (unclear) or not, but I believe it was twelve or fourteen.  So we got all we could get by extension, and then we decided to go to, to New York.  And we went up there, on weekends, on Friday, after we finished our school day, around 6:00 o'clock, I remember.  We used to get together, the five of us, my wife, two of her sisters and as I say, one friend of ours, so we had five.  And we drove to New York.  It was about a six-hour trip.  There was no I-90, whatever, it's 195 or Route 40, which goes to, which went through all of our little towns, where you had to reduce your speed to twenty-five miles, and the traffic lights.  And then, so I didn't have any--the trip, really it took six, about six hours.  We stopped on the turnpike to eat dinner, and we got up there about 12:00 o'clock.  And we had a standing place for, at the hotel every Friday, during that period.  So we had a room ready.  That's a old hotel.  It was near Washington Square where, New York U was, the branch that we went to.  So we had that standing engagement there, and so we went up there for, for a year.  We started in, in October--September, and went up until May.  And the interesting thing is we, we finished, we were up there during '54 [1954] and '55 [1955], we were up there then.  So we graduated in '55 [1955], and that, that Supreme Court decision [implementation order] came in '55 .  So we were right in the heart of that, and, of course, we did a lot of talking about that going back and forth, when, you know, this, the news got around that they were planning such, such a program.  So that's when it came.  So we graduated from New York University in 1955.
Speaker 1: Do you wish you would have just waited a couple of years?
Speaker 2: Waited?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.
Speaker 2: No, because really, now, we--so many years had passed because we weren't able to go, and there were so many young people in the classroom.  When we went to Morgan (chuckle) I--and, and by the way, this was right after one of the wars, when the boys--the men had this, some kind of help from GI, help, you know, whatever it was.  So we had a lot of young, especially men, who had been in the service and got that, into that program.  So I, I'm sure I was the oldest one in the class.  But in going to Morgan, by the way, we, we went from Annapolis, same way, I had a group of travelers (unclear).  And we went to Morgan for 8:00 o'clock class.  So (unclear), and we did that in the summers, you know.  We lived through all of it, and here we are many years later.
Story_ID: 4200
Speaker 1: It was many years later after "Brown versus The Board of Education" [1954] that  Anne Arundel County Schools finally integrated.  Why did it take so long?  I mean it took almost ten years.  Why did it take so long in Endarundo County?
Speaker 2: Well, I can you though, of course, the person who, who knew that and was responsible was the superintendent, and, of course, he's dead now.  But, but what the problem was, is this, and I, and this was the word that went around.  He met--the superintendent met with his white teachers right when that decision was made.  And so the word was that he told them that they didn't have anything to worry about as long as he was superintendent.  And, of course, he, he may have--he erred a little bit there in his prediction or promise.  So anyhow, but for, during that time, he tried every way under the sun maybe to skirt the, the order to desegregate, trying this plan, that plan, and, but the whole idea was, he was doing really what, what the white people wanted him to do.  And he was just trying to avoid it.  And I guess he was hoping maybe sometime--and I don't know what he was hoping.  He couldn't have thought that he could disregard the court's order.  Now, he, he wasn't--he, he couldn't be that stupid, could he?  But anyhow, it wasn't until 1966 that--oh, by the way, it was under HEW, in Health, Education and Welfare, and that department sent a group of inspectors down in the spring of '66 [1966] to investigate some of the counties to see if they were, indeed, ready or if they could desegregate or if they were just stalling.  So when they came down in that spring of '66 [1966] and after inspecting our county, they decided that our county was ready.  And there was no reason we couldn't.  So the order came to our school board, our superintendent, to desegregate in September.  So that, then they got ready, and then--well, and the either could--their basis, the base was all together, (unclear) cause a black school.  So all that summer, and they spent the whole summer, getting our school ready for the white children.  That makes you (unclear), went in there, and this too, I was a vice principal, and so I got the assistant superintendent who was in charge of it, contacted me and told me--and by the way, we worked a twelve-year basis.  We had eleven years of work--eleven months of work, and one month in the summer of vacation.  That was a plan that we, we worked on as principals or administrators.  So I was entitled to my mouth and I had applied for it.  So they said that if I would forego my mouth's vacation that they would pay me an extra month, if I would do that and stay there and help that, help them to get the school ready for the white children.  It just so happens that my wife and I had made plans much earlier on too, we were going, going to Europe on the--you know, we had already made our plans to go on (unclear).  And I was so happy to be able to, to tell him that I had other plans.
Story_ID: 4201
Speaker 1: We ended (the preceding tape) around 1966 when Anne Arundel County decided to integrate the schools.  What happened that September?
Speaker 2: Well, all right, when September came, of course, word got around, 'cause all knew what had happened.  And, of course, there were white people that expressed their displeasure, even to the point that they wanted to change the [school] name from Bates, to take some of the sting out of it, I guess.  And so the superintendent gave in to them, and so they took out the name Bates and they called it the Annapolis Middle School, no, Annapolis Middle High School, I guess.  So when it reopened in September, it was Annapolis Middle High School.  Now, Mr. Hilliard, Mr. Hilliard was the principal of Bates.  So when--oh, by the way, they separated the teachers.  They took out--we had some, maybe seventy some teachers on their staff, and they left us around twenty-two, (unclear) some they had distributed around--.
Speaker 1: To integrate the schools as well.
Speaker 2: Yeah, to integrate the white schools.  So, and, yeah, Mr. Hilliard stayed as the principal and I stayed as the vice principal.  And so they came, and, of course, we, we had this difficulty--some of them didn't--now, the white children came to our school.  And, of course, the colored ones who were coming there for the first time did something about the building.  They had been there before, you know, for one reason or another.  So they didn't have that problem, but the white children, of course, had a little problem in finding their way around from, you know, to the class to go (unclear).  But, now, what all this, that they, the superintendent and others predicted would happen if white and colored children went to the same school, of course, that never, never happened.  Now, I'm speaking now, for Bates now.  That never happened.  They, for the first days, of course, naturally, they, they went around with their friends.  The white children's friends were white, and the colored children's friends were colored.  So you could tell that difference, and as they went to class and different places, they were usually with their kind.  And so that, this happened for a while.  We didn't have any disturbances, no fights and that sort of thing with that.  In fact, during that whole time, nothing happened that we couldn't solve right there in the school, right within the system.  We didn't have to call in--now, some of the other schools, that happened.  I'm speaking now of Bates, where I was and the experiences that I had with it.  So, as time went on though, and as they went to class and went to lunch and all together, they began to soften up a bit, and you saw that they--some of them, more and more they were getting together.  And, but here's one thing about it, it was quite a, an adjustment for all 'em.  The, the whites were, the white parents, some of them had told their, their children, you watch out for these, these black children had guns and knives and bows and arrows and everything.  And, and then, then the colored parents told their children, you don't know what's gonna happen.  You don't know how the white teachers are gonna treat you.  So there was that apprehension, and it was apparent in both cases.  But they, they gradually--and then some never did actually associate with others.  Some did very freely, and it went on that way.  And I say, we never had any problem that we couldn't, we couldn't settle.  And I, I had a chance to get in touch with them maybe more than as classroom teacher because at that time, one of my sons was in transportation.  And we had, oh, quite--a lot of, when, when it was organized as a middle school, we, we had all the ninth grades in Annapolis, and some of the tenth grades from nearby communities.  So my job was--and one of my jobs was to supervise the, the arrival and departure of the buses and settle any problems that developed and all.  So I met them every morning, and I said goodbye to them every afternoon.  And some of 'em, they, in the morning, would--could say, with a cheery good morning or some, some of 'em came in with their noses in the air and never got 'em down.  And, but that, but that's the way it was.  And, but they--it showed that the differences that you find among people, I mean so far as how their feelings are, what they felt about the races getting together.  So--.
Speaker 1: So four years later, in 1970, you decided to retire.
Speaker 2: Yes, I, and then I had--this middle school was in existence for two years.  Then they changed it to a junior high school.  Oh, and then I stayed there for two more years, so that made it '70 [1970]. So in '70 [1970] I decided that I had been in for forty-two years, and I thought it was a nice, a nice number to stop with.
Story_ID: 4202
Speaker 1: What were some of the biggest changes that you saw in, in your forty-two years of teaching, what were some of the biggest changes you saw during that time frame?
Speaker 2: Well, the changes that took place, of course, very gradually.  And they were gradual, you hardly noticed it.  In those early years, there weren't, wasn't much change.  They, they stuck to that--for instance, in 1926 in this, in the superintendent's report to the county, he listed forty-two colored schools.  And in 1940, I guess it was, he listed again--and I don't believe the number had changed at all.  Now, some--and the makeup might have changed, but we still had that forty-some teachers--and supervised by one colored supervisor, one supervising forty-two colored schools, all over the county.  All right, now the changes, I mean I, as I say, as far as, it was very, very (unclear) because, you see, the, I mean the white people had control.  They had control, and after all, and here in Annapolis [Maryland], we, that was before the time that we started demonstrating.  And there were no demonstrations or very few complaints.  For the most part, we took what they gave us and went on with that.  And so really during that time, until it started--you start talking about integration or desegregation, and then the, the superintendent and the board got a little disturbed about it because they said, "Now, maybe these, the white children maybe have to go to some of these other buildings."  So what they did then, here in Anne Arundel County, which they did in a lot of counties, especially the Southern ones, they started this frantic building program.  And they built schools.  They built--and, and now, then now, that, now this, this was really and certainly, maybe the middle '40's [1940s] at least before this thing started happening.  And the problem at that time they had maintained these little one-room schools and little two-room schools, they weren't, they weren't paying any attention to us at all.  They weren't paying any attention at all.  Let me put this in, there were, at Bates, when you started to go to the point we needed more room, over the street--next street over, running parallel to where the school was, there was a old deserted, white elementary school, and they had separated that building into two parts and moved it over on the Bates ground, and made that an annex for us, old shingled wooden building, dilapidated.  And then we went in--and they, well, they did this in the apparently they could sleep at night, after doing it.  So what I'm saying is there was very little, changes made, very little progress made until there was that talk about maybe there'd be some integration.  And they--and what they were doing really was just to try to make it look like, like that they, that we were equal.  They wanted to show that.  So anyhow they started that, but then, as I told you what had happened, and that brings us up to I retired in nineteen--[1970] well, you had asked me when--well, really, there was nothing really hardly worth mentioning until that time.  And then they built these new buildings, added new parts to some of the old ones and to begin, our schools began to not become equal, but at least it looked they were thinking about it.
Story_ID: 4203
Speaker 1: After you retired [after 42 years as a teacher and school administrator in Anne Arundell County, Maryland], you had some time on your hand and decided to write your first book, spend some time writing your first book.
Speaker 2: Well, yes, now, we're talking 1970, but I--well, I took a nice little rest, and a lot of things that I wanted to before, I didn't have time.  And one thing I, I said I learned it in the elementary school in manual training (unclear), and I did a lot of things in this, this house when we, we built it in nineteen--oh, 1960.  We built it in 1960, and we made some changes in it, some structural changes, but a lot of it, it had the painting, and I even painted the outside twice from a ladder.  And I, a lot of nerve I had then.  I was younger then, but anyhow, I painted that, and so I painted all the inside, and oh, some wallpapering and all that sort of thing.  So all those sort of things, I liked to do, and of course, when I was in school, well, I had my month summer.  My, my initial one-month vacation, and other times, I had--and I took care, I always liked taking care of my yard, the lawnmower and all, I did all that myself, which I now miss quite a bit because I can't still do it.  So by the way, it was a few years though after I retired before I thought about to do--the thing of writing a book cause really, and then when I started thinking about it, I just thought writing a book is such a huge undertaking, write a book, all this--and do all that.  And, but, you know, as time went on I began to think about it more and more, and now, I was getting older, those I had worked with were getting old, some of 'em were dying.  And it occurred to me that, what these schools were like when we were working in those for twenty--in the '20's [1920s] and '30's [1930s] and '40's [1940s], all that would be lost unless somebody recorded it.  So after turning it over, I decided I was gonna make a try at it.  And so, I had been--and then this had an influence on me too--a teacher, a retired teacher in, over in Montgomery County, wrote a book.  She, and as you would have it, she graduated from Bowie.  She went to Morgan.  She went to NYU (laughter) [all the same schools he had attended], and she was just about my age, my years of experience.  So I said that, if she--and I, and I saw the book, and I said, now, if she could do that--and by the way, she, somebody else, another teacher went with her.  And I said, if they could do, I can do that.  And that really gave me the final push, that idea. and (unclear) Well I got started on it, and I decided at the beginning that maybe I would like--if I could do the first one, I would try to do three.  I'd like to do the one telling how, what the schools were like during that whole separate but equal era.  And then I grew up in Annapolis, what Annapolis was like, so that was my second one.
Speaker 1: But going back to "Separate But Equal Education in Anne Arundell County", what is it that you hope people who read that book, what is it that you hope they'll gain from it?
Speaker 2: Well, it seems if they read my two books maybe they--, I would like for the experience of us who didn't know about it, and there were a lot of us who really didn't know exactly--I mean what we went through, it would be something to, to explain it or to inform them, and then I thought this and another reason was, I would like to have something for any person who might later on, might want to do some research on it, and this could be a written something that actually was done by somebody who had experienced it and all the others that I didn't--it wasn't done on my experience, I looked it up and verified.  And so my, my purpose--and maybe I stated this in the beginning of it, was to make a perfect record of what it was like, that's right, during that 'separate but equal' era.  And then the second was to serve as a resource for anybody who'd be seeking information as to what they were like.
Story_ID: 4204
Speaker 1: This year, as we celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of "Brown versus the Board of Education", do you think that integration was successful, and what are your thoughts on that?  Do you think as blacks, it's benefited us or that it has somehow not served us well?
Speaker 2: Well, I think they benefited.  I think this, I think the Supreme Court did what it was asked to do.  It was asked in, in essence to end segregated public school education.  And that was what they were asked to do.  That's what the complaint was.  Well, they did that.  And they, they brought an end to it.  So I think the Supreme Court did what it was asked to do, nothing more, but just that.  Now, the fact, and where we haven't integrated more, that's not the Supreme Court's fault.  We, somebody said that that, their promise hasn't been kept.  But I, I don't see it that way.  I'll say this, that they did what we asked them to do, end segregated public school education.  And now, if we didn't follow it up maybe and, when some of 'em, some of the other--and some new things in order to get them to integrate, that's our fault.  But I think this, that it's gonna be difficult thing to get them to really integrate because you can't, you can't make laws and you can't make people give you certain things.  And you know that ole saying, and maybe you've heard of it, but "Birds of a feather flock together", and actually, maybe it's true that we feel better among ourselves.  I don't know, maybe we do.  And some of the, maybe some of the young ones who didn't know anything about those years, and who were born into a--not an integrated society, but one where it was no segregation, they didn't know the other, and maybe they would feel all right.  But now, for fifty years of my, I couldn't, I didn't assoc--I couldn't associate with white people.  And it's hard for me to get over that.  And so I wonder some time, am I as at ease in the white group as, as I am with a colored one.  And if I'm not as much at ease, is it a weakness on my part.  Well, you know, some of those things go through my head during the times when I have nothing else to think about.  So I, I think this, and then too, I look at it this way, in addition to what the desegregation of the schools came, but in the '60's [1960s], all the legislation that was passed, voting and a lot of equal things--bills, civil rights bills that passed in the '60's [1960s] were a direct result of the ruling that the court made, cause they're saying if it's not legal to separate you for education, it's not legal to separate you for eating and from one to, from this and the other.  So I look at it that way.  But you know some people, and I've heard some say that, "Are we any better off?"  And I say, that's somebody who didn't live during that period 'cause if you lived during that period, you've lived quite a bit, and I'm sure there wouldn't be any question in your mind, but that we--I know I'm much better off and I would have been much better off if I'd been born during the period--or if there had been no desegregation when I went to school.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: How so?  Ah, well, I would have been, for instance, and, and our schools went to the seventh grade and the white ones, right in Annapolis, went to eighth grade.  All right, that, that's one.  All right, I went to school for a hundred and forty days.  They went for a hundred and eighty.  Now, that has to make a difference.  I would have been a smarter boy in school.  I would have made the principal's (laughter) list or the honor roll.  But it has to make a difference.  Now, this went on all those years and yet now, when it comes to now, if we're behind them in all of our scores and all, what would you, what do you expect?
Speaker 1: Why do you think test scores are lagging for many African American students when, in comparison to whites?  And also, when we look at some schools in inner city areas and in predominantly black areas, they tend to not have the resources that schools in the suburbs and in predominantly white areas have.  So why do you think we are lagging in those particular areas?
Speaker 2: Well, in testing, well,  here's what I say, the tests are biased, I say in language that a lot of colored children never, the words and expressions, oh, they never heard of.  That, that's one thing.  And then the, another would be, as far as right now is concerned, like, well, a city like Baltimore and some others that are, Washington, and cities that are like that, it's just that, well, they didn't have anything, the quality of teaching has dropped so.  I was shocked when, I mean I was writing about Baltimore, and they said there's so many--they had so many uncertified teachers.  And that was something unheard of back in our time.  We, you had to go and you didn't miss that summer school thing because you could be classified then as a second-class teacher, and your salary would be, would be dropped.  You had to, to do that.
Speaker 1: Do you think they should do that now?
Speaker 2: Yes, I--and I think this too.  I think that--now, in Bowie [Normal School, later Bowie State University], they taught us how to teach, that whole two years we spent, how to teach, not what to teach, but how to teach, and how to motivate children.  You don't, you don't hear the term motivation.  The beginning of our lesson plan was, your motivation.  How are you gonna get these children interested in what you want to teach 'em?  Now, you don't hear that today.  They, they, they just--and they had it in their heads and all, and they, but a lot of them have it their heads, but you can't teach it to children.  So I think the children, they're, they're not being, not enough emphasis is being placed on methods of teaching.  And I think this, that the, the colored children are suffering more from it because of the back--their background.  The white children come from a home and where they live, they're in--a lot, lot of the fact, the reason why they stand high in scores is not because of the teachers, it's because of their home. We could say, they learn in spite of the teacher, and that sort of thing, so that's my feeling about that.  Now, I think this too about, about the conditions of--like, for instance, and by the way we have these areas that are predominantly almost totally white or black.  Well, the, the make-up of the school will influence the (unclear) and reflect that.  Schools where there're mostly black children, maybe, those children, those schools are gonna be predominately black.  As I said, I don't think it's ever had, not any point in trying to bus 'em and mix 'em up.  I never was in favor of that.  But I think it's a lesson, the housing problem changes some.
Speaker 1: But why aren't you in favor of busing, cause that, that is the only way to mix them up when you look at people usually go to school in the neighborhood where they live.  And you tend to often times live in neighborhoods--.
Speaker 2: Well, because of the, the time that you, you spend.  And somebody said, now, there's a six year old child, they don't want to put that child on a bus that's gonna go way to I don't know where.  In two hours, at Bates, and I still have this clear in, clearly in my mind, that all the children, all over the county spent getting down to Bates.  And some of 'em spent two and a half hours of a day on the bus, coming from up near the, the Borman City line, right on there to Calvert County, you know.  And all that time that they spend, and some of 'em had six years of that.  Look at the time that they spent on the bus.  So, I, I, I didn't believe in it then, and I, I don't believe in it now.  Now, how are you gonna get 'em mixed up, I don't know.  I don't have any suggestion to make (chuckle).  That's somebody, some other person smarter than I am will have to figure out how to do it.  But I, frankly, I--well, I don't see a way you can really get 'em--you can't make some--make them mix up.  You can't do that.
Story_ID: 4205
Speaker 1: After you published your first book "Separate But Equal", how did, how did it sell?  How well did it do?
Speaker 2: It, it was well, pretty well received.  But here's one, one thing that I found out after I published my book, and if I didn't know it before, and what made me realize it was I tried to get two or three publishers to publish it, you know, for me.  And so I sent my samples to them and one company, there's one right across the bridge on the Eastern shore, and that publisher wrote me a letter, and he, and he sent it very nicely, but he pointed out to me your audience for your book will be black.  And he didn't come out and say (unclear), but say, black people don't read much.  So it, it--I felt this way.  I said, now, this book is the story of, of the elementary school through that period, and all these children and in big  Anne Arundel County, all them, had children going to elementary or high school, this covers the whole thing.  And I said, now, I know every home would want one.  (Laughter) Every home didn't want one and every home didn't get one, but I tell you what, now, I've published 2,000 at first.  And I won't say we sold them, but we got rid of 2,000 cause so many of 'em, you know, you got to give so many of 'em away for one reason or another.  But we got rid of that 2,000, and we did a second printing of a thousand, and we still maybe have two or two, or 250, two hundred fifty of those still left.  But I'm gonna tell you right now, it's a fact that more white people buy 'em, more white people buy 'em.
Speaker 1: How long did it take you to complete it?
Speaker 2: Now, when my first one, it took me a little long because I wasn't under any pressure.  I didn't have to get it ready by a certain time.  So I really took my time, and some time I'd put it down--like for instance, in the summer on a day like today, I didn't do much writing.  And then I remember that certain--there were certain TV shows like somebody Junior, what was his name, J.R. was on--.
Speaker 1: "Dallas".
Speaker 2: Now, Dallas would come on, and show, and I like baseball, and the baseball, and I liked to look at that.  So they--I, I didn't hurry any.  And I guess probably two or three years (unclear) or maybe more than that.  But I had it in my head and was getting it together, but so far as, and actually writing it down, you know, I didn't spend any long, any length of time just working on it.  I didn't do that.
Story_ID: 4206
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about your second book which was published in 1994.
Speaker 2: Well, I--.
Speaker 1: Could you tell us the title of it and the--what it was about?
Speaker 2: Oh, I, the, I chose to call it "The Other Annapolis" because, you know, I had read something around that time that Jimmy Carter said in the inaugural that he wrote, that there was two Americas, and that sort of hit me.  And so I said, well, now, all right.  Since he saw that as two Americas, Annapolis--and I thought about the "Tale of Two Cities", but I said, and that's, that's not so original.  So I (chuckle) I didn't go on with that, but I said, but there is--we're in the same area and all, geographically, anyway.  And they all, there was (unclear) were there, is the Annapolis, and when the whites speak of the Annapolis, and what you read about Annapolis, that didn't, that didn't include us.  It didn't include as at all.  So I decided to say that this was the story of "The Other Annapolis", how they lived.  And so that gave me the idea for the title.
Speaker 1: And what are you hoping people will gain from it who read it?
Speaker 2: Well, to learn a lot and maybe as they did from the first one.  It was, and I think I said it in my forward, that it would be recorded.  It will actually be included in the overall history from Annapolis when that history is written, that would be included.  And also I said, that could, will provide a source too for anyone who was maybe making a study of life Annapolis at that time, during that period.  And that was from fifty, from, what?  Was it 1900 to 1950.
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty [1950].  So for people who don't know about the, the rich African American history here in Annapolis, why do you think that is?  Why do you think that people just don't know about it, that it's not well known?
Speaker 2: Now, I know this, when I was growing up, we didn't hear about in the schoolhouse--I heard a lot about it at home.  Then my father, we had some, we had pictures of the president of Hampton or Tuskegee, one of them.  I know we had that picture in our hallway, and you talk about Mordecai Johnson, Howard University, Mordecai, we, he talked that all--now, we heard that in our home.  Now, the average black home, you didn't hear that in.  They just did not do it, cause a lot of 'em, even back there then, it was not a mother, father thing in the, in your household.  And they didn't talk about it, and so, for that reason, they didn't, they didn't learn much.  If you're not exposed to much about history, and again, I say, my father subscribed to the local paper, and I told you, the magazines, and I remember there was one called "The Liberty", "The Saturday Evening Post" or something like that.  And these came to our store.  He had them come to the store, not to the house.  He'd get it on a monthly basis or whatever it was, and his newspaper, and I, I may have told you there, I have a, the carrier's bill for, "The Evening Capital", which was a local and in, on "The News Post".  And he got that back, as I said, way back, and we were exposed to that.
Speaker 1: What is that you want people to know about the other Annapolis from 1900 to 1950, what's the most important thing that people should know about the other Annapolis?
Speaker 2: Well, one thing is, that they were a, a self-supporting people so to speak.  They had a little area there and we called it--it was called the fourth ward.  And they had their little businesses, stores and what not.  And they had their eateries, their night clubs, and their one little theater and elks club, all that's right in that little area there.  And I, I would like for--and I called it one time, I referred to it as the, the what of New York?  What's the colored place in New York?  Harlem, it was the Harlem of Annapolis, before the war.  And it really was at that time.  So I would like for people, white people and other people who live now, colored people to know this, that little community existed, and how it was broken up later in what they called--what kind of develop they called it?  Some kind of development.  Somebody said it's some of kind of destruction rather than development.  But what they did was, the city and the state, built buildings and moved out all the black people, broke up the fourth ward.
Story_ID: 4207
Speaker 1: We were talking about your second book that you published, "The Other Annapolis" in 1994.  How well did sales do on that one?
Speaker 2: Well, that one, let me see, and maybe, now, that was more expensive because of the, so many pictures.  Pictures make 'em cost more.  But what that, I did that purposely to make that more of a picture or in it, (unclear) than the other, it was a coffee type, and I thought it would help sell more because then the story would be told in text and also in, in pictures.  And a lot of people who don't read a whole lot, they don't mind looking at pictures.  So all right, then that one, I'm trying to compare the sale of that with, with the first one.
Speaker 1: "Separate But Equal".
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But I think that one--I, I don't know.  I'm just trying to see.  I guess that sold better too to  black people.  And we, we also we had 2,000 (unclear) so we got a second printing of a thousand.  And they're still going, but we, we still have maybe a couple hundred of those to go.  And now, we, of course, all these books like that--we had to publish them.  We, we, we funded them, me, my wife [Rachel Hall Brown] and I, out of our old age money hoping to get it back, you know, put it back.  And I, I guess we did, but a lot of maybe, whatever profit, if we would make any or that sort of thing is still in the, what we have on, you know, hand.  But we're still selling them, and we go to different places some time.  We went last Saturday to a festival where (unclear) I think Rachel, I mean Earl mentioned.  And people (unclear) see, but the problem, maybe I guess is getting it before them because once they see it, they buy, but there're not so many things that you can catch a group of 'em together.  We went out to churches and that sort of thing, and maybe that's more a way, I figure some way to get them to events, like festivals or different groups.  And once they see them, they buy 'em.  So I, I'm pleased with the way they're accepted, and I may have some left over, you know, for quite a while, but I'm satisfied.
Story_ID: 4208
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about how you feel about the way that you've lived your life and what is most important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, I tell you, it, as I think back over it, there were some things I would not have done, some things I would have done.  But as I think back particularly about the profession, the teaching profession, and at the time I had to make a choice, well, there weren't many things we could choose from.  And I think back, and I say, now, I don't think I could have done any better.  I couldn't have gotten any more satisfaction out of really any other endeavor than teaching because I, I real--I realize it more and more the older I get because these kids, they're grown up now, and they come around with their children and all and talk about--and some of those children and our students, they now are our friends, now, they're adults.  And some of them in our church particularly.  Some of our good friends are our former, former students, and when, and a lot of little boys come around and say, "I was always in your office all the time."  Well, and they really weren't, and if they were, I've forgotten.  And I think this, that, I don't know any other endeavor I could have engaged in that I would have gotten more satisfaction out of teaching.  And then too, one other, something that made me think about my mind, if it would stick to it is, as I said, it wasn't many things that you could do for a living for us.  And I've always felt this way, one of my fears or concerns is, I wouldn't want to wake up one morning and don't have a job constantly, I mean that, early on that thought occurred to me.  And I said, now, well, the school, there're gonna always be children (laughter), so there, there'll always be teaching jobs.  And then too, all right in 1928, they started the retirement system.  And by the way, you were--at that point, you were starting, those who started in '28 [1928] or after had to join.  So I joined the retirement system which caused them to draw, to withhold a little something from my pay every month, but now, we've lived what, I've lived, what--we've been on, I've been on retirement for thirty-four years.  So we joke about it and say, we're breaking the, the system (chuckle).  We gonna run 'em out of business.  So, I, I've lived that long, and Rachel [Hall Brown], thirty some years she's been retired.  And we didn't have to change our lifestyle whole lot.  I mean we, after all, we, we're satisfied with the usual things.  We didn't have expensive taste, and we built this house and went, and before--and got it all paid for before I retired.  So we, we've been, I'd say doing all right.
Story_ID: 4209
Speaker 1: And when you think about the shortage in the teaching profession, what are some of your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm thinking of, I know there is a shortage, and I think about the cause of it.  And because one of them is, that now there are so many other areas open to, to black teachers who go in to make more money.  And then here lately, I mean they've allowed the school system to deteriorate or degenerate in such a condition, who want, who would want to go into them?  And that's a shame really.  When you, when you read about what's happening in Baltimore, the fact--why is that they, they don't want to spend money--when these guys make their speeches, all of 'em talk about education, how important it is.  I'm talking about the lawmakers.  That's always in his spiel, but when it comes to in the budget, the first they don't approve, you know, the first thing they cut is the schools.  Now, right now, the schools Baltimore are in the condition they are because they haven't had the money, I mean the main thing, they haven't had the money to maintain good equipment good buildings, and to hire good teachers, I mean those who are fully qualified to teach their subject.  Morlanski (ph.), he was a history major, and he found himself teaching special education.  Well, you know, that's ridiculous.
Speaker 1: For people going into the teaching profession, what advice do you have for them?
Speaker 2: Well, prepare, and preparation first.  I think if they're gonna teach, when they go to a college, they ought to have that in mind.  They ought to have plenty of, of methods or education courses.  That's a, that's imperative that they do that.  You can't teach somebody something that you--and you have to know, and first, you have to know it yourself.  And then you have to have some ideas or some, some ways of, of knowing how to do it.  And, and I go back Bowie [Normal School] all the time, it's quite in with, if they (unclear) make your plan and the first thing almost is in your motivation, what you're going to do to interest these children?  Make them want to--and, and so many times--and the children--the teachers today don't even think about motivation.  And I think that's one of the greatest of faults that we have.  And they ought to be teaching in the field.  In other words, if you are--if history's your major, you have those courses in which you will, you've learned how to teach history.  I, I believe that's paramount.
Story_ID: 4210
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the whole thing in fact, it's with and not only with the African American family, is this fact, this business of once we were a nation of producers, and now we are consumers.  All the work that people used to do, black and white, not all of it, but such a great percentage of it, everything you pick up is made in China or somewhere else.  And I think in Annapolis now, when I was, there were--in my teens like, you didn't see no young, healthy, young men standing around, doing nothing during the working day.  They went to Baldwin, over there in the, the shipyard over there and different factories in Baldwin.  I understand they've just about disappeared.  I know, I've known people who worked down on the, (unclear) longshoremen, loading the ships and all, making good money, making good money, send their children to college, and when they finish they have good pensions and all.  And now those jobs are not there.  Ford Meat, of course, is shut down, Westinghouse, I mean a lot of, I mean Annapolis young men and women went there to work.  And they don't have 'em, and I'll say this, as long as these young men and young women, they, they gonna have to have money.  They want things, and if they can't get that money legally, they're gonna get the best way they can.  And now, I'm sorry they got a taste of this easy way to get it, so they call, and I think even if things ever got back to normal, I believe some of 'em would still hang or stoop to that easy way to make that money, and then they're gonna get caught and put in prison, but the take that chance.  So I think this, and really, I don't think it's gonna be much progress made in the economy until we can figure some ways and the government, and, of course, I say the government, Congress and the president, they have the, the authority and they have the power, and they have the responsibility for protecting the country, its foreign and domestic, and that doesn't just mean protecting from gunfire.  It means that they should be able to take care of them so they would have a way of making a decent living.  And that's for everybody, not just, just a few.
Story_ID: 4211
Speaker 1: Why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, as I say, knowing what has happened helps you a lot to predict and plan for the future.  And I do feel this, I think even with our children, I believe this, if they knew more about, you know, what some of us in the past have done, and the fact that the only reason a person should be, who's done these things, made these discoveries and made these inventions and done this, and they're not geniuses.  They're ordinary people.  Some of 'em even dropped out of high school, and so that's one thing I think all children should, it should be pointed out to them that you don't have to be a, a lawyer or a doctor a teacher or preacher, you (unclear) a lot of other things that people need that you could get, (unclear) start, learn how to do this or do the other, and make a nice living for themselves.
Speaker 1: And why do you think it's important to preserve black history?
Speaker 2: Well, I, again, we get the idea, and for instance, when I was in (unclear) I heard some names thrown around like Booker T. Washington, Frederick Douglass and all that, but I learned that from home really, but I think it's necessary for 'em to know that because they get the idea that only white people had brains enough or were able to, to do something.  And they ought to be, know about these people or, and all, and many different aspects of life as they could so that it's not just the doctors and the lawyers, and that there're other people who are doing well for themselves if these--and that many extraordinary things are done by ordinary people.  That's the whole idea.
Story_ID: 4212
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Ooh, how would I like to be remembered?  Well, let me see.  Of course, I really, I really, I'd like to be remembered because I mean I spent so much of my life in education.  I'd like to be remembered for or as a person who--we used to say something one time about teaching the whole child--educating the whole child.  And I, I spent a lot of my time, at least I (unclear) thought to a child.  When you go to a math class, you learn a lot more than just math.  And I always, my--with the children I had, I tried to get them, I was, spent a lot of time, not a lot of time, but I didn't miss an opportunity to point out to them that this is the thing to do.  And this is not the right thing to do.  And that's sort of thing, and I hope now that some of my children that I came in contact with will have benefited from that little sideline to the regular subject matter.
Speaker 1: You have a lot of titles, historian, educator, author, which of those do you like the best, and which one do you think best represents who you are?
Speaker 2: Well, I think this, and maybe it's a natural think, an educator, because that was my life's work.  I went to school to prepare for it, and I spent forty-two years doing it, you know, and I, I think that would be the one.  Now, these others I just, I earned incidentally, as a hobby almost, and as far as being a historian and writing that, sort of, that was something I did because I wanted to do it, and with the hope that, the world or at least a part of the world would benefit from it.
Story_ID: 4213
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, what stands out the most?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know, stands very high is my seventy-two years of married life, my seventy two years of married life stands out, and the life I've had with, with Rachel [Hall Brown] all these years, the family.  Well, it would have to because it was so many year (unclear) (earlier?).  So a lot of it, (unclear) so that's really the highlight, I guess of my, of my life.  And these other things, writing the book and all, you get a lot of satisfaction from it, not a whole lot of money, but the idea that it's something permanent that you have done, and that you hope it has--others will benefit something from it.  That's a lot of pay that you get from writing books.
Speaker 1: And when you look at your seventy-two years of marriage, how were you all able to make it successfully?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle) Eternal vigilance or my, yeah, that or sheer determination.  That's what I wanted--you have, and I've told this to youngsters, you go into marriage, I mean if you go in there saying that, if he does this or she does that, I'm out of there.  Now, if you go into that like--you're gonna be out of there right soon.  Now, for me now, and I guess Rachel shared my feelings, I never thought about any second marriage or anything other than this one here.  And it just so happened now, I didn't go into it--or I was, I had been out of school for four years.  I was twenty-three or twenty-four, and I had a chance to, you know, get a fairly good look at life and what it was and all.  And, and I, I passed up a few chances (laughter) because I thought that wasn't (laughter), that wasn't the right way to go, and finally Rachel came along, and saw in her what I liked and we got together and--but, but that was determination now.  You have to work at it, and you take and give a lot; you take and give a lot.  And if two people are so determined--especially a female and a male--I'll see that, two men, two straight men and two straight women could live together more harmoniously than (laughter) than a man and woman, and I believe that because they, they're so much alike.  A man is certainly--you think alike.  And he thinks he's always right, and she thinks she's always right, and that's so--oh, it's--and what a nice life.  I'd recommend it anybody.
Story_ID: 4214
Speaker 1: I think sometime about the future, and I wonder some time what it holds for us, but then I never reach any conclusion.  (Unclear) just things, I don't know why I've been blessed to live this long or why I'm left here, but then I always (unclear) questions, I just go ahead and accept it and, and go ahead.  And, everybody's pushing me now, you've got to live to be a hundred.  Well, I don't necessarily want to live to be hundred, but I'm getting a lot of pressure for that.
Speaker 2: So you might just do.
Speaker 1: Now, my sister by the way, the only, oldest liver in the family died in '98 [1998].  So, and I have two, the other two women, ninety-one, ninety-four--no, there're three of us and I'm ninety-five, but all of them in my family, all my brothers and sisters maybe, except maybe two, I believe, lived to be about seventy or eighty years old.  My father lived to be eighty-four.  My mother lived to be in her early eighties.  So we come from a long, a line of long livers, seemingly.
