Story_ID: 4358
Speaker 1: First of all, I want you to state your name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Roland W. Burris, that's "R-O-L-A-N-D," middle initial, "W," "B-U-R-R-I-S."
Speaker 1: What does the "W" stand for?
Speaker 2: Wallace.
Speaker 1: Wallace, okay.
Speaker 2: Named after the great musician, in those days, Fats Wallace, which became [Thomas] Fats Waller [musician] as I understand it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My daddy [Earl Burris]  used to be a band promoter.  So--.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In my hometown.
Story_ID: 4359
Speaker 1: I want to ask you what your favorite vacation destination is?
Speaker 2: Well, what I'm focusing on now, of course is the African continent. And unfortunately I have a disruption in my plans, but I would do one foreign country in a year as well as one African country.  And I started out last year with France and South Africa.  And then I had to make these other adjustments.  So I have western Africa on the agenda for my next trip.  And then eastern Africa the year after that.  So, my journey now is back to the Motherland.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: My favorite food.  I am one of the most non-gourmets you'll ever see.  I do not have any particular delight, because of the dietary condition that I'm in right now. What do I like?  I like fruit and vegetables.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: It's spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying or word?
Speaker 2: Gosh.  My favorite saying--it's an expression, "It's not enough to be good.  It's not enough to be better.  Only the best is good enough."
Story_ID: 4360
Speaker 1: Now I want to start with you--you know, your childhood. We usually start with the childhood.  And you had just talked about your father just briefly, that he was a band promoter.  And I'd like you to talk about, you know, where you grew up, and you know, and your--well, I'd like you to talk about your father to begin with.
Speaker 2: Well I grew up in a small southern Illinois community by the name of Centralia [Illinois].  There were about 10,000 people during the time I was growing up there, and about 2,000 were black. My dad [Earl Burris] was a laborer for Illinois Central [Railroad] and he was a businessman.  And I had--my mother was, at that time, worked in the businesses that my dad would open up.  Whether it was a little restaurant one time, and a little candy store at another time.  And eventually ended up in the grocery store business [Burris Grocery] and operated up until my mother's [Emma Curry Burris] death.  And I had two other--I had a brother older and a sister older.  I was the youngest of three children, and had two grandparents on my father's side and one grandparent on my mother's side.  But I was a little small boy when my grand-stepfather passed.  Because my mother died when she was very young--my mother's father died when she was young.  But I did know all those generations.  And I was raised by those generations, as well as other aunties and uncles and the community.  I tell everyone that I grew up in a very wholesome, though racist environment. And we did not know the racism, because our families sheltered us from a great deal of that and challenged us to do, you know, to be as good as we could be.  They went to Lincoln School [Centralia, Illinois] from, grade one through eight and it was the colored school. And the other seven elementary schools there were predominantly white, though there were other blacks who may have gone to those schools, because they lived in the district where they could go to those schools.  But I had a great childhood--challenged.  And of course, we didn't, you know, have monies per se.  I thought we did.  But once I got older, I just found out that Mom and Dad and everybody else knew how to make ends meet.  We were rich in resources, but poor with dollars. And I, you know, grew up in an environment with a lot of friends.  Some of them are still living and we're very close today.  And we had a very religious environment.  Grew up my Dad was Methodist, my mother was Baptist and we had to go to both churches (laughs).
Story_ID: 4361
Speaker 1: And it was my dad's [Earl Burris] efforts along with the minister of the Methodist church that had--the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had started to integrate our swimming pool.  This is 1953.  And the year before that, other blacks in our community had, you know, made efforts to swim in the pool.  See, blacks in Centralia [Illinois] could do almost anything, go downtown and shop and try on clothes, and do those other things.  But they could not swim in this, in this, public park pool that was built in 1937.  So it was a time that they decided that, "We're gonna integrate the pool."  And my dad who worked Illinois Central [Railroad] traveled to Chicago [Illinois] to hire a lawyer to come down to represent us, and that's about a 300 mile trek, and those days it was an eight hour train ride.  But Dad came and he couldn't find a lawyer and returned home empty handed. The following day he went over to East St. Louis [Illinois] and he found a lawyer.  And he retained this attorney.  A matter of fact, he gave the attorney a retainer fee of $100.  Now that may not sound like much money today, but in 1953 $100 was a one month's salary for my father at Illinois Central as a laborer.  So that was a major outlay, and of course, it was Memorial Day 1953.  My brother, who was home from college, he was a junior at college at that time, and my, and--and the three other brothers from the other family called the Lawson family.  You know, Willie (ph.), Lavance (ph) and Roland Lawson (ph.)--the five of us, along with my dad and Reverend Starks headed out to swim in the pool.  To make a long story very short, you had to shower before you go swim in that pretty blue water (laughs).  And so we showered, went in and I took a beautiful swan dive off the high diving board and you know, splashed into the water.  And we, you know, swam around and nothing happened.  We had integrated the pool.  The story is that once we were home celebrating that now we could swim in this pool, our father came in and he was very upset.  And we had to determine what was his problem.  And he explained this to me and to us.  He said, "The lawyer that we hired did not show up."  And these words still ring true in my ear.  "If we as a race of people are going to get anywhere in this society, we have to have lawyers and elected officials who are responsible and responsive. "  I was fifteen years old at that time and school ended in that June.  And that summer, when I turned sixteen, I could not stop those words from ringing in my ear.  And from that incident, I set two goals.  One goal was to be a lawyer, and the other goal was to be a statewide elected official of Illinois. So my quest of becoming an attorney and my quest to become a statewide elected official of Illinois was not some willy nilly idea that, you know, just popped up out of nowhere, or just sheer ambition.  It was a--it was a goal that was set at the age of sixteen.  And I plotted a course and a strategy that would put me on track to do that.
Story_ID: 4362
Speaker 1: I finished my junior and senior year at [Centralia Township] high school [Centralia, Illinois].  As a matter of fact, if I weren't so, you know, of a tough kid in those freshman and sophomore years, you know, I would have graduated with honors. But I did win a scholarship to Southern Illinois University [Carbondale, Illinois], where I was a pre-law [preparatory course for law school] student, and a government major in the college of liberal arts.  I finished four years there, and I won a scholarship to the University of Hamburg [Hamburg, Germany] in Germany, where I studied international law, working on my Master's degree. And I was gonna spend a year in Germany and come back to SIU [Southern Illinois University] and finish up my Master's in international law and then go to law school.  However, I applied to law school while I was in Germany and I got admitted to two law schools.  University of Illinois in Champaign [Illinois] and Howard University School of Law [Washington, D.C.].  And then I wrote  for scholarship money.  The University of Illinois, of course, wrote back and indicated to me that they did not give scholarship to freshmen--and probably they didn't give scholarship to black freshmen is what the response was.  And so I got a letter a few days later from Howard.  And Howard said, "Based on your academic standing, we will offer you a scholarship."  So that's how I ended up at Howard Law.  And, of course, the rest of that is history.  I mean there's a whole--so I did finish law school.  And I came--the day after graduating from law school, this is now 1963.  I went to Howard from '60--1960 to 1963.
Story_ID: 4363
Speaker 1: And I returned to Chicago [Illinois], and of course, I had to study for the [Illinois State] Bar [Examination] and all those other things, but I was then trying to figure out how I was gonna get into politics.  I mean I still had these goals.  I can remember when I was in college [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  I used to sit on the steps here in Chicago at my godmother's house over on 71st [Street] and St. Lawrence [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  A young man lived right across the street from me by the name of Tom Burrell.  Who--you know, he was in college [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] and he was studying to go into the advertising business. So he and I would sit on the front porch and we would speculate.  He was gonna be this great advertising mogul, and I'm gonna be this, you know, big time elected official.  And so we--we've been on joint appearances before young people, and we tell them how at the age of nineteen and twenty we had these dreams and these goals and both of us were able to obtain 'em.  Tom Burrell [Burrell Advertising company] now is the largest advertising company of African American heritage in, in America.  So, you know, that's the type of planning and experience that went into, the Roland Burris achieving, the Roland Burris goal setting--and obtaining those goals.
Story_ID: 4364
Speaker 1: You talked about growing up around your, you know, grandparents on both sides.  And I want to know a little bit more about, you know, those sides of the family.  Were they squarely rooted, you know, in Centralia [Illinois]?  Or they had moved there, or where had they moved from?  And, you know, I mean I would like to know--I know that your family was, you know, entrepreneurial to an extent.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) True.
Speaker 1: That they were, you know, very religious.  You know, that is was really a wholesome environment.  And you know, very much an extended family, that you grew up in.  But I would like to know something more about what you know about your own background?
Speaker 2: Well, I've done some research on two of those.  I've done research on my father's father's side and I've done research on my mother's mother's side. I go back with my father's father's side to George Burris into the mid 1800s. George Burris married Josephine Tidwell.  George Burris and Josephine Tidwell had fourteen kids, the oldest of which was Blant Burris.  Blant Burris had five kids, the oldest then--actually he had six kids, one of them died.  But the oldest was Earl Burris. Earl Burris married Emma Curry.  Emma Curry and Earl Burris had three kids, the youngest of which was Roland Burris.  So I've done that research and they grew--my great grandfather [George Burris] came out of Tiptonville, Tennessee.  And he moved to Southern Illinois, called Pulaski County.  And he was a dirt farmer--well I mean, he was a farmer.  He used the mules to plow the ground and he grew the crops and he sold the crops to make a living.  So he was a farmer.  And my grandfather, Blant Burris, who was the oldest of these fourteen kids, moved along with him from Tiptonville, Tennessee to Pulaski. But in 1910 when Illinois Central [Railroad] needed strike breakers to come to Centralia because they had a--Illinois Central Railroad had a roundhouse there in Centralia where they turned the old steam engines around.  And there was a major strike, so they brought in blacks to break the strike. Well, my grandfather moved from Pulaski to Centralia. He was married at the time, and because my father was born in Centralia in 1912.  And he--well, you know, that kind of indicates where the father's side is.  And so that's four generations from my great grandfather. In all of those seven boys and seven girls, by the way, I knew most of them, my great uncles and great aunties on my father's side. And that's the Burris reunion that we have every year.  We're in our 21st reunion.  We will be in Bloomington, Illinois.  And we started some twenty-one years ago with that side of the family and those fourteen kid siblings. And when we started I think five of them were still alive.  But they now since have all passed, seven girls and seven boys.  And my grandfather of course was the oldest.  And most of these people lived to be into their eighties. On my mother's side, Emma Curry, I go back to, to my great great grandfather on her side. He was a slave.  And when they were freed in 1865, as the story was told by one of his granddaughters, who I think now is still alive at ninety-nine years old, by one of his granddaughters is that he always wanted to be a major in the service.  And he was--lived in Greene County, Georgia.  So when he was freed, he took the name of Major Greene--he named himself.  And Major Greene then married, and I forget the name of his wife, but he married, and they had eight kids, one of which was Charlie Greene.  And Charlie Green married Mattie.  I forget Mattie's last name.  And then she became Mattie Greene.  Charlie and Mattie Greene had eight kids, four girls and four boys.  One of which was Mary Greene.  Mary Greene married Charlie Curry.  Charlie Curry and Mary Greene had eleven kids, eight of which survived.  The second oldest of those eight kids was Emma Curry.  Emma Curry married Earl Burris, and of course, Earl and Emma Burris had three children. The youngest of which was Roland Burris.
Story_ID: 4365
Speaker 1: See what I find interesting about your background now, on the--On your mother's [Emma Curry Burris] mother side--the Currys.  Were they also--did they end up in Illinois?  Because it--you know a lot of African, I mean, African-Americans came from--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) They came--
Speaker 1: The South.  But you were--your family was rooted here in southern Illinois.
Speaker 2: Well, on my mother's side, they came from--my grandmother [Mary Greene] and her husband, Charlie Curry, came from the South to work at Illinois Central Railroad. So I don't know exactly the year that they came, but this was after my grandmother--because they were hiring blacks in those days.  Now this could be--and I guess my mom was born also in 1912.  But she could have been seven or eight years old when her parents moved here, because the story goes that my mom did finish eighth grade in Centralia [Illinois], but her father died then.  And so she had to help her mother, since she was the second oldest, to try to help provide for all the other siblings.  Whereas my father [Earl Burris] was a high school graduate, and he graduated from high school in 1932.  So that means he was approximately twenty years old when he finished high school.  But he did, he did finish high school.  And then he headed off to Milwaukee [Wisconsin] to try to go to junior college, but as you know what year 1932 was.  That was the [Great] Depression years, and so dad [Earl Burris] only wen to college for six months, and then he headed back home to help his parents save their home, which they had built in Centralia.  They had built this beautiful, large two story home on Rexford Street, which by the way was just demolished because the family didn't have the wherewithal to, you know, to keep it going.  It was heir property and it ended up just deteriorating, because the surviving children would not--or grandchildren would not keep it up. But my grandparents Blant Burris and Bertha Burris built this, you know, what they call a big Southern mansion--not mansion, but Southern home with the big front porch on it.  And it had a basement in it, and it had an upstairs.  And it was always something to go to Ma Burris's house.  But my dad had to come home and help save that because, you know, it was during the Depression years.  And he had to sell--he went down, up and down the railroad tracks, picked up coal, put it in those, what we called the sacks, gunny sacks and sold them for $50 a--fifty cents, not $50--fifty cents a bag in order to help them meet the expenses to pay the taxes on their home.  And Dad always wanted to be a doctor, and he ended up into the--in business.  I mean he was always with some type of a idea, a program.  And I remember when we were in the grocery store business, he always wanted to start a chain of businesses.  But this is 1940, you know, '47 [1947], '48 [1948], and here's a black man talkin' about he wanted to have a chain of grocery stores and, and he couldn't get any capital.  Couldn't go to the bank and borrow any money. They would certainly take out money when we deposited it in the bank and write the checks, but they wouldn't loan any money in those days to, to a black business.  So Dad then found out something about in the early '50s [1950s], you know, that there was a SBA [Small Business Association], a small business loan.  And he kept talking about trying to get a small business loan.  He never did get the small business loan.  And so you know, they tried to work the store, but our store had one problem.  The problem was our loving mother.  Mom would feed anybody in the community whether they had any money to pay or not.  And so, you know, there was not any major thriving because we sold the food on credit.  And they paid Mom or paid the store off when they got their check, either from the Illinois Central [Railroad] or from public aid, or when they got paid.  And people got paid every two weeks or every month.  And some of those bills in those days would be thirty or forty dollars worth of food and they would come in and give Momma twenty or fifteen dollars and pay on the account.  Well, after that got to be a little bit old, Ma would just, you know, bury it, (laughs).  And she would not go back and try to collect the old money.  So we, we--it was not as profitable as it could have been.  And as I got older, I tried to get Mom to be profitable, especially when I was in college [at Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  One day I came home from college--because they opened up the store I think I was--I guess I must have been in sixth or seventh grade in 1946 or '47 [1947].  So I came home from college in 1957.  Because Mom was having a tough time with sending money to me for school.  And so I, being the devilish young man that I was, I went and dug out this old box of bills.  And I just got on the adding machine one night and added up boxes of unpaid accounts that was owed to Burris Grocery.  And that number in those days, almost reached in the hundreds of thousands of dollars (laughs).  In those days.  I mean that's the type of receipts that Mom had left where she was feeding people and they weren't paying.  And it was so--it was the goodness of her heart.  And I tried to convince her to do that, and of course, she became very angry with me when I had done that, and needless to say, nothing ever happened with that, even when I graduated from law school [Howard University Law School, Washington, D.C.].
Story_ID: 4366
Speaker 1: My mom [Emma Curry] did not live because she had gotten ill, and he was in and out.  She died at age fifty-three.  Just as my brother had gotten his master's degree from SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] in 1963, I'd graduated from Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] in '63 [1963].  He was teaching school in our hometown now, in Centralia [Illinois]. He started teaching there in 1957, by the way.  But he went back to Southern [Illinois University] back and forth.  And while he was teaching, he got his master's degree.  But he died at thirty years old.  And he was teaching seventh grade there, and he was married and had three kids. And my mom was in and out of the hospital in those days, because she had some illness.  But in 1964, Thanksgiving day, a week before Thanksgiving, my brother had surgery on that Thursday for his digestive problem. Thirty years old, just bought him a new home, just--had the new car, and he hadn't paid--made a payment on his home. Three young children, nine, seven, and five and he went in, had surgery, and he lived a week after surgery.  That Thursday night, that early Thanksgiving morning, his wife was there, and my mother was at the hospital with him.  And he just died at age thirty.  His system just stopped working and shut down.  And so what was so sad about that service was the fact that he got a--a school teacher, you know, thirty years old.  And we were sort of very well known in our community, 'cause we were the first blacks to ever deliver the newspaper, we were into business.  So it was you know--we had a very good family reputation.  And naturally the whole community was traumatized over my brother's death.  But at the funeral, my mom was so distraught that she said, "Don't worry son, it won't be long before I join you."  I'm sitting by trying to comfort my mother, on one side.  Dad [Earl Burris] of course was on the other side, and, we both looked at her and looked at each other.  And sure enough, three months to that day, she died, on February 22nd, 1965.  She went into the hospital, same hospital and didn't come back.  She just gave up, and she had an internal illness.  So, you know--and that, of course, caused our store to--now my sister, who was between my brother and I, and she was married, and I think she had six kids by that time, tried to operate the store.  She and Dad did.  But they didn't keep it much longer after Mom died.  I think it was about 1967 or so, they finally closed the doors on Burris Grocery.  And that kind of shut the door on my father's ambition.  And he became, you know, sort of distraught.  He was still working at the Illinois Central [Railroad].  But the loss of his wife, and his brother, and his son, just caused him--and so he lived about four more years after that.  And he died at age sixty.
Story_ID: 4367
Speaker 1: What lessons do you think you, you learned early in life?  You know, from your parents [Earl Burris and Emma Curry Burris]  or from the people who had influence on you?
Speaker 2: Several lessons. number one, If you tell somebody--My key thing in life.  If you tell someone you're gonna do something, do it.  Don't promise that you're gonna call somebody tomorrow and not call them.  If you're not gonna do it, don't promise it.  And if you can't do something that you promise, then you get back to that person and indicate to them, "I'm sorry,  I cannot do that.  (Unclear) but I can't do it."  And I think that, that  has been a steadfasting principle that has caused me to build up my reputation.  Uh, if you look at my [Centralia Township] high school [Centralia, Illinois] year book, which I did when I was going through some stuff the other day.  Because my 45th high school reunion is coming up, uh, this June.  And I'm one of the co-chairs of the committee.  And I read in the year book.  And it said about me at graduation, you know, "Whatever he does, he does it well."  So--And that's how I was in my athletic days.  I was a small individual.  But I played football.  And I got honorable mention All-state in football playing.  You know, 140 pounds and 5 feet, 5 inches tall.  I was still--I gave everything I had. I, you know, ran track.  I was not that fast, but I just had the, the, constant ability to, to achieve.  I had the drive and the desire.  And so that old saying is "Whatever you do, you do it well."  That's what really, you know, caused a person to, to be successful.  And since I got older now, of course, I've developed other principles.  You know, "Conceive it, believe it, and you can achieve it."  And that was, (unclear) that's what I call the three "P's".  And that's just what I tell the young children when I'm giving speeches and talking to them.  I refer to the three "P's" as preparation, patience and perseverance, And you can lick it.  And I used all of those qualities to overcome all type of obstacles. I, I remember going to Southern [Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and how my brother who was three years ahead of me at SIU, how he ate and what he ate.  Because of our economic situation.  I mean we weren't poor, we weren't rich.  I thought we had more than we had, because we had the [Burris Grocery] store.  And you know, we, we weren't very hungry.  And so everybody looked upon us, 'cause we had, we had more (laughs), than the other people.  So, it was kind of a situation where, uh, you know, I was alwa--in a kind of a middle-class--poor status, (laughs).
Story_ID: 4368
Speaker 1: But my brother would come home every weekend [from Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  And he would bring the food back.  And he and his two roommates would eat. He would supply the food, so they would have to cook it and--'cause they lived in private homes at Carbondale in those days.  You didn't say in dormitories, okay, all the black students had to stay in the homes.  And so, they would cook the food in the homes and my brother would eat these starchy foods.  That's what we think really had something to do with his illness, four years of that.  And in my first three months of that, I was living with my brother and these other two roomates.  And I just told my mom [Emma Curry Burris] I could not handle that type of food.
Story_ID: 4369
Speaker 1: Blacks could always do a lot of things in Centralia [Illinois].  But they couldn't do--whether it was Mount Vernon [Illinois] or Carbondale [Illinois].  It was different communities.  But the community--oh I know what I was gonna tell you too.  That at the--but our elementary school [Lincoln Elementary School] was integrated--I mean was all black.  And what our teachers made sure of was that when we got to high school that we could match up with any other school, or those graduates that were going into--into Centralia Township High School.  And so that's the type of family.  I mean I can name every one of my elementary teachers to this day. There was just such a tight family bond there, that the teachers were always, you know, Miss Mason, Miss Bryant, Miss Claybrook, Miss Bibb, Miss Vonador, Miss Height, Mr. Pope, seventh grade, Miss Tate and Mr. Walker the eight grade.  The double to Mr. Walker was the principal.  Those individuals were so influential.  And when my brother started teaching there in the seventh grade, naturally, I'm, you know, in college [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and graduating, and going on to law school in Europe.  I found out what they were paying these teachers.  I about, you know--I couldn't believe it.  It was either fifteen hundred or sixteen hundred dollars a month!  And you know, (laughs).  This was--and with families, but they were very dedicated educators.  And if you look at my hometown [Centralia] and the achievers that came out of that community, whether they were in science, or law, or medicine, or sports.  You know, that community had a whole lot of achievers.  And we used to talk about the fact that it must have been in the water.  But, it was that, that village raising those children, and the emphasis that was put on respect for elders, and emphasis put on, you know, "You can achieve."  And "You are somebody."  I mean those, those things were there and we were prepared to deal with it.  And walk into that environment in those days and compete against the--all the resources that some of the white students had at Centralia [Township] High School was very disconcerting.  But you had the likes of a Bobby Joe Mason who came out of my school [Centralia Township High School, Centralia, Illinois] and went on to Bradley University [Peoria, Illinois] and a great basketball star.  And ended up playing twelve years with the [Harlem] Globetrotters. We had Bill Norwood who graduated from Centralia Township High School, on to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] and on to the military, flying jets and leave as a captain, and go to United Airlines and becomes the first black pilot at United Airlines.  And then become the first black captain in United Airlines, and just retired here recently.  You have the PhDs that are there, or a Harold Bibbs or a--or the other MD, classmate Conrad May who's a--here.  So I mean, we had that type of a environment, that type of competition, that type of family knit with, you know, Miss May could spank me, or Miss O'Neill could spank me.  And if you know, Mrs--the story is about Mrs. Howard who I passed three times and only spoke to Mrs. Howard twice when I passed.  And my dad [Earl Burris], you know, comes home from work and he cleans up and he goes up to the store.  And then he passed Mrs. Howard too.  And when he hits the door, I did not know that what Mrs. Howard had told him. But he hits the door and he says, you know, "Roland come here!"  Come in, "Did you pass Ms. Howard today?"  I said, "Yes Dad."  "Did you speak to Ms. Howard?"  I said, "Yes."  "Well how many times did you pass her?"  I said, "Three times."  "How many times did you speak?"  I said, "Twice."  He popped me right upside my head.  Knocked me to the floor in the store, in the middle of the store!  And I'm down on the floor looking up in all tears.  And he looked at me and says, "Boy if you pass Mrs. Howard one hundred times, you speak to Mrs. Howard one hundred times. Don't you pass your elders without speaking."  I never--I never will forget that (laughs).  Even today, I go around senior citizens I'm still speaking (laughs). I'm still speakin' to them.  But that's the type of discipline that, existed in my hometown.
Story_ID: 4370
Speaker 1: What kind of child do you, would you describe yourself as?  And in that answer, what were your sort of--you've answered that you wanted, you know, what motivated you to be a lawyer? But did you have any dreams or sort of aspirations other than what you've already talked about?  But what really what--what kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: I think I was a very fortunate child, not mischief.  I was a tough kid because I prided myself in my physical physique.  And I prided myself in building a very healthy body.  I drunk a lot of milk in those days and did not smoke or drink until I was a junior or senior in--my senior year in college because I was an athlete. I was a child that liked attention and found out that accomplishment would bring you attention.  'Cause I remember when we used to carry the newspapers, a lot of the--my brother and I were the only blacks carrying the 'Centralia Sentinel' [newspaper].  And he was ten years old and I was seven years old.  And we would--in the summertime we would sit on the window ledge and fold our papers to put them in our bag to put 'em on my bicycle to go deliver them to the customers. And so what I found out that people liked to see how the boys folded the paper. And I found out you'd get a lot of attention by folding the papers real fast. So I became very good at folding papers.  And it was always a big thrill to people to come by and watch little Burris fold those papers. And then, of course, I was one that, was trying to achieve, and I was very competitive. You know, you beat me this time, I'll beat you next time, because I'll go and prepare so I can get better.  But it was all in fun.  I mean I was never in any trouble, per se with the law, other than fighting.  You know, I fought some of my colleagues on occasion.  And because of my physiques and abilities, I was able to win.  I only lost one fight as a kid.  Been about fourteen or fifteen years old and this kid had come down from Chicago [Illinois] and he was a little bit rougher than I was.  But I lost one fight, (laughs). But I also liked fine things.  My dad [Earl Burris] didn't drive a car.  My dad never did buy or own a car.  He wouldn't buy or own guns because he didn't like guns and I couldn't go hunting.  And I wanted to go hunting, and that was one of the disappointing things that I did not experience.  And we didn't own a car. But my friends did, so I was okay.  The doctor's son owned a car, and the other friend of mine owned--father owned a car who ran the restaurant.  That was that was Lonnie O'Neal and so we--we were able to, you know, get by those kind of situations.  And recall we played a lot of games: canasta, and pinochle and--and we played evening games in the summertime.  You know, kick the can and you know, and basketball and--it was--I had a great childhood. I look back on it now and say, "Gee whiz, that's--"  You know, you could just see how I was molded into what I'm doing today.
Story_ID: 4371
Speaker 1: How did you end up choosing SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: First--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) So was that--was it because your father--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) No, my brother.
Speaker 1: Your brother had gone there.
Speaker 2: And that's another story there too, by the way.  You know, my brother graduated [high school] in 1951 and he was in Chicago [Illinois] working. And he wasn't coming to school. My dad [Earl Burris] got on the train, came up here, got my brother--had him to quit the job, put him back on the train, took him to Centralia [Illinois] and the next day, they got on the train, and he took him down and enrolled him in Southern Illinois University.  He said, "You're going to college."  So I had no choice of what I was going to do.  That's just how strong my Dad was.  Because he knew what it was to get an education.  But I wanted to go to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], because my friend Conrad [May] the doctor, he had graduated from high school in three years.  So he was at Northwestern.  He would come back home and talk about Northwestern.  But what I found out was Northwestern was very expensive.  And I couldn't go to Northwestern.  And then when I got the scholarship to go to Southern Illinois University, to SIU.  Then of course that directed me to SIU.  And plus I went down there to play football too.  So the five of us from my [Centralia Township] high school football team headed to Southern--to SIU in August of 1955.
Story_ID: 4372
Speaker 1: What did you major in at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was a govern--I was a pre-law.
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Pre-law, okay.
Speaker 2: But I was in the college of liberal arts.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, okay.
Speaker 2: And by the way I just went back to Southern last week talking to the students in the college of liberal arts.  They brought back some of the alumni to tell them about our experience at SIU. And so I'm still very active with my university.  I'm still very active with Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] by the way.  I just got selected as one of the twelve board of advisors for the law school.  They're creating kind of a adjunct support outreach group.  They can only have three alumni out of the twelve members to go on that board.  And I was one of the three Howard law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] alumni that was selected to go on that advisory board because I'm very active with my alma mater.  I'm very grateful to the tools that they gave me, to be able to--how should I say it?  Enjoy this life, to overcome all the obstacles that you would encounter in life, and to, to be successful at doing it.  I got the tools.  I got the fortification.  I got the background.  And I got what it takes to, to survive.  And, and all my many years, I've been able to do that.
Story_ID: 4373
Speaker 1: Okay.  I want to ask one more question about SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  You were going from a small town to a--it's a large campus isn't it?
Speaker 2: No, no.  In those days, Carbondale [Illinois] the city had 10,000 people in it.
Speaker 1: Oh!
Speaker 2: And the university had 5,000.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: There were five thousand students in 1955 and--there again, there's another story there.  Dr.Delyte Morris  [SIU President] built that institution up into the university that it is today.  But the town of Carbondale now has grown tremendously.  I guess it's what, twenty-five, thirty thousand people there maybe.  And there are twenty-five or so odd thousand people at the university.  But I was the leader in integrating the city of Carbondale. Blacks could not sleep in hotels, or motels.  They could not sit in restaurants.  This is in the mid '50s [1950s].  They, they could not go into to do store and try on clothes.  They could not go into a bar and have a drink at a bar.  And my fraternity, which was Alpha Phi Alpha, was having a twenty-fifth anniversary.  And so we were helping these brothers to come down there and they had no place to stay.  And so within--so we started saying, "Now wait a minute.  We gotta do something about this."  And so we called--I called a meeting with our vice president then of my fraternity.  And called a meeting of all the black Greek organizations.  The Kappas, the AKA's [Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority] and the Delta [Delta Sigma Theta sorority].  I think we had about four of us there.  And they met.  And we said, "Gee whiz, let's come up with a strategy."  Well one thing they said, "Well, somebody got to go to the president and talk to him about this."  So since I was the leader, I was kind of selected to go to the president.  And two or three other members went along with me to go to then talk to [Southern Illinois University] President [Delyte] Morris.  So I scheduled this meeting with President Morris and he met with us along with a university lawyer.  A gentleman by the name of John Rendleman.  And we met and discussed the fact that we cannot have a place for our visitors to stay when they come to Carbondale.  And he said, "Well, I have no evidence at all of that.  I need some information, some facts. So if that you say that there's discrimination, I need to get information."  Well being the pre-law [preparatory course for law school] student that I was, you know, I--that's all I needed.  So I set up this plan, where we would go to--and it was funded, you know, through some of our fraternity's treasury.  We would go to every restaurant, every hotel and every store.  But then what I had to do is make sure we had witnesses, right?  That we were really denied.  That I couldn't trust the fact that we'd go into a bar and don't know who's there.  So I had some Jewish friends. They were led by my Jewish friend from New York.  And I can't think of the other name too, Lester Margalese.  And Les and, and two or three other buddies would go into the restaurant ahead of us.  And they would sit with a table where there would be another empty table.  And three or four of us blacks--by the way, it now boiled down to only three of my fraternity brothers, three or four of my fraternity brothers. The rest of those Greeks had kind of, you know, drifted along the wayside.  They didn't go through the actual collecting of the evidence.  And we would go into these places and--and they wouldn't serve us.  They would make comments.  We would document all of this stuff. To make a long story very short, we had this all written up and typed up.  And I called another meeting with the president and the lawyer and went back and said, "Dr. Morris, here it is."  And he about fell off the chair.  He could not believe this.  He said, "Well Roland, this is what we need."  I didn't know what he was gonna do with it, you know. And he says, "Well Attorney Rendleman and I are gonna look this over and we'll get back to you."  Well in about a week or two they got back to me and said that, that they had called a meeting with the Chamber of Commerce of the City of Carbondale and that meeting was gonna take place at their next monthly meeting which I think was May or June.  It was getting pretty close now to graduation.  And so Dr. Morris went there.  It was this whole meeting of the Chamber of Commerce and three or four of us tagged along with him.  And he indicated to them that there's discrimination in the city of Carbondale that is not fair to the students who are here.  And we gotta have this community open.  And so they all were just sitting there nonchalant.  As if to say, "Well, you know, what evidence did you have?"  And Dr. Morris then pulled out this report.  "I now have this report.  And this is what you said at this restaurant.  This is what you said at this clothing store."  And you could just see the blood drain from these white males' faces.  Because he had the goods on them.  So finally the president of the Chamber of Commerce spoke up and said, "Well Dr. Morris, you know, we'll take this under advisement and we'll get back to you." I didn't know what was gonna happen, but I graduated that June.  I took on off.  I was in [Hamburg] Germany.  And a young man, an excellent football player by the name of Willie Brown took up the cause after I did.  And he wrote me in Germany and said, "Every institution had opened up their doors to black students except one."  And that was a little tavern that downstairs that they called the "Rat Hole." (laughs).  And so they said that they would--and, you know, they closed up shortly after that too because all of the students had began to, to not support them.  So, you know, that effort was made in, in Carbondale.  And I, you know, relate that story to the students on how Carbondale was integrated with the help of Dr. Morris, and without any picket signs.  'Cause I was threatening to go to the attorney general.  I had enough by being a pre-law student and I, you know, didn't know what the attorney general--Never talked to the Attorney General of Illinois, (laughs).  But, you know, I, I picked that up.  And I kept threatening to go to the attorney general.  You know, that is discrimination.  And of course, we integrated the city without picketing, without any type of rancor.
Story_ID: 4374
Speaker 1: You leave Carbondale [Illinois] and you're, you know, you're on your way.  You've gotten your scholarship to Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  And--but what--you went to Germany. Tell me the Germany part.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh God.
Speaker 1: Was that--why was that?
Speaker 2: Well I--there were two students selected to go to the University of Hamburg [Hamburg, Germany] and two German students selected to come to SIU [Southern Illinois University]. It was an exchange student program. So out of the two hundred and some-odd students in the competition entering, I was one of the students that was selected.  And so two of us went over there.  And you know, all the thing was in German.  And my lectures were in German.  So my second language is German.  And when I got there in August of 1959, what I had learned in my two years of German classes was not what they were speaking in Hamburg, (laughs). It was a little disconcerting.  But my speaking German was not that great.  But I quickly learned the language, because  I stayed with a German family and I then moved into an international dormitory when school started.  See school didn't start there 'til October.  But my professor thought that I had to be there two months to get acclimated to the country and to the culture and all that which was good.  Because I had a chance to run around Hamburg and check things out and then do some studying and then try to get myself prepared to go to school in November--in October.  So I moved into the dormitory, the last week of September.  It was an international dormitory.  And this is what's so great about that I mean--we had students from all over the world.  Thirty countries were represented in this dormitory.  And each foreign student had to have a German roommate.  So there were about 120, 130 students.  And the dormitories were private.  The university didn't have dorms. The students stayed in private dorms. And the University of Hamburg in those days had about fifteen or sixteen thousand students.  It was a pretty big university for those days. And I was there doing papers and attending classes.  Of course, I traveled through Europe to some extent when I was over there, you know, as a student. I began--the consulate knew that I was there and I was a pre-law [preparatory course for law school]. student.  Plus I was a you know, a black student that was on an exchange program from Illinois--from an American university, which was unheard of in those days.  So the consulate used me to--kept giving lectures about America and I found myself traveling the country.  And I ran into a person by the name of Dr. [Senator Samuel Ichiye] Hayakawa.  I don't know if you recognize that name, but he was a senator from California.  He was a linguistics expert.  And he was also on a couple of those lecture tours.  And I was on programs with him, as the American consulate, was doing all of this--seminars about America.  And so I was participating in those.  And one of the favorite expressions I came up with, "They always want to know about the race question in America once they find out I'm black, and not African."  Most folk--people thought I was from Africa.  And I spoke rather decent German in those days, so they had difficult telling.  And then I'd tell them I'm American.  I mean, they just could not believe it.  And they'd want to know about the race problem.  So I did make this one comment to some of the individuals that you know, it--'cause I'd witnessed discrimination in Germany.  I said, "You know, the second day here when I went to pick up my trunk at the railroad station."  See the black soldiers were not up north in Hamburg.  They were all mostly in southern Germany.  So a lot of the people did not see blacks.  I mean, that was in 1959, that was kind of an anamoly to some of those people. This little kid about ten or twelve years old, I'm standing in line trying to get my trunk.  This kid picked my hand up and rubbed it off.  This is a true story.  And rubbed my hand to see if he could rub it off, you know.  And then he kept saying to his mom, 'ein Schwarze, ein Schwarze' [trans. "a black, a black"].  You know.  And so I'm two days in this country.  And I had to deal with that kind of a situation.  But then again, there were those families who were very curious.  And I got invited to so many different homes.  And--because they were curious.  Especially when they found out I was American.  And the best story is that the other student that I--that went over from SIU with me, a gentleman by the name of Ed Swick.  Well Ed was a Fulbright--he got a Fulbright travel grant.  I applied for the travel grant because they didn't give it to two schools and so I didn't get it.  But Ed--so they had it all arranged where Ed would stay in a home out in the suburbs.  And they had this big rich family that he lived with in the suburbs.  And they was out there having dinner one evening and they got to talking about the race problem in America.  And see I didn't know all of this, right.  And, and they're talking.  And then the doctor--he was a dentist.  He made the comment, "Well America would not send a colored student over to, you know, the exchange program."  Ed didn't say anything, all right. He just kept on talking.  And the next thing I know, I got a call that--to come to Sunday dinner at Dr. Schafer's house, (laughs).  So I have no idea what's going on.  And so the Sunday came and I got the subway and went out to Rauchstadt, the suburb, suburban community and, you know found Dr. Schafer's house.  And one of the kids came to the door.  And the kid came to the door and he opened the door and he closed it real fast.  All right, I said, "I'm at the wrong house."  So I rang the bell again and then, you know, one of the bigger kids came.  And he said, "Yes may I help you?"  I said, "Is this the Schafer's house?"  By this time, Dr. Schafer had also come to the door.  And he was looking over his son's shoulder.  And he said, "Yes."  And this is all in German.  "May I help you?"  And I said, "'Herr Doktor Schafer ist hier gewohnen?' Do you live here?" [trans. "does Dr. Schafer live here?"]. "'Ja, ich bin Doktor Schafer'" [trans. "yes, I am Dr. Schafer"]. "'Ich bin Roland Burris'" [trans. "I am Roland Burris"] (laughs). I said, I said, "'Ist Herr Swick hier?'" [trans. "is Mr. Swick here?"].  And Dr. Schafer turned about twenty shades of red.  And he invited me in.  Meanwhile, Swick is behind the door cracking up.  Because what Dr. Schafer had said, "That America would not send a black student on the exchange program" (laughs).  Get it?  And there I was.  I show up and I'm the other student.  And I'm a black American.  But I come into this environment and Ed is now on the floor.  I mean Ed is--he's (laughs)--.  And finally, Dr. Schafer then starts confessing and remembering all of this.  And then I get in on the joke and understood what's happening, because I didn't know what was going on.  But the bottom line of the fact is that Ed did not say anything to Dr. Schafer.  But he just invited me out to dinner.  And so I ended up becoming, you know, the, the--proving to him that America had sent a colored student over on the exchange program.
Story_ID: 4375
Speaker 1: When you come back to--and you're going to Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.].  Now what was that experience like?  Because you're, you know you're--this is--this is what you planned for a long time.  I mean to go to law school. I mean to go to law school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you arrive there now.  You're at--This sis the first time really that you're at an all black institution.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And, and I want to know, you, you know, you to describe that experience.  And, you know, and that whole--.
Speaker 2: Very interesting.  'Cause after coming back from [Hamburg] Germany, I then went back to my home town Centralia [Illinois].  And because my parents had to buy me an airplane ticket, to fly back, I took a lot of the resources from my family. 'Cause I didn't have the travel grant.  And to come up with, you know, four or five hundred dollars in those days, to fly was very, very tough. You know, so it's still about you know, two or three months salary to get a plane ticket back from Germany.  So, I went home.  And then I had to go from Centrailia to Washington D.C.  So since my dad [Earl Burris] worked for the railroad [Illinois Central Railroad], he got me a pass.  And then I must have had, I don't know, thirty or forty dollars in my pocket.  But when I got to the train station, the pass that my dad had gotten me was not valid.  And we had to buy a one-way ticket, which took all of my money except ten dollars, to buy the train ticket.  So I, you know, headed to Howard D.C.--out to Washington, D.C. to Howard with little or no money and then when I got on the train, I had to get me some food.  So I bought me a ham sandwich and a Coke, and it was an eighteen hour trip from Centralia to Washington.  I arrived in Washington the next day, and I'm headed to the university.  You know, to go find out how I get in school, 'cause I've never been to Washington D.C. before, okay.  And I had some names.  I knew one of my friends was there, had gone to SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] with me.  And he was the director of student activities, Mr. Carl Anderson.  And so I did have a, you know, name.  But then I--so I went to the university and I, you know, asked if they had a place for off campus housing.  "Well, no..."
Speaker 1: Stop one second.
Speaker 2: (Pause in interview).
Speaker 1: Wait for the sirens.
Speaker 2: So we didn't--so they didn't have any off campus housing for me. I had no place to stay.  So I said, "Well, okay, I will--."  'Cause I took a cab then to go to the university campus.  I spent some cab fare.  I said, "Well okay.  I was in the Alpha [Phi Alpha] house."  I got the address to the Alpha house.  And I went down to the Alpha House, took a cab there.  When I got there, the house was closed down for remodeling.  Nobody was there.  The house was, you know, boarded up, you know, because they were remodeling the house.  And so then, I figured, "Okay, well maybe I can call Carl Anderson."  So I got the telephone directory, got the number and called Carl Anderson.  There was no answer.  So I took a cab back to the university trying to find Carl Anderson.  They said, "Well Carl Anderson is on a two week vacation."  Now I'm down to $3.75, no place to stay and the only person I knew in Washington D.C. was not there.  Fortunately--just to show you how the Lord works--I had met a young lady on the train and she had told me that her brother was the admissions director at Howard, by the name of Eaton.  And then of course, she was gonna be a nursing student and she was on her way back to D.C. and then she was going to be going to Hampton Institute [Hampton, Virginia] for nursing.  So she had given me her phone number.  And I had kept it on a little piece of paper.  And she was also a cute little girl too, so you know, I don't know if I had other agendas, but, anyway, it turned out to be a necessity.  So I called her and said, you know, explained my plight to her.  And she said, "Well yes, come on over to our house."  So I got a cab from Howard, went to her house and then up--you know, her parents, they fed me, 'cause I hadn't eaten anything all day.  And then they said, "Well this lady right around the corner also keeps students."  So they found a place for me to stay.  But they, the keeper, it was thirty-five dollars a month.  Well, now, I've got, you know, about a dollar seventy-five cents in my pocket.  So I then asked them if I could make a phone call.  I called my mother [Emma Curry].  And said, "Mom, you know, I found a place to stay.  But I don't have any money." [Story continued on tape 3.]
Story_ID: 4376
Speaker 1: [Roland Burris continues to tell how he arrived in Washington, D.C. to attend Howard University School of Law with only a few dollars, nowhere to stay, and his only friend there was out of town.] Finish the story where I didn't have--didn't have any money. So I called my mom [Emma Curry Burris],  my mom said, "Okay, I'm gonna wire you some money."  And (laughs)--and I got it about a couple hours later.  It was on in the evening.  And we get this notice, the telegram, that there was--go ahead and pick up the money.  So I went to the Western Union and I went to get this big chunk of money.  Mom had sent me $25.  So I said, "Oh my God."  So I was a little embarrassed.  So I said, "Well yeah, I got a little money now."  But I went to the landlady,  I said "Now, ma'am, my mom sent me some money.  I only got twenty-five dollars.  What I'm gonna do is I'm gonna give you fifteen and I'm gonna keep ten."  And she said "Okay."  And I said, "I'm--she will send me some tomorrow."  Okay so that night I slept.  And the next day I got up and I headed to the university [Howard University, Washington, D.C.]  trying to find a job.  But I also went by the admissions office.  And come to find out that I had sent in a deposit.  But because I had a scholarship, that they refunded me $50, okay.  And they gave me in cash a $50 refund.  And it cleared all my admissions and everything else.  And it's also that day I got a job.  The job that I got, because I was the last student to be hired, was a dollar an hour.  And it was cleaning the dormitories for the freshmen students to come in.  The dormitory called Cook Hall, over there.  So I got my little $50 and got all squared away with school.  I went over and found out where I was going to be working.  Prepared to go to work the next day.  Went back to my landlord.  I said, "Here's your $20."  She said, "Well you're an honest young man."  (Laughs) You talk about being blessed.  And so I paid her off and the next day I went to work. And because I was the last to show up for work guess what detail they gave me?  I was on the latrine detail.  I had to clean the toilets in the boys' dormitory.  And this other guy, you know, he'd come back there for a second year, he was an undergraduate student.  He was on the mop, he was on the mop detail.  He's a big guy.  And so he said, "What are you doing?"  "I'm going to law school."  "Law school!  What are you doing over here?"  "Well I gotta earn some money."  "You mean you're cleaning the toilets!"  I said, "Well look, you gotta start at the bottom and work your way up to the top."  Well to make that story very short, I worked there for a few days. And then I got into [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] law school.  But then my friend came back from vacation.  And Carl Anderson said, "Roland, we got fellowships.  You can apply to work in the library or work in the dormitory or work for the dean."  So he says, "You could stay in a dormitory and still get eighty or ninety dollars a month," I chose the fellowship that would make me assistant dormitory director, alright.  So I applied for the fellowship and got it within a few days.  So I got my fellowship and I'm now over at Carver Hall.  And sure enough I'm in Carver Hall as the assistant dormitory director, got my room and moved my stuff all in.  And one day this young guy walks into Carver Hall.  And he looked at me, "Where do I know you from?"  I said, "Cook Hall."  "Oh yeah, oh yeah.  What are you doing here?"  "I'm the assistant dormitory director."  He said, "You're the assistant dormitory director?"  I said, "Well yeah, remember I told you when I was cleaning toilets you had to start at the bottom?" (Laughs). It's a true story.  And the guy says, "Oh my God yes," you know.
Story_ID: 4377
Speaker 1: School [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] started.  Of course, I had to adjust to black professors and personalities. Because even though I had elementary school teachers black. My [Centralia Township] High School [Centralia, Illinois] and [Southern Illinois] University [Carbondale, Illinois]  teachers were all white.  And we had two white students in our class.  There were fifty-nine of us that started from all over the country. And fortunately, one of my schoolmates from SIU [Southern Illinois University] showed up, because he had been in the [U.S.] military for two years.  And I had been in Germany for a year.  So we ended up in law school in 1960 at the same time.  So that was kind of comforting.  And then I met another young man his name was Julius--by the way he name was Julius Johnson.  His wife is Norma--Norma Holloway Johnson , the [United States District Court of D.C. ] judge in [Washington] D.C. who dealt with [U.S.] President [William 'Bill'] Clinton [in a grand jury investigation].  Well that's who my school--my law school classmate Julius Johnson married, Norma Holloway Johnson.  So then--and he met her at Georgetown [University, Washington, D.C.] when he was at Howard and they, they married.  But then I had another young man there from Madison, Illinois.  And I got into Howard law school from a reference from a, Howard Law grad by the name of Billy Jones.  He was at East St. Louis [Illinois] and he sponsored me and he sponsored McCaskill.  And he had told me to look up McCaskill.  So we had some contacts when I got to Howard.  But I did not know--I knew Julius but we were never classmates.  We were always, you know, friends.  And Julius was a couple of years older than I was at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois].  But we then, you know, started our classes and all the activities and adjusting to the rigors of law school.  Well it was, your know, unbelievable.  I mean I--of course, I'd come from an environment where you were able to speak out.  And my classmates were very concerned about me with my ability to challenge professors and to, and to, you know, speak your--your mind.  This was the environment I came out of.  And my classmates were just horrified.  They just knew that I was going to be, you know, thrown out of school.  Because I corrected one of our female teachers that taught legal--bibliography, research.  Legal research.  I had the same course in undergraduate school.  And one of the statements that she was making was erroneous and I corrected her, and told her what the right answer was.  And my classmates were going under the desk. They were, they were horrified at me and my--you know, but I didn't think anything was wrong with it.  This was how I was, was brought up, that you just speak your mind.  But, they finally told me that one of the professors punched his brother out of law school at Howard.  So I said, "Okay."  I kind of mellowed.  But I had a great three years at Howard.  Nothing ever happened.  As a matter of fact, my senior year [third year] they elected me class president. Because my classmates got to know that Burris is a solid person.  I talked to them about, you know, politics in Chicago [Illinois], and what I was gonna do.  And I had just come back from Europe.  And then they--and, and the classmates really took to me.  And even to this day we have our, our reunions and--but didn't about twenty of us graduate.  Twenty-two I think.  And four or five of them are now dead.  And we get ten or twelve of us together at our class reunions and I hold ever five years.  You can see that I'm always involved in these reunions.  I'm involved in my high school reunion right now, (laughs).  I love to keep those--those ties.
Story_ID: 4378
Speaker 1: What do you think was different--I mean, you know, hindsight is 20/20.  But how do you think that experience in Howard [University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] was different than the experience you would have had at UIC [sic, University of Illinois College of Law, Champaign, Illinois].
Speaker 2: It was the nurturing, the camaraderie that was built up, the closeness of the professors.  I can still call, you know--I can't name too many of my high school teachers and my--some of the professors I can name at SIU [Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois] . But I can name all my professors at Howard law school because of the closeness and the ability that they had to make sure that you learned the law.  Herbert Reed, he was a great civil rights lawyer, passed away.  Dorsey the--I forget Dorsey's first name, taught us ethics and parts and--a couple of them are still living, Red Morris in criminal law--teacher's now dead. Spotswood [W.] Robinson [III] was our dean.  That name you might recognize former civil rights leader.  Really one of the strategists with Martin--Marshall, Justice [U.S. Supreme Court Justice] Thurgood Marshall and the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] Legal Defense Fund team.  We did, you  know, some of my classmates--I was the one that helped do all the xeroxing and the running when they would argue cases before the [U.S.] Supreme Court in the '60s [1960s].  I had that experience.  All the civil rights activity and all the great civil rights leaders were there. Mordecai [Johnson, educator], not Mordecai, [James] Nabrit [educator] and Jimmy Washington, and Jack Greenberg and Constance [Baker] Motley.  All those names were in and out of Howard, during the '60s [1960s].  And so I got that exposure.  I couldn't have gotten that exposure at U of I [University of Illinois College of Law, Champaign, Illinois] or Michigan [Universtiy of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, Michigan] or U of C [University of Chicago Law School, Chicago, Illinois]. It just wasn't there. And being in the federal jurisdiction where all the government was also--with my wanting to go into politics.  It just gave me a tremendous exposure and foundation.
Story_ID: 4379
Speaker 1: You graduate, I mean and you said, you know, just a little bit earlier that you had your plans for Chicago [Illinois].  And, and you know, I, I note that really when you graduated from law school [Howard University School of Law, Washington, D.C.] it was two year before the Civil Rights Voting Act, you know, passed 1965 [ ref. to Voting Rights Act of 1965].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So my--you know, I want to know what this, you know very brash still, you know, very young Roland Burris, what he had came here armed to do?
Speaker 2: Well I came back to Chicago armed to get into the political arena.  The day after I graduated, which was the graduation was on June 7th, 1963, I left that night at midnight.  I arrived in Chicago on June 8th, with my wife [Berlean], packed--I got married by the way, half way through law school.  And my wife and I and our little positions packed up in a car, and we moved back to Chicago to start my career.  Needless to say, I--we finally found a place here.  Because she was a registered nurse and she went back to working at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] hospitals and we could stay in a furnished apartment.  And so that's how we began to live.  And I began to look for a job and I couldn't find a job.  I'm a law school graduate, 1963--by the way we were looking for apartments because, you know, she hadn't intended to go to University of Chicago.  She hadn't thought about that.  And that's when they had in the newspapers "white only."  They used to advertise in '63 [1963] if you were looking for apartments, you know, "coloreds" or "white only, coloreds need not apply" is what they would have in their ads.  Which, you know, was shocking to me.  But we found a place, you know, at the University of Chicago that all worked out.  And then I started looking for a job. I went to, you know, Illinois Bell Telephone [Company] in those days and I'm a law graduate trying to do their management training program.  And they told me, "Well no," they couldn't do that.  That I'd have to, you know, go through their training to be a linesman. Which meant I had to climb the telephone poles and go down in the manholes. And I looked at this person that was interviewing and I said, "Now I got twenty years of education.  I'm sure you're not serious about that.  My dad [Earl Burris] didn't raise me to be in no manholes and telephone poles.  You know, I'm a law graduate.  I'll take the [Illinois State] Bar Exam."  "Well sorry."  So I couldn't find a job. Fortunately I was studying for the bar and I got a call from the [U.S.] Treasury Department, Comptroller of the Currency.  They said, "You had applied for a job here in Washington [D.C.].  We have an opening in Chicago.  Are you--."  "Yes I am."  "Are you interested in working?"  And so I took the job in Chicago.  I became a national bank examiner for the Treasury Department,  Comptroller of the Currency.  And became the first black in this nation to get credentials to examine a bank in 1963.  And I went through my training process and I was examining all these banks.  And then banking became very interesting to me, because I had never been associated with banking. So I did that for a year.  It just so happened in 1964, our daughter [Rolanda Sue] was born.  And my wife didn't like me to leave on a Sunday afternoon and come back on a Friday night. I mean, I literally had one day in Chicago and a half a day on Sunday.  I was in Chicago on Saturday.  I would go over and examine the banks in Michigan, Indiana, Wisconsin, all over the Midwest.  And we had to take off on Saturday afternoons, and spend the night there.  So you could be there to open up that bank on a Monday morning.  And you--people didn't know you were coming.  So you, so you had to be there to open the bank up on a Monday, and your surprise examinations. So I did that for a year.
Story_ID: 4380
Speaker 1: In the meantime [working for the U.S. Treasury Department, 1963-1964], I found out about the banking business.  I said, "Well gee whiz, I can go work for a bank."  And so I applied to two banks because I had to get off the road with that bank examining and I applied to First [National Bank of] Chicago [Illinois] and to Continental [Illinois National Bank and Trust Co., Chicago, Illinois].  Because at the time I applied I was examining--I--for eight weeks I was examining First Chicago and seven weeks examining Continental.  So I applied at those two big banks.  First Chicago was something else.  They sent me out to psychological testing firm.  I had to have to go through all this psychological tests.  And then in my exit interview as I pass all these tests the--and in those days I wore a mustache.  I still wear a mustache.  And so finally the personnel guy just said, "Well I have to ask you this question.  Why do you wear a mustache?"  I said, "What?"  "Yeah, you know, mustache.  We don't generally wear mustaches in the banking business."  So my response to him was, "How many black men do you know?"  And he kind of turned a little red.  And I proceeded to explain to him that at least three out of four black men, if you ever take an informal poll, have mustaches. And the guy was so taken aback.  He stuttered and stammered and said, "Well, oh, oh, oh, okay, we'll get back to you."  Needless to say, I was not hired at First Chicago, and I have since told this story to all the chairmans of the boards that, you know.  But Continental Bank, I was interviewed, and it was a young aggressive young white fellow interviewed me.  And you know, indicated that, I was just very impressive to him.  And so I was worried about whether or not if they were going to send me out to a psychological testing firm.  Whether they were gonna, you know, not hire me because of my mustache.  And you know, he said, "No we're gonna hire you, you know--you're gonna work--." I got hired at Continental.
Story_ID: 4381
Speaker 1: Continental [Illinois National Bank and Co., Chicago, Illinois] had problems.  Come to find out--you know, now I'm a lawyer.  So Continental did not know what to do with me.  For three months, I sat at a desk and went to training programs and they were trying to figure out where they were going to assign me.  I was the first black professional that Continental Bank hired. They had other blacks there in other positions.  And finally when they, three months later, when they decided to assign me, they sent me to the trust tax division in the trust department.  That's where they prepare the tax returns for all of their estates, and all of their big trust accounts.  They did the tax returns for them, income tax return or the income tax return for the trust, or the estate tax return or the Illinois inheritance tax return.  But my--so after, you know, getting orientated there, then they had, started printing some of these returns by the computer.  So my first job was, believe it or not, stapling income tax returns together that was printed by the computer.  That's what I was doing.  And I did that for, you know, a couple of days.  And, you know, I'm looking around.  And I said, "Now wait a minute now.  I'm a lawyer.  This is not right."  And I raised the question with my boss.  And his boss couldn't answer it.  I raised another question, so it went up the chain.  And finally they said, "Well, the vice president will be meeting with you Roland, to discus your position."  This is the guy that did all of the recruiting for the law students.  And by the way, when they assigned us, they assigned a white law student to the training program.  They assigned me, who's a lawyer to the trust tax division, okay.  So, you know, that was another indication.
Story_ID: 4382
Speaker 1: I said, well you know, I'm talking to this vice president [of Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Co., Chicago, Illinois] now, I said, "Why would you send, you know, me to the back room in trust tax division, where I'm stapling income tax returns together by this computer, and you send a young white law student to training program?  I'm a lawyer."  This vice president looked me straight in the eyes and he said, "Roland, I didn't create racism in this society, and I as one individual cannot change it.  If you gonna make it in this bank, you gonna have to be ten times better than your white counterparts."  I mean, this is in your face.  This is head on confrontation of what was happening.  And I was so disturbed I could not work for the rest of the day.  And I, you know, finally went home.  And I began to relate this story to my wife [Berlean].  And you know, she was holding our little baby [Rolanda Sue Burris] at the time.  And tears just begin to flow down my eyes.  And the baby began to cry, and my wife began to cry.  You know, we were--what in the world do you do in this situation?  Here I am confronted with racism just head on.  You know, how am I going to deal with this?  I mean I was totally upset.  And, you know, I went to bed that night, you know, crying and, and saying my prayers and asked the Lord for an answer.  And I woke up the next morning with a big smile on my face, and said, "You have the answer. The vice president gave you the answer."  I went back.  I didn't go in and quit my job.  I didn't pick a brick and throw it through the window, get a picket sign and walked outside.  I went back and said, "I'm gonna be ten times better than any white counterparts."  So I got those returns stapled together, got promoted over into the other tax division to do their returns.  I did the returns.  A couple guys quit, I, you know, did their returns.  I started getting my friends to bring money into the bank.  I gave Continental Bank five years to make me an officer of that bank.  And I began to get my reputation throughout the bank.  Would you believe in four years and eight months in April of 1969, I got this call from the senior vice president to come to his office.  And he indicated to me that the board of directors are meeting today.  And should there be a quorum, you name is submitted to become an assistant cashier of this bank.  And needless to say, at two o'clock the list came out.  And Roland Burris's name was on the list as an officer of the bank.  Which is was you know, a little bit more money and a little bit more stature and so on, so on, so on, and so forth.  But it's because of the goals that you set.  See, I gave them five years.  And some of my friends that worked in the bank were kinda anti.  I mean they were not very cooperative.  I remember sitting at a dinner table with four or five of the black employees of the bank.  And I used "we."  And one of them jumped all over me.  "What do you mean 'we?'  It's 'us' and 'them.'"  I said, "Well no, they pay my salary.  I'm here on the team and that's how I'm going to play this card.  It's gonna be 'us'--It's gonna be 'we,' not 'us' and 'them.'"  And so I made--became an officer.  And I became a commercial lending officer and you know, the vice president of the bank when things ended.  And so that's what happened in the banking business.  And a lot of other stories about how I then ran the--after I did the four years in tax division, I got transferred out of tax into the commercial division.  You know, I was going to be training to lend money to doctors and lawyers, because they were trying then to go after some of the black depositors.  'Cause I was also bringing money in from friends and family members into the bank.  And so they figured I had this type of a resource.  But I ended up being transferred.  And--but then is when [U.S.] President [Richard] Nixon in '68 [1968] had come up with this black capitalism program.  And the bank was saying they were going to take a lead in trying to lend money to minority businesses. So what they found out--they had already started in this, in this direction.  But then they found out that all the people around the community knew Roland Burris.  So, you know, they slid me over of going into one division of lending into the small business section of lending.  And we ended up creating a division there that loaned money that was backed by the [U.S.] Small Business Administration.  And I ran a division.  I set up a whole group.  I had seven people on my staff, and I became head of that group (laughs).
Speaker 2: Now isn't that interesting since your father [Earl Burris], you know, was interested--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) You remember that.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Right, I listen very well (unclear) interview.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  Trying to get a, trying to get a loan from the [U.S.] Small Business Administration.  Yes.  I ended up--and that's how I funded [entrepreneur] Jacoby Dickens, I funded [Chief Executive Officer] Don Jackson in Central City Marketing [Inc.], Don Walker who used to have the 'Black Book.'  All those guys--then even--I funded the first black church owned hospital in America.  I loaned them a million dollars.  It did not survive, but they paid every penny of it back plus interest.  You know [musician] Lou Rawls's uncle, Reverend [Louis] Rawls, about ninety-seven years old, paster of Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  Reverend Lou Rawls borrowed a million dollars to buy that hospital.  And I loaned it to him.  So that's the kind of activity I was involved in at Continental Bank.
Story_ID: 4383
Speaker 1: I want to ask sort of a curious question.  I mean you weren't from Chicago [Illinois]. How did you make inroads, you know, quickly in this community?  And then I have another question after that. But I mean, you made inroads.  And why was that?  Was it because you were one of the few people in the bank--.
Speaker 2: No.  That's because I joined every organization that I could join.  And those that I did not join, I created.  I told you I wanted to be in politics.  When I was at Continental [Illinois National] Bank [and Trust Co., Chicago, Illinois], I was out in the community working, I knew I had to learn politics. So I became a runner for [U.S.] Congressman [William L.] Dawson.  I worked for a guy named Lawrence Woods.  I was a go-fer for Lawrence Woods and did all the little running around and you know, doing this and whatever they would need to do for Dawson.  And then I was, the gofer for [Charles] Charlie Chew and [William] Bill Cousins was the manager of Charlie Chew's campaign in 1966 for the [Illinois] State Senate.  And then I was the gofer for Bill Cousins.  When Bill Cousins ran for office in 19--July of 1967, Alderman for [Chicago, Illinois] City Council, then he selected me as his campaign manager.  So I managed his campaign from December of '66 [1966] up to February, when he was in a run-off.  In April, he was elected to the city council.  In 1968, I set up an organization called [Black] Independent Political Organization.  And I was elected head of that organization.  We were gonna challenge the regular Democratic organization.  And in 1968, I ran for the state legislature (laughs).  So I'm out in the community, right.  So this all ties in.  As a matter of fact, one of the reasons why they transferred me out of the bank--out of the trust tax division in to the commercial division--now I was a tax consultant.  By that time now I was teaching all the tax classes.  I'm now the tax consultant.  (Pause).  I'm now the tax consultant.  For the entire trust department.  I answered all the difficult questions.  I did all the direction of Abe Saperstein's estate when he was--when he owned the [Harlem] Globetrotters.
Story_ID: 4384
Speaker 1: We were on the political side of things.
Speaker 2: Right.  'Cause you said that you got involved and then you started the independent--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The [Black] Independent [Political Organization] preserve.  But how--what happened when I was at the [Continental Illinois National] Bank [and Trust Co., Chicago, Illinois], and I was in the trust tax division, I wanted to run for the [Illinois State] legislature.  This is now 1968.  So I raised a question with the bank.  And I'll try to cut some of this short, because you know, I told you I had all these stories.  That I wanted to run.  And so I didn't want to leave the bank.  I didn't want to leave my job.  So I asked, "Could I run for the legislature and not leave the bank?"  So my vice president couldn't answer it.  So his boss got back to me and said, "I'll let you know in a couple of weeks Roland."  So the next thing I know, "We want you to come to a meeting."  With the president of the bank, the vice chairman of the board, my vice president and two senior vice presidents.  And that was the top of the house, kinda--the only person that was not there was the chairman of the board.  That was Dave Kennedy who was off in Washington somewhere.  So I met with these top executives of the bank.  And I said, "I want to run for legislature number one. I support branch banking, number two. I don't want to leave the bank.  Can I, you know, still run for office, for you know, the  29th district legislative seat and not have to, not have to resign?"  They said--and I said--and the second question is, "When I win, since it's only a part-time job, can I still work at the bank?"  So they said, "Well let us take it under advice and we'll get back to you."  Well in a week or two they got back to me.  And they said, "Number one. Roland, yes you can run. You don't have to resign from the bank. And when you're elected, you can still stay at the bank."  I mean this was a major accomplishment.  "And not only that Roland, but we're also gonna contribute to your campaign."  So I got out.  And the first time they ever had a primary in June in Illinois.  Most times primaries are in March.  But they had this primary in June of '68 [1968].  I ran. There were five others in the race and I came in sixth.  No, I think I came in fifth (laughs).  But I established my--I established my mark.  I established myself and the vice chairman of the board said, "If we got that kind of talent in the bank, we got to get him out of the trust tax division and put him in commercial."  That's what prompted my transfer out of the tax division into the commercial division where I was going to be dealing with doctors and lawyers and the professionals.  But then they, you know, switched me over to dealing with the business persons.  But I lost that race in 1968, but it established me within the community. I'm working in the community.  I'm on every organization board, 29th District Board of Education conference, working with then--Gus Savage, when he became [U.S.] Congressman, Jim Montgomery--and by the way the big time lawyer in this building here on the eighth floor--and Montgomery, by the way just went into legal partnership with [lawyer] Johnny Cochran.  Jim Montgomery was involved.  And I think he ran for alderman of the 21st Ward.  So I was in the community being very active.  And how I met Judge [William] Cousins, Justice Cousins was I joined the Chatham Avalon Community Council, 'cause I lived in Chatham [Chicago neighborhood].  And so since I was a young lawyer, and a fresh body, they made me the conservation chairman.  And they wanted to you know, give a report to city hall on the potholes and the broken curbs in Chatham. Well, what they didn't know is then they gave the job to me--what did my high school yearbook says? "Whatever job you give him, he does it well." So I found out every pothole in every street in Chatham, documented by the address of where it was, and every broken curb in Chatham. And you know, filled out that report and submitted it to the council--the council members could not believe it. It was by block--by block, by address. They took that down to city hall within--the end of that summer, they were preparing potholes and fixing curbs in Chatham. Because I took the job and did it well.
Story_ID: 4385
Speaker 1: You know, as I hear your story it sounds so easy.
Speaker 2: It wasn't easy.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Very, very tough and you're fighting all type of pressures.  The racism was so thick at Continental Bank Continental Ill, I used the expression, "You could cut it with a knife."  I mean it was just that obvious.  You know they just did no allow blacks to wait on customers. Because they thought customers would reject.  And they, you know, wouldn't let us do estate customer contact work with any of the estate planning or any of the corporate-- or any of the corporate accounts, or the personal trust accounts.  Because they figured that customers would reject.  And, , they wouldn't hire accountants.  I mean you know, we always, the blacks always had to go to the back room.  They had very little customer contact.  But my whole thing was to stay in there and fight the, fight the war, fight the battle.
Speaker 1: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Fight the, fight the battle.  And do it with professionalism, but tenacity.  And, and number one you have to be good.  You have to know what you're doing.  The blacks at Continental Bank [Illinois Bank and Trust, Chicago], when I became an officer, they were very skeptical of me. They were, they were upset and things were not going right.  And I'm the only black officer now at the bank.  And the black employees, the whole group of them were meeting out at the one of the fraternity houses on the south side of Chicago.  Plotting what they were gonna do.  So my friend, one who told me, the "us" and the "we" when I said "we" and he said, "No, it's us and them."  Well he was had become a friend of mine by then.  You know, we would run around together.  In fact, we had done some political stuff together.  And he was very active with me.  And so he told them, "Well, maybe you ought to invite Burris."  They didn't even want to invite me to the meeting.  And he convinced them, "Well we ought to listen--."  So I came into one of their meetings and listened to their complaints.  And so I said, "Well, you can you know, lay out some strategy.  But before you all go and do that, let me give you a suggestion.  I would suggest that you talk to the chairman of the board and just see what his position is on these--draw up your demands."  "Oh, no, no, no."  I said, "Think about it now."  So they thought about it.  And they said, "Who's gonna deliver them?"  I said, "Well, you'll deliver them."  "Wait,wait, we're not going to give them to you."  I said, "No, you don't give them to me.  You deliver them."  "You mean you'll get us a meeting with--"  "Yes I get you a meeting with the chairman of the board."  I didn't know if I could do it or not.  And I told them.  So I went back to the bank, called the chairman's secretary up.  Said, "You know, Mr. Chairman, I gotta meet with you."  So I went in there and said, "This is what's happening.  I'm not an emissary for 'em.  But we have--they want to send in a committee to meet with you to indicate to you their dissatisfaction with this bank."  He said, "Roland, I will get my secretary to give you a date and time."  Within a week, at least six of 'em were in the chairman's office.  That blew their minds right there.  And they said, "Well, you know, we don't want to be representing our group and--we don't want to be the spokesman."  So the chairman spoke up.  And I suggested that maybe you want meet with all of them.  He spoke up and said, "Well, okay.  We'll have a dinner meeting at  the Union League Club [Chicago,Illinois] next week and the whole group will come, (laughs).  So about forty of the employees wen to dinner a week later at the Union League Club.  They had about twelve demands that they laid out and all of them could hear it.  'Cause see I didn't want this he said, she said stuff.  So--and I went along with the whole agenda.  And the chairman looked at me after he got through.  He said, "We can do this, we can do this, we can do this, we can do this and this."  At least, I think eleven of them he could do right away and twelfth he said would take a little bit of time.  The blacks in the bank could not believe that it had happened.  Within six months every one of those things that they had demanded took place.  So that built up my credibility. And after having-- 'cause they figured I was you know, the, the house boy.  That I would talk.  But I wasn't gonna try to speak for them.  That certainly--a great deal of Roland Burris' (laughs) persona.
Story_ID: 4386
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Really came here in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Right.  And I'm just--And you know, coming here, sort of--and there's somewhat of a distrust sometimes of outsiders.  And I know you got involved politically.  You know. And I know Chicago [Illinois]was a little different, you know, still then.  But I'm just curious about, you know, was there--you know, how did you sort of prove yourself?  And even politically, you know, speaking.  Because, you know, the days of Do--those were different days in lots of respects.  And you know, you speak differently, you know.
Speaker 1: Do I speak differently!
Speaker 2: You do.
Speaker 1: I do?
Speaker 2: You know what I mean.  You speak, you speak more 'proper' than a lot of the people who you might be dealing with. And political--
Speaker 1: (Laughs).
Speaker 2: I just saying, you know.
Speaker 1: Well I, I, I had this, I had this (pause) What should I say, this direction.  It was a divine direction.  I mean I--believed that deeply.  'Cause you know, it started, I told you, back at age sixteen.  And I'm on, you know, this mission.  And, I'm plotting, you know, the step of the way.  I can recall that I was so serious in college, that one of my girlfriends quit me because I wouldn't hold her hands on campus.  And you know, sit out under the tree and smooch a little bit.  And--because I wanted to keep my image. As being, you know, a very serious person on campus.  And that's just how focused I was.  I had fun, you know I was in a fraternity.  And I partied.  But , I was very focused and very serious. And coming back to Chicago [Illinois], people, you know, can read you when you're sincere.  And I proved myself.  I did not undertake anything where I couldn't, you know, perform in it.  So I proved myself.  And so that's how I began to build up a reputation.  And there's another saying that I have, "What you want to happen to you is people to talk positively about you when you're not present." And that means that your reputation is being built. And if you were to go out in the street now, and we've done this in polling, "What do you--Do you know Roland Burris?"  "What do you think about Roland Burris?"  "He's honest, he's sincere, he's a hard worker."  You know.  Those are the things that I sought to establish.  And that's what has been put across to the individuals who have any contact with me.
Speaker 2: But what about the, what about the political thing?  Did you find--I mean I'm just--I understand you came here with a mission.  But was it hard to get--? Or you just showed up and volunteered and worked and it was your--?
Speaker 1: It was, it was tough.  It was--I, I can't tell you that , it was done without consternation.  It was not without frustration.  It was not without just, just total disappointments at times.  But there's a stick-to-itiveness that was there.
Story_ID: 4387
Speaker 1: I, you know, had to run for office.  But you know, when I was in the banking business, I mean when I was with the bank [Continental Bank], they wanted me to run for city councilman in 1971.  I didn't do that.  But then in 1972 there was a fellow who was running for governor.  His name was Dan Walker.  So rather than supporting [then lieutenant governor] Paul Simon who was then backed by Mayor [Richard J.] Daley--because I was fighting old man Daley, we were fighting the regular Democratic organization and we went with this independent candidate. Because I was a member of the Committee on Illinois Government, which was a liberal wing called CIG.  And I became the vice chairman of that organization.  And I was with the Independent voters of Illinois, that--(IVI), that liberal organization.  So I was a member of all these organizations functioning.  You know, being very active and being effective.  Having candidates and supporting candidates.  So in 1972 when Dan Walker came along, I put together a group.  I know the initials.  I don't remember the name of it.  It was, called the fair group.  And it was for my--The fellow I told you about at Continental Bank, Ron Greer and some of the other people that worked at the bank with me, and we supported Dan Walker.  And Walker won the primary over Paul Simon.  And then we supported Dan Walker against the incumbent Republican governor Dick Ogilvie.  So in 19--November '72 [1972], Walker beats [Governor Richard B.] Ogilvie.  Well in December er of '72 [1972], Dan Walker asks me to join his cabinet in Springfield.  So that then brings me into state government as a cabinet member.  I resigned from Continental Bank [Illinois Bank and Trust, Chicago] in January 1973, and I take up my oath of office in January 17, 1973 as a cabinet member.  Well that then gave me a platform to begin to make contacts to do what?  To consider my political ambition.  But in the mean time, I had also been active in an organization called the Jaycees They, they started out to be the Junior Chamber of Commerce, but they changed the name into J-a-y-c-e-e-s, and they became the Jaycees eventually.  Well I was, you know, the chapter president and I became national director of this region.  And I was prepared to become the first, black resident of the Illinois Jaycees, state president. But I had then moved into the bank in 1968.  I'd gotten moved over to began to deal with minority loans right. So my boss who's picture by the way is in that stack I just gave you.  His picture is in one of those folders there, we came across.  I then ended up saying "Well, You know, I want to run for president of Jaycees."  Well, he said, "You can't do both.  You can't run this program dealing with minority lending at the bank, and be president of the Illinois Jaycees.  We will give you leave of absence with pay if you want to become president of the Jaycees.  We will do that."  It was all structured and I had no opposition to become president to the Illinois Jaycees.  I figured that would help me in my political career.  But I didn't want to not have the opportunity to run this program at the bank.  Because I figured I could be more community based and help more people by doing that program. I was in Decatur, Illinois when I made the decision that I can not run for president.  I wen to the fellow who had cleared the way for me.  And I says, "Joe--"  A guy named Joe McCue (ph.) "I'm not gonna do it.  The way is clear for you to do it."  I left Decatur with tears in my eyes.  I didn't even stay for Joe's nomination.  Came back and started, you know, continued the program at Continental Bank [Illinois Bank Trust Company, Chicago].  Well, but I was active in the Jaycees organization.  When I ran--when I became  a cabinet member, I was at offices all over the state, all the garages.  I was in charge of all the telephone (unclear).  So I could travel all over Illinois.  I started meeting contact and making friends.  So when the governor came up for reelection in 1976, I told the governor's staff people, " I want to run for state comptroller."  'Cause I figured out where I wanted to go by then, you know, the comptroller's office.  They said, "No, Illinois ain't gonna elect a black.  No, it's not gonna happen."  So I said, "Well, you got your choice.  I'm gonna run anyway."  And by this time, Dan Walker the incumbent governor was fighting [Chicago, Illinois] Mayor [Richard J.] Daley.  I mean they were at war.  It was literally war.  So [Illinois Governor] Dan Walker put together a team.  And since they know that this--Dan Walker's political operatives knew I was very supportive and I had a good base out there, they put me on the team to run for comptroller. But Daley counteracted Dan Walker and he took the Democratic secretary of state by the name of Mike Howlett, and he took the black president of the [Illinois state] senate by the name of [Cecil] Partee.  And then he ran Partee for attorney general to counteract Burris.  He pulled him out of the [Illinois state] senate to run for attorney general.
Story_ID: 4388
Speaker 1: And so Mike Howlett had a team slated with [Chicago Mayor Richard J.] Daley and [Illinois Governor] Dan Walker had a team, which I was on.  Needless to say, that primary of 1976, all of Walker's team lost.  We lost, the incumbent governor lost to Mike Howlett.  Daley and them beat him by 100,000 votes.  I lost to a guy by the name of Mike [Michael] Bakalis who was on the Daley team for state comptroller.  Show you how fate would have it, and that of course, though caused [Cecil] Partee to be nominated for attorney general--the first black to be nominated for a constitutional office.  But it only happened because I forced the issue for Daley to put him on the ticket.  Well, then come to the general election in November of '76 [1976].  There's a fellow who was then a U.S. Attorney and now he running for governor named James [R.] Thompson.  James Thompson beat Mike Howlett by the largest margin in the history of the state.  His plurality was 1.6 million votes, that's what his plurality was.  And needless to say, [Cecil] Partee lost to  Bill [William J.] Scott.  The only Democrat who won on the Daley team was a guy named Mike Bakalis, who had beat me in the primary.  Bakalis beat the incumbent Republican comptroller by the name if George Linberg.  who's now a U.S. Court of Appeals judge.  So Bakalis then took office as the only Democratic office holder in January of 1977.  And because Illinois had ended a new constitution in 1970 that said, "That those elected in 1976 will only serve two years,"  I had another turn.  They had a turn again in 1978.  Well, here we go.  Bakalis decided that he didn't that he didn't really want to be comptroller, he wanted to be governor.  So he then challenged Thompson who only had a two year term.  But that left the comptroller's office vacant.  I haven't run in the, in the--for comptroller in the primary before. You know, I had made a lot of contact and a lot of friends.  But then the party.  I got the Cecil Partees involved, the Wilson Frosts involved, the [Eugene] Gene Sawyer. I joined the regular Democratic organization January 1977.  'Cause I had been fighting those guys. I had fought [Eugene] Gene Sawyer.  I had fought Wilson Frost.  But I walked in there 'cause I wanted--Now that I was out of office, in 1977.  I left my cabinet position and I went and worked for Jesse Jackson.  I became the chief National Executive Director and Chief Operating Officer of Operation PUSH.  Because George Johnson and Dale Gresham (ph.) guaranteed my salary to go work for Reverend Jackson,  because they needed--he needed a tough administrator in.  So I left the cabinet.  I went and spent twelve months with Reverend Jackson.  But in July of '77  I joined the regular six ward regular Democratic organization.  Then Alderman [Eugene] Sawyer took me in without any question.  And when we met, the question was, "Okay, what do you what to run for?"  I said, "I want to run for state comptroller again."  So we began to put those pieces together and the rest was history.  And, and in 19-- November--I mean, I'm sorry, in--March of 1978 the primary. I was challenged.  But I was able--the party slated me.  The black committeemen [Eugene] Sawyer, [Cecil] Partee, the West side committeemen, Shepard and a couple more of them got me slated.  So the party was in back of me in '78 [1978] for state comptroller.  But the white downstate Democratic party structure didn't think a black could win.  So they didn't want me on the ticket and they put up a state senator to challenge me.  So I had a primary race.  I beat the state senator in the Democratic primary in march of '78.  But then I had to face in the general election a white Republican nominee [John Castle] who was in Governor Walker--Governor [James] Thompson's cabinet, who was wealthy, and his father had been a two time attorney general of the state. So he had the name and the money.  I challenged him in November of 1978 and over--See I beat him by 150,000 votes.  Over 1.6 million people said yes to Roland Burris' dream.  In 1978 I was elected to the Office of State Comptroller, twenty-five years from the time I'd set that goal to the time that it did take place.  And on election night, in November of 1978, the media would not declare me the winner.  Because they said that I had lost by 4,000 or 5,000 votes.  And what had happened is they tried to steal the election.  There was one candidate in downstate Illinois that had reported the person running against me as having gotten 179,000 votes out of his county.  There are not 179,000 people in the county.  But they took the 19,000 votes that he had gotten,  I had gotten 36,000 votes in Madison County and they put a seven right in between the 1 and the 9.  That was no accident.  You cannot put an accident in reporting.  So the AP [Associated Press] reporter who did that, whoever reported that gave him 179,000 which showed that he was beating me by 4,000 or 5,000 votes, rather than me beating him by 150,000 votes. So it wasn't until Thursday, after we had gone through all of this machinations of recounting all the county statistics from all the county clerks.  And I had a press conference on Wednesday and the media said, "Aw, it's sour grapes, you lost the election."  Because I called for impoundment of all the ballots in every, every precinct of the state, with the Northern, Central and Southern district of Illinois.  I wanted the U.S. Attorneys to begin to take control of those ballots.  And so it was then being on Thursday they finally admitted the error.  And on Thursday the press finally reported Roland Burris was elected.  The first African-American in the history of Illinois to become--constitutional office.
Story_ID: 4389
Speaker 1: It was under a Republican--I mean Jim Thompson was Gov.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Jim Thompson was elected in '78 [1978].  He beat Mike Bakalis--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he beat Bakalis by a million votes
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.  But as a Democrat you won [Illinois state] Comptroller.
Speaker 2: As a Democrat I won Comptroller.
Speaker 1: And was that unusual at that time?
Speaker 2: Well, see also at that time they also elected--Let's see I won the comptrollership and the Italian-American by the name of [Jerry] Cosentino won the treasuryship [state treasurer]. So we had two of us to hold office.  Oh and--and Alan Dixon was elected Secretary of State. So there were three Democrats three--[James] Thompson [Republican] who was the one in Governorship and Bill Scott [Republican] won the [Illinois state's] attorney generalship again. So in, in '78 [1978] , they--we had three and three [Democrats and Republicans] in state government.  But then the ironical thing was by 1980, Dixon had gone to the [United States] Senate.  So [Governor James] Thompson appointed [Jim] Edgar secretary of state.  [William J.] Bill Scott had gone to jail [tax evasion].  So Thompson appointed [Tyrone C.] Fahner the attorney general.  The lieutenant governor [David C.] O'Neal resigned.  The next in line to be governor from 1980, until we were sworn in, January 1983 was yours truly.  I was the comptroller and the lieutenant governor of the state at the same time. Because on our constitution you cannot fill the vacancy of lieutenant governor. It stays vacant. In order to ascend to the governorship to the vacancy you have to be an elected official.  So we had an appointed attorney general who was number three.  We had an appointed secretary of state who was number four. The number five officer was the comptroller.
Story_ID: 4390
Speaker 1: Why do you think you were--I understand why you were successful here. But was it because of your downstate roots that (unclear).
Speaker 2: My downstate roots.  I was able to campaign throughout Illinois and relate to those voters with my experience in Centralia.  Centralia was a powerhouse athletically--football, basketball.  And when I would  go through the towns, if you go to Peoria, if you go to Rock Island, "Well, you know, I'm from Centrailia."  "Oh, well did you know so-and-so?"  Absolutely.  I could talk sports and the word went out.  Plus I had my Jaycee connections. My Jaycee buddies worked throughout the entire state.  And some of them to this day--some of them were still with me in 1998 when I ran for governor a second time.  They we still backing me whether they were in LaSalle, Peru, or Sterling-Rock Falls, or Henry County.  And, and then (unclear) we got the hog capital of the world.  Um, I cant think of the name of the town right now.  But it will come to me.  So--but I got Jaycee connections.  And so all that base.  It was helpful in making you know, all this come together. And it has to be the performance and the committment by myself and the responsibility of being responsive to the people. You know what my dad [Earl Burris] said, his favorite expression? "You have to be responsible and responsive." So, I never forgot those words. And, of course, I tried to do the--well I won the--in 1982 for reelection and I beat my Republican opponent overwhelmingly.  As a matter of fact my plurality was 1.1 million votes in '82 1982. Because see when they said, "Roland Burris was elected," people didn't know he was black.  The Burris name didn't sound black.  They said he rode on Alan Dixon coat tails when Alan Dixon was secretary of state.  And Alan Dixon won by one of the second largest margins.  He beat this person.  He was running against a Republican by 1.4 million votes.  And my plurality 1.1 million stands at the third highest plurality in the history of Illinois, where I won the election by.  And I was reelected in 1986 by 800,000 or 900,000 votes.  And then of course in 1990, I ran for the office of Attorney General.  And that was a tough race.  I challenged the incumbent current gentleman who was a states attorney of DuPage County [Illinois].  His name was Jim Ryan.  He was the current Attorney General.  He was a very tough opponent, very worthy opponent and a professional opponent.  But,when I'm to-- So you get to the governor and then it's the attorney general.  Well when Neil Hartigan was losing to Jim Edgar by 100,000 votes, I was beating Jim Ryan by 100,000.  Hartigan lost to Edgar by 100,000 votes.  I'm next on the ballot.  So that--people went Edgar/Burris.  And then George Ryan beat [Jerry] Cosentino by a large margin for secretary of state.  But then they had to come back and they picked up Dawn [Clark] Netsch of comptroller and they picked up Pat Quinn for treasurer.  Okay.  So we still had three Democrats.  I was the attorney general, Netsch the Comptroller and Pat Quinn, the [state] treasurer.  And he had , Edgar and [Bob] Kustra and the secretary of state was George Ryan and he had Burris top Democrat, Netsch and Cosentino.
Story_ID: 4391
Speaker 1: When you were [Illinois] comptroller, with that whole experience, was it all that you expected and more?  Or there--I just want to understand the whole experience for you.
Speaker 2: It was a--well number one you, you--first of all I had been in the governor's cabinet.  And I had gone in on top of an agency where you had people in place and they naturally were nervous.  With trans--transition.  A Republican administration to a Democratic administration and so some of these people who were career people did not know.  But come to find out that they were dealing with a person who was very fair.  All you had to do was perform and do your job.  Now we had to make some changes at the top.  And some of the governor's people when I was in the cabinet were very upset with me because I did not clean out the Republicans.  I didn't go in there wholesale and at four o'clock  in the afternoon, the way they did Democrats, "Clean out your desk."  There were a couple top Republicans in there.  I said okay--I met with them.  And I said "Now, when do you want--How much time do you think you need to, you know, make a transition?"  And so they would give me a date.  I said, "Okay."  We negotiated it.  It was a fair deal. And so, you know, they booted out.  By the way, they became some of my best friends when I was in the, in the--of course, they went on and worked with the Republicans.  And the republicans controlled the house and the senate right.  And a couple of them, one went to the [Illinois state] house [of representatives] and one went to the [Illinois state] senate.  And so, how do you think I got all my legislation through, or how I got to the Republicans?  Because they were staff people and I was fair to them.  (laughs) So I didn't go in and drop the hatchet on 'em.  So then that's the Roland Burris approach. --And so I already had some inkling of how you handle people.  And then when I became the comptroller, well naturally I am an elected official.  You know, there's no there's no governor over it.  You're in charge.  You know, you don't have no boss, you're it.  And so we had all these people in place, and most of them were Democrats.  But I still had to build a team and get them in my confidence.  So did I--How did I go into the office?  And I tell people you go in with the understanding that look, you're here, you know what you're doing?  I need to know what you're doing.  So tell me what you're doing.  And I learned from them what they were doing.  Well, my skills as an executive, the decision maker, now all I got to do is know what has to take place.  So those are the type of initial meetings that I had with my staff.  Then I had to bring some people on that would be, you know, my top people as deputy comptroller.  Deputy comptroller, I brought a black guy in as deputy comptroller.  I brought a white guy in as a deputy and I balanced them off.  Okay.  I brought in a very balanced team.  Up from Chicago, I got a Hispanic here and female over there.  I mean I was making sure that there was diversity.  This was 1979, okay.  And so I then be--then I had to govern.  I knew that I had to carry out the agenda, and every promise that I made to the people I had to carry them out.  And when I campaigned for reelection, I campaigned on the fact that "Promises made, promises kept."  Not only that, but I did some things that I didn't even promise you all.  I was gonna let the people what happened--let them know what happened to their money. I put out a report that's still being put out by the comptroller today, 'It's your money'. We collect this so much in taxes--this is where it went. We spend so much money, this is where it went. And this is what's happening to your money.
Story_ID: 4392
Speaker 1: I must say that I pretty well had a handle on what was happening in the office [Illinois Comptroller], and what I wanted to do with the office [at the time he took office in 1979].  And the programs, I put major programs in place.  I did the first balance sheet for the state of Illinois.  The state of Illinois and most governments were on what we call a cash basis accounting process. You--cash in, cash out.  You didn't do any type of, of anticipating of revenues or anticipating expenditures.  And for--The state of Illinois was a state in 1918.  They had never really had a balance sheet prepared on what, what the state's assets were and what its liabilities were.  And so this movement was taking place and when I came into office and I kind of latched on to that movement.  And I joined the various organizations--I'm a joiner again, right.  I became active in the State Comptroller 's Associations.  As a matter of fact, It was very loosely organized, under the umbrella organization called NASACT, the National Association of State, Auditors, Comptrollers and Treasurers--all three financial groups.  So I organized them and put them--. Yes? (spoken to someone entering office.)  I organized the Comptrollers and became the first president of the--well not--well, they had a president, but I got 'em active and I beca--they elected me president and then we really established the major entity that exists today as an active body in state government called the National Association of State Comptrollers.  Which is still under the umbrella organization of the National Association of State Auditors, Comptrollers, and Treasurers.  But I was also active in the, in the umbrella group which I became president of [1985-1986], as the first African-American to head up the National Organization of State Auditors, Comptrollers and Treasurers.  So, you know, here again the activity was there.  But I began to set the tone.  Not only in Illinois, Tennessee and Maryland had done a balance sheet prior to Illinois, but I became the third state to do it.  And the first major state to spend the resources and the effort to go back--we had to go back to 19--we took a start date of 1947.  And for some reason, our accountants picked that date and we had to go through every financial record from that period in order to establish a base and then verify the expenditures in the records in order to make sure that we had gotten all of the liabilities of the state, that we could handle and we ran into problems on a couple of occasions.  But it took us a couple of years to really get it-- we got a, one statement out in 19--I think it was 1982.  But then we got an award from the Government Finance Association [of the] United States and Canada in 1983 as having prepared a statement in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.  That was a major accomplishment, to,  to do something like that.  Of course, I fought the governor.  you know, Governor [James R.] Thompson's (unclear) Bureau of the Budget was the authority on finances.  Whatever his director of the budget said, that was it, until we came along.  We became the conscience of state government.  Because when they were doing all this spending, we would report the spending.  We would report the financial condition of the state and if the governor say it was fine, we'd say it's not.  And when it would come down to it, we were right.  And so we had that battle going.  And finally they--Springfield [Illinois] press corps recognized that there was a second opinion in government that was valid.  And then what Thompson began to say, they began to question and verify with my office, which also gave us credibility.  The Comptroller then became a very viable entity.  Because this office was only created in 19--70 [1970].  And the first comptroller was elected in '72 [1972].  And  [Michael J.] Bakalis beat him in '76.  So one comptroller was in for one term, George [W.] Lindberg.  And then Bakalis was in only for two years.  So we only had a comptroller for six years when I came in 1978, you see.  So the office was in disarray.  It took sometimes four and five months to get a check to the vendors or to pay bills.  I, improved the operation of the office so that within one year we got check processing time down.  By June of 1980--well that was April of 1980--we had checks down, processing down to 24 hours. And we spent X  number of (unclear)--was it 20 million dollars a day or something like that?  No it was a lot more than that.  I forget the, the exact amount of, the number of dollars that we spent daily.  Oh no it wasn't because the reason why I'd keep 200--. It was It was 200 million dollars a day, is what we were spending and we had to process those type of checkbook--the vouchers would come in, in the morning, the next morning the checks would be in the mail.  And that's how I built up a reputation from all the vendors.
Story_ID: 4393
Speaker 1: Now what did, what did  this position [in 1979 Burris became the first African American Comptroller of the State of Illinois] represent for the African-American community?
Speaker 2: I think it represented accomplishment.  It represented the fact that, you know, we can achieve positions that really have not been sought or held before.  And that we have individuals who are competent to perform in those positions.  And that's how it should have been viewed.  And we should have been there long ago.  I should have not been the first one.  Though we were denied the opportunity only because of our race.  But then when we got there, or when I got there, I had to make sure that everything I did would set the tone so that people could come after me.  And I would not be to the point of saying, "Well I told you those people couldn't handle that."  See, I knew that burden that was on me.  By being the first, I've always understood that.  And I always said, that I'm a pioneer.  I'm a trailblazer.  That I make sure that the same traps that were seeking to get me will not get my brother and sister who come behind me.  And that was my commitment.  And you could see in the banking business.  You could see it in, in government or any of the areas that I've performed in.  Was to be that trail blazer and to make sure that the--there might be some big chunks of concrete left after I knock the wall down.  But you won't have to knock the wall down.  Because you know, the good Lord has given me that mission and that direction to be able to do that.
Story_ID: 4394
Speaker 1: Now why was the [Illinois] attorney general's position?  Why was that of interest to you beside your legal background?  I mean had you sort of done the [Illinois state] Comptroller's thing and you know, you'd been--What was, what was of interest about that particular position?  Was it because it was closer to the governor's spot?
Speaker 2: Well, partially.  You know, once I got in the office and once I got reelected not once but twice, naturally you start saying, well okay, well I want to seek to see if my goals are--be able to become governor.  In 1990 I was gonna run for governor rather than attorney general.  And so the party asked me to step back. And that they would clear the way for me to be attorney general if I would, you know, not challenge (unclear) have a Democratic primary.  So I did that.  But I also wanted to be attorney general.  You know, it was a good office to hold and plus I was a lawyer.  And should I want to retire there, as attorney general, I could always then go out into the legal field.  I didn't want to be Secretary of State because-- It's a good administrative position, but it didn't carry much capital after you left office.  Attorney general and governor would carry some capital with it.  Though you didn't have the jobs and you would not have the resources as attorney general as you would as Secretary of State but it was certainly more of a, a career path for me, than, going from the Comptroller to, the number five office to the number four office.  I would go up to Attorney General.  Plus the Attorney General was a, you know, was something that I thought about in college.  So it goes back to, you know, me saying, "I'm gonna bring the attorney general in here." [when fighting discrimination during his college years] And so, it--it had that attraction.
Speaker 1: And what are you proud that you accomplished there?
Speaker 2: Several things.  I had a very good four years. Whether it's in the area of getting the first grand jury--Every Attorney General prior to me had sought to get grand jury powers to go after certain crimes.  See, the only two individuals in Illinois now who can prosecute crimes is a state's attorney, we have 102 of those, or the U.S. attorney.  The Attorney General can do it, but he has to go to the state's attorney to use his sitting grand jury to prosecute.  Well, I put forth legislation and got the legislature to grant to me, the attorney general's powers to go after drug kingpins.  And I seat--sit--sat the first grand jury in the history of the Attorney General's office in--to go after those high powered drug dealers, and county-wide.  See 'cause each state's attorney was prosecuting across the county, and, and if you were over in the next county then you were certainly out of the jurisdiction of that state's attorney, and the other state's attorney might not have the budget and he might not have the resources.  Well, by that power, we could work with state's attorneys and we could sit a grand jury in Chicago and indict people down in Montgomery County or down in Marion County.  And that's what we did.  And we went after it.  Of course, I got opposition from the Republican administration.  Why?  Because they figured even though [Illinois Governor Jim] Edgar signed the bill, they did not want to give me the authority--but they didn't want to hold it from me because it could be a campaign issue.  So he signed the bill, but then they weren't going to let me put it into place so I had a tough time getting state police investigators in place and getting the office up and running.  But when I did, we went after 'em.  We had two years of, of accomplishments in going after drug kingpins.  That was one thing.  The Women's Advocacy Division.  I created the first Women's Advocacy Division in, in, in America where we deal with violence against women.  And made grants and highlighted that and held seminars across the state training police officers, and, and court personnel on how you deal with orders of protection, and how you deal with violence against women.  We established a childr-, Children's Advocacy Dvision and went after child abuse.  Passed a law right now, where you, if you're an educator in Illinois and your child come to school with any type of bruise it, the teacher has to report that to a hotline number.  Medical personnel have to report any child coming to the emergency room with scars on them to a hotline number.  And Children and Family Services does an immediate investigation to determine whether or not that is from child abuse.  I passed those laws.  I passed--I reestablished the Civil Rights Division in the Attorney General's office.  The, the legislature was passed in 1949, they, they never set up the office. The legislature' was, on the books they have a Civil Rights Division in the Attorney General's Office.  And we went after of all things, what?  Racial profiling by police.  Whether it's in Belleville Illinois, or Pekin Illinois.  And, and then we went after other civil rights violations throughout the state.  So I've had--just off the top of my head, some of the accomplishments that, that were done in my four years.  With tough budget problems too.
Speaker 1: Hmm.  A lot of fighting there.
Speaker 2: Yes.  They cut the budget because they knew that I was running for governor and they did not want me to have any type of a major track records that would show my abilities.
Story_ID: 4395
Speaker 1: What about then your run for mayor?
Speaker 2: (Chuckle).
Speaker 1: What was--What, what, you know?
Speaker 2: Well I had run for governor [of Illinois] in 1994.  because I, you know, looked at the political clock.  And I knew there was an incumbent but for some reason, and I had to follow my direction, I don't question my guidance.  And the guidance was, "Roland, you know, this is your time to move out of the attorney's general's office.  This is your time to go for governor."  And I didn't question that.  So I planned to run for governor.  Well, what I didn't plan on, was losing the primary.  I got beat in the Democratic primary by the lady who took my spot as state comptroller [Dawn Clark Netsch].  Because I ran into all kinds of opposition from my own party when I sought that other move to get the, the, the power.  And so I lost the Democratic primary in 1994 in March. That means I became a lame duck Attorney General.  So I was leaving office January of 1995.  Well in August or so of '95, I'm sorry, no, in '94 [1994].  A lot of people knew that I was leaving office.  And they began to talk to me about  mayor [of Chicago].  I said, "I'm not interested in running for mayor."  You know, I wanna now go--and I had this--all these jobs planned.  I was gonna go to one of those big law firms that you're [interviewer Julieanna Richardson] at.  I had-- I was bargaining with them to go into the big law firms.  So I went off to the Attorney Generals' conference.  It must have--well, I had attended one conference in November I think it was.  And the November election was over. And [Illinois governor Jim] Edgar had been reelected.  And so Netsch had gotten--had lost as I said she would.  She lost by the largest, well she got the lowest percentage, not the (unclear).  She only got 31 per cent of the vote.  And no other gubernatorial candidate had gotten such a low number.  Because the program that she beat me on which was gonna fund the education with a tax swap--was a program that Edgar took with all of his money and just beat her in the ground with it and she didn't even have a prayer.  I mean it was so lopsided.  But, the November elections were over in '94 and that's when the pressure stated.  People who I respected, people who supported me, Hispanics, Asians, whites, blacks, came to me and said, "We need a serious challenge to Mayor [Richard M.] Daley.  We need a chance, Roland.  At least to have our, our candidate's, I mean our, our voice heard.  And we need a representative."  And so I, you know, naturally talked this over with my family.  But I said, "Well, you know, Joe [Joseph] Gardner's in the race."  You know, we can't do that again [split the vote between two African American candidates].  We've already been through that with [Eugene] Sawyer and [Tim] Evans and then we went--you know of course we had two, we had [Eugene] Pincham and Danny [K.] Davis the following time.  And in '91 [1991], and so this is gonna again come up in '95, and I just said, "No.  No, I'm not really--that's not where I'm going, to be Mayor." Then I got more pressure.  And of course they said, "Well we will get Joe Gardner out of the race."  I said, "Okay.  You get Joe Gardner out of the race and we can talk."  Joe did meet with a group of people and promised that he was gonna withdraw.  And so they set up this plan where on December 10, I would announce my candidacy for mayor.  On December 11th, Joe Gardner would withdraw.  And that I would then challenge Daley in the [Democratic] primary.  I announce on December 10.  Big, you know, hoorah.  Big reception. Off and running.  On December 11th, Joe Gardner wasn't to be found.  So then the people started wondering well, the, you know, what's happening.  So they finally locate Joe and he said, "Well I'll do it, you know, just before Christmas."  "But well we've got to file our petitions.  Well, he's, he's, well, I'm gonna (unclear) Joe file the petitions.  He filed his petitions.  So then I told the group, "Well, I can't go through with this unless..."  And they said, "Well, no, but you gotta stick in.  You gotta do it.  Because we, we're now out on a limb.  You got-- You know, you've announced your candidacy and we've got people committed and all this other stuff. And you know Joe is gonna get out just before Christmas."  Joe didn't get out just before Christmas and then Christmas came and Joe left town for a week or so.  And then he was gonna get out just after New Year's.  Well Joe made promises to two or three people that he was gonna get out.  And by this time now it was getting time where we couldn't even file as an independent.  But then the people came and said, "Well, we need 53,000 signatures.  We're gonna get you, you know, 80,000 or 90,000 signatures.  So we will have a way to put you on the ballot."  I said, "Well if you alll are gonna do that I, I couldn't disappoint all those people.  So they did.  They got about, I don't know 60,000 or 70,000 signatures, (chuckle).  And so I said, "Well, we then can only run as an independent in the general election when whatever happened to Joe, if Joe wins then I will, you know, we won't continue.  If Joe loses, then we'll go after it."  And of course, that was a losing proposition right there.  To be going against Daley under those conditions.  And, so, you know, Joe naturally lost in February.  And on March 3rd, we cranked our campaign up again.  The election was April 4th.  So in 30 days we raised 250,000 dollars and I came as close as anybody in challenging Mayor Daley--he only beat me by 120,000 votes, and we had 30 days to run a serious campaign.  But that was a true draft.  I answered the call of the community.  I answered the call of my supporters and gave them the chance and a choice.  And of course, because of that, to this day, I paid a tremendous price for that.  Because when I did that all my lucrative contracts went out the door and going to the lucrative law firms went out the door.  But I knew I had a fallback.  I had talked to my friends at Jones, Ware & Grenard, the minority law firm.  It was just, helped me in the process that they say "Well Roland, regardless to what happen, you can come work with us."  Well I wanted to come help build a small, to help build a minority law firms anyway.  So that was an easy decision for me in that regard.  And I went to work for them--after, eventually losing.
Story_ID: 4396
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about this stage of your life.  Are we looking at Roland Burris the practicing lawyer?  Are we looking at Roland Burris the retired politician?  Are we looking at Roland Burris who is--in--you know, in transition but is still planning another part of a political career?
Speaker 2: Well I can't say that I'm planning another part of my political career.  But I can say there is a very strong interest in my career being continued by a lot of supporters.  But what I'm trying to do now is to establish a law practice, and to still stay very active and very involved in the community.  I work very closely with Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] now in Rainbow PUSH and the issues that are being brought forth either under the police profiling or issues being brought forth under the contracts where the city is not being fair with the minority vendors, or working with minority companies.  My legal practice is primarily in the area of transactional work.  I'm not a trial lawyer.  I work with those companies that are trying to establish their businesses.  And I have, you know, a few of them, that are clients of mine that I'm assisting legally in giving them guidance and direction.
Story_ID: 4397
Speaker 1: What are your views about, you know, the building of you know, the role that we [African Americans] can play in this [politics].  And the future that blacks have and in the real way.  And--
Speaker 2: Well naturally it's, it's not a--it's not an either or situation.  Economic power is also key and political power is key and they run on parallel tracks.  We gotta deal with both.  Reverend [Jesse] Jackson [Sr.] does make the statement about what he did to, fighting to get on Clark Street [Chicago, retail district].  And now he's fighting for LaSalle street [Chicago, financial district].  Absolutely, we should have been fighting for both of them.  He was doing it at the same time, it's just that how you prioritize.  My thing is an example that should I'd been nominated and elected governor of the state, I guarantee you that we would not have blacks out there seeking--you know, a percentage of contracts.  You know, it's, it's a matter of how you are sensitive to where the economic piece is.  And there's a different, different sensitivity that comes with a person who has been denied or who has been out.  And sometimes you can find whites who are as sensitive.  And, and they move to correct some of the ills and wrongs that have taken (unclear) Our society.  But some of 'em, whites are not even that conscious.  I mean I don't even think they ought to be dealing over in that area.  whether it's, you know, the, the political agenda, or, or, or the economic agenda.  And it's a matter of us being present.  See by my having been Comptroller of Illinois a lot of things changed in Illinois government.  That which--they, you know, probably did not think about, I was there as the conscience.  You know, seeing that that thought process took place.  And then there would be another reaction that take place.  The same thing with a Emil Jones in Springfield.  He might not call the key as President of the Senate.  But he as a minority leader, he's gonna represent the Democratic party. He's gonna represent Democrats and other interests.  But he's also gonna represent black folks. And so by him being at the table, you see a whole lot of things happening that would not ordinary happen out of the goodness of some other person's heart because they might not have even thought about it.  It might not have even been in their consciousness or, on, on their radar screen.  So given those circumstances, the presence--that's what we want. I'm of the believe that we have to be bring 'em up in the pipeline.  They just gotta keep coming.  Whether it's politics, pressing to be up in these major corporations, pressing to be up in these law firms.  We just can't all pull out and go and start our own, own business.  I mean, you know, I support that in some instances. But I also support us becoming like now the head of Maytag Corporation.  We gotta run some of these Fortune 500 companies.  We gotta have--And then that person who gets there has to be sensitive enough to recognize, that they got there on the backs and the strength of a whole lot of black folks.  Even though he has to keep the corporate culture in place.  He also has to keep his consciousness in place of specifically trying to be the role model for other young blacks to come up through that system so he will not be or she will not be the only one.  And that's the commitment that we have. We have to overcome the structure of this classist, this racist society in America.  That's a burden that we all must bear whether you're an entrepreneur starting your own business, and trying to get wh-, you know white customers.  Or as we ser-, as we say, "serve the general market rather than the special markets."  And whether or not you're in a corporation, whether or not you're in political office.  We're still out numbered in this country.  This is not South Africa, this is not Ghana, okay, where one ethnic group, one--where black people are in charge.  We're only 10 or 12 per cent of the population.  So therefore we have to then a, assert ourselves and be constantly vigilant to make sure that our brothers and sisters are able to come along and not have to fight the same battles that we fought.
Story_ID: 4398
Speaker 1: It may not be totally written yet. It's still in progress. With a Carol [Moseley] Braun ascending to the senateship [in 1992], senatorship, my ascending to the comptrollership,  currently Jesse White is there.  It was, it was my whole agenda that we would keep blacks in statewide elective office.  We have to keep them coming.  So you can establish the, the comfort level of individuals expecting that to happen.  And then it has to happen with governorships.  And it has to happen at every level.  So that it then becomes an ordinary routine happening in our society.  It's no more the first of this and the first of that.  So that's what I see the evolving legacy of us being in the minority in the structure of this racist system--that we have to continue to push the envelope, continue to move forward, continue to press and keep it ever evolving.  there's certainly a history there of the evolution of politics in Chicago [Illinois].  And you take 'em one step at a time.  [Cecil] Partee's nomination [for Illinois attorney general in 1976], naturally then set the tone for somebody to be elected statewide.  You know, I forced, you know, Partee to be put on that ticket, but at least he was nominated.  So with Partee being nominated, then the blacks said, "Well we nominated one.  Now  we gotta elect one." Said, "Burris is qualified to be Comptroller."  I know this committeemen along with Partee said that, "This person ought to be backed by this party who have given all their support to all the other candidates.  We should have someone of our ethnic background to hold a constitutional office."  And no one could object to that, but some of them did.  But then the resources and the machinery got together, and it happened.  So I see the, that the, the legacy being is that we have to establish those, those positions--We have to obtain those positions and we have to then perform in those positions.  I--I won't--I don't want to criticize anyone on this tape, but, you know, a lot of people were--I think she did a tremendous job in her legislative activity but a lot of people were disappointed in, in Carol's personal performance, in her personal life.  I heard too many people say that.  Now what's that gonna do when we need her in the Senate?  And I worked very hard for her, her reelection.  But a lot of people were turned off because of her, you know, performance.  She should have been reelected.  She should still be the United States senator from  Illinois.  So once you get there, you ought to be able to stay there and sustain it.  You can't have people saying that, "See there, you know, she now has, she now has messed up."  So the legacy has to be that you gotta have some more Carol Brauns, some more Roland Burrises, some more Jesse Whites come in the pipeline.
Story_ID: 4399
Speaker 1: Who you admired and you would consider as sort of a hero?  And why?
Speaker 2: Well the first one would my father [Earl Burris],  because of his vision and his direction, that he grounded me with. There would be his buddy, my eighth grade principal Mr. Harold Walker.  Those two individuals--Mr. Walker just passed.  He was about 80-someting years old when he died--in terms of, in terms of that.  Then of course Dr. [Delyte] Morris at Southern Illinois University, with his, position and his stance on diversity and human rights and civil rights. And, you know, I have so many individuals that, --I begin to remember in the financial world, there was a gentleman who, you know, was my boss at Continental Bank [Chicago], Fred Shule (ph.).  He's  now deceased.  And so I've had a lot of opportunities and a lot of people who saw in me what I was trying to portray.  And helped bring out my skills and abilities in terms of accomplishments.  So--there were, there were quite a few.  And I, oh gosh. You got the Daryl Grishams of the world.  I mean where would I stop if I start calling names?  They've all had, had an impact on me.  Bill [William] Cousins. You know he was--I was very impressed with him when I ran his [aldermanic] campaigns.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'm trying, trying to come up with some more names.
Speaker 1: That's okay.  The other--question I have for you is about--Well I wanted to ask one more question politically.  And that was, you know you worked with [William L.] Dawson when he was a household name here [Chicago].  You worked with Wilson Frost who hasn't been heard from (unclear), you know, in a long time.  He was very powerful.  You know--I think, I think you said you also worked with Cecil Partee.
Speaker 2: Well, now I worked--I fought those guys until 1977.  I was on the other side of them.  I fought Wilson Frost.
Speaker 1: But you also--But you said, that--I thought that you said that you worked with Dawson though.
Speaker 2: Yeah well, well--yeah back when I got started.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked for Lawrence Woods who was Dawson's top guy.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: I was a go-fer
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For Lawrence Woods.  And we were--you know, I had to get the chairs and, and run the errands and do those things.  I was jut trying to learn how to--how the politics worked.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But then I ended up going with the indep--the independent Democrats.  And when--see when Wilson Frost ran for city council, I supported you know, Jim Montgomery and Gus Savage.  They challenged Wilson Frost but the two independents were running and, and Wilson won.  But subsequent to that, I became--you know, we became friends once I joined the [regular Democratic] organization.  Once I joined [Eugene] Sawyer's organization those guys took me in.  There was no--See I never did get personal with them.  My thing was always in the best interest of the people.  That's the same thing that they were working for.  We were just going at it in different--different avenues, different angles.  And so I never did do anything out of line.  I never was, you know--nasty or anything else.  Even with Partee, you know.  When he was president of the [Illinois] Senate, I was down there in [Governor Dan] Walker's cabinet in '72 [1972].  And Partee helped me--on a couple of occasions.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's good.  Okay.  Now I want to ask--Well just really quickly, do you have a definition of 'politics'?
Speaker 2: Politics is doing for people what they cannot do for themselves through the policy making process.
Story_ID: 4400
Speaker 1: You have, from an outside perspective, been blessed with a very supportive wife [Berlean Burris] .
Speaker 2: Very much so.
Speaker 1: and I
Speaker 2: There's a long story there too.
Speaker 1: (chuckle) But I would like you to talk about what role, I mean shortly, but what role she has had, you know, played in your life.
Speaker 2: Sure.  An excellent role.  I, I--and she was a young student nurse when I was doing summer work at Provident Hospital [Chicago].  That's where I met her.  She is originally from Mississippi, born and raised.  And she came up here to go to  nursing school.  I met her.  And when I went over to Europe, I began to think about who would be somebody I'd like to spend the rest of my life with.  And so I made the decision that it was her and I started communicating with her from Europe.  And when I came back from Germany, I told her I was on my way to law school and when I finished law school, we were gonna get married. And needless to say, we got married after a year and a half in law school [at Howard University School of Law]--because, you know,  we were--the distance and we were really in love at that time.  And so we decided to do it.  Plus I needed to make sure I settled down out in [Washington, D.C.] too, so that I wasn't  running around all that much.  But anyway, so we got married and--it's-well it's really a funny kind of a thing because I told her I wanted to be a politician and she had no idea what that was, until we really got started and when I was joining all of  these organizations and gone from the house all the time with the little kids and I'm making this meeting and working on this thing, and this project and doing all of this other stuff,  you know, it wasn't something she could grasp and it was difficult in convincing her that this had meaning.  But she saw me--you know, she was there all the way 'cause I used her as a sounding board to plot my strategy, you know, take my steps.  And do I do this, or do I do that?  Do I run for this  office or don't I run you know can't run this time.  You know. So she was a part of all of that.  And I can remember in 1976 when I had--The desire was so strong for me to run for [Illinois] State Comptroller in '76 [1976], if I had not run, I don't know what would have happened.  But I ran and I lost.  I didn't get but 50,000 votes.  I guess it was--I mean no, I got 200,000 dolla-, 200,000 votes and I lost 50,000 dollars.  But I ran.  But then the second time I ran for State Comptroller in 1978, those two years.  Then you know she was very, very adamant in saying, 'Well, Roland, you didn't have the party backing.  You can't get out there unless you're backed by the party."  And I said, "Well honey, I'm gonna get the party's endorsement."  She said, "Well I don't know if you can do that or not."  I said, "Well okay, if I get the party endorsement, would you be with me?"  She said, "Yes."  Guess what?  I got the  party endorsement.  She was with me.  And so I went on and I was victorious.  When I ran for the state legislature in 1968, the first time I ran and I came in sixth.  Remember that?  Well she had my little son, now he was about one years old and she was out trying to put the posters up on the streets, you know, and passing out posters with the little baby in her arm.  You know, she was like campaigning with me, for me.  You know,  'Cause I was covering one area and she was--'Cause I didn't have, you know, a campaign staff.  But she is very brilliant professional in her own right.  She was a registered nurse when we got married.  After we came back to Chicago, and we had our two kids, well then she went back to school.  Because she had found out, that you know, being an RN was just not (unclear) in the field of nursing, you had to get a BSN.  So she enrolled in Loyola [University, Chicago] and they only gave her 15 hours credit for all the (chuckle) three years of nursing school at Loyola and so she had to go for four years to get her Bachelor's in Nursing, after having been a registered nurse.  And she thought that was totally unfair.  But in order to graduate in four years, she had to go to four schools all at the same time.  She was enrolled at Loyola, taking courses at Roosevelt and two courses--a course at two junior colleges, in order to make sure that she could graduate in four years.  She got a Bachelor's from Loyola in Nursing and then she went on to the University of Illinois and got a Master's in Nursing and Public Health.  And then Loyola hired her as an instructor.  And she taught a while at Loyola.  And then she moved to Chicago State [University] because it was closer to the house.  And then, she was an instructor at Chicago state.  And then she decided that she was gonna go back to school.  She said she was gonna go get a PhD.  And she enrolled and--As a matter of fact, she was gonna be at the University of Chicago or Northwestern.  And she sent an application to Northwestern and they called her up on the telephone and admitted her to their PhD program by phone, (chuckle).  Because of her academic standing.  And so she went to North-, Northwestern.  She got her PhD in Higher Education Administration.  She became Chair of the Department of Nursing at Chicago State.  Then she became Dean of the College of Nursing at Chicago State.  She was Dean for eight or nine years.  And then she got out of that area.  And then she went to National Louis University as the vice president of  National Louis University.  And of course, she took her, her buy-out at national Louis back in 1996 when I ran for governor and she says, you know, it's time for her to go and rest.  And that's what she was home doing until, she came in one day.  And she said, "I'm gonna do something I always wanted to do."  I thought she was gonna get piano lessons because she always talked about wanting to finish learning how to play the piano.  And she said, "No, that's not it. " I said, "What are you gonna do?"  She said, "I'm gonna go back to school."  Now this is (unclear) She's a Northwestern PhD right?  She says, "I'm going to divinity school. I want to just study the Bible."  We've been married over 38 years and she had not  missed a night in reading her Bible.  But she just wanted to get a formulized, I mean, you know, a, a formal indoctrination in the Bible. so she could understand it a little bit more.  So she enrolled at, University of Chicago.  They admitted her to the University of Chicago Divinity school.  And she went there for orientation and didn't like that.  And she ended up going to McCormick Theological Seminary.  And of course, she had enrolled in McCormick for a semester.  It was not for her.  It was all history and theory.  She wanted Bible.  Then she found out about Moody, Moody Bible Institute.  And she got in just in on the nick of time to get into their  program.  And she enrolled in Moody.  And two years later, she finished with a Master's Degree in Biblical Studies from Moody.  Moody found out--'Cause I ran for Governor in 1998. Moody found out who she was and what her credentials were and prevailed upon her to join their faculty.  She is now a professor of graduate school at Moody Bible Institute and she wrote her job description because she is doing field--she's a professor of field studies for all of Moody's graduates.  She oversees what they're doing in the community.  The chaplaincies and how they're volunteering and this kind of thing.  And for that, she gets paid.  And she is as happy as a--you know, as a kid in a candy store.  And she is very, very challenged.  And she's really believing in her religious, her calling.  And all of that energy was also helpful to me.  Because she was not just a subservient female to be there at my beck and call.  She's very independent, you know, very perceptive, very--opinionated.  And therefore, it was a good balance.  And you know, and I took a lot of her advise in doing or not doing things. And so she played a major role in all of this.  And I know that she was the partner that I needed to accomplish these goals.
Story_ID: 4401
Speaker 1: My life has not (pause) you know, really been some happenstance, some accident.  It is a divinely directed life.  I believe that with all my being.  I am on a mission.  I have a mission.  Now the press calls that arrogance, egotisticalism and a person who just can't stay out of office like the boxer who can't stay out of the ring.  You know, always craving for attention.  But I say that I am, directed into these things.  And I have not received any direction at this point to, the desire to run again for office.  But all of those runs that I had, even when I ran in '98 [1998] and lost, (pause),  I, You know, certainly could have stayed away, and not gone through all of that.  After I had lost that primary. But see I've never lost a general election.  And so when I get to competing with those inner desires or that uncontrollable desire, which I say is direction, then, who knows, whether I might have to do it again.  But publicly you (unclear) somebody's gonna hear this, if you put this part on, that somebody will say that, I am you know, saying something to this effect that, that there is a, a power that's there. That direction needed to make these type of decisions and to step out on faith and to do those things.  I'm a deep believer in that.
Story_ID: 4402
Speaker 1: You have two kids right?
Speaker 2: Two kids.
Speaker 1: and their--their names are?
Speaker 2: Rolanda.  Because we didn't have a boy's name when she was--girl's name when she was born.  And so we put an 'A' on my name.  And when her brother was born, we made him Roland the II.  And we're getting ready to change my wife's  name to Ronelda, (chuckle).
Speaker 1: (Laughing).  Okay.  One last question I wanted to ask you.
Speaker 2: And they are accomplished individuals as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean my daughter is working on her doctorate degree at Northern Illinois University now.  As a matter of fact, today she's gonna be before a committee to see if they will accept her proposal.  She's writing her dissertation.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: Our son is a Northwestern law grad and he's in the development business.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: My daughter teaches--I mean she's a, a director of student support services at  Barat College in Lake Forest [Illinois].  And my son runs his own company.
Story_ID: 4403
Speaker 1: What to you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: That he was a trail blazer.  That he blazed the trail for individuals to follow.
