Story_ID: 222360
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Amazon, [HistoryMaker] Amazon Brooks.  I spell it A-M-A-Z-O-N, Amazon Brooks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My married name, Brooks.
Speaker 1: Now, what was your maiden name, ma'am?
Speaker 2: Duncan, D-U-N-C-A-N, Duncan.
Speaker 1: All right, now, what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Date of birth is 1897, November the 26th, Arcola, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay, Arcola, right?
Speaker 2: A-R-C-O-L-A.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and ma'am, what did you do for a living?
Speaker 2: My people farmed.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My grandfather [Spencer Knighten] was a farmer.  Yes, and I lived with him when my mother [Ellen Knighten] and stepfather--we lived in Mound Bayou [Mississippi].  When I was seven years old, we moved from Arcola, Mississippi to a little place called Bourbon, Mississippi and Trail Lake [Plantation, Greenville, Mississippi], two little, small towns.  Bourbon had a depot.  Trail Lakes, Trail Lake had a depot, Bourbon had a--what do you call those things?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: A train stop, didn't have a train, a place for the train to stop.
Speaker 1: A depot?
Speaker 2: Didn't have one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you stopped and you could get the train there, but you had to flag the train.
Speaker 1: Okay, it was no station, no station.
Speaker 2: No station.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just have to flag it down.  Okay.
Speaker 2: There's one south of that village, they called Trail Lake.  It had a station.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm wanna you about that in a minute, but I just wanted to establish who you were.  And I've read the--at least the Chicago Tribune reported that you were the oldest registered voter in the City of Chicago [Illinois].  Is that true?
Speaker 2: As far as I know.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and, ma'am, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: What's that?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Let me see now, Sunday.  Trying to think of the date.
Speaker 1: Well, I've got it here.
Speaker 2: August 25, 2004.
Speaker 1: Yes, and, and where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Where are we now?
Speaker 2: We are at 420 West 63rd Street [Chicago, Illinois].  I think that's where we are, right?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, yes, okay.
Story_ID: 222361
Speaker 1: All right, now, before we get into--go into detail, there are five lightweight questions we always ask, okay.  And they just require a short answer.  And the first one is, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I don't have much of a favorite food.  I used to be choosey about food, but no.  I get hungry, I just want something to eat.  I don't have too much appetite.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?  A favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue used to be my favorite color, but I don't care much about any of it now.
Speaker 1: So you got tired of it?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head, yes).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite now?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no).
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, the summer.  I guess I like April.  I think April is my favorite month, April.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't care that much about the hot weather.  I don't care too much about the cold weather, but I don't complain about the cold weather.  I can, can take it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite vacation place to go?  No?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no).
Speaker 1: Okay, and do you have a favorite phrase or saying that you like to say?
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?  Yeah, do you have some words to live by that you say all the time?  Or a favorite quote
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: No?  No, I was asking if you had a favorite saying, something that you say all the time or, or a favorite quote?
Speaker 2: Yes, I had a cousin that I was very fond of, Reverend William Howard Knighten.  When he was talking to you, he say, "All right, now."  So I find myself, when it's something right to the point, I say, Reverend Knighten said "All right, now."
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Reverend Harvey [ph.], the minister that died before Reverend Daniel [ph.], he was a big, fat fellow.  Everything, it get too much for him, too much for him.  He couldn't, couldn't deal with it.  He'd throw his big ole fat head back and say, "God Almighty."  So I find myself saying that just like Reverend Harvey, I'd say something, say "God Almighty."
Story_ID: 222362
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your family history.  And I want to start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all I know.  I don't know anything about my father's [Thomas Duncan] side.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ellen, E-L-L-E-N, Ellen.  They called her Ellen, Ellen, but it was just Ellen.  In later years, she named herself Ella.
Speaker 1: Okay, she liked Ella better?  Is that the reason?
Speaker 2: Everybody did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, Ellen is so flat and pull it up, like that (trailing off)--
Speaker 1: Okay, and what was her maiden name or what was her name when she--
Speaker 2: Knighten.
Speaker 1: Knighten, okay.  That's K-N-I-G-H-T-E-N?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right, Ellen Knighten, and do you know her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: December the 25th.  She was born somewhere in the State of Alabama.  Her parents were slaves, Eutaw, Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know what year she was born?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think back, I could try to tell you.  She died in 1949.  That's when she died.
Speaker 1: How old was she when she died?
Speaker 2: She would have been eighty years old had she lived till Christmas Day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For '49 [1949], so you can count back from that time, about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --what year she was born.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she was born about 1870, I guess, yeah, about 1871.
Speaker 2: Somewhere, somewhere along, around there.
Speaker 1: Yeah, right.
Story_ID: 222363
Speaker 1: What do you know about your mother's [Ellen Knighten] side of the family?  What do you know about the ancestors on that side?  You said they were in slavery when she was born or right, just before she was born, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know about her.  She had two or three aunts, big people, tall, big people.  Her grandfather's [sic. father] sisters.  I can remember them.  Aunt Susan [ph.], Aunt Lucy [ph.], Aunt Betty [ph.], Aunt Jenny [ph.].  Those were my mother's aunts.  I could remember her uncles, my grandfather's brothers.  Those are my grand uncles, Uncle Tom [ph.].  He had a large family.  Uncle Isaiah [ph.], he had a large family.  That's the only two brothers I remember is Uncle Tom and Uncle Isaiah, any others, I don't remember them.
Speaker 1: Now, did they, did they talk about, did they talk about what life was like in slavery?  Did any of your--
Speaker 2: No, I never did hear--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --relatives talk about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: They would come to see my grandfather [Spencer Knighten], and I don't remember them talking very much about it.  Grandfather, grandmother [Nancy Knighten] never was bitter.  They always spoke kind of their master.  Master's name was Johnny Watson [ph.], yeah.  Yes, sir, spoke very well.  They talk about Green County [Alabama].  That is where they lived in Green County, Eutaw, Alabama.  They were slaves there.
Speaker 1: Did they ever like tell stories about, you know, what--about those days and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Story_ID: 222364
Speaker 1: So do you remember any of the stories they [Brooks' maternal grandparents, Nancy Knighten and Spencer Knighten], they used to tell you, some of the old people in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they used to tell the stories about, ghost stories.
Speaker 1: Do you remember a good ghost story?
Speaker 2: Afraid when it's told.
Speaker 1: You get afraid (laughter).
Speaker 2: Remember, I would be afraid.  Yes, I can remember being afraid.   Yes, sir.  Yes, sir.  I can remember a pastor telling a tale, I guess it was the truth.  It was a, a Negro and a white man that a nut, they called a hickory nut, and one they called a scaling bark [ph.].  They was out in the woods wherever these trees was, they gathered a lot of these nuts.  And they wanted to know about a place where to go to count them, and they wouldn't be disturbed.  So they thought and thought, and after a while, they thought about the cemetery.  If you go to the cemetery, you wouldn't be disturbed there.  They went all the way back to the farther end of the cemetery, a colored man and the Negro man, just counting.  They said, "One for me and one for you."  Both of them, say, "Uh-huh."  "One for me and one for you."  "Uh-huh," all the way through.  They got to end of it, and they're saying, "One for me and one for you, and that's all."  One of 'em say, oh, no.  Oh, yes, when they put the two nuts on the gate posts on each side, one on each post, painted 'em, one black and the other one white, the nuts.  And that's all.  Say, oh, nah, the black and white one at the gate.  So, one of 'em reached up and got his hat and put it in his bosom, the colored man did.  They (unclear) black and white one at the gate.  It was, he was talking about the nuts.  He thought he was talking about the white man at the gate, he thought he was talking about that.  But he wasn't talking about that.  They was talking about the nuts, the two nuts.  So Negro got up and got his hat and put it in his bosom.  They thought he was talking about souls, says, and the Negro went back to the house, what they called a "big house" and told his master that God and the devil, down at the cemetery dividing souls (laughter).  I can remember a preacher, Reverend Cook [ph.], telling that story.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I get it now, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so they used to tell some awful stories.
Speaker 1: Did they talk about haints in those days?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Did they talk about haints?
Speaker 2: Heat?
Speaker 1: Haints, haints, like ghosts, you know, haints.  Did they talk about haints?
Speaker 2: Hate.
Speaker 1: No, haints.  That's the word, I know some people use down South for ghosts, the word haint.
Speaker 2: Hate.
Speaker 1: Haint, yeah.
Speaker 2: H-A-T-E?
Speaker 1: H-A-N-T [sic.], H-A-N-T, H-A-I-N-T.
Speaker 2: Hating?
Speaker 1: No, like somebody haunted a house.
Speaker 2: Oh, haunt.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh, they used to tell all kind of tales, lies, that's just what they were.  That's all that some of 'em did do.  My people never did believe in that too much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not even my grandparents.  They didn't believe in no ghosts.  Some call 'em spirits.  Some call 'em ghosts.  No, they didn't believe in that too much.  Some of the tale that their parents told or something, they didn't know about it.
Story_ID: 222365
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: Sure, they reared me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother's [Ellen Knighten] parents.
Speaker 1: What were their names?
Speaker 2: Knighten.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Grandfather's name was Spencer Knighten.  Grandmother's name was Nancy [Knighten].  They were owned by the same white people.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, who--they had been slaves, right?  They were--they had been slaves (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: --by the--okay.  All right.  Did they talk about the Civil War or any of that?  Did they know anything that?
Speaker 2: Yes, grandfather would always, talked about the Civil War.  He should a ran away and joined, but he didn't go.  Yes, sir.  He was a honorable man that weighed never 300 pounds.  See, what is his color?  I guess he was the color of that--
Speaker 1: So he was very dark, you're saying?
Speaker 2: Very, nah, he wasn't dark.  He was black (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was black (laughter).
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Excuse me.
Speaker 1: And weighed about 300 pounds too.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know anything about a Hudson seal coat or Northern seal fur coat?
Speaker 1: Yes, it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: His hair was just like that, just ringed with curls.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he had like curly hair, well, curly, black hair.
Speaker 2: Curly black hair.  It wasn't any more than that long, just curled up on his head, all over his head, curly hair.  I don't know.  Somebody said something about Montaglasco [ph.] and that's what he was.  You ever heard anything about a race--
Speaker 1: Uh--
Speaker 2: I don't know whether it was a tribe of African, what, I don't know.
Speaker 1: What did they say?  What was it again?
Speaker 2: Montaglasco, somebody said that's what he was.
Speaker 1: Mollyglasco [ph.]?
Speaker 2: Okay, or--
Speaker 1: The name was Spencer Knighten.  He just rocked when he walked (laughter).  I thought he was the greatest man ever lived, my grandfather.  He was kind.  He was nice to all his children.  He was good to us.  My grandmother name was Nancy, and his name was Spencer.
Story_ID: 222366
Speaker 1: I knew his [Brooks' grandfather, Spencer Knighten] mother, his mother.  I knew my grandfather's mother.
Speaker 2: What was her name?
Speaker 1: Chena [ph.].  I don't know how you spell it, Chena, a woman about that tall, about that tall, little ole, little old short woman.  I remember them when I was about seven years old.  Some of 'em, one of my aunts went back to Alabama, and the brought her to Mississippi.  And they brought her to my grandmother's [Nancy Knighten] house who was her daughter-in-law.  My grandmother would fix dinners, turnip greens, and mustard greens and whatever season of the year it was, she'd fix that, big pails and fix it up in a pail or something and we would take it to her, to her, one of her daughters' house.  Her name was Lucy [ph.], Aunt Lucy.  She was a big ole woman, about that wide, almost, rocked when she walked, Aunt Lucy.  She was, she was about the color of that--
Speaker 2: Okay, so she was very black also.
Speaker 1: Very black, Aunt Lucy, and my grandfather, very black.  They had a brother named Isaiah [ph.].  I don't think he was so black.  I think he was brown, and a brother's name was Tom [ph.].  He was brown.
Speaker 2: Now, they were farmers, right?  You said they were farmers?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.  Yes, they was farmers.
Speaker 2: Did they--what kind of crops did they raise?
Speaker 1: Cotton.
Speaker 2: Cotton.
Speaker 1: Cotton.
Speaker 2: Cotton, corn.  They didn't have many oats, wheat.  I don't remember nothing about any wheat, nothing about raising any wheat.  I can remember oats, oats.  Corn was a major thing (unclear) raising, corn and cotton, grass, they planted crops of grass.  That was what they fed the stock on, grass.  Yes, indeed.  They had watermelons, yes indeed, all kind of things in the gardens such as collard greens, cabbage, turnip greens, all of those things.
Story_ID: 222367
Speaker 1: Your parents [Ellen Knighten and Thomas Duncan] moved to Mound Bayou, Mississippi at some point, right?
Speaker 2: My parents, when I can remember myself, we was at this two little towns that I was telling you about between Merigold [Mississippi] and Mound Bayou when I can remember myself, we was living there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And when I was about--they moved from Arcola, Mississippi when I was a month old, I understand.  And they moved, that's where they moved to Mound--not Mound Bayou, to this little, little country towns, Shelby [Mississippi]--not Shelby.
Speaker 1: Is it Bourbon [Mississippi]?  You mentioned Bourbon before.
Speaker 2: Bourbon, Bourbon and (unclear) I forget.
Speaker 1: You said Trail Lake [Plantation, Greenville, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Trail Lake and Bourbon.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Bourbon had a station.  Bourbon had a platform where they flag the train.  Somebody had got up there on that railroad with a handkerchief or some kind of cloth and the train was coming.  If they flagged the train, the train stopped there.  But at the one south, they didn't have to do that.  I guess a whistle blew, I suppose, something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 222368
Speaker 1: What are some of the, ma'am, what are some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Some of the sights--
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds and smells of growing up?  Like what kind of thing did you see, what kind of stuff did you smell, and what kind of sounds were going on?
Speaker 2: Sounds.  I don't know, used to fish, used to fish.  There was a farmer, name of Simmons [ph.].  He had a bayou, a little body of water.  It ran through there.
Speaker 1: A bayou, right, yeah.
Speaker 2: We called it that place which you owned, maybe the owned forty acres, forty acres of land.  This body of water ran through their place all the way across the (unclear).  And all of us used to fish there, used to go to fishing there.  Their house sat on kind of a knoll like, excuse me, sat on a knoll like, round like a mound.  And we'd often go over there during the week when we, wasn't any work to do and fish.  We dug the baits.  I was afraid of 'em.  I never got used to them, never got used to the baits, like it was worms, earthworms.  That's what they was, and we called 'em baits, fishing baits, but they're just earthworms.  That's all they was, could be that long.  Ah, they were nasty things.  I never got used to 'em.  I would always, almost get a whipping.  The children weren't allowed to whip the children--children weren't allowed to whip each other.  I would holler and cry.  I wouldn't wanna bait my hook.  I'd lie and make like the bait was biting me.  Baits didn't bite nobody.  They was just a nasty thing, wasn't very nice.  (Unclear) all was wrong with 'em, but they didn't bite nobody.  I lied wanting someone to bait my hook for me.  That's all it was.  Sometimes they'd bait it, and sometimes they'd get tired of me and wouldn't do it.  (Unclear) crawfish, you know about a crawfish?  Yes, sir.  They would stay around, you know, when a storm, it'd be a storm, it would uproot, it'd blow a tree up and it'd turn over.  And all the bottom would be just that roots, over that roots there, down under there would be the water where the tree would root, leave a deep hole, a deep hole.  And all of that dirt, looked like strings would be hanging up.  You ever see anything like that?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You have.  And that's where you would really catch crawfish in that hole (laughter), that deep hole where that root is turned up and on the side like that.  Yeah, frogs.  You know anything about a frog?
Speaker 1: Just a little bit (laughter), just a little bit, not much.
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yes, sir.  Almost forgotten some of those things.
Story_ID: 222369
Speaker 1: Now, when you were a little girl, could--did they have a school where you were?  Could you go to school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we went to school in town.  We walked two or three miles or more.  We lived west of Mound Bayou [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Go down the railroad east, and you go out to somebody's field and go across the field and go through the woods, (unclear) a home.  That's where we'd go.
Speaker 1: Now, did you--where did you start school at?  Did you start in Mound Bayou or did you start in some other town?
Speaker 2: We went to school at Trail Lake [Plantation, Greenville, Mississippi] first.  The first school I went to was a church house.  It was a Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, Mount Airy [ph.] (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, wait a minute.  I think it was Mount Airy.  Anyway, my mother's [Ellen Knighten] church was a Baptist church.  The man she married later, and his wife died, his name was Emmanuel Coleman [ph.], Mr. Coleman.  He used to sing.  Oh, that man could sing.  He was a Methodist.  I think his church was Porters Chapter [Porters Chapel Methodist Church, Vicksburg, Mississippi].
Story_ID: 222370
Speaker 1: Tell me about your father.  Now, what do you know about your father and his side of the family?
Speaker 2: I don't know much about my father.
Speaker 1: Do you know his, what was his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Or his mother.  I just know his name.  I can't remember him very much.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can most remember his suit.  I can remember him coming to see me.  He had on a suit, little bitty checks, black and white checks.  I can't remember anything about his face or nothing I can't remember about him.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Thomas Yebrey [ph.].  Thomas, I don't know how you spell that Yebrey, but his middle name was Yebrey, Thomas Yebrey Duncan.  They called him called him Tom Duncan.  He lived at Arcola [Mississippi] all the time.  I don't remember him.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember when I was in my early twenties, after I was here in Chicago [Illinois], and they say he went back to Louisiana.  He was from, that was his native home, Louisiana.  Anyway, when I was a very young woman, I can remember him going back to Louisiana.  He, he didn't like farming.  He worked for a doctor, Dr. Cheeks [ph.].  I can remember Dr. Cheeks.  He cooked, housekeeping, everything for Dr. Cheeks.  I remember that.
Speaker 1: Dr. Cheeks was in Arcola?
Speaker 2: (Nodding head).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can remember him coming to our house out in Mississippi near the railroad, horses and mules, buggy, wagon and whatever, didn't have no car.  They didn't have no cars then.  I didn't see an automobile 'til I was about ten or twelve years old before I saw an automobile.
Story_ID: 222371
Speaker 1: Did you see your first automobile in Mississippi?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You were in Chi--where?
Speaker 2: I had, my people had moved from Mississippi and they was at Mound Bayou [Mississippi], must have been around 1910 before I saw an automobile.
Speaker 1: Okay, did somebody own one in Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They were just passing through?
Speaker 2: They passed through there going to Jackson [Mississippi] or some place.
Speaker 1: What did you think when you saw the first one?
Speaker 2: What did I say?
Speaker 1: What did you think?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Just was glad to see it, was glad to stand on the side of a public road and look at it.
Speaker 1: Had you heard about 'em before?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, yeah.  I had heard a lot about the automobile.  Yes, I heard a lot about the automobile.
Story_ID: 222372
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Now, you went to school in Trail Lake [Plantation, Greenville, Mississippi] first, right?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, that's where I went to school, at Trail Lake first.
Speaker 1: And this is, so, this is a school for the black kids, right, in Trail--this is a school for the black children, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I don't remember where the school was for the white children.  That was a church house where I first went to school, a church house.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Trail Lake, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, did you like school?  Did you like it?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I--they had taught me my alphabets at home.  We called 'em A, B, Cs.  They taught me how to read.  I went to school.  I couldn't imagine the children sitting up there and not saying anything.  So I had my book.  I'm mo' show 'em that I know how to read.  I was sitting up there.  I said, A, B, C, D.  Finally, I got out loud, A, B, C.  Somebody said, "Somebody here reading too loud."  Somebody came to me and told me to lower my voice.  Don't read loud.  Read to yourself.  I can remember that well.
Speaker 1: Now, this was like a one-room school?  Was it like one room for all the grades?
Speaker 2: One room, um-hm, one room, but everybody--one room for everybody, all in the same room.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She just had a, a cane, a switch or something.  You got to doing the wrong thing, couldn't behave yourself, they'd have you to come up, hold out your hand, and whip you, whip you in the hand.  I didn't get many whippings.
Speaker 1: What did you like the most about school?
Speaker 2: I didn't like anything about it much, too much about school.  I can remember a couple of, they called it exercises when the school was closed.  And they had a speech or something, and mother'd make you a pretty dress, get you some pretty little shoes, get you a ribbon for your hair, have you all dressed up.  And you'd have this speech, you'd say this speech 'cause there'd be two or three of you or more where they have what they called a dialogue.  You remember, you don't remember nothing about that, do you?
Speaker 1: No, ma'am.
Speaker 2: Dialogue.  You would have a verse or so to say and the one next would have one to say, like that, a song.  They had a nice time, yes, sir, a nice time.
Story_ID: 222373
Speaker 1: What other schools did you go to?  You went to school in Trail Lake [Plantation, Greenville, Mississippi], and then--
Speaker 2: That's the only school I went to, the school in Trail Lake.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: And the next year, we was getting ready to move to Mound Bayou [Mississippi].  So they didn't worry about sending us to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Waited till we got to Mound Bayou in the winter.
Speaker 1: So, did you go to school in Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: What--did the school have a name?  Did you--what was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: I don't remember it having no name.
Speaker 1: Just the Mound Bayou school.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We called it the pre-school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The public school, elementary.  We called it pre-school (laughter), public school (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Baptist College [Mound Bayou Industrial College, Mound Bayou, Mississippi] there, the normal school [Mound Bayou Normal and Industrial Institute, Mound Bayou, Mississippi], they paid, you paid to go there.  You could go there in the first grade.  Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what was your--do you remember any of the teachers at Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the teachers at Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: Any of the deacons?
Speaker 1: No, the teachers.
Speaker 2: Oh, sure.  I remember all of 'em at the public school.  I remember some at the normal and Baptist College.  I remember their names.  Gertie Bryant [ph.] was a teacher at the public school.  She had sisters and brothers.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher in school?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: Treated 'em all alike.  I never was a teacher's pet.  Always was a kind of a loner, tried to do some of what was right.  I tried to do too much wrong, tried to do some of what was right.
Story_ID: 222374
Speaker 1: Now, when you were growing up, ma'am, who is the most important grown up in your life when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I didn't have many, no choices, no choices much.  I had to treat all grown people nice and with respect.  That was a must.  That was a must.  I had to do that.  If I didn't, I had to answer to my parents [Ellen Knighten and stepfather, Emmanuel Coleman (ph.)] and grandparents [Nancy Knighten and Spencer Knighten] for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't ever remember no one having to, wrote home and tell my grandparents or my parents nothing on me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Had a pretty good behavior.
Speaker 1: So what did you like to do when you were growing up?  What kinds of things did you like to do?
Speaker 2: Well, on Sundays we went to play with the Simmons [ph.] children, who lived right in back of us, that I was telling you about, had that bayou to run through their farm.  They had a girl.  We called her Missy.  She must been about fifteen or sixteen years old when we moved to Mound Bayou [Mississippi].  Her name was Ada [ph.], and she had two little sisters, about my size and age, and one was a year or so younger and another one was still younger.  I remember their names, Vanviola [ph.], around my age.  Sally [ph.] was about two years younger.  And a third one we called Roogue [ph.].  Her name was Naomi [ph.].  She was a pretty little girl.  She was brown, and she had curly hair.  Her hair was brown.  Yes, sir, we played, we played with dolls, played with dolls, and we would count, play hide-and-go-seek, whole lots of things.  Boys, boys shooting marbles.  They played ball.  We'd try to play ball.  We played, girls, we played a little baseball, count, hide-and-go-seek.  You ever play that game?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.  I never was good at playing many games, but I tried.
Story_ID: 222375
Speaker 1: Now, do you have any brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Mother [Ellen Knighten] had two or three to die at infancy.  I think she married when she was about eighteen years old.  And she had a, her oldest child lived to get nine months old, and the rest died very young in infancy.  She was near thirty years old when I came.  Yes, sir.  I can't remember them.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  She would have been twenty-eight, I guess, when you were--when you were born, she would have been about twenty-eight years old, I guess, from what--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just about that age, just about that age.  Yes, sir.  But I can remember myself.  We was at home with grandmother [Nancy Knighten] and grandfather [Spencer Knighten], had a big house, called a double house, a big house.  So grandmother and grandfather was head of the house, the boss.  It was nice.  I can't ever remember my mother and her mother and father having a stiff argument, if I must use that expression.  I can't ever remember them having words like that.  And when my grandparents, my mother married again, I remember his wife, his first wife.  She used to visit her name.  Her name, we called her Ms. Delia [ph.], a nice woman.  She had a little girl.  She looked just about like he did, her little--her daughter.  She had two sons, was a few years older than this little girl.  Her name was Sally [ph.].  She had brown hair.  She was white.  So I can remember, we went to the same school, and her ole man, he was kind of off.  We called him Uncle Mack [ph.].  I can remember when he came to school, when it had rained once, and he brought something like a raincoat and some boots, brought this for the little girl to put on.  Her name was Sally.  And some time later, he came back to the school again and told the teacher, "Well, I came for the little girl this time."  You know, he didn't know nothing about being careful and using diplomacy, "Came for the little girl this time.  Her mother's dead, this time I came to get her.  Her mother's dead."  That little girl started to crying.  Ms. Ella, this teacher, her name was Ella Adams [ph.], Miss Adams said, "Don't cry, Sally."  And some time later, it must have been a few years later, Mr. [Emmanuel] Coleman [ph.] married my mother.  He was a nice man.  Something about [President] Abraham Lincoln, he remind me, always remind me of Abraham Lincoln.  When I look at his picture now, I think about Abraham Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Okay, so he looked like--did he have a, he had a beard and all that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  A long face like him and mustache and a beard.  He was a nice man, but he was ugly.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: He was nice to me.  He was a nice stepfather.  He saved my mother from whipping me a many day.  He sang, sang at his church.  Everybody liked to hear Brother Coleman sing.  Yes, sir, he sang.
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: He had two sons, big boys, Julius [ph.] and Louis [ph.], and this little girl.  Her name was Sally.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Lots of water's gone under the bridge since then. Plenty of water.
Story_ID: 222376
Speaker 1: Ma'am, did you ever meet I.T. Montgomery [Isaiah T. Montgomery]?
Speaker 2: Well, not formally.  I saw him outside.  I saw him in the store where they had the post office.  It was a store there, a little ole short man, wasn't very tall, dark complexion.  I remember his wife [Martha Robb].  She was very fair, very fair, and her daughters.  They didn't have no sons.  I can't remember no sons.  They had four or five daughters, maybe six.  One of 'em taught school at one time where I went to school (unclear), Mariah [ph.].  Her maiden name was Green [ph.], and we called her Ms. Green, yes, sir.  Yes, I remember I.T. Montgomery, little ole, short, dark man.
Speaker 1: And he was, tell us about him?  What did he do?  What was he famous for?  I mean what did he do?  What--
Speaker 2: What did he do?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: He had an office there in the store.  I think he did.  I guess he had one at his house.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: He was one--was he one of the founders of Mound Bayou [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: One of the families?
Speaker 1: No, one of the founders of the--
Speaker 2: He was "the" founder.  He was "the" founder of Mound Bayou.  I understand that it was a--what they call it a grant, a grant?  Something about Jefferson Davis was the head of it, appointed him over this.  I done forgot how many acres it was, and he--anyway, he was in charge of it.  My grandfather [Spencer Knighten] and his brother bought eighty acres and this other farmer from--I don't know, had so much, eighty acres.  I think the smallest they sold was forty acres.  Next was eighty, next was three forties.  What would that three forties?
Speaker 1: One hundred and twenty.
Speaker 2: Hundred and twenty, just in plots like that, whatever they, whatever they wanted.
Story_ID: 222377
Speaker 1: Now, I'm gonna ask you about some other people and just tell me if you remember 'em in Mound Bayou, Mississippi.  Do you remember the Martins, any Martins?
Speaker 2: Martins?
Speaker 1: I think they had a store.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I've been away from Mound Bayou--
Speaker 1: Since 1915, right, you say--
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifteen [1915], been away from Mound Bayou.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You remembered some Pates, right?
Speaker 2: The Pates?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Do I remember them.  Ole man, Square [ph.] Pates.  He had three or four sons, Barley [ph.], Barley, I think Barley's name was Charlie [ph.].  I don't know why they called him Barley, Barley, Frank [ph.], Monroe [ph.], and they called one of the boys, Monkey [ph.].  I think his name was--I forgot what Monkey's name was, Square.  I went to school with Square.  Every year I went to school there, which he was a little older, maybe two or three years older than me.  He had two little sisters.  His sisters was younger than me.  Yes, sir.  Square sang.  He was a smart little boy, had a lovely voice, sang, had a bass, heavy voice, I guess they call that a bass voice.  Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Now, he's got a--well, there's a granddaughter of his or a great granddaughter that sings opera now, you know, one of the Pates.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: [HistoryMaker] Harold Pates' sister here in Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Olivia [ph.].
Speaker 1: --has got a sister that sings--
Speaker 2: Oliva.
Speaker 1: Is that who it is?
Speaker 2: She married a fellow by the name Jenkins [ph.].  I had left there and come to Chicago, Jenkins.  We called him Jim Jenkins, and she was his second wife.  Now, their first cousin married my uncle.  My uncle's name was William Knighten.  That was my mother's [Ellen Knighten] brother.  He married Roxie Dixon [ph.].  She was from some part of Mississippi, hilly part of Mississippi, and later years, she was teaching school, a country school teacher.  She came up in my parts of the country, teaching school there.  And my uncle courted her and married her, Miss Roxie.  Square Pates was her mother's--Square Pates' mother and this lady's mother was sisters.
Story_ID: 222378
Speaker 1: How far did you go in school?
Speaker 2: I didn't go any farther than the fifth grade.
Speaker 1: Now, why?  I mean is there a reason why?
Speaker 2: Well, I came here [Chicago, Illinois] when I was seventeen years old.  I had dropped out of school.  I don't know I stopped going to school.
Speaker 1: Did you have to work or what?
Speaker 2: Oh, Lord, yeah.  But that didn't have anything to do with me dropping out.  Yes, we had to work when we got a certain age, at about 12, 10 or 12 years old, we had to work.
Speaker 1: Well, why did you move to Chicago?  You came up here at--
Speaker 2: Well, my uncle's wife, he sent her south in 1914 to be with his parents who was my grandparents [Nancy Knighten and Spencer Knighten], had six little children, two girls.  The oldest girl was eight years old.  She was afflicted.  She was just like this (shaking head back and forth).  That's the way she did.  She was like that from birth.  And next was a boy.  He was John [ph.].  He was very smart.  Next was a boy.  His name was Amos [ph.].  The third was a boy.  That's the one that was a minister [Reverend William Howard Knighten] and used to say, "All right, now."  He pastored Progressive Community Church [Chicago, Illinois].  And then it was another little girl.  Anyway, just ten children in all, ten in all.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, you were telling me why--how you moved to Chicago, why you moved to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Well, this woman--did I tell you about her ankle when I was telling you about her?
Speaker 1: Well, we weren't on camera yet when you told me, but you said that she jumped out of a cotton house window--
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right, and when she was in her early thirties, that's when her ankle started to giving her trouble, swelling and having trouble with breaking out.  And so she started to having trouble.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The doctors wanted to know from her did she ever hurt her ankle.  When they asked when she was a girl, I think she said twelve or fourteen, she told 'em about this and that's where the trouble was, came from.  She jumped out of this cotton house window and sprained her ankle.  And she had all that trouble when she was a young girl.  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: So did they bring you to Chicago to help her or what?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Did they bring you to Chicago to help her?  Did your uncle bring--
Speaker 2: Well, I lived with them.  I was supposed to go to school, but I don't know why I didn't, I didn't go.  She was with us all summer of 1914.  She and these six children was down there with us about two months, all the summer.  And later, just before the cottons was, you know how the cotton--what they call it?  The bolls, you know about a cotton boll, know anything about a cotton boll (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, it forms a ball, really a big ball.
Speaker 2: It burst, ripened, and it's white.  You pick pick the cotton then.  You pick it and gin it and go through all that process like that then (unclear).  Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 222379
Speaker 1: Did you come back to Chicago [Illinois] with her [Brooks' uncle's wife]?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: The next year.  She came back, and she wasn't here no time before another baby came.  And she went to the hospital, [Cook] County Hospital [John H. Stroger Jr. Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  That baby died.  It never did come home.  The other children never did see her.  I don't know what happened about the funeral arrangements (unclear).  But anyway, that baby never did come home.  It was a little girl, and they didn't name her.  They died before they named her.  I done forgot how (unclear), few months, few months old.  She died.  So when time for her to come home from the hospital, she wasn't able.  She stayed in the hospital a while after this baby died.  She stayed there at the hospital a while, County Hospital.  That was in 1917.
Story_ID: 222380
Speaker 1: Ma'am, you were already here in 1917, right, in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I came here the 30th of May [1915], 30th of May.  I left home [Mound Bayou, Mississippi] the 29th of July--29th, 29th of May.  I left home the 29th of May, and I arrived here on the 30th, holiday.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's Memorial Day.
Speaker 2: Memorial Day, better known as Declaration Day [sic. Decoration Day].  My uncle met me at 43rd Street Station [Chicago, Illinois].  He left home when I was--I saw in the [family] Bible where he left home in 1901.  I forgot the date and the month, but I know he left home in nineteen one [1901], nineteen one [1901] when he left home.  A nice little man.  He was very religious, very religious.  I would a called him a upright man, believed in what was right, not pretend.  What he thought was right, he believed in it, he stood by it.
Story_ID: 222381
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what was Chicago [Illinois] like when you got here in 1915?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: Oh, the streetcar fare was a nickel.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A man in the front called a motorman, drove the car, and one on the back end was a conductor.  He took the fare.  Fare was five cents.  He gave you a transfer.  You didn't pay nothing extra.  You paid the nickel.  He gave you--you paid, you asked for a transfer or they gave you one or asked you did you want one.
Speaker 1: So were the--
Speaker 2: I was here several years before the fare went up to seven or eight cents, here a good while.
Speaker 1: Where did you live when you first came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: 132 Swan Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, 132 Swan Street.  Did you come here on the train?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was the fare very expensive on the train?
Speaker 2: I think the fare was, I think it was $17.00, one way, if I'm not mistaken.  I think that's what it was.
Speaker 1: But money was different in those days, wasn't it?  I meant it went a long way.  I mean money was a lot different in those days, I guess, in terms of what it could buy.  I mean what you could buy with it.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, it was.
Speaker 1: You said that--you were telling us before that with a nickel, you could go to the bakery and buy like a whole lot of bread, right?
Speaker 2: That bread that we'd get four loaves for a nickel.  And for the day-old bread, Livingston Baking Company was on--there's a bakery down, the bakery is on the west side of the street.  It wasn't State Street.  I don't know what street that was, that the bakery--Livingston Bakery Company.  Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 222382
Speaker 1: What did you do for a living when you got to Chicago [Illinois]?  What kind of work did you do?
Speaker 2: My uncle worked for the Commercial Chemical Company [Chicago, Illinois].  That was somewhere way southeast.  I never did see the place.  But I knew it was south and east from where we lived.  That's where he worked.  I took care of the children.  It was seven children.  It was seven children.  The oldest girl was afflicted.  She walked with a rock.  Her voice trembled and shook when she talked.  She didn't go to regular public school.  She went to a school where retarded children went.  I went over there to that school, the first and second year I lived with them, went over there to take her to school or something.  Anyway, I had some business over there at that school.
Speaker 1: Now (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She died--
Speaker 1: I got it.  You said she died, you say?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's been dead several years now.  Her name was Aurelia, Aurelia Mae [ph.].  She left a daughter.  This daughter lives in--where is this place out here?
Speaker 1: I don't know.
Speaker 2: I can't think of the name of the place.
Story_ID: 222383
Speaker 1: When you reached Chicago [Illinois], did you register to vote?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think you could, voting.  I don't think we was voting at that time.  I've forgotten (unclear).
Speaker 1: So you couldn't vote in Mississippi, right, if you were there?  Or did you?
Speaker 2: They voted there in Mound Bayou [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: Did they?  Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't remember the other places where they voted, they couldn't vote.  But I know they voted there in Mound Bayou.  The people there (unclear).
Speaker 1: Well, Mound Bayou is a black town, you know, so, yeah.  So they voted there, but when you came to Chicago, were people involved in politics at all?
Speaker 2: I can remember voting in 1919 or '20 [1920], I remember voting, something like--
Speaker 1: Do you remember who you voted for?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Thompson, Thompson was the mayor later around in that time, [Mayor] William Hale Thompson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--they called him "Big Bill" Thompson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's right.  The race riot [Chicago Race Riot of 1919] was under him.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, what--now, tell us about the riot.  You were in Mississippi, right?
Speaker 2: I wasn't here.  I left here one Sunday, and it started the next Sunday.
Story_ID: 222384
Speaker 1: Now, you got married just before the riot [Chicago Race Riot of 1919], right?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: Well, you want tell us about your husband?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) One of the biggest little liars.  That was the lyingest little man.  First year we was married, he'd come home, all the next year with neat flowers.  Mrs. [HistoryMaker Amazon] Brooks is still a bride.  She's still receiving flowers.  That's what he--come home grinning, a big bunch of flowers.  Next thing I know, the little guy was stealing money out of the baby's bank (laughter), yes, sir.  The second year he was just running away from home and coming back, running away and coming back.  I'd wake up some mornings, he'd be gone and his trunk would be open and he'd be cleaning out the trunk and put it in his little bag.  He called it, called his bag his grip.  He kept up, kept that up all of 1920, first of '21 [1921], he kept that up, running away, coming back, running away, coming back.  I decided I can't make him stay home, but I can make him stay away from me, I can do that.  I got tired of him running away and coming back, running away and coming back.  So all of '21 [1921] and part of '22 [1922], he was away from home.  I just got tired of it.  Some time, way later, I saw where he was married and I went to the lady's house--mother of my church.  My church was, was Indiana [Avenue] at that time, Antioch [Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] was on Indiana, 51st [Street] and Indiana.  She was looking for something, something in the church paper.  And when she looked into it, she laughed.  She said, "Look, this is--they'll," (unclear) say, "this is as cute as it can be," say, "this old couple here," say, "she's eighty-six and he's seventy-something."  I laughed.  I said, "That man is older than that."  She said, "Well, this is an old picture, say I had this two or three years or more."  I said, "Oh, yeah."  They were members of Boddie's, members of Boddie's church.  You remember [Reverend] Louis Boddie that used to have a church [Greater Harvest Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  I never was there, but I remember the church on State Street, somewhere on State Street.  It's out south here.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I've heard of Reverend Boddie, yeah.
Story_ID: 222431
Speaker 1: So in 1919, you had just gotten married, right, to Mr. Jones [ph.], right?  Was that who it was?
Speaker 2: I came to Chicago [Illinois] in 1917 [sic. 1915].
Speaker 1: Seventeen [1917], okay, but you--in 1919 when the riot [Chicago Race Riot of 1919] took place, you had just been married, right, and you, you said you went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I had been, that summer, later that summer, I went to Chicago.  I was down there all during the riot.  I don't know just how long it lasted.  I guess just a few days, I suppose.  I don't know.  I forgot.
Speaker 1: What did they tell you about it when you got back?  What did they tell you was going in when you got back?
Speaker 2: They wrote to me.  Oh, well, told me everything that they knew about it, I guess.  They had to almost hold me down there.  I wanted to get back here to Mr. Brooks [ph.] so bad (laughter).  I wish something had caught Mr. Brooks (laughter) because (laughter).  Mr. Brooks would leave home, come back dressed in somebody else's clothes.
Speaker 1: So that didn't work out too well.  So you said you let him go, right, Mr. Brooks, you--you got rid of Mr. Brooks, right?
Speaker 2: Say what?
Speaker 1: You got rid of Mr. Brooks, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes, I finally got rid of Mr. Brooks.
Speaker 1: Now, did your--that's your son's [William Brooks] father, right, Mr. Brooks?
Speaker 2: (Nodding, yes).
Speaker 1: Okay, so your son was born about 1917, right, you say, '17 [1917].
Speaker 2: About that year, running pretty close (laughter).
Story_ID: 222432
Speaker 1: What did you do for a living when you were raising your son [William Brooks]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I worked at a hotel, laundry.  I worked at the Congress [Plaza] Hotel [Chicago, Illinois].  And I worked at restaurants.  I worked at laundries.  Oh, I was busy.  I worked all the time.  Yes, sir.  I was busy.  I didn't play any.  I didn't have no time to play.
Speaker 1: So you didn't have any fun at all?  You didn't do anything for fun in those days?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: Did you go out to hear music or anything or--
Speaker 2: I never danced a step.  I never played a game of cards.  I didn't have no reason for not, I just didn't care for it.  I didn't dance any at home.  I never went to a dance.  I never played no cards.  I worked at the Congress Hotel, two or three different times, the housekeeping department.  The last time I worked there, I worked in the laundry.  I worked at the Palmer House Hotel [Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois], worked in the housekeeping department there, Palmer House Hotel.
Speaker 1: Do you have any interesting stories from those hotels?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do you have any interesting stories from the Palmer House or the Congress Hotel?
Speaker 2: What kind of stories?
Speaker 1: Interesting stories.
Speaker 2: (No audible response).  (Shaking head).
Speaker 1: No.  My grandmother worked for a hotel in Dayton [Ohio], you know, did the same kind of, you know, she worked as a maid and worked in the laundry, and worked in a bakery.  And she used to tell us about people that she would meet at the hotel--
Speaker 2: Yeah, uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Did she meet any famous people or interesting people?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  I was working at the Congress Hotel when Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.] came there.  I (unclear) it was 1918, 1918.  He stopped on, I think the 15th floor.  I was working on the 18th floor.  I was a hall girl, the 18th floor (unclear), anyway to the story below or two stories or something.  He stopped there 'cause he spoke at the stockyards.  Yes, sir.  I was a little girl when he was president.  When I can first remember the name, president, he was president.  They called him Teddy Roosevelt, Theodore "Teddy."  Booker T. Washington was the president at Tuskegee Institution [Tuskegee Normal and Industrial Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] at that time.  They were good friends seemingly, he and Teddy Roosevelt, good friends.
Story_ID: 222433
Speaker 1: Did you hear a lot about Booker T. Washington when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  He spoke at Mound Bayou [Mississippi] a couple of times when I was growing up, had a--I don't know what they called the day, but anyway, they had a day that he was, he was--I can remember.  Yes, I heard a lot about Booker T. Washington.
Speaker 1: Do you remember any of the other black leaders from those days that spoke in Mound Bayou?
Speaker 2: Let's see, can I remember--I know I can, but I can't think of 'em right off hand.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you ever hear Timothy Thomas Fortune speak?  T.T. Fortune, did you ever hear him speak?
Speaker 2: Boykin [ph.]?
Speaker 1: Fortune.
Speaker 2: How do you spell it?
Speaker 1: F-O-R-T-U-N-E, Fortune.
Speaker 2: Forsey [ph.].
Speaker 1: No, Fortune, like you read your fortune, like--
Speaker 2: Fortune.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was one of the--I think he was leader of something called the [National] Afro-American League.  I don't know if he was around--
Speaker 2: Fortune, no, I don't remember about him.
Speaker 1: Or--did you ever hear Ida B. Wells speak?
Speaker 2: Oh, did I.  (Laughter) I know when they built that development [Ida B. Wells Homes, Chicago, Illinois] down there.
Speaker 1: Which one?  Oh, her, the projects, the housing--
Speaker 2: Housing there.
Speaker 1: The federal housing project.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you hear her speak then when they--you heard her speak when they opened that up?  Well, tell us about when you heard her speak?  When did you hear Ida B. Wells?
Speaker 2: When I heard of what?
Speaker 1: Ida B. Wells.
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness, I know when they built it, when they was building it, I used to walk home.  I worked at that laundry there at 33rd Street.  It was called the St. Lawrence [ph.].  They changed the name to St. Lawrence.  And they was building it.  It begun somewhere around 35th, I think it did.  I used to walk through there.  I lived at 51st [Street] and Prairie [Avenue] at that time, (unclear).  I used to walk through there.  Sometimes when I would get up early mornings, I'd walk to work.  I'd get early enough and--yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the leaders in the black community when you were young?
Speaker 2: Jackson, ["Fighting] Bob" Jackson.  He was the alderman of Second Ward, Louie B. Anderson [Louis B. Anderson].  Jackson was the Third Ward [sic. Second Ward].  Louie B. Anderson was the Second Ward, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Do you remember Oscar DePriest?
Speaker 2: Sure, I remember him, Republican.  Yes, I remember Oscar DePriest.  I don't think, I'm trying to think did I ever see him.  I lived there at 37th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue] some years later.  His brother used to collect the rent.  He was a agent, Riley [ph.], Mr. Riley.  That was a--I don't know whether he was any relation to them, but I know he was a agent, one of the agents, and he'd collect the rent.
Story_ID: 222434
Speaker 1: Did you read the [Chicago] Defender in those days?
Speaker 2: Did I? Yeah, the Chicago Defender.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the Chicago Bee?
Speaker 2: Bee?
Speaker 1: The Chicago Bee.
Speaker 2: That paper?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hum, I can remember.  Yes, I can remember the Bee.
Speaker 1: Which one did you like the best, the Defender or the Bee?
Speaker 2: Well, I read the Defender more, I guess.  I guess if I had read the Bee as much as I read the Defender, I would of liked the Bee the best.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I guess so, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 222435
Speaker 1: Any other stories from the hotels [Congress Plaza Hotel and Palmer House Hotel, Chicago, Illinois]?  Did you meet any other famous people in the hotels?
Speaker 2: I don't think I did.  Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Well, how did they treat you in those days in the hotels?  How did they treat the maids in the hotels in those days?
Speaker 2: Pretty fair, pretty fair.  It was different types.  It was maids, chambermaids, wore the keys, and it was a, (unclear) they called us scrub girls.  We didn't wear no keys.  We didn't have no keys.  We scrubbed, called bathroom girls.  Yes, sir.  We wore plain aprons, plain apron.  Chambermaid's apron had a bib on it.  I don't know whether (unclear) went over their head or what.  But I know their apron had a bib, and a (unclear).  Scrub girls, we wore just a plain apron, just a plain apron with a belt around.  Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 222436
Speaker 1: Do you remember the [President Thomas] Woodrow Wilson administration?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I remember when he was elected president, remember when he was elected president.  He came in there after [President] William Howard Taft.  Taft came in after Teddy Roosevelt [President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr.].  Wilson came in after Taft.  Yeah.  I'm trying to think of who came in.
Speaker 1: I think Roosevelt came back, didn't he (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who came in after--
Speaker 1: --didn't he come back, didn't Roosevelt come back or he ran again or something, didn't he, something?
Speaker 2: That's [President] Franklin Delano [Roosevelt].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, I'm thinking of the wrong one.
Speaker 2: A cousin of his.
Speaker 1: Do you remember [President Warren Gamaliel] Harding?
Speaker 2: First Democrat we had, after Wilson.  Wilson was Democrat.
Speaker 1: Right.  Do you remember Harding?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: Harding.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Warren G. Harding.
Speaker 1: I think he was elected in 1920, I believe, I believe, yeah.  Do you remember the rumors that Harding was black?
Speaker 2: Un-un.
Speaker 1: You don't remember that?  Okay, but there's a rumor that Harding was black.
Speaker 2: I can remember such a little (unclear)--Harding, Harding.  Warren G. Harding.
Speaker 1: Now, did you vote for these people?  I mean did you--were you voting in those days?
Speaker 2: I don't--I'm trying to think were we voting then?  Look like to me the men, colored men, started to voting before the women, did they?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am, and matter of fact, women didn't get to vote until 1920, right.  That's right, 'cause you couldn't vote until 1920.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's when I--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --began to vote, and I was living on Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the first time you voted?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Forgot.  I done forgot.
Story_ID: 222437
Speaker 1: Can you remember a time when voting was a big deal, I mean the first time, it was really important to you?
Speaker 2: First time I was voting, I was living 32nd [Street] and Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois], I think I was.  Fountain's Undertaking [ph.] place was there.  I lived next door, big building, and the people's name was Ware [ph.] that I, that we rented from, Ware.  And we went up near, near to 31st Street, it's a house somewhere up there where we were, waited in.  This was 1920, and we moved there in 1919, stayed there several months, people by the name of Ware.  She was a member of Bethel A.M.E. Church [Chicago, Illinois].  It was down on the thirties, somewhere down in the thirties.  She (unclear).  Yeah, she was a tough little customer, knew everything, been everywhere and seen everything.  Yes, sir.
Story_ID: 222438
Speaker 1: Do you remember Marcus Garvey?
Speaker 2: Absolutely (laughter).  I never, I heard a lot about him, but I never did see much, remember seeing much of him.  But I remember a lot about Marcus Garvey.
Speaker 1: Did you know people that were in the Garvey Movement?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yes, I knew some, yes, I knew people that was in the movement.  Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Did you ever have a chance to hear him speak?
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.  I don't remember hearing him speak.  Yes, sir, Marcus Garvey.
Story_ID: 222439
Speaker 1: You got married again in 1950, you say?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I married a fellow by the name of Jones [ph.].  He had three little children, the oldest one wasn't quite--the oldest one was fifteen, I think.  And the daughter was thirteen.  The youngest one was ten, had his tenth birthday.  Oh, talking about a brat.  He was really a brat, that little boy, ugly, just ugly.  His name was Aaron [ph.].  They would have been pretty nice children if it don't be for their father.  Father was the cause of 'em being like they was.  (Unclear)  he worked at the [Union] Stockyards [Chicago, Illinois].  They called it the packinghouse.  I done forgot the name of that company, Siegal, Siegal and Weller [Siegel-Weller Packing Company], Siegel and Weller, something like that.  You remember that name?  Yes, sir, and he worked there.  He was a butcher, and knew everything for everything.  I don't know what they done before he went there (laughter).  I don't know how they existed before he went there to the stockyards.
Speaker 1: So you're suggesting that he thought he knew more than he actually did?
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.
Speaker 1: Well, how long were you married that time?  How long were you married the second time?
Speaker 2: How long would I have been what?
Speaker 1: No, how long were you married the second time you got married?
Speaker 2: A few months (laughter), a few months.  Yes, he was gonna marry someone to pull him and his children out of the kinks.  He was from Memphis, Tennessee.  People, all of 'em own their little shacks, and he was the only one didn't own one.  And seemed like they blamed him for that, for not having his home.  But he came here to Chicago [Illinois], and he was gonna show them what he could do.  And he didn't do nothing, had separated from these children's mother and married another lady.  And he finally left her.  They separated somehow.  I never did see her, I never met her.  But I can remember when they separated, yes, sir.  So we wasn't together no time.  My uncle and I--my uncle's wife had died.  And my mother [Ellen Knighten] and I went to live with my uncle.  He had seven rooms on 46th Street.  We went to live with him.  Yes, sir.  My mother died in 1949.
Speaker 1: You said she was about eighty, you said, yeah, about eighty years old?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 222440
Speaker 1: Now, aside from going to church, is there anything else that you liked to do?  Did you listen to the radio or go to movies or--
Speaker 2: Most of the while, I never was a fan, always got get along without, went once in a while.  It was all right, and if I didn't go, it was all right.  I never was, had no hang-ups on nothing.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first, got your first radio?
Speaker 2: Let's see do I remember when I got the first radio?  I guess I do, trying to think.  I guess I do remember it.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite radio show?
Speaker 2: I remember, I liked Arthur Godfrey.  I liked him.  My mother [Ellen Knighten] had programs that she listened to.  She never had to work out.  Even down south, a little girl, she worked some in the field.  But after she came here, she came to Chicago [Illinois], she didn't work out.  Yes, indeed.
Story_ID: 222441
Speaker 1: What are some of the highlights of your life here in Chicago [Illinois], would you say?
Speaker 2: Well, during the time that I came along, I would say mostly subject to my parents [Ellen Knighten and stepfather, Emmanuel Coleman (ph.)] at the age of seventeen.  You wasn't very much on your own, mostly at home with your parents.  And if you had any common sense, you knew how to listen them and try to please them just because you was sixteen or seventeen years old.  You didn't get out and go and do just like you want to because your people was nice.  As long as you was at home under their roof, if you didn't behave yourself, you couldn't stay in their house and do like you want to.
Story_ID: 222396
Speaker 1: Now you were a Republican for a long time, right?  You were telling me.  Were most black people Republicans?
Speaker 2: The ones that I came in contact with, the majority was Republicans.
Speaker 1: Now, what made you change from being a Republican to a Democrat?
Speaker 2: I don't know, just most everybody--not everybody either, but most people that I came in contact with seemed to think the Democrats was doing so much better.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well, was it Roosevelt's administration that made the difference, FDR [President Franklin Delano Roosevelt]?  Was that--
Speaker 2: FDR.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us why do you think he was better?
Speaker 2: I don't know why (unclear)--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Listening to the other people, I guess, listening to the other people, I guess.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you remember [Representative] William L. Dawson?
Speaker 2: Thompson?  Bill Thompson?
Speaker 1: No, Dawson.
Speaker 2: Dawson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, William L. Dawson.
Speaker 2: We were just talking about him, wasn't we?
Speaker 1: I know.  I just wanted to get it on tape (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I wanted to get it on tape.
Speaker 2: Oh, I see.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, I can remember Dawson.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was a Democrat, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And became quite powerful, you know, in the city, I guess on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: What was he?  Was he a alderman?
Speaker 1: Well, he was an alderman, and then he became congressman.
Speaker 2: Dawson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he was the alderman of the Third Ward [sic. Second Ward], I think, first, and then he became a congressman.
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: And what about, [Representative] Ralph Metcalfe [Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Do you remember Ralph Metcalfe?
Speaker 2: Oh, the athlete, something, wasn't he?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he became alderman--
Speaker 2: I can't remember too much about him, but I can remember about Metcalfe, Ralph Metcalfe.
Story_ID: 222397
Speaker 1: Speaking of athletes, did you go to baseball games when you were young?  Did you ever see any of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think I saw a few.
Speaker 1: --Negro League games?
Speaker 2: Out in Washington Park [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think I saw a few baseball games out there.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the Negro League?  Negro Leagues?
Speaker 2: Yes, what was that fellow's name?
Speaker 1: Satchel Paige or--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yes, I remember Satchel Paige.  I never did see him, but I remember him.
Speaker 1: Did you ever run across a fellow named [HistoryMaker Ted] "Double Duty" Radcliffe?
Speaker 2: I've heard of him.  I never did see him, Double Duty.
Story_ID: 222398
Speaker 1: Did you vote for Harold Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I voted for Washington.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you think of him?
Speaker 2: I never did go overboard about any (unclear).  (Unclear) held myself in check.  I'd got too excited over anything or anybody, didn't pay, didn't pay.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: Got all wrapped up in 'em, thinking they couldn't do no wrong, and this, that and the other.  And when they done something, then they left you out there on a limb, a way of speaking.  You try to take it slow, try to be sensible.  Try to be sensible about whatever (unclear)--
Speaker 1: So you don't get too excited about politicians?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).  (Shaking head).
Speaker 1: Okay, so is there any politician that you can think of that's, that you think really did a lot for the community--
Speaker 2: No, I don't know (unclear) a lot for 'em, only some that done the best they could.
Story_ID: 222399
Speaker 1: Can you tell me, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I'm afraid I don't take as much interest in it as I should, got older now, and, got older now, and I feel like we gon' get along without me.
Speaker 1: But what do you think about the world today in 2004, compared to what it was like, you know, a long time ago?
Speaker 2: I don't say I'm losing interest, but I feel it's not much I can do but hold a good thought and do the best I can, anything that I can do to help, which isn't very much.  But I'm willing to do that.  I realize I can't do a lot now.
Story_ID: 222400
Speaker 1: Ma'am, what advice would you give young people today about how to live a long time and to lead a good life?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I think to take care of the body, keep the body clean, take care of your body and next is to mind their own business, mind your own business, leave other people alone, other people's business alone, don't meddle into their business, try to keep yours to yourself as much as you can.  I think that's important.  Maybe it's not.  Maybe it's some people don't think it's important, but I think it's pretty important--
Story_ID: 222401
Speaker 1: Well, what do you hope children will do now?
Speaker 2: I hope children will do?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think to go to school, one of the main things is get as much education as you can, which I didn't know too much about that.  I know that you needed some education.  My people didn't stress it as much as they should.  I don't think they should.  Did someone come in?
Speaker 1: No, I think that's a wind, I think it was the wind--
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: My neighbor has a key so I was wondering if--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, I don't think they put as much stress on education as they should have instead of making us work.  When it wasn't anything to be done, then we went to school.  But as long as it was a boll of cotton to be picked, like that, we had to stay home till it was all finished, couldn't go to school till it was all sold (unclear).  And when, in the spring, when it came up, the corn was replaced.  I never had to stay out of school to, what they call, drop the corn.  I never had to do that.  But I had cousins that had to do it.
Story_ID: 222402
Speaker 1: Ma'am, when you look back at your life, and all the things that you've done, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: A what?
Speaker 1: I said, when you look back at your life and all the things that you've done, what do you consider to be your legacy or what would you consider to be the most important things?
Speaker 2: What was the most important?
Speaker 1: Yes, ma'am.  When you look back at your life, what's been the most important things?
Speaker 2: I was subject to my parents [Ellen Knighten and stepfather, Emmanuel Coleman (ph.)].  I didn't have nothing, to them (unclear).  I didn't have no ideas of my own.  Didn't--I did what they, as long as you was under their roof, at home, under their roof, you had to do what they wanted you to do.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no, I was asking you, when you look back over your life--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --what is the, what do you think are the highlights or the most important things that you've done.
Speaker 2: What I should have done?
Speaker 1: No, the important things you did do, the most important things that you did.  What do you think are the most important things that you did when you look back at your life?  They could be raising your son [William Brooks], I don't know.  I mean what--
Speaker 2: I didn't have a sweet time raising him.  My boy wasn't a good boy.  I loved the very ground he walked on in a way of speaking.  He never give me a sass word or cross word.  But that don't say that he was a good boy.  Other things that he done, maybe if I hadn't been so strict, and not so tight, some of the things that he did outside, he would a felt more freer to do some of 'em at home more in a decent way.  But I was very strict, very strict, like I think I was too strict 'cause he never gave me a sass word.  If he did, I can't remember it.  But yet and still, he wasn't a good boy.
Speaker 1: Now, did he fight in the war, World War II [WWII]?  Did, was he in the [U.S.] Army?
Speaker 2: No, he was in a lower class.  He was in a lower class, 4F or whatever it was, whatever that lower number.
Speaker 1: Oh, he didn't get drafted?
Speaker 2: Oh, he had to register, oh, yeah, he had to register all right.  He registered, all right, but he wasn't called.
Speaker 1: So did he get in trouble?
Speaker 2: Oh, always in and out of something.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, sir.  Yes, sir.  I never upheld him in anything.  I was always strict, tried to make him do what was right.  He was careful about trying to not do the wrong thing around me.  That's one of the reasons why he wouldn't stay home because the thing that he couldn't do at home, he knew I wouldn't tolerate it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If I hadn't been so strict, he would've stayed around home more.
Story_ID: 222403
Speaker 1: Do you think that history is important?
Speaker 2: Yes, I think it is if you want to stop and think and it certainly won't do any harm.  Maybe it won't do any good, but it certainly won't do any harm to know it and remember it and study it.
Story_ID: 222404
Speaker 1: Our last question is, ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I would like to be remembered as a nice, truthful, kind person, interested in people, likes something about people and tried to conduct myself in such a way that people would like me, speak well of me, to be real, to be real.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not just somebody out there living, going through the motions, trying to fool people and put up a front.  Just be real.  Try to have a word.  If I tell a person something, they could depend on it, not just tell 'em something to be telling 'em.  (Unclear)  [HistoryMaker] Ms. [Amazon] Brooks or Mother Brooks or Brooks or whatever they call me, said it, and it's that way.  I know it's that way because she said it.  I know she wouldn't a said it if it wasn't otherwise, or anything like that like that.  Yes, sir, have a word.
Story_ID: 222405
Speaker 1: I have a cousin.  I love the very ground he walks on in a way of speaking.  But he can tell me he's gonna do something.  I'll be by there tonight.  Maybe supposed to be here in the afternoon.  Maybe he'd ring my bell about seven or eight o'clock tonight, gon' do it, but he have a time to do it.  I've never called him and questioned about it.  And he's--he has to be in his sixties.  He's almost as tall as he is.  I think he's taller than you and he's much larger than you.  He'd make two of you.  I don't know (unclear).  Yes, sir.  He's a great guy.  I think he is, but better not go to sleep on nothing he tell you.
Speaker 2: So it's important to keep your word, right, you say?
Speaker 1: Yes, sir.  He's a deacon at his church, Fellowship [Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] where--what's that fellow's name?
Speaker 2: Clay Evans, [HistoryMaker] Reverend Clay Evans.
Speaker 1: Clay Evans.  He's not the pastor there anymore now.  They have another pastor.  I've forgot what his name is, a young man, just like we have a young man.  Yes, sir.  I love my cousin.  We've never had a cross word.  I looked after him, helped to look after him when he was a baby.  His mother died when he was born.  I helped to raise him, my uncle, my mother [Ellen Knighten] and I, we helped with him.  His father [Henry Clay Evans] married when he was near four years old, his father married again.  She wasn't very nice.  She had, she left two children and a little girl who was near four, maybe she was near three.  And the boy was a, just born, and she died.
Speaker 2: Okay, I think we--is there anything else you wanna tell us before we end?
Speaker 1: I don't think it is anything important.  Anything else you want to ask?
Speaker 2: Well, I can probably think of a lot of things when I finished, but (laughter)--
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: I'll probably think of a lot of things when I'm done, but, you know, there're a lot of questions, but--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: But thank you very much though for spending the time--
Speaker 1: It's quite all right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 222406
Speaker 1: Okay. Go ahead and tell us who's in the top photo?  Can you tell us who's in the top photo?  Ma'am?
Speaker 2: Top photo?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Eunice Christine Herbert Knighten [ph.].  That's my first cousin's wife.  She's been dead several years.
Speaker 1: Okay, who else back here?  Are these all cousins?  Are these all cousins of yours?
Speaker 2: My cousin married her.  That was this boy that I was just telling you about.  I was so crazy about in a way of speaking.  I love him so much, but I wouldn't dare go to sleep on nothing he said.  Michael [Knighten].
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  She's the one in the center in the black.
Speaker 2: This is you, right?
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And these are the rest of your cousins?
Speaker 1: Bring it a little closer.  Turn it around, don't have to bring it any closer.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Are these your cousins here on top, or relatives?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think where were we?  In Markham, Illinois at--
Speaker 1: Oh, that's in Markham, right?  Well, you have to tell us if these are your cousins?
Speaker 2: My church, this night, we had--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is at a funeral in Markham, Illinois.
Speaker 2: We was back at their house.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  All right, what about the bottom one?
Speaker 2: And what about the bottom one?
Speaker 1: That's my son at the bottom, that man.
Speaker 2: And what's his name?
Speaker 1: William Brooks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, next.
Speaker 2: And that's the pastor with the--
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Can you tell us that again?  (Siren in background) Can you tell us that again on the mic?
Speaker 1: I'll do what?
Speaker 2: Tell us the same thing again about who this is?  Just tell us who this is.
Speaker 1: What they are?
Speaker 2: Yes, ma'am.
Speaker 1: That's Gus Jackson [ph.], that lady's husband.  There she is the same night at the hotel.  Wipe that.  They haven't been dusted since the last time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Can you tell us about this photo that's on the chair now?  (Thunder)--
Speaker 2: Can you tell us who's in this photo?  I know you're on the left, and I think it's the lady that, whose anniversary it was.
Speaker 1: On this side, on this end.
Speaker 2: Right.  What's her name?
Speaker 1: Theodosia Jackson [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And who is in between you?
Speaker 2: She's passed on and so has her husband.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who's in the middle?
Speaker 2: A lady by the name of Margaret Locke [ph.] was a friend of hers.  She was a caterer.  This lady used to work for her all the time, used to do a lot of cooking.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  And one more time, what was the occasion?
Speaker 2: I used to help 'em.
Speaker 1: This was a fortieth anniversary of the couple, right the, fortieth anniversary of a couple that you know, right?
Speaker 2: This was what?
Speaker 1: What's the occasion again?  What was the occasion?
Speaker 2: They celebrated their forty-first year of wedding anniversary.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: It's in Las Vegas [Nevada], you say, and who are the people?  From left to right, who is that?
Speaker 2: That's my cousin.  Her name is--what is that girl's name?  Sharon [ph.].  She lived here in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: And who is that?
Speaker 2: That's his wife.  They lived in Vegas.  I was out there visiting them.  I arrived there on Saturday, and she came the next Tuesday.  She was from Chicago.
Speaker 1: And who is the next person?
Speaker 2: My cousin's wife, Amos P. Knighten [ph.], that's his wife, Lou [ph.].  She's gone on to meet her maker.
Speaker 1: All right, and that's Amos Knighten on the end, right?
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: That's your cousin, Amos Knighten?
Speaker 2: That's Amos Knighten.
Speaker 1: Okay, we're gonna shoot it now.  And that's you in the middle in the blue.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
