Story_ID: 653562
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson, I'm the interviewer; and Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --including your middle name, and then I want you to give your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm gonna state my name, which is [HistoryMaker] Bernard Beal.  I'm not gonna spell my middle name.  B-E-R-N-A-R-D, is Bernard, my last name is B-E-A-L, and my date of birth is 2/22/54 [February 22, 1954].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date to the best of my knowledge is December 10th, 2013.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm an investment banker.
Story_ID: 653563
Speaker 1: And I'd like to--I'm gonna ask five People magazine-ish questions, we ask them of everyone, short answers (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: Your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Pizza.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Favorite (laughter) time of year?
Speaker 2: Winter.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?  Oh, yeah favorite--
Speaker 2: Phrase or saying?  Well actually I have two, but I'll, I'll stick to one: It never gets uglier than the truth.
Speaker 1: And a favorite place to vacation?
Speaker 2: That's a hard one.  I don't really vacation.  (Pause) Well my family likes to go to the Caribbean.
Story_ID: 653564
Speaker 1: I wanna start out by--really you were raised by your [maternal] grandparents [Essie Williamson Beal and John H. Beal, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know, what about your parent's names?
Speaker 2: I know both of my parent's names.
Speaker 1: Okay, so can we go through that?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My mother, her name's Virginia Beal.  My biological father's name was George Gogn [ph.].
Speaker 1: George?
Speaker 2: Gogn, G-O-G-N, Gogn.
Speaker 1: Gogn, Gogn.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Gogn, Gogn.
Speaker 1: And nationality?
Speaker 2: African American.
Speaker 1: Oh wow.  Do you know about either side, their, their backgrounds, can you tell us that?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure, sure.  Well, both my parents were--both my biological parents were of diminished mental capacity.  I don't think--I think my mother probably, who is, my mother's still alive, and she probably would be on a fourth grade level, maybe fifth grade level.  My biological father, who is no longer alive, is probably second or third grade level, and that really was their capacity.  I, I think so.  Naturally, I had to be raised by someone who had a little more capabilities than my biological parents.
Story_ID: 653565
Speaker 1: When you say of diminished capacity, are you saying men- what people refer to as mentally handicapped?
Speaker 2: Exceptionally yeah, yeah, yeah.  My mother [Virginia Beal] could read or write, my father [George Gogn (ph.)] couldn't, and really didn't have the ability to, I think, master that skill.  So, yeah, diminished capacity.
Speaker 1: So how did they meet?  Do you know that?
Speaker 2: I don't think, you know, my mother had me when she was nineteen or twenty, and he was about eighteen.  And I think they met because they were not closely supervised (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) I'm sorry.  So, so you're raised by your grandparents on what side, your mother's?
Speaker 2: My mother's.
Speaker 1: Your mother's grandparents [sic.], okay.
Speaker 2: I never met my grandparents on the other side, and I know nothing really about them.
Speaker 1: So, so give your grandparents names?
Speaker 2: Sure.  My grandmother's name is Essie Mae Beal [Essie Williamson Beal], and my grandfather's name is John Henry Beal [John H. Beal, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And how many children did they have?
Speaker 2: They had six.
Speaker 1: So where was your mother in the birth order?
Speaker 2: She was second.
Speaker 1: And do you--so can you describe them, because wha- now was your mother living with you at this time, the whole time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  So they continued--they--my mother lived with my grandparents until they died.  And she's now living with the aunt who basically, when I say my biological mother, my aunt was really more of my maternal mother.
Speaker 1: She's the one who, who helped, I mean who, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's the one who really, you know, basically without her, my life would've taken a very different turn.  So she's the one who I really often when I refer to my mother, I'm really referring to my aunt.
Speaker 1: So what is her name?
Speaker 2: Her name is Ariemae.
Speaker 1: Ariemae?
Speaker 2: Ariemae Lonon [Ariemae Beal Lonon].
Speaker 1: Okay, Ariemae?
Speaker 2: Lonon, L-O-N-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 653566
Speaker 1: So who's at the household is what I'm wondering?
Speaker 2: So this is a great thing.  Okay, so when we grew up, we grew up in a five room flat, railroad flat.  My grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.], grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] were there.  My Aunt Eloise [Eloise Beal] until she got married stayed there.  My mother [Virginia Beal].  My Uncle Sonny [ph.] who was only about seven years older than I was.  My younger brother Larry [Larry Beal], and we were all in that apartment together.  And my Uncle Thomas [ph.] for a little while, yeah my Uncle Thomas.
Speaker 1: So wait.  Your grandparents, your uncle--your aunt that raised you--
Speaker 2: She woul- she didn't live in the same apartment.  She lived down the street.
Speaker 1: So there were two, two uncles.
Speaker 2: I had two uncles there, one younger, one older.  My brother and my mother, and my aunt.  So there were a total of--was that, two, four, six, eight people in that apartment.  It's a three bedroom apartment.
Speaker 1: So this, I read that it was in the Morrisania--
Speaker 2: Morrisania section of the Bronx [New York].
Speaker 1: Of the Bronx, okay.
Speaker 2: It's basically the South Bronx [Bronx, New York] called Fort Apache.  You probably saw the movie ['Fort Apache, The Bronx'] about--it was actually, I think Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] came there and declared it the worst slum in America.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: I remember when that was actually reported--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in that 'cause I, I remember there was some news feature or documentary or something--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --that was done--
Speaker 2: Yep.
Speaker 1: --of the area.
Story_ID: 653567
Speaker 1: Tell me what your--do you know--I wanna ask also about your grandparents.  Do you know how, how far back on that family line do you know?
Speaker 2: I can go great-grandparents on both sides, grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] and grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.].  I have only heard about my great-great-grandfather on my grandmother's side.  But never really more than just talking about him around the table.  So I don't know a lot about him.  But I, I, I know my grandparents and my great-grandparents, I know something about them.
Speaker 1: So can you tell about that?
Speaker 2: Well, the thing about my great-grandfather [Willis Williamson (ph.)] and great-grandmother is--
Speaker 1: On your mother's side?
Speaker 2: On my--well everybody's on my mother's side.  So my grandmother's side.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Is that they bought land in South Carolina when they were able to, once they were allowed to.  And that land is still in our family.  That land is where they are buried, that land is where my grandparents are buried.  It's not where I'm gonna be buried (laughter).  But, it's, it's been in our family for quite a bit of time.
Speaker 1: And where in South Carolina is it?
Speaker 2: It's, it's in an area called Beech Island [South Carolina].  It's landlocked, so there's no beach, there's no island.  It's right outside of Aiken, South Carolina which is near Augusta, Georgia.  So kind of gives you a feel for it.  My great-grandfather on my grandfather's side, the only thing I ever really know about him and the thing my grandfather would tell me from time to time is that he died saving a drowning person.  And that's really about all that I do know about him.  It's the sad part of our history that we really can't trace things back as far as I'd like to.
Story_ID: 653568
Speaker 1: You know, my, my grandfather--my--there's--it's the--it's the history part, but there're little flashes occurring.  My mother [Margaret Barfield Richardson] was adopted.  But this woman, all of a sudden, is finding all this information and she just sent me something that appeared in the Afro-American [Afro-American Newspapers] about my adopted grandfather, my grandfather I grew up with.  And he, you know, it's his funeral notice.  And they say, grocer dies at the age of ninety-five, but, ninety-seven, but there are like 110 between grand--
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: --chil- grandchildren, great-grandchildren, great-great-great, there are 110 of them at that time and I was and I was in the fifty-one of the great-grandchildren (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt] has decided that she really wants to at some point interview people before we're all--pass on.  So she was gonna go down to South Carolina at some point.  I have--I, I don't have the intellectual curiosity, I should.  I don't.  And you know, occasionally my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] who raised me will wanna talk about stuff like that and I probably should go back and listen to it.
Speaker 1: You should, you know, and if your daughter is gonna be the bearer, she should've been here today.  But you know the thing is, is that it's really important.  I can't tell you, on a lot of different levels.
Speaker 2: Well, my daughter's very sharp.
Speaker 1: So, what--and there's a lot of information out there.  But so the--so these--
Speaker 2: I'll tell you this, not to interrupt.  There isn't a lot because in, in the part of South Carolina that my folks come from, they didn't really keep really good records on African Americans.  And the records they did keep were in a courthouse that burned down so.
Speaker 1: There are--I was gonna say there's a period of time that a lot of things--there's some--there's a blank period.  But North Carolina is better.
Speaker 2: Yeah, certainly.  South Carolina is, you know.
Speaker 1: So you're this--you know, as far back are they just out of slavery, is that the period of time and are--?
Speaker 2: Well my [maternal] grandparents [Essie Williamson Beal and John H. Beal, Sr.] were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No they wouldn't have been.
Speaker 2: No, but my great-grandparents, yes.  They were--they were slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay.  They were slaves?
Speaker 2: They were slaves.
Story_ID: 653569
Speaker 1: So now, tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: I--you might find this hard to believe, but I actually remember my very first steps.  My very, very first steps.  And I remember walking from my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] over to my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal].  And I remember it, I've always remembered it, so it's not like a--it was a re- recalled memory.  But I remember it and I remember that the way I walked was the exact same way that my son [Michael Beal], when he took his very first steps, walked.  He did the exact same thing, which is to hold your hands up in the air above your head, like this (gestures) and walk.  So he--that was--that's what I remember and I remember it and I remember when my son took his first steps that he did the exact same thing and I thought that was pretty weird (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Like he was channeling you or (laughter)--
Speaker 2: Maybe it's hereditary--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Maybe hereditary.
Speaker 2: --and we just don't, yeah, yeah, so.
Story_ID: 653570
Speaker 1: So let me--another question I have, you have a brother, right?
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: So your brother is younger?
Speaker 2: He is.
Speaker 1: And so how many years younger; and his name?
Speaker 2: He's, he's four years younger and his name is Larry [Larry Beal].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So can you tell me what growing up in--in your household was like?  Can you des- and which--so is it a street or are you in a high rise?
Speaker 2: It was a street.  We lived--my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] worked like nobody I'd ever met before or since.  He, he had two full time jobs and three part time jobs.  He wasn't Jamaican (laughter).
Speaker 1: I was gonna say (laughter) (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No he wasn't Jamaican.  But he, he, he worked as an elevator operator on a Park Avenue apartment building during the day.  And at night, he worked for the Daily News [New York Daily News] loading paper on and off of trucks.  And so, we didn't see him a lot because he was working all the time.  And then his part time jobs were, he was the superintendent of the building that we lived in.  And by doing that, we were able to get our rent down from eighty-five dollars a month to fifty-six dollars a month.  And he had--he was superintendent of two other buildings.  And so we all grew up working, you know, helping to keep the buildings, you know, taking the garbage out, sweeping the stairs down, mopping the hallways down, loading--it was a coal burning furnace, so you know, shoveling coal or--and wood into the furnace, making repairs.  So and, well when I got to be about six or so, my grandfather told me that if I wanted to--he had heard that the corner store was hiring and I could go work in the corner store, which I did.  So he was a guy who, you know, I just grew up seeing him go out and go to work, and come back.  And my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal], she had a part--she had a job too.  I wouldn't say a part time job, but she only had one job.  So she, she worked as a domestic for a couple on Park Avenue, the Solomons [ph.], who were, you know, just amazingly nice people to us and our family.  And so when my grandmother died, they came to the funeral.  They stayed in touch.  They, you know, even after she stopped working for them they always stayed in touch and they were exceptionally nice to, to us, you know, so.  It sounds corny, but a lot of the food that we ate came from the Solomons' house when they'd give stuff to my grandmother that they weren't gonna eat or you know, stuff like that.  I'd say it was a very close knit, loving, warm family.  And my grandfather was the person that I looked to that gave me the most life lessons.  You know, I've gone to--went to a great prep school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut].  I graduated from a good college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  I went on to graduate from a good business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California].  You know, I have lots of educational training, but the stuff I rely on the most is the stuff he taught me.
Story_ID: 653571
Speaker 1: So what are some of the things he taught you?
Speaker 2: Well, that phrase that I use, it never gets uglier than the truth, that's a phrase that he gave me.  That, you know, that when you find you're--and I gotta say I haven't always stuck with the things he taught me.  But that phrase is one that he used to say a lot, that it never gets uglier than the truth.  And he'd say, "You know, that lie is one pretty girl, you know."  She really looks good (laughter) he said, but--and he was a little vulgar so I'm gonna clean it up a little bit.  But he'd say, "You know, after a while she gotta take that wig off, take those eyelashes off, pull off the makeup and she's one ugly bitch" (laughter).  So he goes, "The truth might be ugly, but it's not gonna get any uglier."  So that's one that sometimes I rely on that, you know, you have to man up and tell the truth as ugly as it might be.  And so that would be one of them.  Let's see, what else did he tell me that I really kind of like.  He told me the lazy person works the hardest.  And that--that he tried to draw this thing for my brother [Larry Beal] and myself, we would often have to bring the wood in for the, for the furnace.  Then he'd say, "Just take three pieces of wood at a time.  Don't try to take seven, don't try to take eight, take three pieces, move them from this pile to that pile."  And I, I, I did that, 'cause I did almost everything that he told me to do.  My brother, on the other hand, thought it would be shorter to just take seven.  And you know, you drop two, you gotta pick up one, you drop three more, it just takes you a longer time to do it and so.  I, I know my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt], she's a schoolteacher now, she, she showed me a film that her kids put together and one of the things her kids said is that the lazy person works the hardest (laughter).  And so, so, the kid said, you know, "It's, it's a lot easier to just do the job right the first time and not try to take a shortcut."
Speaker 1: That's what the kid said?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause my daughter says it all the time, 'cause I used to say it all the time, because my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] said it all the time (laughter).  So, so, yeah that would be another one that he used.
Story_ID: 653572
Speaker 1: He said that Beals liked to work, which is what I tell my kids, that we like to work and we like to work hard.  So my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt], you know, is a compulsive kind of of worker, as is my son [Michael Beal].  And he used to say he'd rather be an hour early than a minute late, which I remember about punctuality.  I've tried to pass that onto my kids, that hasn't worked as well.  My daughter says she'd rather be fifteen minutes late and apologize (laughter).  And so that's not quite it.  And I think the thing that he gave me the most, I don't know that he really intended it this way, but I've been thinking a long time about something.  As I got together with you, I was trying to think of, in anticipation of meeting with you, kind of what things really made an impact on me growing up.  And the thing that made the most impact on me, I think, growing up was--one day we were all around the table having dinner and I've told you how many people lived in the house, there were a lot of us.  And so it would've been my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] at the head of the table, of course, my grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] right to his left, then my Aunt Ella [Eloise Beal], my mother [Virginia Beal], my Uncle Thomas [ph.], my Uncle Tony [Anthony Beal], my Cousin Tina [ph.], she was there, my brother [Larry Beal], myself and I sat to the right of my grandfather.  And my Uncle Thomas  was probably twenty-three at that the time and my Uncle Sonny [ph.] would've been, let's see I was probably eight, I was seven or eight, so my uncle's--so my uncle would've probably been about fourteen or fifteen, my Uncle Sonny.  My grandfather got up from the table, he walked over to my Uncle Thomas and he picked up Thomas' plate, you know, the dinner plate.  And he said, "Thomas," and Thomas said, "Yes, father?"  And my grandfather pulled a hammer out from behind his back and smashed the plate into like a million pieces.  And I was like holy moly.  He went, "You've had your last free meal here."  He goes, "You're a man and men don't live off of other men."  And he goes, "I'm not saying you're not gonna get any more food off my table, but your mother's gonna have to sneak it to you and I want you to find a place to live and be a man."  And I remember thinking I don't want that to ever happen to me.  And I was only seven or eight.  I was like I don't want that to ever happen to me.  So, my son is twenty-nine and for Christmas I'm giving him a broken plate.  He's married, he's on his own, he's launched, he's free.  My Uncle Thomas, took him about a week, but he moved out.  He eventually got married, had a couple of kids and had a very good life.
Speaker 2: I wonder if anything provoked your grandfather to do that or if that was just--he may have--he may have thought that Tho- Uncle Thomas was getting a little too comfortable.
Speaker 1: He called him a petticoat man, he said, "I don't want you to become a petticoat man."  I don't know what that means.
Speaker 2: It meant under--but under the woman's petticoat.
Speaker 1: Oh is that it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Oh I never knew what that meant until now.  But he goes, "You're not gonna be a petticoat man, I'm not raising any petticoat man."  I remember that.  And I just thought, man I ain't, I'm getting out of here, when I'm eighteen (laughter) that's not happening to me.
Story_ID: 653573
Speaker 1: Now was your--were you the- were you your [maternal] grandfather's [John H. Beal, Sr.] favorite?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I have a feeling.
Speaker 2: Yes.  So, here's the other thing.  So we're, we're gonna jump around a little bit.  So, when I went away to prep school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut], I got A Better Chance scholarship, I went to private prep school.  My grandfather was really happy about it, my grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal], everybody's happy, the whole neighborhood's happy.  And I go away and it's really tough.  And my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] who raised me came up to get me one day.  And she said you know, I was really proud of my school so I wanted to show her around and everything else.  And she said, "No, we have to go back to the city, your grandfather's in the hospital."  So I went back with her back to New York [New York].  We went to the hospital and my grandmother, my uncles, my aunts, my little brother [Larry Beal] and I were in my grandfather's hospital room.  He was only fifty-four, he'd had a heart attack.  He just worked so damn hard.  And he said, "I don't, I don't think I'm gonna make it."  And we're like, "Are you kidding, you know, you're gonna be fine, you'll be fine."  He goes, "I don't--I just don't think I'm gonna make it."  And he said, "Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal], you're in charge of the family."  I was thirteen.  I had uncles and aunts who were a lot older than I was, a lot older than I was.  I think my uncle, at the time, was probably twenty-nine or thirty.  I mean yeah, yeah, yeah.  And so I decided that I was going to, 'cause my grandfather, he died the very next day, he died the next day, and I got the call.  So, when the call came in, my grandmother handed me the phone and she said, "It's the hospital."  And I said--I was talking to the guy and he told me my grandfather had passed and I started to really cry, 'cause I, you know, I, I loved the guy.  He had never, ever raised his voice to me, ever.  He told me he was disappointed only one time and--now my grandmother used to beat the crap out of me (laughter), that's a different deal.  She didn't--she didn't play.  But my grandfather never ever, ever even raised his voice ever.  And you know, always was encouraging and really talked about education and all those things.
Story_ID: 653574
Speaker 1: So when he died, he had actually a life insurance policy, which doesn't sound like a lot of money now, but it was twenty-five thousand dollars, that was a lot of money.  It was a ton of money.  And we were living in absolutely horrible conditions toward the end.  When I came back from school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] and saw how my family was living, it just broke my heart, because the neighborhood had really deteriorated very rapidly.  Drugs had become just rampant in the neighborhood.  And my family toward the end was living in a place where they had--didn't have consistent electricity or water.  The junkies were stealing pipes out of the buildings.  And you know, I felt conflicted 'cause I went up, I was going up to this prep school and I remember, I've told this story before, but my first week at prep school there was a kid who clearly didn't wanna share a room with me, he just didn't.  And everyone thought it was about race, and it might've been to some extent.  I got to know the kid a little bit and I think he just wasn't used to sharing a room with anybody.  I was overjoyed that if--for the first time in my life I was gonna have my own bed, you know, 'cause I was like, "Do we both sleep in this," (laughter) 'cause I had never not shared a bed with anyone.  So (laughter) I was like unbelievable, I have my own bed, you know.  Other than like camp, some type of sleep away camp, but like consistently my own bed, are you kidding me.  You know, the food and, and I just felt great.  But then I'd live that life and then I'd go back to where my folks were living, it was horrible.  And you know, we didn't have to live that way.  My [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] really chose that over the alternative.  And you know, my grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] had applied for public housing.  And let me tell you, public housing is no treat, right.  It was a thousand times better then where we were living.  It was clean, safe, it was sanitary.  It had a lock on the door.  They had, you know, it was really nice.  But my grandfather wouldn't let us move into it.  He just wh- he didn't like--trust the government at all.  And he didn't trust white folks even though he worked for them.  He kind of--he kind of thought two different ways.  He could--he could like people individually, but collectively he didn't trust them.  And he just wouldn't, he wouldn't do any of that stuff.  And so we never moved into public housing.  He would always say, "I never saw anybody come out.  I only see people go in, I never see anybody move out.  So, we're not doing that and I don't trust the government, you know, now, now they are your landlord and they could kick you out, they could take your house, they can do all--," you know, he just--he had a fear--a fair of amount of skepticism of that.  So, we didn't do--we didn't go into that.
Story_ID: 653575
Speaker 1: When he died and when we got the money--and oh and one more thing, he didn't like debt of any kind at all.  So he never wanted to owe anyone, anything when we had--he had a car but he paid cash for it.  And if he saw the amount of debt that his grandson had it would spin in his br- grave.  So there was no--we never could do any like movement because we didn't have enough money to buy anything and he would only pay cash.  So when it came time to get our first house, to move out of there to move to better housing and get a house, that house cost about $12,500, it was half of what we had.  And the guy from the bank tried to tell me about financing and then if we just put down, you know, 10 percent, we could put down 12,050 and we can just pay like $187 a month.  And I just didn't wanna hear it.  You know, I didn't--I was only thirteen and so I didn't--I didn't wanna hear it.  I just didn't.  I said, "You know, my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] wouldn't do that.  We're gonna buy this house, we're gonna pay cash and that's it.  We're not gonna any bank involved or anything else."  And that's what we did, and my aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] and mother [Virginia Beal] still live in that house today, yeah that we paid 12,500 for.  It's a two family house and you know, it's no--never has been any debt on it, and hopefully never ever will be.
Story_ID: 653576
Speaker 1: It's really interesting about my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] because he, in addition to not public housing, he would always say, "People go in there, the only way they come out is feet first.  I've never seen anybody move on up from there (laughter)--move on out."  He goes, "They're in there, the grandchildren in there, great-grand--you're in there forever."  He considered it another form of like slavery.  The other thing he wouldn't do is take any kind of welfare, like he, he just felt, "I don't want the government taking care of my family, 'cause then they're the man of the house, not me."  And so we cou- you know like, let me tell you something man, I was like, "Can't you just please take the welfare cheese and bread so I can have a decent sandwich" (laughter).  No, he would not, no.  So what my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] would do is, she was a really good cook.  She would buy the welfare stuff from people who got welfare.  She would buy it from them, 'cause you know the powdered milk, the cheese, bread, and she'd make sandwiches and sell it back to them, all right.  And so, people--I mean she didn't say, "Hey I'm taking this cheese and I'm selling it back," but she would make these plates and she'd use this stuff to make food plates and people would buy them.  And you know, it was something that he really was adamant about, not taking any kind of thing.  And you know, my wife [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] often says that that is what saved our family.  Because had he, you know, I hope this doesn't sound sexist, but my belief is men are biologically programmed to take care of their families.  Okay, you're gonna take care of your family.  And if you can't find work and you don't have resources, and the only way you can get food for your family is welfare, I am definitely not gonna criticize you for taking it, I'm really not.  And if the only way you can get that welfare is that as a man you have to leave your family because the government basically says we're not gonna give welfare to families that have a man in place.  Then I can see why some men would leave their families to take care of them.  My grandfather believed that he could always find a job sweeping a street or doing something, or picking up trash or doing something, and that he did not need to have the government take over care--the care of his family.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you he was pretty prophetic if you looked at things today--
Speaker 1: I know, I know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I mean, the thing, you know, I mean all the things that have been reported on and everything.
Story_ID: 653577
Speaker 1: So do you know why he had those views?  I mean it's one thing to state them, but do you know why?  Where did the--where did the, even the dis- I mean there is a lot of distrust that exists in the black community, but where did that--why was the distrust of public housing, was it you wouldn't do--you just don't give away free housing, is it, I mean I'm just trying to?
Speaker 2: He just, you know, I don't know the answer to that.  I'm gonna ask my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon], 'cause she would know.  I don't know why he disliked and distrusted government and the institutions so much.  I know that he was pretty much a mouthy sort of guy.  I mean, you know, he wasn't an in your face sort of guy, he was actually pretty deferential around people, especially white folks.  He was not a really--and when I said there was only one time that my [maternal] grandfather  and I disagreed where he told me he was disappointed and that's when I told him that I just--I thought he was--he wasn't a man around white people.
Speaker 1: You told him that?
Speaker 2: Yeah I did.
Speaker 1: How old were you?
Speaker 2: Ten.  Ten.  He took me to his job and--when he worked as an elevator operator down there.  And the people were very nice to me, but you know, they called him by his first name.  And in the neighborhood he really didn't tolerate people calling him by his first name, he wanted to be called Mr. Beal [John H. Beal, Sr.].  And there--and I just thought these white people were disrespecting him.
Speaker 1: So what did he say, that conversation, what did he say (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He actually, you know, he was gonna give me a whipping.  He--he said you know, "You don't understand what it takes okay."  And he just said, "I'm gonna--you don't talk to me like that."  And he took off his belt and I was down on the bed and he had his hand on me, but before he could even like, like do anything, he started to well up, and I just--
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: He never did anything.  And I thought thank god it wasn't my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] because she would've beat the crap out of me (laughter).  Thank god she didn't hear it (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) She would've, would've given you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She would've--oh she, my grandmother was tough.  She didn't take any gruff.  And she would--she, she certainly--she didn't--she didn't believe in sparing the rod.  So, she was much more of a disciplinarian.
Story_ID: 653578
Speaker 1: When you think back around your growing up, tell me what sight, smells and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I really liked the aroma of the food my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] used to make.  She, she made the best sweet potato pies you would ever, ever want to taste.  They were just amazing and the smell of them, and the warmth of coming home and smelling the food cooking in the kitchen of, of, you know, kind of eating the cornbread, even on those days where we had chitlins or my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] would go poach something out at the park (laughter), you know.  You know, whatever--
Speaker 1: What did he poach?
Speaker 2: Squirrels, raccoons, opossums, you know, pheasants, you know, whatever, whatever he could find in the park, you know.  If he couldn't--if he couldn't--if we ran low on food, he'd always say, "I'll get something," yeah.  Or he'd go fishing or you know, whatever, whatever it took.  So, yeah.  Mine is more the food and aroma on the smell side.  On kind of the sight side, you know, we had a park in the neighborhood [Morrisania, Bronx, New York] that was just really one block wide.  So it was in the middle of a block.  We grew up on Boston Road between Teasdale Place and 164th Street, and there was a park between Boston Road and Cauldwell Avenue.  And it's really weird, it--it was just a little asphalt park, but I just loved going there, playing with my friends.  We could play baseball there, they had a swing set there, they had seesaws there.  They had a little sand pit.  And you know, the sight of that--I--I've gone back a couple of times and it's, it's still there.  They've changed it around a bit, but it's, it's still there.  You had to go upstairs, it's now handicapped accessible.  And it was directly across from my church [Grace Gospel Church, Bronx, New York].  So, even on Sundays after we went to church we'd go home, change clothes and run back and play in the park.  And that's probably one of my more fond memories.
Speaker 1: What about sound?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my musical tastes have changed, okay, they have.  But I grew up with the same soundtrack that most people in my generation grew up with, which is basically Motown [Motown Records].  So, you know, The Supremes, you know, whenever I hear that music it does remind me of my early childhood.  I lost touch with that music after I went away to prep school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] and picked up a different taste in music that's more in tune with my current taste in music.  But when I hear those soul songs, you know, The Supremes and the Four Tops, Temptations [The Temptations], does take me back to that as part of the soundtrack of my early life.
Story_ID: 653579
Speaker 1: And you mentioned church, so what, what denomination?
Speaker 2: It was a Baptist church.
Speaker 1: And what was the name of the church?
Speaker 2: It's called Grace Gospel Church [Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: And, and so can you--so you grew up Baptist?
Speaker 2: I did, I did.
Speaker 1: The preachers and the sermons of--was it--was yours--'cause they're different, two different types of Baptist churches?
Speaker 2: Yeah, here it's a really weird Baptist.  Grace Gospel was a great church and you know, I was lucky in that even though neither of my [maternal] grandparents [Essie Williamson Beal and John H. Beal, Sr.] went to church, they insisted that we go to church every Sunday.  So, they didn't go, but they made sure we got there.  Our church was in the heart of the ghetto.  The preacher was a white guy who had come up from the South.  And he was an amazing guy, all right.  His name was Dr. Bente [Herbert A. Bente].
Speaker 1: Dr.?
Speaker 2: Bente, B-E-N-T-E, Bente.  And he just was an amazing man and he made sure that we got exposure to lots of different things.  So he would take the kids from the church on trips and sometimes we'd go to Bear Mountain State Park [Bear Mountain, New York], sometimes he'd take us to Rye Playland [Playland, Rye, New York], he'd take us out to Orchard Beach [New York, New York].  So every weekend he would take, not just myself, but lots of kids and he'd take most of the deacons and the deaconesses, they would help chaperone the kids out to these different events.  Or he'd do stuff like take us to the movies, they'd play movies--
Speaker 1: (ON CAMERA INTERRUPTION)
Speaker 2: They'd play movies in the church from time to time.  They'd have church dinners, different social events for kids, they'd put on plays at the church.  So the church was not just something you went to on Sunday.  It was, it was really a seven day a week church.  And you'd go there after school sometime.  You know, guys like myself who really couldn't fight that much or well would go there and you could go there and you could work after school and not get your brains beaten out.  So, church was a pretty important place, not just for religion, but it was kind of a social place as well.
Speaker 1: So let me ask you, are you living--is it--you sa- what is the building you're living in?
Speaker 2: It's a tenement building.
Speaker 1: It's a tenement building so there're lots of families in there?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were two families per floor and it was about six or seven floors.
Speaker 1: I see, okay, so they were small, okay.  I mean not like the modern, you know, the--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, okay, not the--but those were--but the projects were like that, but they were new ones.
Speaker 2: The projects were like that.  The projects were twenty stories, they had elevators.  There were--there was no elevator, this was a walk up tenement.
Speaker 1: So you lived--so, so there's no fa- he's not like the Baptist minister with the cadence and the amens, there wasn't--I just--
Speaker 2: There was some of that, but not a lot of it no, no.
Speaker 1: I see.  Spiritual, singing of spirituals?
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.
Speaker 1: I've never heard--
Speaker 2: It was a black church with a white minister.
Speaker 1: I've never heard of that, I'm telling you.
Speaker 2: Oh he was fabulous.  He actually brought Billy Graham to the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know, I wasn't there when it happened, but he did bring Billy Graham to the church and Billy Graham said, "This is a fine little church."  Dr. Bente was--he was a significant figure in the lives of all of the kids in our neighborhood.  I can't think of--I, I mean I'm talking about the kids that I hung out with, kind of a clique that I hung out with.  I can't think of anybody who didn't go there.
Story_ID: 653580
Speaker 1: So who were the kids that you hung out with?
Speaker 2: So I, I--my, my best male friend was a guy who lived in the next building, but he was right across the airshaft, his name was William Holmes [ph.] and we called him Boo Boo.  And my next best friend was a kid who I only befriended because I really was sweet on his sister, but after a while I really kind of liked him, Ritchie Garland [ph.] who died unfortunately when he was about ten or eleven years old.
Speaker 1: He died of what?
Speaker 2: Spinal meningitis.  Well, really meningitis.  He, you know, he drank some water out of the street and something bad happened to him and he died very shortly thereafter.  I really liked his parents, adored his sister, just adored her, but she didn't have a lot of time for me.  We actually ended up dating there for a short time after I graduated from college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota], from college, but during the time that I was chasing her, she never had time for me.  And so she'd be my--I think I brought a picture of those kids that I grew up with.  So, yeah and we'd play like, you're too young to know about this show, but there used to be a show called 'Man from U.N.C.L.E.' ['The Man from U.N.C.L.E.'] and we'd all play 'Man from U.N.C.L.E.' you know.  We'd each have little roles and we'd ride our bikes around.  It was--even though it was a really horrible slum, you couldn't have told us that we were poor, we didn't really--I didn't really know it, you know.  I'd see stuff from time to time or read about things, and I'd go, that can't be real, no.  This is real, so.  We had--we had--I had a lot of fun growing up as a kid.
Speaker 1: And so you wa- was sitting down to dinner, was that commonplace in your family?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know, 'cause when you were saying, you know, you can remember, that was interesting you remembered the dinner table, you know, where people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we all sat in the same spots, so it's kind of easy to remember.
Speaker 1: All the time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, everybody sat in the same space.
Speaker 1: Wow, I don't think we were that organized as a family (laughter).  My father [HistoryMaker Julius Richardson] sat at the head, but we--
Speaker 2: Oh really?
Speaker 1: You had assigned seats?
Speaker 2: Well I think it just (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Tradition.
Speaker 2: --kind of happened.
Speaker 1: Kind of happened.
Speaker 2: And at our house, you know, my wife [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] sits at one end, I sit at the other, the kids sit in the same spot, you know.  It's not, it's not--you know, I, I didn't--I don't sit down as much as a family as we did then, but yeah we ate our meals together as a family and we talked a lot.  My [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] would always bring up something about something he's read in the paper or heard about, and people would talk about it.
Story_ID: 653581
Speaker 1: So you talked about your [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] and you said she was a whole different thing, she was strict.  So what, what examples of that are there?
Speaker 2: Okay, so you know about the Internet, right?  So, Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] grew up in the same neighborhood [Morrisania, Bronx, New York] that I grew up in.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And so I had a chance to meet General Powell, he was speaking at a SIFMA meeting and the head of SIFMA, Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association [New York, New York], actually I think it was called SIA S-I-A back then, Securities Industry Association.  He said, "Hey, Colin Powell is gonna be our speaker, we'd like you to go to the airport and pick him up."  And normally I would've thought, you know, that doesn't sound like a great task, but it was a fabulous task 'cause I really wanted to meet General Powell.  So, we're talking to General Powell coming back, and I said, "You know, I grew up in the same neighborhood that you grew up in."  And he said, "Well did Mrs. Strong [ph.]--was she still there when you were there?" and I went, "Yeah, she was a horrible--," I said, "yeah, she was there."  And he said, "Mrs. Strong was the leader of the--," what did he say.  "She was the precursor of the Internet."  He said, "We called it the auntnet (laughter).  The aunternet" (laughter).  And there were these women who were always looking out the window, they were always looking out the window.  Like you could walk down Teasdale Place at two in the morning, I never did; but you could walk down Teasdale Place two in the morning, you wouldn't have to look up, you could just say, "Goodnight Mrs. Strong," she'd go, "Goodnight baby."  You know, she was always looking out the window.
Story_ID: 653582
Speaker 1: So I did tell you about that park that was on Teasdale Place; and you know, I don't wanna make this sound like a horrible story, but I didn't have a lot of clothes growing up.  So I had my school clothes, my church clothes and my play clothes.  And so I had on my school clothes which I couldn't get dirty, okay, I just couldn't.  So I took it off and I didn't have on, you know, I took off everything, I just was bare up above.  And we're playing in the park and I'm getting sweaty and everything else.  And I'm walking down Teasdale Place with my shirt tied around my waist, another shirt on top and Mrs. Strong [ph.] yells out the window to me and she says, "[HistoryMaker] Bernard Beal, put your shirt on and act like you've got some sense."  And I said, "Why don't you--," oh no, she said, "Why don't you put your shirt on and act like you have some sense."  And I said, "Why don't you mind your own business, okay" (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh you didn't.
Speaker 1: So let me tell you the distance from Mrs. Strong's house to my apartment.  It's half a block down and half a block turn the corner.  We lived on the second floor.  So I was walking half a block down, half a block up, I take the steps up two at a time.  We didn't really lock the door, so opened the door, I said, "Grandma [Beal's maternal grandmother, Essie Williamson Beal] I'm--," (gestures) pow, she hits me right in the head like, like I didn't say anything, she just went pow, right in my face, just smack.  And I was like what is that for and she had this thing where she would grab your hand, grab your arm and she'd just start beating you, beating you and you're running in a circle and she's just beating you.  And she goes, "You got some kind of nerve mouthing off to Mrs. Strong like that.  You act like you don't have a family.  You think--people think you're raising your damn self.  And you are gonna go back out there and apologize to her and then you coming back."  So I'm like holy moly.  So like--for years I've been trying to figure out how the hell did she know that, because we didn't have a telephone, so it isn't like Mrs. Strong called her and told her anything, okay that didn't happen.  What happened was, Mrs. White [ph.] who lived in the same building heard what I said to Mrs. Strong, called Mrs. Sherman [ph.] who lived across the airshaft from my grandmother (laughter), it was the mother of my best friend.  Told Mrs. Sherman what I had said to Mrs. Strong (laughter) and Mrs. Sherman lifted up the window, yelled out to my grandmother and told her what Mrs. White had told her about this.  And so in the time that it took me to walk less than a block, my grandmother ended up beating my ass.  And so I kind of knew that people were always, 'cause my grandmother was one of those birdwatchers.  She was always at the window looking out the window at kids.  Looking out, seeing what's going on.  And you know, the kids used to call her birdwatcher and my mother [Virginia Beal] birdwatcher junior, 'cause she was right, they were both in the window, 'cause we didn't have television, so.  All the action was in the street.
Speaker 2: But see those things.  Now that was a smart aleck comment you made though (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I say you deserved a beating over that.
Speaker 1: Actually, you know, back then people would discipline you, you know, other people would discipline.  You know, now nobody touches anybody else's kids.  No one even says anything to anybody else's kids.  But back then, yeah, people would discipline.
Story_ID: 653583
Speaker 1: So this--so you're having meal times, you're going to church [Grace Gospel Church, Bronx, New York].  And what are the other things happening, you know, do you remember holidays, holidays being celebrated in any way?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, sure.  We had a--Thanksgiving was a big deal in our house, invite lots of people over.  Family would get together.  Christmas same thing.  We didn't do Christmas quite the way everybody traditionally does it.  My [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] would usually, if he got a Christmas tree, it would be Christmas Eve or Christmas Day when the guy who was selling them had abandon them (laughter), you know, given up.  He'd go out and get one, and it would be a scrawny ass little tree (laughter), it'll be anything no one else wanted.  And he'd, you know, put it up.  Well, you know, we exchanged gifts but they were not extravagant gifts.  My [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] who raised me would always get some sort of educational type toy.  She never really got us, you know, she got me a chemistry set and other things like that.
Story_ID: 653584
Speaker 1: Let's talk about your [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon].  So what--at what point is she raising you?
Speaker 2: So my aunt really took over, I thank god, when I was in first grade [at P.S. 140; P.S. X140 The Eagle School, Bronx, New York].  You know, I started to read very early and so like I'd say when I was about four I could read.  And it was really my aunt who would come over, you know.  She was married but I, I think things were pretty rocky in her marriage and the guy was a knucklehead.  And he eventually took off.  And thank god, 'cause if she had had her own children or you know, had something else I don't know that she would've really had that much time for me.  And so she really--she was the first person in our family to graduate from high school, and so she really took an interest in teaching me how to read.  She'd bring the papers over, she'd get books, you know, she was really into that stuff. And you know, I don't really--you know, I just think now she was probably what twenty-one, twenty-two, and she was--no she had to be older than that, she was twenty-one or twenty-two when she--when I was born.  So she was probably twenty-seven, twenty-eight.  And that's still a lot.  And so the one thing you probably don't know about me is these aren't my real teeth, these are bonded.  I was born--I, I looked severely retarded when I was born.  My teeth were really snaggly and snarly.  Both of my eyes were right here on my nose, I was born--
Speaker 1: You were cross eyed.
Speaker 2: --severely cross eyed, not just cross eyed, severely cross eyed.  I could not move my eyes from my nose.  My aunt actually paid for the operation to straighten my eyes.  I was too lazy to do all the exercise, so from time to time one of my eyes wanders.  And the teeth thing eventually we cleared up, but--
Story_ID: 653585
Speaker 1: When I went to school [P.S. 140; P.S. X140 The Eagle School, Bronx, New York], I couldn't read the board; and in those days they had this test for your eye and they'd give you this big E.  I don't know if--no we need somebody older to interview me (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, I am--I am as old as you are.
Speaker 1: No you're not.  So, so they give you this E and the--the--
Speaker 2: I'm his--I'm your age.
Speaker 1: Well, you're in a lot better shape.
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: So (laughter), so they give you this E and they put you twenty feet away and then there'd be a board with the Es on it and they'd say, "Which way is the E?" And you'd have to point this way the E, this way the E.  And the te- I couldn't--I couldn't see that far, I just couldn't see that far.  And so you know, it was humiliating because I couldn't see that far and the teacher eventually--I know her name, I'm not gonna say it, she eventually moved me ten feet away and she'd say, "Which way is the E?"  And I really couldn't see it and then she'd move me five feet away and I still--I couldn't.  Two feet away, I couldn't--I couldn't see from here to there (gestures).  I could not see that far.  When I read I had to have the book like this, almost as if I were blind and I would only really be able to look out of one eye at a time.  So I could not.  And so finally she put my face right up against the damn thing and said, "Can you see it now?" And I can see like some of it, I could see it, you know.  And so, but I couldn't make it out.  So they basically called my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] to the school because my grandmother and mother [Virginia Beal] would walk me to the school, my biological mother would walk me to school.  They called her to the school and they said, this is not a politically correct phrase anymore, but they said, "The kid's retarded, and we're gonna have to put him in a retarded school because it's not fair to the other kids and it's not fair to him, he's retarded," blah, blah, blah.  So, you know, my grandmother didn't know and my mother certainly didn't know.  She was, you know, I was reading stuff to her.  So, they said okay.  And my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] found out about it and blew her stack, and just blew her stack.  And so she went around to the school and she said, you know, "I have one question," I still remember this.  She go, "I have one question" (laughter), they said, "what?"  She goes, "What did you do to this kid in the four weeks that you've had him to make him retarded 'cause he can read and write, (laughter) and he can add and subtract."  I could--I could add, subtract, multiply, I couldn't--I didn't get division.  And she'd go, "What, you know," she had--"what did you do to make this kid retarded?"  And so they said, "Well he can't read." And she pulled out one of the books and said, "Read this," you know, "read it, read it right now."  And so I held it up like this, I'm starting to read it and the woman said, "Oh no, he, he memorized that, he memorized it, you know, he's--he didn't--he's not reading, he memorized it."  And so my aunt said, "Okay, you see that paperback you got in your bag, give me that paperback book."  She said, "He didn't memorize that, give it to him."  And I couldn't read every word in it, but I could read some of the words in it.  And she said, "No, we're not putting him in any retarded class, he's not retarded."  And she said, "He can't see that well, he can't see," you know.  And then my--she--I don't know where she got the money from, but she got the money to send me to the hospital and have my eyes straightened out and got me glasses.  And you know, that's kind of how (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And this is your aunt that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was my aunt, yeah.
Speaker 2: Wow.
Speaker 1: Well, the weird thing is.  I met, you know--
Story_ID: 653586
Speaker 1: --Begged my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal], begged her.  She said, he said, "Look you got two retarded people, get--take this girl and get her fixed--get her fixed and get, get this--it's gonna," you know.  And then when I came out and looked the way I did.  You know, there's a picture of me as a child, which I did not share with you 'cause my wife [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] said, "Don't share that picture, do not."  But it's scary looking, it's scary looking, it really is.  And so I can understand people thinking that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But isn't this amazing, I mean look what happened.  I mean that's what is amazing about the whole thing.  So because there was a lot of beliefs that you do fix--you do fix the woman if that's the case 'cause that, that would be the--it would be a tendency towards that?
Speaker 1: Absolutely, absolutely.  I can certainly understand why people would feel that way.  But, you know, back on the, the glasses thing.  I, I had a chance to introduce Senator D'Amato [Al D'Amato], former Senator D'Amato, at an event and before going to the event in preparation for it I decided to read his autobiography 'cause I wanted to know more about him.  And the exact same thing happened to him.  He, he was in the New York City public school system [New York City Board of Education; New York City Department of Education], he needed glasses.  He was--he could read, all that other stuff, but he couldn't do the eye test and so they thought he was retarded (laughter) and they wanted to send him off and luckily for him, his, his, his mother [Antoinette D'Amato] said, "Oh no that's not the case."  And I had brought my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] to that thing 'cause I--after I found out about it, I brought her to meet him.  And I said, "This exact same thing happened to me and here's the woman who saved my life really," 'cause you know, although you know, who knows (unclear).  If they had sent me to that school I'd end up selling pencils or something, I mean who knows (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, your grandparents, what were th- where were their position on this too or did they--?
Speaker 1: Well, they didn't.  But my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.], to the best of my knowledge, didn't get involved in this.  I don't believe he did.  I, you know, he liked--you asked me if he was--if I was his favorite.  I, I think that's probably true, but I think really my aunt was his favorite.  I think she was his favorite.  So why didn't he put her in charge of the family instead of me?  Part of it might be that she had a husband, that might be part of it, part of it was my grandfather was a little bit on the sexist side (laughter).  And you know, I wouldn't wanna say anything against my uncles because I, I love them dearly.  But I probably spent a little more time listening to him and doing what he wanted to have done.  So, but you know, might, my grandmother was kind of like these are the teachers and they must know, you know, they know, they know.  And how would, how would she know.  She should--she should've--how would she know that because I could read at home didn't mean I could read at school.  And because, you know, my grandfather would always have me making these signs and you know, he'd say. "I need a sign that says, you know, 'put this back,' you know 'clean this up,' I need a sign that says 'close this door,'" and you know, make a sign for him.  Or he'd, you know, ask me to tally up some numbers, you know, for him.  I mean he co- he could, he could do that stuff, but it was easier to give it to me to do, you know.
Speaker 2: So they--do they recognize--do your grandparents that they--are they sort of--you know how grandparents or parents look at kids so, they saw that you could read.  But they--and so do you remember the operation and--
Speaker 1: I do.  I do, I do remember the operation.
Speaker 2: So you were--you're saying in kindergarten or first grade [P.S. 140; P.S. X140 The Eagle School, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 1: No, first grade this happened.  I didn't get the operation until I was in the third grade.
Speaker 2: Oh so that--all that time you go--
Speaker 1: I was reading like this (gesture).  I--and I was like, you know, kids would laugh at me because I had to have the book like right--and when I say right against my nose, I mean right against my nose.
Story_ID: 653587
Speaker 1: But Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal], kids can be really cruel.  So you don't remember any cruelty like that when you go to school?  Kids can be cruel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, there was some of that.  I, you know, there was some of that, but I, I was pretty safe in that, like after that period because of my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] and because the school [P.S. 140; P.S. X140 The Eagle School, Bronx, New York] knew that anything that wasn't quite right, she--her ass would be up there.  She would be at that school pitching a--holy hell.  I got a lot of attention from the teachers and I also started to, to excel.  So I was reading well beyond my grade level well, well beyond, and I was doing everything else well beyond my grade level.  And in fact, they wanted to skip me, and you know, my aunt wouldn't let them do that.  She basically, I don't know, you know, hindsight's 50/50.  You know, was she right, was she wrong.  Her feeling was, you know, they wanted to throw you out before, now they're gonna move you up, so a place where you're not gonna be able to keep up and then they're gonna say see I told you the kid was, you know, not capable and this is some backdoor way of getting rid of you.  I don't think that was the case honestly, but I wasn't in charge of my own education at that point in time.  And so, back then they had a practice, which is no longer legal unfortunately, where they tracked kids.  And they would, they would separate off the kids who are high performance kids and those kids weren't as cruel as the other kids, I'm telling you, they just weren't.  And I was a high performance kid.  So I was kind of in a little bubble.  Yeah I looked weird, you know, I really looked weird and I couldn't see very well and I needed people to help me get around.  You know, I was confused, I saw doub- I still see double sometimes.  But I, I saw a lot of double stuff, so it was hard.  But you know, the normal childhood nicknames and you know, Mr. Magoo and you know, cruel stuff like that doesn't bother (laughter).
Story_ID: 653588
Speaker 1: Well did you have glasses at the time?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, I didn't get glasses 'til the third grade [at P.S. 140; P.S. X140 The Eagle School, Bronx, New York].
Speaker 1: 'Til third grade, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, third grade.  I had the corrective surgery in the third grade.
Speaker 1: So, I didn't even know they could do surgery like that.  That sounds like surgery they would do nowadays.  So they--so they corrected--
Speaker 2: Yeah, what they did was they went in and they snipped the muscles 'cause they--on one side, I guess they snipped them here (gestures), and they shortened it this side to pull my eyes away from my nose.  And you know, as I said there was some exercises I was supposed to do, but I never did them.  And you know, I'm still a little self conscious about it from time to time about the eye going off.  And so when I told you that normally I sit at a profile it's because that tends to keep my eye straight as opposed to facing you head on.  So if I were normally sitting and talking to you, that's the position I take, like this, and that's what I had that made you, that's the position I would take when I was talking to you.
Speaker 1: I see.  So this is--I'm sorry I find this all--okay, fascinating.  So anyway, so you--so in third grade when you have the surgery do you notice a difference?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, absolutely.  One, once I get the glasses, now I don't have to hold the book here (gestures), I still have to hold it close, I have to hold it like right here and over time I've been able to--one of the good things about getting older is I can hold the book further away.  But I can--I--I can hold it further away from my face.  I can see clearly now.  I can also, you know, do things that I couldn't do before like play catch, you know, do the kind of things that other kids--the glasses really helped open the world up for me, you know, in terms of playing and reading.  And so reading didn't give me quite the headaches it used to, you know, my head would hurt after a while from reading 'cause it was so close, it so strain--so much strain on the eyes.  So yeah a lot.  Things really took off for me after that.  I, I, I got kicked in the eye--in this eye in a public pool and so that's why this eye is a little off a little bit, but when I was in--it was the summer that I was in--after I had the surgery I got kicked in the eye in the pool, and it was pretty bad, you know.  Eye sight has always been a challenge for me.
Story_ID: 653589
Speaker 1: What subjects are you gravitating to; and then the other thing is that statement you made to Miss Mor- was it Morris, no--
Speaker 2: Mrs. Strong [ph.].
Speaker 1: --Mrs. Strong, that was a very smart aleck statement so it seemed like you were spoiled, but I'm wondering?
Speaker 2: I wasn't spoiled.  I don't think so.  I was--I was--I was--I don't think I was spoiled.  I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You don't?
Speaker 2: No, I think Mrs. Strong could get on your nerves.  She was always on the kids.
Speaker 1: She was a nebby nose.
Speaker 2: She was (laughter) always on the kids and you know, I knew I shouldn't've been playing in my school clothes anyway, and I couldn't put them on because I was sweaty (laughter).
Speaker 1: Just, you know, you should've just said, "Yes ma'am," and kept walking.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah, yeah, yeah.  Well, in hindsight that would've been the smart thing.  In terms of my subjects, I always have loved math, it's my favorite subject in school.  It was my favorite subject at Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] when I went away to prep school.  I thought a little bit about majoring in it, but I didn't think you could make a living at it.  So I majored in economics because I thought that was the closest to business.  I--I've always liked numbers, playing around with numbers, moving around numbers, analyzing numbers.  It was a subject that came pretty easy for me.  I thought that I'd liked reading and English, and I thought I was pretty good at it until I went away to prep school and I found out that I really, you know, I was a giant in a land of midgets and when I got to the land where people were tall, I really had to struggle.
Speaker 1: Now you--so elementary school is what--what's the name of the school?
Speaker 2: It was called P.S. 140 [P.S. X140 The Eagle School, Bronx, New York].  In New York [New York], they didn't, the schools didn't have names, they had numbers (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh so like generic, you know, it is, I mean.  When I first saw it I was like what kind of school name is that.
Speaker 2: Public School number 140 (laughter).
Speaker 1: No identification, no--.  And then where did you go to--so is, is elementary from, you know, whatever first to sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And then you went to what they call junior high?
Speaker 2: I went to junior high school which also had a number, it was P.S. 120 [sic.], but it also had a name, it was called Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York].  It's still there.  I went back and visited, actually I sponsored some classes there, 'cause I, I--and I was once the commencement day speaker.
Story_ID: 653590
Speaker 1: Now who were the--what were your teachers like, and were they white or black, or I mean do you remember like?
Speaker 2: They were mostly white.  Mostly white, mostly Jewish, predominantly female.  I do remember my teachers.  I think with a couple of exceptions I could probably name first to ninth grade.  I think I could.  The teachers that kind of made the biggest impressions on me, there was a guy named Mr. Rayburn who was a really, he was my homeroom teacher in the ninth grade, and actually I think he--I had him eighth and ninth grade, very good.  Miss Bacon [ph.] who was the first black teacher we had at our school.  She was really very good, liked her.  I think Miss Ellis was the librarian.  She was sharp, got to know her.  Luckily she lived in the neighborhood so you would not only see her at school, you'd see her around in the neighborhood.  And you know, the teachers there I think liked me, except maybe you're right, maybe I am spoiled.  I, I was pretty arrogant.
Speaker 1: Because I hate to say anything but, you know, when you won, won the math contest you told that story, you know I think you were in the seventh grade?
Speaker 2: I won the math contest seventh, eighth and ninth grade.  But I won it--I won it in seventh grade and I said, "You might as well put my name on the trophy now because I'm gonna win it in the eighth grade and ninth grade too," (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right! I mean I'm just thinking, no seriously.  You didn't get a spanking that big enough in my book.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know.  I didn't--I yeah, I--I won't say that I was spoiled, I think I was--I don't know, maybe I had low self esteem; I don't know.
Story_ID: 653591
Speaker 1: Do you think that there was--so let me--I have to ask you this question about your relationship with your birth mo- mother [Virginia Beal].  Now, what--is there any sense of embarrassment on your part or not understanding or I mean at the point that you can sort of figure things out, which it seems like you were figuring things out pretty young.  What are you understanding about that or what are people explaining?
Speaker 2: So (pause) I have a warm spot in my heart for my birth mother.  She--she's, she's a very innocent nice person.  And you know, she--when I went away to high school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] and went away to college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota], she would write me these notes, that always said the same thing.  But I thought that really took some effort on her part to sit down and write me a note and put a stamp on it, walk it out to the post office and send it or give it to somebody to take to the post office.  You know, she could not--she can't--she can't take care of herself.  Was I embarrassed by her growing up as a child?  I was a little embarrassed that the other kids--I was more embarrassed by my birth father because he was really low functioning, really, really low functioning.  And so the kids would tease me about that.
Speaker 1: No, where was your, where was your father around you though?
Speaker 2: Oh he, he never, he never stayed with us.  My interaction with him was minimal.
Speaker 1: Minimal, but they knew--but people knew that was your father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They would tease me about it and I'd go, "Oh no he isn't, no he's not my father, he's not my father."  But they would tease me, "Oh you know, George Gogn [ph.] is your father, you know, he's retarded.  Your father's a retard" (laughter).
Speaker 1: So I'm saying kids can be cruel.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah (laughter).  Well it's part of the--it's part of the process, you know.
Speaker 1: It's part of the process.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's part of the process.
Speaker 1: I know, but I mean, but still.  Well you know, those things--
Speaker 2: Life is a contact sport.
Speaker 1: I know but you know what, but honestly some of those things can have a lifelong, you know, leave lifelong scars on kids, if they're very--you know, 'cause things like that are hurtful--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and it's not like you can control it or anything--
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.
Speaker 1: --or even barely understand all of it.
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well, believe it or not, you might find this hard to believe, this is the first time I've ever talked about it.  The only other person I've ever talked about this to has been my wife [Valerie Lancaster-Beal], not another person, not my--not my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon], not my mother, not my [maternal] grandparents [Essie Williamson Beal and John H. Beal, Sr.], nobody.  So you're either pretty good or I'm feeling pretty stupid (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) No, but I'm telling you this would make an amazing book for a--I mean it would--you'd sell a lot of copies, I'm telling you would sell a lot of copies (laughter).  I mean honestly, it's pretty amazing.
Speaker 2: Yeah my wife says that, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Well I agree with your wife.
Speaker 2: I'm a pretty private guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, but I don't know.
Speaker 2: So I'm doing this.  That's Adela [Adela Cepeda], Adela can get you to do anything (laughter).
Speaker 1: Oh but no, but it's so, so you, you--but there's a spo- but you know what I think, for all of this someone in your household whether it's your grandfather, your aunt or your grandmother, I think your grandmother was making sure you weren't spoiled.  But she--maybe she felt someone was spoiling you, but someone is spoiling you in that household, because you're a little, you know, or it could be--come from insecurity, but still I don't know.  I mean, 'cause if you said that (laughter), what you say, "Just put my name on the winner of the contest, the math contest--"
Speaker 2: "Save some money, save some money and put my name on it for the eighth grade and the ninth grade too."
Speaker 1: On my god (unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) (Laughter).
Story_ID: 653592
Speaker 1: So who are the teachers that are influencing you at that time, and we're--we're in junior high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Junior high school.  So, by the time junior high school rolls around, you know, I'm--again we had tracking, so you know, you were in the one classes, and then I think about in about the eighth grade they made it illegal to put all the kids in the one class so you couldn't, and they wrote the law that you could no longer pu- take the highest performing students and put them in the number one class.  So, the school's response, which I thought was great, was they then put all of us in the four class, so 8-4 was now what used to be--would've been 8-1.  So, we moved to 8-4 and 9-4, and we had Rayburn.  So he was--he was definitely one who kept me going.  There was a woman by the name of Mrs. Hollingsworth.  I think she was Jamaican, or she was from the West Indies I know that.  And she really is the reason I got into the A Better Chance program so.
Speaker 1: She is?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was the one who said--
Speaker 1: And this is in eighth grade?
Speaker 2: It was in the eighth grade that she told me about the A Better Chance program.  She called my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] to the school.  She talked about the A Better Chance program.  She said that I should apply.  And then, in the ninth grade we did apply.  My aunt wanted me to go to a school in the city, in New York City [New York, New York], but Mrs. Hollingsworth said, "You know--you don't get to choose where you go; and they'll try and make a match for you as best they can."
Story_ID: 653593
Speaker 1: So I got into the program [A Better Chance] and--
Speaker 2: Look at me.  Okay.  Go on.
Speaker 1: I got into the program and they sent us off for training at Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts] for six weeks, just to kind of like understand the world we were about to go into.  How to get--how to deal with certain situations, you know, there was some math and a little bit of reading and writing, and it was all quite fine.
Speaker 2: Now Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal], has your [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] passed away at this point?
Speaker 1: No, he's still alive.
Speaker 2: He's still alive, okay.
Speaker 1: He's still alive.
Speaker 2: That's right because you got the call in school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut].
Speaker 1: Right, right, he's still alive.
Speaker 2: So, this is a young period of time, you know, to have kids go away.  It's one thing if maybe it were even high school, but you're sort of on the edge--
Speaker 1: I, I went away, I did--I did ninth grade still in the city.
Speaker 2: You did, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, tenth grade is where I went away, yeah.
Speaker 2: Tenth grade, okay, okay.  So, how is that experience?  And is there discussion about whether you should even go away and stay away, 'cause a lot of people, I don't--parents, they'd be like no way Jose?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there was a discussion about that because I got into the high performance high schools in the city, so (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh you did, what--which, which ones were they?
Speaker 1: Bronx Science [The Bronx High School of Science, Bronx, New York] and Seward Park [Seward Park High School, New York, New York], and I would've probably gone to Bronx Science or Seward, Seward Park, which were, you know, you had to test into those and I did and I could've gone to Bronx Science, you know.  And I really--if you had asked me when I was in the seventh grade where was I gonna go to high school, I knew I wasn't going to Morris High School [Bronx, New York] which was right up the street because, you know, I didn't feel like getting my butt beat every day, which is where I think Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell] went, I think he went to Morris.  And I always wanted to go to Bronx Science, that's the school I wanted to go to.  I had a teacher once tried to steer me toward a vocational school and I went are you kidding, you know, I can't--I can't even nail a nail in, you know, are you kidding me (laughter) vocational school.  So I knew it was gonna be an academic school and I also knew that my grandfather said that he wanted me to be the first person to graduate from college, 'cause my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] had been the first person to graduate from high school, and that each one should move further and so.  I assumed I'd go to an academic school.  They, you know, my grandfather wanted me to go to college, there was money for me to go to college after he died.  And you know, it wasn't--there wasn't a question.  There was discussion about whether I should stay here or go away.  And the decision was that I would go away, and it was basically my aunt who said that this was the best opportunity--that this is where, you know, rich people send their kids.
Story_ID: 653594
Speaker 1: Now, do you know what year this was of, of A Better Chance?
Speaker 2: Sure, I do, because I eventually became chairman of A Better Chance.  So, A Better Chance was started in 1963, and this was '69 [1969].  So six years then.
Speaker 1: Oh the program is real young still?
Speaker 2: Still (Simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So it's really--
Speaker 2: And it's still a federal government program at that time.
Speaker 1: Oh okay.
Speaker 2: So, it was--it was basically spun off from the feds.  This was one of, well I guess you could call it one of Nixon's [President Richard Milhous Nixon] ideas.  Although it wasn't, it preceded Nixon, it was called the Better Society [sic. Great Society] programs.
Speaker 1: Well, that might be Johnson [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, I think it was Johnson, I think it was Johnson.
Speaker 1: So, so it's only six years old, it's probably, it might have been graduating it's first, you know, if they started in (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Might have been.  I've met some of the guys from, you know, in my role as chairman, I've met some of the guys from '63 [1963] and '64 [1964], met some of them.
Speaker 1: And do you know who was running the program at the time?
Speaker 2: Fred Easter, yeah, Fred Easter was running the program.
Speaker 1: So, how, how man- so ho- so when you went there were--is there anyone else from your school [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York] that is, is being recruited or are you--
Speaker 2: Oh at my school?  Yes.  So there were four of us.
Speaker 1: Four of you that ended up going?
Speaker 2: Yeah, there were four of us.  There was myself, there was the guy who lived across the airshaft from me, William Holmes, he went to Collegiate [Collegiate School, New York, New York], which was actually the school that my son [Michael Beal] graduated from.  A guy named Wayne [ph.]--god I can't remember Wayne's last name.  Wayne, he didn't make it.  He went, he went and he burned out.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: William and I both made it through, and then there was a white kid by the name of Jimmy Bernadine [ph.], because back then A Better Chance was mostly for African Americans, but they took other kids who were in impacted neighborhoods.  And I--and I don't really know what happened to Jimmy.  I kind of lost track of him, but there were four of us.
Story_ID: 653595
Speaker 1: So at--when you went to Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut], how many of you are there, I mean how many--are you the on- how large is the school, how large is Wooster?
Speaker 2: Wasn't school--Wooster was not a large school.  So when I went to Wooster it was all boys when I went, it became coed later.  There were, I think, forty-six boys and twelve girls in my graduating class, I guess it was like, yeah I think it was--it might have been forty-six total in our graduating class.  Not a, not a huge amount of kids.  Nice individual attention boarding school.  Loved it, can't say enough great things about it.
Speaker 1: Wow.  So, you talked about navigating both worlds.  So, you go, you say you spend the--there's a preparatory program or and you said that was where, that was?
Speaker 2: That was at Williams College [Williamstown, Massachusetts] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) At Williams College, okay.  So, that's your first time, even that, I mean first time on a college campus?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well that was the thing.  They wanted you to see what the goal was at A Better Chance.  So, they wanted to say, you know, we're not taking you out of here just to send you to high school.  We expect you to go on to college and to do good things.  And so, they showed you what a college was like, what Williams College was like, which was an amazing college.  And what a college town was like, and they had a lot of college kids there.  I don't think there were any black college kids, but there were a lot of college kids there who told you a little bit about what college was about.  They were the tutors, they were--I thought--they, they took us on a trip.  I remember this, they took us on a trip to Canada, and from Williams College we went into Canada, I think it was Toronto [Canada] just to see another country and they said, "You know, this is a different country, but as you can see, the people are like the people in our country."  And you know, it wasn't the easiest time politically or racially in our country.  But I was kind of in a bubble for most of that, I, I really was.  It never really impacted me to a significant extent.  I don't think so.  I mean I'm not sure, but I don't think so.
Speaker 1: You mean, what didn't impact you to a significant extent?
Speaker 2: All of the racial strife--
Speaker 1: That was happening?
Speaker 2: --that was going on, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, all right.  Well, there--I mean while there's racial strife going on, this was also opportunity and I don't know, was there any--well, there had to be.  You had mentioned, "I was--you mus- grandfather said he wanted me to be the first."  So, there's a lot of belief and hope in being the first?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] really believed that education was the key to everything.  He believed that, he believed it in his heart.  You gotta, you know, you gotta know, you gotta be twice as good to get half as far, and you gotta really compete, you gotta be the best, the best you can be, the best.  And you know, he really pushed that and the fact that my Aunt Mae [Beal's maternal aunt, Ariemae Beal Lonon] graduated from high school, he always talked about that.  Now my uncles also graduated from high school, my Aunt Ella [Eloise Beal] didn't, and my mother [Virginia Beal] clearly she didn't finish elementary school.  But he really talked about that, he kept her little photograph with her, her in her cap and gown, everywhere.  You know, he was very proud of that.
Speaker 1: So that's a, that's a big thing, that's what some are missing in our society today, but that's, that's a whole 'nother thing.
Story_ID: 653596
Speaker 1: I wanna know, can you talk about your--I mean you sort of indicated your first day with, you know, the, the one guy.  But can you talk about your, your, your, your experience there, even the first day there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So, my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] took me up there.  She took me up, we went up by bus and then we--I thought man I'm not go- I was, I was, I was terrified, that's the right phrase.  I was just really scared.  I didn't know what I had gotten into, I mean I really didn't.  And she took me, we, we landed on the bus station in Danbury [Connecticut], I remember this--I remember this.  We walked to the White Street diner on White Street and I thought, holy moly, the hell I have gotten into.  Then we got a cab, took me to the school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] and you know, the first thing I noticed is we went up to the registration desk and they said, "Oh you're not gonna be on camp- on the camp- main campus, you're staying in the farmhouse."  And I thought oh why--what (laughter).  Why am I not with everybody else?  And they said, "Oh no, this is--you know you're gonna be in the farmhouse, there're gonna be other fourth formers there, you're not gonna be, you know, tenth graders.  You're not gonna be, you know, don't, don't worry this will be fine."  And so I went to my room and I ran into Bill [ph.], was actually his name, he was gonna be my roommate.  And the housemaster, which is what we called them, housemasters.  The housemaster said, "Okay here's Bill, this is gonna be your roommate."  And I thought man this is a big room, you know, it's a big room.  And we--I think I said, you know, Bill didn't seem too happy for me there.  And I remember that night as we were going off to sleep I said to him, you know, "Do you know how your parents told you to always associate with good people and keep away from bad people?"  I said, "That's really what I plan to do here, is to just kind of pick up the good people."  And he said, "Yeah, my, my dad told me that and now I'm in the room with one."  And--(laughter) and so, I was like, I didn't, I didn't understand what he was talking about 'cause I'm not--I didn't think I was a bad person (laughter) you know, so you know.  Bill, he clearly didn't wanna share a room with me, he really didn't.  And it was a day or two, I don't--it couldn't have been more than a day or two, 'cause that would've been on a Thursday, there was really more adjustment stuff and BS on Friday and Saturday.  It was just kind of talking to people.  There really wasn't anything to do.  You know, we ate our meal, it wasn't very, very structured actually.  Talked a lot about the house and how the house worked and all that other stuff.
Story_ID: 653597
Speaker 1: Before classes started they had replaced Bill [ph.] with a guy by the name of Jan Gleysteen, who was gonna be my roommate.  Real nice guy, he's an architect up in Boston [Massachusetts] now.  And he, actually, I stayed at his house sometimes and he actually came and stayed at our house a couple times 'cause he--his family lived in Washington, D.C.  But Jan really kind of helped me navigate the waters at Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] and Wooster really was not, is not, and I hope it never will be like any other prep school in the country in that the students ran the school on a day to day basis.  The students ran the school.  There was a student government that was real.  Every student had a job, which really was something that I was comfortable with working.  I remember Jan telling me that, you know, we had to wear a coat and tie every day to class, no jeans, blah, blah, blah.  I wasn't quite used to getting dressed like that for school.  And it was at Wooster--well let me--let me try and take this literally.  So, the first day of classes the bell rings, we go to breakfast, and at the end of breakfast a guy by the name of Fritz Reinhardt stands up in the front of the dining room and he was the maitre d.  And he probably was--he was a senior.  And he was dressed like impeccably.  And standing to his right was a guy named Allie Clay Felder III, who was black.  Actually Allie is the first black person I ever met who wasn't poor, who knew a lot of his history.  And who, both Fritz and Allie were military type guys, okay.  Both of them actually went into the [U.S.] military.  And they said, "Okay we're gonna hand out the jobs for the month."  And I remember leaning over to Jan and saying, "What the--what is this, we have to work?"  And he goes, "Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah."  And I went, "Do we get paid?"  He's like, "No, no, we don't get paid, we just have to work."  And so they put me in the kitchen, actually my duties were in the dining hall, not the kitchen and my job was to clean the windows and clean the doors and the brass on the doors and stuff like that.  And I en- you know, it was something that you had to do in that school.  And that's something that they've maintained even though they've become a day school, that every student has a job and every student has a part of the campus that you have to be responsible for and take care of.  And so when I went back to the hood, I tried to do that with my brother [Larry Beal] and other people, and say why don't we just take responsibility for cleaning up certain things and each of us try and clean things up.  That didn't work so well, but it worked really well at Wooster.  The other thing about Wooster is that it was a church centered school.  And it was kind of a Quaker/Episcopal school.  And so we had church every day, except Saturday.
Speaker 2: So chap- they wer- (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chapel, chapel, chapel, every day except Saturday.  And Sunday was a big day, Wednesday was a big evening.  So the church chapel would be sometimes during the day, sometimes in the evening; but it was every day.
Story_ID: 653598
Speaker 1: And you know, I just decided when I was there, you know, because of the arrogance that you pointed out, I just assumed that I was gonna be--I'd always been number one, so I just assumed I was gonna be number one.  I just--I had always been, so I just assumed it.  And I remember, you know, back then they used to post class rank on, on the, on the door of every classroom.  So--and on the main bulletin board outside of the dining room.  And so, when the semester ended and grades were published, I just assumed I'd be number one.  So I went--there's forty-six kids.  So I went and I looked at the top I wasn't there, the second, I just kept looking, looking, looking, I was next to last.  I was next to last.  And I was embarrassed, I was ashamed, and I thought everybody was making fun of me, and laughing at me and I didn't belong there and two things happened.  One, Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] in addition to giving your report card, they wrote a very long letter at the end of each semester to your parents.  And in that letter, sometimes it could be as many as five pages.  They described what your academic session had been like, what your challenges were, what your achievements were.  And the letter was so hard to read, quite frankly that, you know, no one in my family could read it.  So, they would give it to me (laughter) to read it to them.  And I found out what my teachers thought of me.  And they all thought that I had potential, but I didn't have the abilities, the training that, you know, and that, you know, there were some teachers who didn't really wanna invest any time, but the other thing that happened was, the guy who became the dean of students [Donald Schwartz], really took an interest in me.  Just really took a liking to me.  And he would take me down to--there was a dairy down from the school.  He would take me down to the dairy from the school and he would help me study.  He said, "Look, you just don't know how to do this, there's a way to do this.  You've gotta organize your thoughts.  You don't know how to structure a sentence.  You can't write, you gotta--."  So he basically, and remember I was in the honors class in the hood, okay.  He basically--he didn't have to do math, that--math is a universal language, so it's, it's no different.  But I couldn't write, I couldn't communicate what I was thinking, I couldn't put it down on paper.  And he helped me structure sentences, learn how to do all that stuff and he also helped me to kind of anticipate what was going to be on the test, and you know, how to prepare for the test, how to respond to the test booklet.  How to write a sentence that they could understand because my grammar had been so poor that, you know, it was difficult for people to understand what the hell I was trying to say.
Story_ID: 653599
Speaker 1: So, how many other black students, you have stated, I mean are there at Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] with you?  I mean t-
Speaker 2: I would say there were--Wooster was a very progressive school.  So I'd prob--
Speaker 1: (Unclear) (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) I think there were probably, I'm gonna say twelve.
Speaker 1: Oh okay, I was gonna say ten to twelve.
Speaker 2: I was gonna say twelve, so I'm gonna say yeah about twelve.  I mean there was--
Speaker 1: And how many in your class?
Speaker 2: Three or four, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Did they similarly, was there any--'cause sometimes in those environments black students stay apart, sometimes they come together.
Speaker 2: You know, I--again, I wouldn't really know what the other guys did.  I really kind of dealt with everybody.  I mean I just--I, I dealt with everybody.  So, the black students I was comfortable and friendly with--I got along with Allie Clay Felder [Allie Clay Felder III] and none of the other black students liked him, but I liked him, I thought he was a good guy.  And he was, he was an amazing guy.  And my--my year, the senior prefect was black, Alfre Woodard.  He was--Alfre Woodson [ph.], he--Alfre Woodson, Alfre Woodson.
Speaker 1: (Unclear). Okay.
Speaker 2: Alfre Woodson was black, is black, and he was senior prefect.  So I kind of thought well, you know, I looked at Alfre, and I said that's what I wanna be is senior prefect.  And so I tried to figure out what he had done to get himself to be senior prefect and I looked at what the next guy had done to get himself to be senior prefect.  And I became senior prefect.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I see. So, what role did that have then were you like a student advisor or head up a class or?
Speaker 2: So, the senior prefect, when I say the students ran the school, the senior prefect decides, picks the other prefects who are gonna run the different dorms.  And the senior prefect gives out all the jobs.  I basically changed some stuff around, because before I became senior prefect, you always got good points and bad points, which were the same as demerits.  And if you had these good points and you had enough of them you could use them as script at the school store.  And if you had too many demerits, you were punished.  And the punishment would be anything from like extra work detail or you know, harder work detail or study hall detention.  But, because of the way I was raised and because of my belief, I don't believe in work as punishment, I believe in not work as punishment.  So, when I was senior prefect I, I ref- I refused to make anyone have to work for being punished.  So work was not--work was something that if I were gonna punish you, and not everybody shared these values, my punishment to you would've been you're not gonna work, you're gonna sit over there, you know.  But I didn't do that either.  But, we, we put in Saturday study hall, so you'd have to sit in study halls on Saturdays.  You didn't have to study, you just had to sit there.  And that became the punishment.
Story_ID: 653600
Speaker 1: So, you after, after you see yourself as forty-six out of forty-seven, and you then start--you, you know and then you have this--this prof- teacher--professor working with you and taking an interest in you and you start seeing that you were developing, and by your senior year, you become senior prefect.  I'm wondering what other--what else is significant about the Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] experience?  You know, that you would say (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I will say two things.  One, I, I just really happened to--
Speaker 1: You're on the track team too.
Speaker 2: --like my classmates, I just really thought they were some of the best guys I've ever met.  And I'm not gonna use the nickname that they used for me there.
Speaker 1: Wh- why not?
Speaker 2: Because then, other people would use it.  And but, whenever anyone calls me and calls that nickname, I know it's somebody I went to Wooster with.  And you know, the students don't get to choose the senior prefect.  The headmaster chooses the senior prefect.  But the students get to vote, okay, they do get to vote.  And I won the vote to be senior prefect.  My classmates elected me senior prefect.  Now the headmaster could always--he alw- he could--can, and had in the past, rejected the student vote and chose the senior prefect.  But luckily I became it.  Now, my advisor friend, Donald Schwartz, said, "I don't think you should do it."  He said, "I really don't."  He said, "I know you, you're gonna throw all of your energy into this," and he said, "I think you should focus on academic performance.  And no--you know, you got the vote to be senior prefect, but you should really focus on academics and focus on getting into college."  And I said, "I think I can do both."  And he said, "I don't think you can do both."  He was right.
Story_ID: 653601
Speaker 1: I probably (pause)--I was the number one student in the school in math.  And it was when they wrote back to my folks [Beal's maternal grandparents, Essie Williamson Beal and John H. Beal, Sr.] they explained that I was--excelled in math and in fact had gotten perfect 100s, which was amazing.  So, the story that is embarrassing and not, you know, it's embarrassing, when I got the first 100, the math teacher assumed I cheated.  He just assumed I cheated, because a good friend of mine had been the number one student in math and he didn't get a 100.  And I said, you know, abso- you know, Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] was run on the honor system, so you could take the math test and go back to your room and do it, but the understanding is you're not to touch a book, you're not to go blah, blah blah--or you could take the math test and go out into the middle of the lawn and do it, well you could only do that if you were a senior.  But you could take the math test and go down to the gymnasium and fill it out, you didn't have to sit in that spot because they just assumed that you were a man of honor and that you could be trusted to take a test.  And so when I got 100, he just assumed I cheated and said so, that I had cheated, and told Donald Schwartz that I had cheated.  And Schwartzy asked me if I had cheated on the exam, which is a weird question because if I had said yes, I was out, okay (laughter).  And I said no I hadn't--I hadn't cheated, I took it straight up.  And so Schwartz went to the math teacher, said, "I believe him, why don't you set up another test and you let him take it in front of you," which he did.  It was a hard ass test (laughter), it was much harder.  But, you know, I, I knew the stuff.  So, you know, it wasn't that--well, while I was embarrassed that I had been accused of cheating and you know, I thought the other boys would think that I was a cheat, to my amazement, even when was forty-six out of, next to last in the class, no one said anything.  They didn't go oh, you know, you're a dumb shit, you know, or oh you know, that's affirmative action for you.  Nobody said anything, they just how you doing, and it was just on about business.  And so when I got--as I moved, moved, moved, moved up my natural inclination would've been to say hey I'm number one in math in this school, I'm the best math student in the school.  I never did that, I didn't, I didn't do that.
Speaker 2: Well, you didn't hav- so you have walked through the fire at this point, you didn't have too, maybe you had learned a lesson (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Perhaps, perhaps.  But I don't know, it was just--it was so weird.
Speaker 2: It was, was the culture of the place is what you're saying (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, if you didn't do that, you didn't boast, you didn't, you know, say me, me, me, you know.  The guys, like I found out later, some guys were really wealthy, I mean like really wealthy, but they never said--that just never came up, it just never did.  And I liked it.  I mean I--I've, I've heard of other guys who went to other schools where things didn't quite work like that, but the culture of that school because of the, the, the church part of it, the chapel part of it was respectful.  In fact, the school motto is, "From each according to his ability, to each according to his need."
Story_ID: 653602
Speaker 1: See, and it's--I mean I think for a transition because, so you were not--you, you--did you ever--were you ever, felt embarrassed about your background or were you--was it more that you were a novelty?  Was there any of that sort of going on?  I mean Ha- you said Hans, was it Hans?  No, his your roommate?
Speaker 2: Fritz [Fritz Reinhardt]?  Oh no you mean Jan, Jan Gleysteen (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Jan, Jan Gleysteen, okay (unclear).
Speaker 2: Jan Gleysteen, yeah, yeah.  No, I, I, I mean, I--I'm trying to think, I don't think I--there were a couple of times where I was just embarrassed for my academic performance in the beginning.  I was just--I was really down that I couldn't compete.  And, and I remember, you know, Schwartzy gave me an--a piece that I had written for the school newspaper, probably the second or third month I was there, that was never published, thank goodness.  He gave it to me when I was about to graduate and it was--it was horrible.  It was just--there were so many grammatical errors, so many spelling errors, it was horrible.  I--I'm shocked, but you know, thank god for Donald Schwartz, he's now passed, but he was the best man at my wedding [to Valerie Lancaster-Beal], 'cause he was my best man, you know, saved my life.
Speaker 1: And you ran track there too, right?
Speaker 2: I did, I ran track and I played football (laughter).  I was okay in track.
Speaker 1: But you know, the thing is the school's [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] so small, I only--who are you, is there a, a collegiate group of, of other schools that (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, so we competed against other prep schools.  And you know, we competed against prep schools throughout Connecticut and Massachusetts; and so we, we even played a couple of New York schools, we played Horace Mann [Horace Mann School, Bronx, New York], where my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt] went to school.
Story_ID: 653603
Speaker 1: So I wanna talk, how, what about college then.  Now, what are you thinking at the time you're graduating?
Speaker 2: So, I had worked every summer at my church [Grace Gospel Church, Bronx, New York] back in the city as a camp counselor, as a teacher, I'd always done that.  And then the summer of my junior year, Donald Schwartz said that I needed to get a job away from the church, that I needed to have something that would be more of like a work study where I could learn something, 'cause he didn't see me becoming a minister, which I didn't--he was right.  And he said, "Get something in a business, go get something in a business, go work at McDonald's if you have to, just, just get, get a job away from your church."  So, I did.  I went to a Jack in the Box up on White Plains Road in the Bronx [New York], it's a great little store.  I worked there for the summer.  Got to know the manager, it was owned by the Ralston Purina Company [St. Louis, Missouri].  And worked there with the manager.  I, I remember Dr. Bente [Herbert A. Bente] calling this guy up and telling him what a godless guy he was for taking me away from the church (laughter), and he really just kind of reamed him a new one for taking me away from the church.  And John [ph.] kept saying, "What are you doing," he said, "I think that reverend is pretty angry, you know, you might wanna go back there."  I go, "Nah, I wan- you know, I wanna do this."  Over time, John began to give me more and more responsibility.  It was--I was only really there for the summer, but he gave me more and more responsibility.  You know, closing out the money--taking money to the bank, doing the inventory adjustments, he was just kind of showing me how the business worked.  And we stayed in touch.  And so whenever I came home on a vacation or a break, John and I would get together.  He actually--nice guy.  He took me to my first Broadway show, you know, took me to a Broadway show and got car service, I'd never had that before.  And you know, took me out to dinner at some nice restaurants in New York City [New York, New York].  But what he really was doing, he had a plan and his plan was that he wanted to buy the Jack in the Box, but John didn't have enough money to buy the Jack in the Box.  And he had a Puerto Rican partner and they convinced me to take my college money and buy the Jack in the Box with them.  Yeah, and that's what I did.
Speaker 1: When you say they, you were talking about him and then it became they, so who's they?
Speaker 2: Oh it's John and Paul.  Nevis--Paul Nevis [sic. Tony (ph.)].
Speaker 1: So how much money do you have that you're putting?
Speaker 2: I had about $6,000, it's money I had for college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  It wasn't enough to get me through college actually, college was $4,500.  So it was enough for about a year of college, but--and I didn't know anything, you know, I don't--I didn't believe in loans or any of that stuff.  So the idea that I was gonna go borrow money to go to college just didn't make sense to me.
Speaker 1: You--that's okay, we're gonna--that's your [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.]--
Story_ID: 653604
Speaker 1: --Sitting here, why take it (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Thirty-five.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: Well, it's not--it's not what you think.  So, John [ph.] is like thirty-five, actually it is partially what you think.  So John's like thirty-five and I think Paul [sic. Tony (ph.)], I'm gonna say was thirty-one, thirty-two.  John was married, had kids, Paul had this girlfriend who was beyond gorgeous.  And I, I was single, I was eighteen, so I mean, you know, I'm single.  But we put it in, we were partners, John was the lead partner and we bought a Jack in the Box and we, I was--that was what I was gonna do, I was gonna--you don't know this?
Speaker 1: I've read it, but I--you know, I've rea- and I was like, is that really true--you know, 'cause I read it, well I read, there was one story that it said a share, then it said it was--
Speaker 2: Oh it was a share, was--I didn't own the whole thing.  It was a share--it was a share.  Yeah, I--I--it was a share.  And I was gonna do that and I was making an amazing amount of money running that Jack in the Box with John and Paul.  And we--I made more money, I was having so much fun.  I made--I was eighteen years old, my tax return, I was so happy about this 'cause understand I knew exactly--because my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] told me everything.  The reason I know what the rent was, the reason I know how much of a discount he got on the rent, the reason I know how much it cost for the life insurance is because he told me everything.  So I know what he made.  I know how much he made.  And my goal in life was to, in a single year, make more than my grandmother [sic.] made in his entire lifetime, that is what I said to myself.  I'm gonna make more in one year then he's made in his entire life, all right 'cause I kind of knew everything he had made.  And what's really weird is, my son [Michael Beal] doesn't have that goal, but he has a different goal, which is that in a single year make more than I ever made in any single year, cash wise, which I thought was interesting when he told me that.  'Cause I thought man, I had that similar kind of goal.  But I knew what my grandfather made and he didn't make a lot of money.  You know, he, he, he, in his best times, he'd make about seventy-five dollars a week, in the best of times.  But normally he made between forty and fifty dollars a week, so I know.  So my first year running that Jack in the Box I made $26,800, which for an eighteen year old kid in 1972 was a hell of a lot of money, okay.  It was so much money that it made it hard for me to--this is why it made it hard--when I graduated from college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] the best job I could get, the most money I could make was with IBM [International Business Machines Corporation].  I looked around Corning Glass Works [Corning Incorporated], IBM, I went to Com Edison [Commonwealth Edison Company].  The best offer I got in terms of compensation was $13,500 a year.  And I thought, I was making twenty-six eight when I was in hi- I was a high school graduate [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut], now I'm a college graduate and the best job I can find is thirteen five.  So I said screw this I'm gonna go to business--I'm gonna go to law school [George Washington University Law School, Washington, D.C.].  So I go to law school, I start talking to people, they tell me that, you know, if I graduate from law school in the top third of my class I could make as much as $17,500.  And I thought, seventeen five, are you kidding me?  So I just thought, screw that I'm going to business school.
Story_ID: 653605
Speaker 1: So I went to business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California]; and when I graduated business school, the best job I found money wise, and I was really focused on making money.  I was focused on making money because, you know, I wanted to--I wanted to have a family, I really did.  And I'll come back to that, that's the how silly I was about it--the urgency of having a family.  But, when I graduated from business school the best job I found was at E.F. Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] and it was $23,500, and I thought well maybe I should go to medical school, you know, really I was like maybe I should go to medical school 'cause this is--I got--you know, this is not enough.  So luckily I went to my boss, his name was Richard Locke [Richard S. Locke], and Dick was just a great guy.  And I, I was like, "Mr. Locke, you know, I really wanna come work here, I like the people, I like everything, but it's just not enough money."  And he goes, he goes, he said, "I'm gonna tell you something."  He goes, "I'm, I'm offering you more money than other people coming out of business school are getting.  You're the--I'm making you the highest offer," he said, "I'm telling you this."  And I said, "Well with all due respect sir, that--," I said, "I could show you, I brought my tax return with me," I said, "here's my tax return from when I was eighteen.  This is what I used to make, this is what I, I wanna make more than this.  I wanna make more than twenty-six eight.  That's, that's my number."  And so he said, "Well look, this is what I'll do."  He goes, "Look, I can't--I can't pay you that salary," he said, "I just can't.  But I'm gonna guarantee you that at the end of the year, I will give you a forty-five hundred dollar bonus.  And so, you know, you will be at $28,000 at the end of the year."  And I was like, "Could you put that in writing" (laughter).  If you know Dick Locke, that was like an insult, all right, that was like an insult.  And he goes, he goes, "You know, this business is a handshake business," but he put it in writing for me, he did--he did, and he gave me a $10,000 bonus at the end of the year.  And I remember thinking, oh my head was gonna explode, it was so much money my head was gonna explode.  And when I--I was like so proud and I took it back to show my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] and to show my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] my bonus check, and I remember my grandmother going, "You working in a legal place?" (Laughter). "Is they having you doing anything illegal down there?"  I'm like, "No, no, no."  She goes, "That is a lot of money."  I go, "Yeah it's a lot of money, it's really a lot of money."  But, you know, he was a very fair guy and he really he--and my goal when I went there was I was gonna be here two years and then go start my other place, my own shop.  And he, every year he would just like astound me with money.  I mean he would just blow my mind.  And unfortunately, that firm went out of business; or fortunately, you know (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.  Well that was, that was the whole--I mean that whole E.F. Hutton thing.  But--
Story_ID: 653606
Speaker 1: I wanna go back 'cause we just skipped over college and I just--
Speaker 2: How did I get to college?
Speaker 1: Right (laughter), I mean 'cause we were like--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --we went from making eig- twenty-eight thousand [dollars] (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right.  So, here's how I went to college.
Speaker 1: So, but--and how did you choose Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota]?  'Cause Carleton is Midwest, in fact it's known often as the Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] of the Midwest.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I had only really applied to two colleges.
Speaker 1: Wait a minute, you're making--that's what I'm not understanding.  This--when are you applying to college?
Speaker 2: Okay, so, I--Schwartzy [Donald Schwartz] was my academic advisor, was not too happy that I wasn't gonna go to college, and he said, "You know, you should at least apply," which is kind of a tactic I've used with my own kids [Michael Beal and Erica Beal Barnhardt] when they like don't wanna do something that I want them to do.  I'd say, "You should at least apply and then it's your decision whether you go or not."  And so, Carleton was part of a consortium of colleges, and they had something called the SAM, the single application method, and the way you did it--this is how I picked Carleton, I picked Carleton two ways.  One, it was fifteen dollars and you got to apply to seven colleges for fifteen bucks.  And if the first coll- if Carleton didn't take you, then the understanding was they passed it on to Macalester [Macalester College, St. Paul, Minnesota] or Grinnell [Grinnell College, Grinnell, Iowa] or Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio], or any of those other colleges that are in the consortium.  That was number one, number two I still had kind of the ghetto education and so I didn't realize that the Midwest was not the west, okay.  And so I thought that when they said Midwest that meant like California, Oregon.  Minnesota, I didn't--I didn't know, the--the west.  So it was the middle part of the west, okay.  So I thought I was going--
Speaker 1: It sounds like a New Yorker.
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter), I don't know.  All right, I didn't know--I didn't know.  So those are the two things that I, I, I applied to Carleton.  I asked Schwartzy, you know, with the single application, which of these schools is good.  And he went, "Carleton is the best one in that group," you know.  So I put them in number one, I put whoever he said was number two in there, I don't remember whether it was Grinnell or Oberlin.  And then I just ranked them and sent off the fifteen bucks and my SAT scores, and transcript.  And I got a letter from Carleton saying that I had been accepted, and that they had this package for me designed, and it was going to cost me $2,500 and the rest was a combination of student debt--student loans and work study.  But I knew I wasn't gonna do that crap, you know, I was gonna stick with the Jack in the Box.  So I, I applied, I was accepted, I could be the first person in my family accepted into college, as opposed to the first person in my family who graduated from college.
Story_ID: 653607
Speaker 1: And, you know, the amount of money that I was making was so much for a guy my age that I really was somewhat irresponsible and that I had a motorcycle, I got a motorcycle when I was in high school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut].  And you know, what good is a motorcycle without a girl behind your back.  So I had a couple of girlfriends, and one of them worked at the Jack in the Box.
Speaker 2: Your Jack in the Box?
Speaker 1: My Jack in the Box, yes she was my--she worked there, but she was also my girlfriend, which is a lesson to be learned about not dating people that you work with.  And so, you know, it happened one weekend that I was to do the whole weekend.  We would--we had a weird way of working, mostly John [ph.] didn't work too much on the weekends, but Paul and I, I called him Paul--his name's Tony [ph.].  Tony and I worked on weekends, we'd sometimes alternate days and occasionally we'd do all three days: Friday, Saturday, Sunday.  And we had an office up above the Jack in the Box and there was a bathroom up there and there was a bedroom up there as well so you could sleep, you know, you know, just relax.  And so, most of that weekend, that weekend that helped me decide to go to college, I spent up there talking to my girlfriend, and just, you know, not really working as hard as I could.  And we were still doing the money drops and all the other stuff, and we probably had close to $18,000 in the safe, probably, probably.  And I had always told people that in the event that we ever had a problem, they should say that the manager isn't here, you know.  I wore a tag that said Joe or something like that, it didn't say manager or anything like that.  You know, I think you can see where this going.  We were working down there, some guys busted in to hold the place up.  They asked who the manager is, they didn't ask politely so I'm cleaning it up a bit.  They asked who the manager is, and she leans over and grabs me and says, "Don't hurt him, I love him."  And he said, "Okay, open the safe."  And I said, "Look, I don't have, you know--," John told me later, "We were insured man," but I said, "I don't have the combination, I don't know how to open it, the man--the white man is the manager and I'm not, I'm just the guy who's the night shift guy."  And he said, "Open the damn safe, open it now."  And I got up and ran, and he shot me.  And that's when I decided maybe I should go to college.  So I called up Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] and said that something had happened and I really would like to come to college and I was told that I could come to college, but there's no package anymore, so I'd have to be a full pay.  And I went to John and to Tony and said, "I've decided I want out, I wanna, I wanna go to college, I want wan- I'm going to college."  They tried to talk me out of it.  I said, "My mind's made up, I wanna go to college, I want, I want--that's what my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] wanted for me, it's what my family wants, I wanna go to college.  And I'm also, I don't wanna get shot again.  I just don't (laughter)--just didn't, it wasn't fun, it wasn't fun."  So, they did not give me my money back.  They said that what I signed, it had specific rules for how you get your money back and they had the right to pay me my money back over time.  And they exercised that right.  They did eventually pay me, they prev- they paid me the money back, but they didn't give me the money to get through college, and so I had enough money to make the first and I believe the second tuition payments.
Story_ID: 653608
Speaker 1: But I didn't have any money beyond that; and as luck would have it, I broke my glasses during the second--
Speaker 2: Semester.
Speaker 1: --semester.  I broke my glasses like right--I looked like something from 'Revenge of the Nerds' 'cause I broke it right there (gestures).  And I had some (laughter) tape holding it together.  I had, you know, it was really horrible.  And so asked my [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] to send me some money so I could get my glasses fixed and she sent me ninety dollars.  And I was going up to the Twin Cities [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota] to get my glasses fixed and a couple of other students heard that I was going up there and they started asking me to pick up stuff while I was up there, like, "Could you get me a record, you know, I want this reco- could you go to this record store and buy these records for me?"  "You're going up to the Twin Cities can you go--stop by this store and buy this shirt for me in this size?"  You know, just kind of like that kind of stuff.  And so I, I, I did it and people basically gave me extra money for bringing this stuff back from the Twin Cities for them.  And then people started saying, "Hey, if you go back up there could you get--."  So, you know, out of desperation I decided that that's what I was gonna do.  I was gonna run errands for people on campus.  And I was just gonna run errands.  And so I, I started doing it mostly for records and stereo equipment, 'cause people would say, "I need--you know, I want to buy this.  If you go up there can you get these records for me?" And I just took the price of the record up there and I tacked a dollar on it and sold it down in the Twin Cities.  Well, fortunately for me, I made that run so many times that the guy at the record store said, "Hey you know, why aren't you buying these wholesale, why are you paying a retail price for them."  And I was like, "What, what are you--what," and he goes, "No, you can buy these records, you're buying the same records," he says, "you're coming up here every week buying the same records, you can go and get them wholesale." And he said, "you can also--there's a magazine called Billboard," he said, "you should get a subscription to Billboard."  And I told him what I was doing.  I said, "You know, I go to college [Carleton College] down in Northfield [Minnesota] and I'm buying these for people in school."  And eventually I started a business which I called Records Unlimited [ph.], and then I called it Records and Stereos Unlimited [ph.].  And I started selling records and stereos at the college campus.  And that's how I--that's how I made--I made enough money doing that to pay for college.  I did a little more than records and stereos, we did a lot more things than that.  But that's how I did it.
Speaker 2: You mean, what parties or?
Speaker 1: We did events sometimes.
Speaker 2: Who's we?
Speaker 1: Me.  I tried to make it sound like it was more, but we.  Actually I hired a couple other students to deliver stuff, you know, like--like I got tired of taking things to people's dorm rooms.  So, but and I did have someone on the St. Olaf [St. Olaf College, Northfield, Minnesota] campus working for me who did records and stereos as well.  But I didn't--by the--by the time I left I sold the business to another student, yeah, yeah.  We got a nice write up in the paper, in the Minneapolis Herald Tribune about the business.  And I remember a guy--one of the guys said, "You don't look like the kind of guy who sells stereos, you look like the kind of guy who steals stereos" (laughter).  I really do sell stereos.  But that's what I did, I sold stereo and records and--
Story_ID: 653609
Speaker 1: You know, we started selling--we started doing transportation.  Like I noticed that--like this is a weird thing.  Like we came back from a spring break in Minneapolis [Minnesota] and I saw a lot of people I knew who went to Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  And everybody was there trying to figure out how we're gonna get from Carleton to Northfield, and you know I would do anything for money 'cause I needed money for college.  So we were like figuring out how do we get to col- from, from Minneapolis to Northfield, and people were saying, "Hey, we can get in these cabs, we each can get in a cab, it's gonna be eighty dollars for the cab ride, we each put in twenty dollars each," blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I just went to the phone booth and called up a bus company and said, "Hey, is it possible to charter a bus from the Minneapolis airport to Northfield, Minnesota."  And they went yeah, and I said, "How much is it gonna cost me?" It's like six hundred bucks [dollars].  I said, "Really?" "Yeah, yeah."  You know, I hadn't thought about doing that, but I made like three hundred dollars doing that, and the kids got a better deal, you know, you could put all your stuff in a bus and it was like a bus is coming.  And so after a while people expected me to have a bus to go from the airport down and from the school to the airport.  And I just did that from time to time, and eventually I started doing those buses to take people from Minneapolis to Chicago [Illinois], many who lived in Chicago.  From Minneapolis to New York [New York] by bus so you didn't have to go by plane and you didn't have to drive yourself.  And then I started doing like care packages for, you know, I got--my girlfriend worked in the dean of students office and I got to--when I would go over and see her I got to know the secretary to the dean of students who was a really great lady.  And she let me get the birth dates of all the students.  So I would send letters out like, you know, Johnny's birthday is coming up and they're in college, wouldn't you like to send a care package to Johnny, let him know you're thinking about him, blah, blah, blah.  We did whatever we could legally.  We thought about doing some illegal things, but we did whatever we could legally to.
Speaker 2: So how much was your tuition then?
Speaker 1: Forty-five hundred dollars.  And when I left college I had $10,000 in the bank, when I left college.
Speaker 2: And then what were you doing summers?
Speaker 1: Well, summers for the most part I'd go back.  I would--I worked at First Minneapolis Bank [ph.] one summer 'cause a guy who went to Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] was the head of personnel there.  So he hired me to do that one summer.  I went back to Wooster for a summer.  I think I actually went back to the Jack in the Box one summer.  I didn't go back to the church [Grace Gospel Church, Bronx, New York], which I may've--I should have.  And then a lot--I know one summer I took classes at the University of Minnesota [University of Minnesota Twin Cities, Minneapolis, Minnesota] 'cause I wanted to try and you know, it was less money than Carleton and I wanted to try and get what I could.
Speaker 2: So you really, you stayed in the Midwest during this time period, you know, for the most part during the summers?
Speaker 1: Yeah, for the most part.  I worked in Minnesota I think, yeah, I think other than one summer I think I did come back and work at the Jack in the Box, but I think for the most part I stayed in the Midwest in Minne- in the Twin Cities [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota] area.
Story_ID: 653610
Speaker 1: Did you like the Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] experience, 'cause this is--I mean you have been very eastern and this was--I mean there's a different sensibility in the Midwest?
Speaker 2: I did like it--I did like it.  I didn't like at first because I found that--I remember calling up Schwartzy [Donald Schwartz] and saying I didn't really like college because I felt like I was starting all over, that I was like, I had been the number one student socially at Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] and there's an argument whether I was number two or number four, you know.  But I'm gonna say I was number three, okay.  I thought I was number two academically.  And so, and here I was starting all over again.  Where I had to like convince people that, you know, I was academically worth it.  And I remember hearing some guys talking in the student center about a test that was coming up and how they were preparing and what the answers were gonna be and stuff.  And I remember one of the gu- guys said, "Hey, so how's it this guy is in the same class that we're in? So don't give him the answers, he's in the same class."  And the other guy went, "He won't know what the hell to do with it."  (Laughter) "He won't know."  And, and I remember the guy saying, "You know, this class is great, they grade on a curve and there's some black girls in our class and they don't have a clue what's going on."  And so I had never had that kind of experience where people talked about you and made assumptions about you based on race.  And it really was distasteful.  Now this just happened to be two outliers.  I think Carleton is the only place that anyone has ever called me the N word.  I think it is.
Story_ID: 653611
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you had none of that at Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut]?
Speaker 2: Oh never, never.  Nobody ever.  You know, actually I remember at Wooster there was a lot--too much for my taste, anti-Semitism, there was a lot of anti-Semitism.  And so, you know, people would say really horrible things about Jewish people.  Staff, teachers, other students and when the school went coed, there were two--when the school went coed there were two Jewish students who joined as part of that class.  Now there were Jewish guys at Wooster, but they knelt down for the cross like everybody else knelt down for the cross.  Susie Goodman who came in and was in my class was Jewish.  She refused.  She said, "I am not kneeling down for a cross, I'm not praying to Christ, I'm not--I'm not."  And she caught a lot of hell, and she really started getting on the guys who were Jewish about them doing it and how that was wrong and they shouldn't do it and that the school shouldn't force Jews to sing Christian songs, read Christian verses, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I remember people calling her both the K word and the C word.  And--but she was pretty strong, you know, I, I still--to say that I still say in touch with her is an understatement, I probably talk to her once or twice a month, talked to her twice in the last couple of days 'cause her husband died.  But she pointed that out.  And then there was one Italian guy, a guy named Fred Balsam [ph.] and people called him WOP, they called him WOP, you know, "Hey WOP come over here do this, hey WOP do that."  And I remember once he and I were in the dining room and I said, "Hey WOP pick that up," you know, something on the floor.  And he said, I almost said my nickname, he said, he said, "Listen," he goes, "that's a derogatory term," and he said, "I don't really like it and I don't think you'd like it if I used a derogatory term for you that some people do."  And I never called him that again.  And I never used the Jewish terms 'cause I knew those were bad.  But I didn't know, I didn't know what that meant actually until he told me what it was.  So, so when you take that environment where, you know, nobody really says anything bad at Wooster, nobody really goes out of their way to hurt their feelings other than, you know, there was a lot of anger towards Susie Goodman, and toward Cohen [ph.] 'cause Cohen, she got Cohen to kind of come into her camp and some of the things they did to them weren't so good.  But when I got to college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] it was much more, more raw.  You know, it's more, you know, people would say things.
Speaker 1: Well that's not as--it's also not as diverse an environment.
Story_ID: 653612
Speaker 1: --Wonder kids.  She came in when she was fifteen.  She went--she was a freshman at Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] when she was fifteen.  She graduated in three years, so she, she graduated from college when most people are going to college (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Going to college.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's very bright and I--did you go to Gene's [Gene Saffold] service?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: I was at Gene's service.  Did you go back to Adela's [Adela Cepeda] for--
Speaker 2: I went to Adela's.  I didn't--there were so many people there.
Speaker 1: Yes, so I went back to Adela's for that and I went over to Carol [Carol Saffold]--Carol's pretty tough, I don't know if you know that.
Speaker 2: She is tough.
Speaker 1: Yes, she's tough.  So I went over to Carol and I said, "I'm so sorry," I know she and Gene were divorced and everything else, but they had kids together.
Speaker 2: And then she really ran the--almost ran the whole service and everything, but go on.
Speaker 1: Did she really?
Speaker 2: She did.  She was con- she was sort of contro-
Speaker 1: Yeah I--
Speaker 2: I can't say controlling, but that's not a good statement.  But she was orchestrating.
Speaker 1: Oh, I thought Adela was doing a lot of that.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Adela did the--
Speaker 1: I thought, but that makes sense.  So I walked over to Carole and you know, Carol and I knew each other in college.  And I said, "Oh it's so sad."  I said, "You know, really, but the good tend to die young."  And she said to me, "Yeah you're still kicking around and you're gonna be here a long time" (laughter).  And I thought, I thought man that's a horrible thing to say (laughter).
Speaker 2: And it just came out.
Speaker 1: It came out natural because she wasn't too fond of me after a while, but she--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) No she didn't.
Speaker 1: Yeah, actually Carol was my date for my--when I, when I was working at the bank [First Minneapolis Bank (ph.)] they said, "Come--," I didn't have a girlfriend then.  They said, "Come over and bring your girlfriend," and they just assumed I had a girlfriend and I didn't have a girlfriend.  So, I asked Carol if she'd go with me and that's before she and Gene were.  And she went with me, which was very nice, I thought that was very nice of her.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She was my gynecologist, introduced to me by Adela.  She's very--she's very good and she quit.
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's--well she's not--I--you know, Carol never had a bedside manner, so I was really wondering why she went into medicine.
Speaker 2: She was very good though as a doctor.  Yeah, she had good bedside manner.
Speaker 1: Oh really?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean she was--
Speaker 1: Maybe it was just with me.  She never really (laughter) cut me much slack.
Speaker 2: Well obviously with that statement (unclear) (laughter).  So that's who you were, okay.
Speaker 1: So, yeah Gene and Arnold Donald.  There was a guy named Theo Foreman [ph.] who was my first roommate who he just--he was African American and he ju- he was from Chicago [Illinois], but he just wasn't, I probably shouldn't use his name.  We--it didn't work out with us.  He had a different view toward college and life, and I think--it just, we didn't click.  Nice guy, we just didn't click.  And so I really wanted to change roommates and I, I changed--man this is way off, in fact I don't even know what the topic of this discussion is anymore.  But I, I wanted to change roommates, and I wanna come back to my rush to have a family, but I, I wanted to change roommates.  I went to the then dean of students who wasn't the same dean I took the mailing list from.  But I went to the dean of students and asked if I could have a change of roommates.  He said, "Sure, there's another guy," blah, blah, blah.  And his name was Francis Pearl Mudder [ph.].  He was an American Indian [Native American] who had been raised--adopted and raised by a Jewish couple in New York [New York].  But he was a full blown, full bred American Indian.  And we met, I figured what the hell, this is just like high school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] where I had one roommate, didn't get along with him, that guy was white.  Now I have another roommate, he's black and not really getting along with him.  So, Francis said well, okay he said, "You know I smoke." And I went, "Well, you're not gonna smoke in the room are you?"  And he goes, "No, I can, you know, I can go outside and smoke."  I said, "Okay.  So that doesn't bother me."  So we get together.  So why am I telling this story.
Speaker 2: Go on, you were expl- so are we-okay, you say--
Speaker 1: So--
Story_ID: 653613
Speaker 1: All right, I'm gonna tell you the story.  But this is a weird story, and it has nothing to do with finance or anything else.  So, that night Francis [Francis Pearl Mudder (ph.)] says, "You know, there's something I need to tell you about myself."  And I was like, "What?"  And he goes, "Well I'm queer."  And I went, "Well so am I, don't worry about it you know."  And he--he said, "No, no.  I'm, I'm queer, not as in strange, but as in, you know, homosexual."  Now we say gay I think.  And so I go, "Well, what kind of homosexual are you, you know."  And he goes, "Now what, what do you mean what kind of homosexual am I?"  And I said, "Well are you--am I gonna wake up in the middle of the night and find out that you're trying to ride my ass, what--what's going on here?" (Laughter).  And he goes, "No, no, no I have a boyfriend," blah, blah, blah, you know, "older guy in the Twin Cities [Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota], don't worry about that, I'm not--," he says, "I'm not attracted to you."  And you know, I thought well what's wrong with me, no I didn't think that.  So I said, I said, "So Francis have you ever, ever tried a woman, have you ever, ever tried it."  And he goes, "No."  And I said, "Well, you don't--you have no idea what you're missing.  You're probably not gay."  I said, "You probably aren't, you know, you're really--you probably aren't."  I said, "Just try it man."  I said, "You know, it's like nothing else in the world, you're gonna feel like amazing."  So, he said, he said, "You know, okay," he said, "I will if you will."  I went, "No problem I love women, you know."  He goes, "No, no, no," he said, "I'll try heterosexual sex if you'll try homosexual sex."  So, I go in my mind okay, you go first Francis.  'Cause my thing is once you try a woman, and you ain't--you're not gonna want a--you're not gonna want to talk to a guy, forget it.  This is a no bet for me 'cause he'll be thanking me 'til the end of the time because of what I've done.  So, I had a friend, she had some issues and one of her issues was she was a nymphomaniac.  So I called her up and I said, "You've gotta help my roommate out, you know.  He's, he's never really had a woman before and you've gotta help him out."  And she was like sure.  And so she came over and she helped him out.  And so then he said, "It's your turn, you know."  And I said, "Well, you know, what?  Are you bringing your boyfriend now?"  He said, "No, no, no, we're--no."  He said, "I got another friend, he's gonna come down and we're gonna--," why the hell am I telling this story.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Laughter) So, so--
Story_ID: 653614
Speaker 1: (Laughter) So, so he says, "I got this friend, we're gonna come down and you know, you can try it."  So, you know, I'm like holy moly, I can't believe this.  I, I, "Didn't you like that?"  And he goes, "Yeah, yeah it was okay."  He goes, "It's not my cup of tea, but it was okay."  How could you possibly.  So the guy comes down, a white guy.  A nice guy.  And unlike the one with the woman, I almost said her name, which was really just animalistic.  It was--you know they had like candles and tea, and the three of us sat around and the guy put his hand on the back of my head to lean over to kiss me and I don't know, it must've been something I ate, I mean I really felt like really bad and so I had to go to the bathroom.  And I had like the worst case of the runs and I, I like threw up and I was like holy moly.  And so the guy goes, "Well I don't think you're into this," and I go, "no, deals a deal, I'm gonna do this, it's not a problem."  And so he, he then puts his hand on my leg and starts to kind of inch up my leg a little bit and I could feel myself getting a little sick again and I'm like oh my god.  And when he went to kiss me I just threw up on the floor and I really, I mean I just didn't--I'm really embar- I was really embarrassed then and I'm embarrassed now to tell this story.  Because I felt I should be able to do this and I, I really don't, I don't have a problem with--there are gay people who work here, okay I don't have a problem with gay people, I don't.  There are gay people in my family.  I, I just don't have that problem, it's just that I'm not gay.  And I realized and you know, Francis [Francis Pearl Mudder (ph.)] has passed, but before he passed some years later I really apologized to him 'cause what I did was just like totally--I just assumed my lifestyle would work for his lifestyle.  And I was born this way and he was born that way, and I don't think--I, you know, I don't think with a gun to my head I could do that.  I couldn't, I couldn't change the color of my skin, I can't--you know and so, it was--it was an eye opening experience.  And I remember writing in the school newspaper, they had this gay--not gay, they didn't call it gay then, they called it queer or something or other.  But they had some, some queer group and they said that you didn't have to be queer to be part of the group, you could be straight.  And I wrote something in about that and I sent it in.  And Francis came to me and said, "I know that you wrote that."  He said, "I know your writing style and I know that you wrote that."  And all I was saying was that I thought you are who you are, you know.
Speaker 2: Well, that--that's a true statement though, you are who you are.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: You know, it has--that's what even the recent movement is about (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah.  Why did I, where--how did I get off on that tangent.  I don't know how I got off on that tangent.
Speaker 2: I don't know, I don't know (unclear), (laughter) we were talking about Carol [Carol Saffold].
Story_ID: 653615
Speaker 1: But let's--so I wanna know--so did you enjoy Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] as an experience?  For wh--
Speaker 2: I, I did.
Speaker 1: And when you got shot, where were you shot?
Speaker 2: In the leg.
Speaker 1: In the leg, so you got grazed?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then, what--so then after graduation, you go where or is this where you work at the first bank [First Minneapolis Bank (ph.)] or you go straight to business?
Speaker 2: No I don't go straight to business school.
Speaker 1: You, no, you worked for--no--okay go on.
Speaker 2: You know, I didn't put this down I'm sorry, I'm really sorry.  I don't go straight to business school.  So I did something that not too proud of, but at the time it made total sense in the way I was thinking about things.  I applied to and got into law school.  George Wa- and I went to George Washington Law School [George Washington University Law School, Washington D.C.], okay.
Speaker 1: Go on.
Speaker 2: And I did this, I took the LCATs, I took the MCATs.  The, you know, the-
Speaker 1: For medical school?
Speaker 2: Not medical school, I meant--
Speaker 1: You're talking about the GMATs [Graduate Management Admission Test]?
Speaker 2: GMATs, the GMATs.  I took the LSAT and the GMATs.  And I decided to apply to law school and business school.  I applied with the help of my academic advisor to seven law schools and four business schools.  I got into all the business schools, and I got into all but one of the law schools.  And I went to GW.  I asked the business schools, I didn't think I wanted to be a lawyer, but my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal] didn't know what the hell business was.  When I told her I wanted to go to business school, she's like, "Well your cousin Tina [ph.] went to DeVry [DeVry Institute of Technology; DeVry University], or whatever the business school is right above the (Unclear) Co. [ph.]," (laughter) you know.  I'm like, "No, no, it's a different kind of business school."  So, you know, (laughter) so I applied to law school.  But I knew I didn't wanna be a lawyer.  So here's the kind of convoluted math that went on in my head.  I figured I had enough money to pay for one year of law school.  I had enough money 'cause when I left Carleton I had ten grand [$10,000], and law school was about five grand [$5,000], and I could always make enough money to pay for business school, okay.  So, I, I didn't want to--this is the honest calculus that went on in my he- my twenty-two year old head, I didn't wanna take away a spot in the law school for some black person who wanted to be a lawyer.  My grades were good enough, my LSATs were good enough that I could get in without disclosing my race, okay.  I didn't disclose my race, I actually checked Caucasian, okay.  And when I said I applied to seven schools and I got in all but one, the one that I didn't get into was Howard [Howard University School of Law, Washington D.C.], okay.  But I got into every other school that I applied to.  And my feeling was, and you know, it's such stupid math okay, because I did take away a spot from somebody who wanted to be a lawyer, okay.  Somebody who wanted to be a lawyer didn't get in, but I didn't think it would be a black person who didn't get in because I wasn't applying as a black person, okay.  It was convoluted stupid math.  And I also didn't wanna take away financial aid from somebody.  So, I applied that way.  I did well in law school.  When I told them I was leaving, they offered to give me a scholarship, I did--I did really well in law school.  But I wanted to go to business school.  And I wanted to go to either Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] or Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California].  Harvard, at that time, didn't have a policy for deferral and Stanford was willing to defer.  And Stanford was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you got both at the same time--you got into law school and business school at the same time?
Speaker 2: Same time, yeah, I applied to them both at the same time.  I applied to them both at the same time.  And I had a plan, and the plan was I'm only gonna do one year in law school and you know what, it's the best thing I ever did 'cause quite frankly that really helps me in talking to lawyers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Thinking, think--
Speaker 2: --and thinking.  It was really--and, and I was tempted, I honestly was tempted to stay on and do that.  But then I found out how much lawyers make and I was like screw this, I'm not doing that.  I'm gonna make some real money, and so I did.
Story_ID: 653616
Speaker 1: I didn't have--I said I would tell you about the family thing.  So when I was leaving school, I decided I wanted a family.  Very simple.
Speaker 2: You're leaving?
Speaker 1: College.
Speaker 2: College, you wanna have a family?
Speaker 1: I want a family.  I bought my first car which was a four door Ford Grenada 'cause it was a great family car, that's what the guy told me.  So I'm getting a family car, he goes, "How long you been married?" "Not married."  "Are you engaged, not engaged?"  "No, but I'm gonna get married," I'm--I was determined to graduate college with a wife and not do this.  So I remember this and you can check and verify this, I--it was like six weeks before school was supposed to be over.  I remember walking over to Yovette Mumford's [Yovette Mumford Markey] dorm room.  I knocked on her door and she opened the door, I said, "I really need to talk to you," and she said sure, you know.  'Cause I had tutored her in math.  And she said, "I really, you know, let's meet down in the common room," she didn't want me to come in her room, she said, "let's meet down in the common room."  So we met in the common room.  She said, "What do you wanna talk about?"  I said, "Look, I like you, you don't really know me that well, but I wanna get married and I'd like to marry you, and why don't we get married right after graduation.  I'm gonna go off to school and you can, you know, work with me."  And so she's like, "Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal]," she goes, "you've never held my hand, you've never--like we've never gone on a date.  You've never, nothing (laughter), you've never test me out, you've never nothing."  She goes, "What would make you want to marry me? You don't even really know me." And I go, "Well you know, I like you, you're good looking and you know, I think you'd make a good wife and I think we'd be a good team," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And I actually caught up with her recently.  She, she got married [sic.] to Senator Markey [Ed Markey].  Do you know her?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Don't know her.  She, she married, she did very well in life.  And she actually she became a patent lawyer, she did real well.  I was right.
Speaker 2: Your instincts were right.
Speaker 1: They were right, they were right.  So, she said no.  She just thought I was crazy, she said no.  Then I went to Debbie Carter's [ph.] room.  And asked her the same thing, and I did that with probably about six or seven women at Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  Just go into--women I've never--I had a girlfriend when I was at Carleton, but I didn't wanna marry her.  And I just kept going to these women, I wanted to marry a black woman, and my girlfriend at Carleton wasn't black.  And so I just kept going to women and so much so that it began to get around campus that (laughter) I was going around asking these women to marry me.  So, I figured out this is stupid, you know.  Nobody--you know, it was just bad that I was going around asking these women to marry me.  So, I went over to St. Olaf [St. Olaf College, Northfield, Minnesota], which is the other college and there, there probably were only like six or eight black girls there.  And I ran into this girl named Wilhelmina Lanier [ph.] and I said, "Look, you don't know me, I'm up at Carleton.  I'm graduating in a few weeks and I'm planning to go to school, but I'd like to marry you, you know." And she sa- she--I--didn't even know me, she didn't know my name, okay.  She didn't know me.  So she goes, well you know, to my surprise, she didn't say no, she said, "We should date for a year and if you still feel that way, then I'll marry you."  So, we, we, we did.  She thought I should go get a job and so we didn't get married, we stayed in touch.  We were engaged.  The wedding didn't happen.  And she didn't believe that I should work on Wall Street [New York, New York], she thought I should be a teacher or a minister or something that added goodness to life.  But she was really a--she's a special woman, you know.  'Cause unlike every other woman though, that lik- like laughed in my face because I said I wanted (laughter) to get married, even though I'd never dated them.  She was at least willing to say hey, let's give that a try, you know.  I'd talk to her forever, when I was in business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California] I talked to her like--
Story_ID: 653617
Speaker 1: So, you went off to business school; and she [Beal's former fiancee, Wilhelmina Lanier (ph.)]--and that's the year that you, your first year bu- well no.
Speaker 2: No, I went off to law school [George Washington University Law School, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Law school.
Speaker 2: I said when I was in business school I talked to her all the time.
Speaker 1: You did, okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you chose--so Stanford [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California]--oh you said Harvard [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts], that's right.
Speaker 2: Harvard wouldn't defer and Stanford was also ranked number one.  So, yeah I didn't know.  My son [Michael Beal] went to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] undergrad and Harvard grad.  He--he, you know.  I have no regrets, I liked Stanford, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Alexis [ph.] is at Stanford now.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) she's enjoying it.
Speaker 2: She got into Harvard, Stanford and Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], yeah, yeah.  It's a great school.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, so how--so what, what do you--who was at--who was at law sch- I mean at business school with you that we might know?
Speaker 2: Who was in my class?  Well in the class ahead of me was a guy named Ira Hall [Ira D. Hall].  Do you know Ira?
Speaker 1: I do know that name.
Speaker 2: Ira's great.  He, he, he--
Speaker 1: He's a New Yorkian.
Speaker 2: He is a New Yorkian in Florida.  And he was like my mentor at business school, and he's just a great fellow.  He, he--we--left there, he was working at Hewlett Packard [Hewlett-Packard Company], he then went to Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], he became treasurer of IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], and I'm trying to remember when he became treasurer of an oil and gas company, but I don't remember which one.  But a real sharp guy.  Let's see who else, Frankie Hughes [Frankie D. Hughes], do you know Frankie?
Speaker 1: Yes, Frank--that's Capital right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Hughes Capital Management [Hughes Capital Management, Inc.], yeah, yeah.  Frankie was in my class.  Let's see who else would be in my class that you might know.  Do I know anybody from Chicago [Illinois] who was in my class?  Hugh Williams, Hugh and Connie Williams.  They have a contracting company in Chicago.  Mostly it's a painting contracting company, but both of them were in my class.
Story_ID: 653618
Speaker 1: So, is this the time, do you--have you already decided you want to do investment banking?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And when do you decide that; when are you exposed to that, before business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California]?
Speaker 2: Before business school.  I--when I was in undergraduate school there was an African American guy by the name of Printice Gary who has his--he has a firm down in Dallas [Texas] now called Carleton Properties [Carleton Residential Properties].  But I was working in the commercial bank, First Minneapolis [First Minneapolis Bank (ph.)], one summer and Printice was also kind of a mentor to me.  He was--he, he was an interesting guy.  At Carleton [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] he was president of the student body and he was also homecoming king.  So he was--people liked him.  And I was telling him about working in a bank and I thought, you know, it was all right, but you know, there's no money and it's all right.  And he said, "Well have you ever thought of working in an investment bank?"  And I, I, I didn't even know what it was.  I said, "Well what is that, they like hold your investments--," I (laughter) didn't know what the hell it was.  And he goes, "No, no, no.  It's a, you know," he goes, "these are the banks that provide capital to businesses, and you know, they're for business needs to raise money, they go to an investment bank and the investment bank helps them raise the money.  It's not like a savings and loan where you get a mortgage."  And he said he knew some people at Dain, Kalman and Quail [Dain, Kalman and Quail, Inc.], which is a Minneapolis [Minnesota] firm.  And Printice invited me to a breakfast there.  How he got to know those people I, I, I mean I should ask him, how was it that he knew these people.  But he invited me to a breakfast there and they had this politician, I don't remember who, speaking at this breakfast.  And at the end of the breakfast, the guys around the table pulled out their checkbooks and wrote checks to this politician and they, you know, peeled them off and you know, collected them.  And I said, "Well, you know, why in the hell did they do that?"  And he said, "Well, you know, they need a law changed and this politician is gonna be helpful in getting the law changed."  And I thought, well you know, is that legal, you know, it that legal.  But I didn't say anything, I just thought it was kind of weird and then he told me the kind of money these guys were making, which was like a lot of money.  And he said, "You should do that."  So, when I was about to graduate from college I talked to some guys at Dain, Kalman and Quail about coming to work for them when I graduated from college.  And they said, "Well, no.  You need a--you need a business school degree, you have to go to business school before you can work in an investment bank."  And the guy said, "Besides," he goes, "you shouldn't come and work for Dain, Kalman and Quail or any other firm in the Midwest.  If you're gonna make it in this business you should go to New York [New York]."  He said, "You should work for a New York firm, that's the only place you can work."  He said, "You can always go to New York and you know, if you like it or don't like it you can come to the Midwest.  But if you start in the Midwest, you're gonna have a hard time getting to New York, so it's gonna be really hard."  So, good advice from the guy.
Story_ID: 653619
Speaker 1: So, that's what I wanted to do; and the more I found out, you know, I start talking to Printice [Printice Gary] and (unclear), the more I wanted to become an investment banker and eventually start my own investment bank.  And I thought it would take me about two years.  So, that was the plan.  But, I've been talking to Lani--Wilma Lanier [Beal's former fiancee, Wilhelmina Lanier (ph.)], I called her Lanier.  I've been talking to Lanier through this whole thing.  And the plan was, I was going to graduate from business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], and then in August we'd get married.  And that was the plan.  There was no--that had been the plan for three years and the plan hadn't changed--well it had changed somewhat really, I wanted to get married right away, but we were gonna get married in August.  So, it's now March, April, I'm interviewing for jobs and taking Lanier with me.  And she just really doesn't like anything about Wall Street [New York, New York].  She just hates it.  She doesn't like the people she meets.  She doesn't like the fact they only talk about money.  She doesn't like--she just doesn't like it.  But I, I love it.  And so, she goes, "Well I don't wanna, I don't wanna be part of this.  You've gotta either find something else that you wanna do or find another woman."  And I really liked her, so and I thought she'd make a good wife.  So, I was like okay, well let's figure out what else we can do.  And I talked to a guy from E.F. Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.], and told him that I really wanted to work on Wall Street, but my fiancee didn't want me to do it because she didn't think any good was done there.  And he said, "Well, you know, there is one area of our firm where people do good things, you know."  And I'm like, "What's that?"  He goes, "It's called the public finance area, they build schools, we finance schools, we finance hospitals, housing, you know, police stations, we do all these bridges and tunnels, airports, we finance that stuff."  And he said, "So you could do good and do well at the same time."  So I went back, I started talking to Lanier about it.  I brought her to meet Dick Locke [Richard S. Locke], my boss, who would be--become my boss.  And Dick brought his then girlfriend, now wife, to dinner with us.  He--later he had Lanier and I over to his home for dinner, and he started talking about, you know, 'cause I guess Paul [ph.] the guy I had talked to at Hutton had told Dick about my problem with my fiancee.  And Dick started talking about all the projects they had financed, you know, this hospital that he had done, this low income housing stuff that he had done, and all this other stuff.  And slowly, but surely she began to come around, especially when it came to education and I look--I said, "Look, I can start my own firm and I'll be able to do that, and you know, that's really what I wanna do."  That--wasn't really what I wanna--but I was like that's really what I wanna do.  And so she was fine with it and that's why I took the job, yeah.
Speaker 2: So that's how you got to E.F. Hutton.
Speaker 1: That's how it happened.  That's how I got into public finance too, 'cause I was gonna do corporate finance.
Story_ID: 653620
Speaker 1: Okay, so there're a couple guys that I met in the process of interviewing.  So, Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] was the only public finance offer I received.  I received corporate finance offers, but because Lanier [Beal's former fiancee, Wilhelmina Lanier (ph.)] didn't like corporate finance I didn't entertain any of those.  And so, I met [HistoryMaker] Don Cornwell.  So Don was at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.], and Don tried his best to convince me to come to Goldman Sachs in corporate finance.  And I just told him that, you know, my fiancee wanted no part of that and I wanted to do public finance, I wanted to do socially relevant, socially good things.  And so he sent me over to the--to their public finance department where I met a guy named Garland Wood [Garland E. Wood].  And Garland, you know, Dar- Garland eventually became a partner and he was, you know, widely successful.  But back then, he was kind of their Urkel [Steve Urkel], you know, he was their quant guy, nerd guy, and so--and he also had this habit of talking above you somewhere, so he never really looked you in the eye, he kind of like talked above your head somewhere.  But he was talking to me about it and you know, it sounded like it would've been fun, but I didn't get an offer for public finance, I only got a corporate finance offer from them.  So, those two guys really, I stayed in touch with both of them.  Garland eventually I became a competitor, direct competitor with, not nearly as talented as, as, as he was.  But I became his direct competitor.  Don, I just stayed in touch with him, and his ex-wife was really instrumental in kind of getting my--myself and my wife [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] together.  And Don's son [K. Don Cornwell] was my son's boss when my son [Michael Beal] went to Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management].  So, it kind of went a circle around.
Speaker 2: Well it's a small world here when it comes to--
Speaker 1: Small street [Wall Street, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: --very small, small, small number of people.  And this is the time that people are seriously getting in, you know, and sort of learning the industry.  I--I'm surprised about the corporate finance, because I always thought that that was harder to, you know, to get involved with if you were--
Speaker 1: Black, yeah.
Speaker 2: --black.
Speaker 1: Yeah I know.  So, yeah and it was.  And I don't know what--what was the reason for me other than, you know, I could've had a corporate finance offer at Hutton as well.  So, the only place that I didn't get an offer from was Morgan Stanley, which became the only place my son wanted to work (laughter).  So, so he did get an offer from Morgan Stanley, and he did go work there.
Story_ID: 653621
Speaker 1: But, you know, and, and what I hadn't counted on was, you know with the rise of black politicians and the rise of black administrators, there was a feeling that they wanted to be covered by a more diverse group.  And so, shortly after that I joined Hutton in '79 [1979], I'd say around '82 [1982] or '83 [1983] every firm started hiring black folks.  Started hiring them--started hiring former politicians, former administrators, you know, they, they promote people up from the back office and move them to the front office.  You know, not all of it was done I think in the best interest of those individuals.  I don't think many of those people got proper training to know kind of the basics of how a deal is put together, what makes a deal work, and how you can structure deals.  And the one thing I'll say about Hutton, I remember my boss [Richard S. Locke] sent me down to Lake Charles Parish--Calcasieu Parish, Lake Charles, Louisiana.  And he told me that we had to go--I had to go down there and this housing deal.  I went down there, I worked my ass off, and when it came time to the vote we got two votes out of seven, and I called him up and said hey you know, I'm really--I thought he was gonna fire me actually.  I called him up to say, "Hey you know, I'm really sorry," blah, blah, blah, blah.  And he goes, "Well how did people treat you down there?"  And I went, you know, "It's a different kind of place."  And he said, "Well you know honestly," he said, "I didn't expect you to get the business."  He said, "I sent you down there for training."
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: And it turned out they had never gotten any votes there and I had managed to get two, I got the two African Americans to vote for us, but they had never gotten any votes before.  And eventually we did do business down there.  But you know, he was the kind of guy who really made it so I got the fundamentals.  He and the guy who ran our desk was a guy named Scott Pierce, and Scott eventually became president of E.F. Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.].  And he and I remained very--well remained is an understatement, remain very close.  Scott is one of the best people I've ever met in my life.  And he actually made the investment that allowed me to start this firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York], $5 million.  And when I wanted to st--
Speaker 2: Scott did?
Speaker 1: Scott did, Scott did.  And Scott, he, he--when I wanted to start my asset management company he put $20 million into that.  You know, he--he was--he was no longer president of Hutton, he was then president of Prudential Asset Management Company and they seeded my company with $20 million, and he was, you know, he made a good return.  But, you know, without him I would've been up a creek without a paddle.  Because he was really a good guy--I, I, I call him every Thanksgiving.
Story_ID: 653622
Speaker 1: So you actually--what--okay, this is what--you start at E.F. Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] in 1979?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And then you start M.R. Beal [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] in 1988?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: So it took you a little longer than you had anticipated 'cause that's not--
Speaker 2: Because Dick [Richard S. Locke] kept pushing more money my way.  I kind of remember once I--
Speaker 1: Oh you kept saying about the bonuses.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I, I remember once I, I basically said to myself, 'cause I really wanted to go start my own firm and I, I came up with a number in my head, and I said if I don't get that number I'm leaving--I'm leaving.  And it was ridiculous, it was a huge number, you know, by those standards then.  But I was having great years, I mean I was a black guy who was quantitative, I could structure the deals, I could bring in the deals, I could process the deals.  The only thing I couldn't do was sell them.  But everything else I could do.  And so I was just, and I could come up with my own ideas and other people were using my ideas, it was great.  So, and you know, my colleagues we got along, for the most part, as well as you can get along on Wall Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: 'Cause it is a very, you know, it's a dog eat dog business.  And what's it like--
Speaker 2: It's a dog eat bone--it's a dog, yeah, it's, it's horrible that way.
Speaker 1: But what's--what was it like back then?  I mean, you know now can--the young people, they're coming in and work and they don't even, they take showers in the morning (laughter) and, I mean was it like--?
Speaker 2: It was like that then.
Speaker 1: It was?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so, I--it--it's one of my joys watching my son [Michael Beal] work so hard 'cause he used to always get on my ass when I was working this hard.  But I, I would often keep a cot in my office that I'd sleep on.  And back then, we didn't have all these fancy computers, so a lot of this stuff you had to do with a slide rule and a basis book.  And you know, calculate numbers out, you know, as best you could and verify them.  Not running computer programs with the drop and click kind of stuff.  So, it was pretty tough.  I was very fortunate in that I had Dick for a boss who was just--and Scott [Scott Pierce], Dick and Scott for bosses who were really good.  Dick socially, Scott kind of politically, kind of helped me navigate the political waters.  And then there was a third guy, his name was Jim Lopp [Walter J. Lopp] and those three guys ran that department, all three of them happened to like me.  What--so Dick was kind of the social kind of side of things, Scott was the politics side of things, Lopp was the creative side of things.  And so Lopp realized that I was pretty good with math and that I could solve, you know, financial problems.  And so he'd give me financial things that he was working on and I could put together, you know, we didn't have spreadsheets back then, but I could put together an analysis of it and bring it to him in a way--you know, he's left us now.  He's a very smart guy, but he was not a quantitative guy.  So I could give it to him in a way that made it easy for him to understand and articulate it, and that's what he liked.
Story_ID: 653623
Speaker 1: And so he got me a lot more exposure and so I began to go up the ranks pretty damn fast.  By the time I left Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.], I was a senior vice president.  And a, you know, it was, it was really good.  And so I had this number in mind.  Dick [Richard S. Locke] gave me a number that was two, two and half times that number, which was an outrageous number, you know.  It was an outrageous number and that's the number he gave me.  And I remember saying to him, and this was honest, I, I was being very honest with him, I said, "Dick, you know, that's not the number I had in mind."  Which is true, I had a much lower number in mind (laughter).  And I went, "That's not the number I had in mind and if that's the way you feel about me I'm, you know, I guess I ought to assess what I'm doing."  And he said, "Wait, you know, let me think about this, let me see if I can sharpen some things up and move some stuff around."  And he came back with even a higher number and I was like that's unbelievable.  I told my--I told Valerie [Beal's wife, Valerie Lancaster-Beal], "You won't believe what they paid me this year."  I mean, my goal was to make more money than my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] had made in his entire lifetime, and if I had gotten even part of that number I originally had in mind, I would've achieved that goal.  I didn't have to get it all.  Getting it all got me past that and then when I got almost three times it, I was just--blew my mind.  And when I--when, when Hutton finally exploded, I found out that I was one of the twenty-five highest compensated people in the firm.  I did--I didn't know it at the time, but I was really well compensated.  I knew I was well compensated, I just didn't know--
Speaker 2: How well.
Speaker 1: --how well relative to everybody else.
Speaker 2: And how equitable 'cause it's--I mean--
Speaker 1: The man treated me fair.  I mean I can't--all three of those guys treated me exceptionally fair.  I mean they were--they were beyond fair to me.
Story_ID: 653624
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you didn't have responsibility for getting the deals, 'cause this is (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I did, I did.
Speaker 1: You did--eventually?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Because this is a time that black--like you said there are black mayors, there're black administrators, there're pension, you know, pension funds, I mean all those things.  (Unclear) funds (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, well they--I never felt--and I could be wrong, I could be totally wrong, I never felt that that was the reason they brought me in.  I really don't know, because they brought me in before all that stuff happened.
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I'm saying it happened during then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah it happened later.  And then they brought in a guy named T.M. Alexander, Jr., I don't know if you've ever heard of him, he was an amazing man.  He's a brother from Atlanta [Georgia].  His father [T.M. Alexander, Sr.] was in the insurance business and in fact his father did all of the insurance for Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], for the bus rides and for everything else 'cause they couldn't get insurance elsewhere, so his father did all that stuff.  But T.M. knew everybody.  I mean, it was like--I was shocked at the number of people T.M. knew and they brought him in for that.  And he, he took a liking to me too, which was kind of cool because he could--he could take me to his meetings and I knew the technical side of things, and he--I--it would mean that he could, you know, bring me into St. Lo- like if we're trying to get a piece of business in St. Louis [Missouri], T.M. might have brought someone from Kansas City [Missouri], someone from Dallas [Texas], and someone from, you know, Columbus, Ohio and he'd pull them all together.  And he, he just had this kind of brain that worked on who are the people that I need to get together to get the right decision and whether that was Atlantic City [New Jersey] or.  And so T.M.--his reach reached beyond the African American community.  He actually brought into Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.], Harrah's MGM deal [ph.].  And at, at that time, a guy who was the vice chairman of Hutton at the time was a guy named John Shad [John S.R. Shad] who later became chairman of the SEC [U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission].  But T.M. told Shad that I should work on that deal, and I did.  But it was just--so I had, you know, I'd kind of forgotten T.M. a little bit, but he was kind of the fourth leg of that stool: the three guys who ran it and then T.M.
Story_ID: 653625
Speaker 1: Now who were--who was--well first before I ask that, 'cause you mentioned Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal].  Valerie you end up marrying--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but what happened to--
Speaker 2: Lanier [Beal's former fiancee, Wilhelmina Lanier (ph.)]?
Speaker 1: Lanier?  So Lanier goes up and--'cause you're supposed to get married in August?
Speaker 2: Right, I started in July.  I started in July.  I started work at Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] in July.
Speaker 1: And, and that didn't--she said no.
Speaker 2: No, she did not say no.  I have not spoken to her.  We had the wedding date, it was scheduled.  I went to Hu- Hutton, we went down to Corpus Christi, Texas.  I was working on a deal in Corpus Christi and I made the mistake that Friday of saying, "Hey guys I'm getting married on Sunday," which was true.  And they all said, "Oh great, you know, let's toast your wedding, you know, let's toast to your wedding."  And I, I wasn't a drinker, I've never done drugs, I've never smoked cigarettes, and I really hadn't drank.  I mean, I had a beer in business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], one.  I hadn't drank before.  And so they said, "Oh you gotta have some--a tequila shot."  And you put the little salt here and you take a little bit of lime and take the salt and take a swig of the tequila and you just knock it back, you know.  And I thought okay, so I did that and I didn't really think much of it.  We probably did about six or seven, maybe eight, could've been more.  Anyway long story short, probably too late for that, but long story short, the next morning, Saturday, I wake up on the like conveyor belt at the airport, you know, the baggage claim conveyor belt.  I had obviously passed out and I was on the conveyor (laughter) belt, and there was a picture.  Actually some Hutton guy took a picture of me passed out on the conveyor belt and, you know, with the hat and a sign that said rest in peace.  And so I had missed my flight back.  I fly back to New York [New York], I go to my apartment and I just pass out.  I mean, I just pass out.  And you know, I was too ch- I didn't have a phone, we didn't have cell phones back then.  I didn't have a phone.  People tell me that they came and rang my bell, my bell, Sunday.  But I never heard it.  I honestly never heard it.  And when I woke up Sunday I kept thinking there's something I'm supposed to be doing, there's--I, I just don't remember there's something, there's something I'm--there's something, something I'm supposed to do.  And I just didn't--I couldn't remember what it was, I was supposed to get married, that's what it was.  But I couldn't remember it.  Lanier has never spoken to me, not once, she has not spoken to me since that day.  I've called her, I really would love to apologize to her, I don't know if she'll ever hear this, but I'm definitely sorry.  I just didn't remember and when I went to work on Monday, one of the guys said, "How's married life? What are you doing here? I thought you'd be on like your honeymoon."  And I was like, "What are you talking about?" Holy moly, I'd forgotten.  And I called up her aunt, who did speak to me.  She was very upset 'cause her aunt had paid for everything.  I reimbursed her.  I told her if you could ever like--she said, "Lanier is never going to speak to you," she called her Wilma, but she says, "she's never going to speak to you, she's so embarrassed and hurt of what you did, you know, by not showing up at the church, not showing up."  My [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] called me up, she was like, "What--people were trying, people went to your apartment, they rang the bell, you know.  I didn't know whether you were dead or out of town or what."  I just--I never--I couldn't remember it.
Speaker 1: So work was very important at that point and you're working crazy hours, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think--and you said because you had never drank?
Speaker 2: I never drank before.  That's the first time I was--that's the first time I ever got drunk, that was the first time.  I just I, I didn't drink, I didn't--you know, what was really weird, when I was in business school I had a roommate, a white guy who was my roommate.  And he drank and did drugs and everything (laughter), I mean it was like and--and that's not true.  I just thought about something, I did take--he gave me speed once, so I did take a--I did take that--I did take that, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 653626
Speaker 1: So, when you--so how do you meet your wife, Valerie?
Speaker 2: Okay, so.
Speaker 1: That must've been devastating though?
Speaker 2: For--Lanier [Beal's former fiancee, Wilhelmina Lanier (ph.)]?
Speaker 1: Lanier.
Speaker 2: Yeah, even when I tell it I'm sad about it.  I mean it's really sad, 'cause she was just such a great woman, she's just such a great woman.  But it wasn't meant to be, you know--wasn't meant to be.  And I ended up marrying a great woman.  So, how'd I meet Valerie?  So this is the way I met Valerie.
Speaker 1: Valerie's in the business though, right?
Speaker 2: Valerie was in the business, that's how I met her.  So, I was at a housing conference in Detroit [Michigan].  And there was a woman there by the name of Bella Marshall who was running part of the housing, the finance agency [Michigan State Housing Development Authority].  And I was talking to Bella and Valerie came over to introduce herself.  And she said, "Oh I heard about you, you work at Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.]," and her--I didn't know anything, I was like a new associate at Hutton, and her thing said assistant manager or something, so I thought well man this is a pretty big person, I ought to get to know her.  And she said, "Oh I would love to talk to you more about all this," and I said, "oh, that would be great, you know."  I said, "Would you mind," I said, "Bella," you know, everybody knew who Bella was, so I said, "Bella's drink is, is low, would you mind going to the bar and getting her another glass of, of wine."  And Valerie said, "Oh sure I'd be happy to." And when she left, I said to Bella, "Let's get the hell outta here--let's just get the hell outta here."  So, the two of us left and I never saw Valerie again for, let's see that was--that would've been '79 [1979] or was it '80 [1980], it would've been '79 [1979] or '80 [1980].  I never saw her again and I didn't really think much of her.  And then one day I was at Hutton working hard, I walked out to the--to the trading desk and [HistoryMaker] Don Cornwell's wife worked on the trading desk.  And she said to me, "Hey," she said you know, "I was at this art exhibit this weekend and I met this woman who I think you'd really like," said, "her name is Valerie Lancaster [Valerie Lancaster-Beal].  And you know, she was there and I was talking to her, and she works at Citibank [Citibank, N.A.]," and blah, blah, blah, blah.  She said, "You should really call her." And I said, "You know, I think I've met her," I said, "I think I ran into her, you know, I think I ran into her."  So, she said, "Oh I think she's a nice lady, you should call her."  And I was thinking well why don't I? You know I deal with you, you know (laughter).  So she said, "No, no, no, you should get somebody your own age, call her."  So then out of the clear blue sky, Frankie Hughes [Frankie D. Hughes] called me, same day and said hey--she obviously was at the same art thing.  She said, "I was at this art exhibit, I ran into this woman," she said, "I think you should call her, I mean I know you're like having trouble meeting people," blah, blah, blah up here.  And she said, "She's in the business so she'll understand your work hours and everything else, and you should call her."  So I don't think much of it.  And that day a guy named Chuck Henderson [ph.] was starting work and he had been at Citibank, he started that day at Hutton.  I went in to introduce myself, we start talking and you know how you play that game, who do you know in common.  He said well--he said, "You must know Valerie Lancaster," he said, "she's at Hutton--no she's at Citibank," he said, "I worked with her, she's fabulous, you must know her."  I said, "You know what, you're the third person today to mention her name, I'm gonna pick up the phone and call her."  So I picked up the phone and called her, they said she wasn't in, she was on vacation.  So I just left a message for her.  And later that day she called me up and said, "Oh, you know I'm on vacation, but I called the office and they told me you'd called, what's up?"  And she remembered what I had done to her in Detroit, that I had kind of like snaked her and took, took the client away.  And I said, "Oh you know, I really feel bad about that thing in Detroit, but you know, we had to leave, we looked for you," all this other crap.  And I said, "You know, you won't believe this, but today three different people mentioned your name to me and said I should call you."  And I said, "I--I'd like to get together, and you know, have lunch."  And she said, "Well, I'm dressed really casually, you know, I don't know that I could get together for lunch I'm dressed really casual."  And I said, "So am I," which wasn't true, you know, "I'm really casual, so we'll meet somewhere for lunch."  So she gave me a restaurant, I told the guys I was going to have lunch with a, a friend.
Story_ID: 653627
Speaker 1: I went, we had lunch; we must've talked for like four hours over lunch, just like really talking and she knew so much stuff that I didn't know, you know, just kind of stuff about the world and history, and things that I just didn't know, it was really fascinating.  And then I just figured what the hell, you know.  I didn't have a television, she had a television, and so I said, "You know, I've read about this show that I'd really like to see on television, but I don't have a television, and can I come over to your apartment and watch television," which I would do once a week, and then we'd go out to dinner.  But as she pointed out, usually when we went out someplace it was always on client expenses, like I would take her to a play, but I had other clients or I'd take her to a dinner in a nice restaurant, but it would be with client--rare- rarely did I pay or if I paid I was being reimbursed.  And so, you know, she just--well, she, she impressed me, you know, I, I was, I was seeing her, but I was also seeing a woman in the Midwest and you know, that woman really wanted to marry me, and Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal], you know, she wasn't too clear as to whether she wanted that or not.  And I remember going to Don Schwartz [Donald Schwartz], the guy who had been my dean at Wooster School [Danbury, Connecticut], and I said, "Look, I'm ready to get married, I've got two women, one who totally adores me and wants to marry me and has told me she'll do anything I want her to do."  I said, "This other woman is a little bit on the difficult side."  And he said, "Well, which one is smarter?" And I said, "Well Valerie is smarter."  And he said, "Which one do you find more challenging, you know, like--?" And I said, "Valerie you know, she's much challenging, you know, she's downright difficult sometimes."  And he said, "Well, if I were you I'd marry her."  Now, he'd never been married, he goes, "But I would--I would, that's the one I would marry."  He said, "Is she smarter than you?" I said, "Yeah, she's smarter, I mean just that's--she's smart, you know."  "Do you trust her?" I went, "Absolutely."  So he said, "That's the one I would marry."  So, that's the one I married.  And I remember telling Valerie, I was like, "Look I got this other woman," I won't say her name, "but she has told me that she will give me her undying love and affection and that she will make my life her life.  What's--what are you giving me?" And she went, "I'm not giving you any guarantees of anything, you know, this is it, I am what I am and that's--," and she was, you know, she hasn't gotten any less difficult, but I took Schwartz's advice, I don't regret it.  The other woman wrote nasty letters to Valerie, called her up and harassed her, and all sorts of other stuff, and she showed a side of herself that was not pleasant.  And so even if I hadn't gotten together with Valerie, I definitely would not have gotten together with this woman.  But that's how it happened.
Story_ID: 653628
Speaker 1: --Understand at this point, I wanna--who is on this--so E.F. Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.], who, who are your competitors on the street for public finance?  Salomon is--
Speaker 2: Salomon Brothers was number one.  Hutton was, you know, three or four, so.
Speaker 1: Who was--who was--
Speaker 2: Number two would been Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management].
Speaker 1: And who's, who's over at Merrill, was it?
Speaker 2: So, so at Salomon Brothers, if you're talking African Americans, there was a guy named Wardell Lazard who started his own firm [W.R. Lazard and Company], who I tried to merge with a million times.  There was a woman named Marianne Spraggins [HistoryMaker Marianne Camille Spraggins]--
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: --who eventually ran Wardell's firm and is now working at George Butcher's [George H. Butcher, III] firm [The BondFactor Company, LLC].  So those would've been the African Americans there.  There was also a guy by the name of Gordon [ph.], god I don't know Gordon's last name.  He was on the corporate finance side at Salomon Brothers and he got in trouble for mentioning how much money he made in a magazine, and they eventually fired him.  At Merrill Lynch there was a guy named Don Smart [Donald E. Smart] who was an exceptionally good looking guy.
Speaker 1: He went to law school with me.
Speaker 2: Did he really?
Speaker 1: Yeah, he ended up at Atlanta Life Insurance Company [sic. Atlanta Life Financial Group, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia].  Are you sure Don Smart, Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts]?
Speaker 2: Don Smart, Harvard Law School, cover of Black Enterprise magazine with a taxi cab without the driver (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's him, that's him.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, him.  He was there.  In fact, I have a picture of him around here somewhere for a deal that he and I worked on together.  Nice guy.  The other firms, Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] which had Garland Wood [Garland E. Wood]--
Speaker 1: Now (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Bear Stearns [Bear Stearns Companies, Inc.] had--no it wasn't Bear Stearns.  Credit Suisse [Credit Suisse Group AG]--First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] had a guy named Bill Hayden [William H. Hayden].
Speaker 1: And what about Fred Terrell [HistoryMaker Frederick Terrell]?
Speaker 2: Fred Terrell was at Credit Suisse First Boston, he was at First Boston, but he was more on the corporate mortgages side.  He wasn't the public finance guy.  Fred is a good fellow.  He's a, he's a--I think he's in my Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] chapter, I think he is.  So there was Bill, Bill was kind of a--Bill Hayden was probably more of the dean of us guys, 'cause he also, you know, he was a tech- we were all pretty technical guys.  So he was a technical banker and his clients just, you know.  If you didn't know he was African American, his clients didn't--he had like Wyoming, Montana, he did you know, Alabama and he, he had some weird clients, Maine, you know, just weird clients.  But I figured if they're working with Bill, they'll work with me.  So I just kind of followed him around.  And he was wi- a pretty generous guy with his time and his talent.  I'm trying to think of who else was out there right around when I was there.
Speaker 1: So at that point in time, Bill Lewis [HistoryMaker William M. Lewis, Jr.] was are--is not here and neither is Ray McGuire [HistoryMaker Raymond J. McGuire].  They're not here.
Speaker 2: No, they're not--they're not.
Speaker 1: This is--this is earlier?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you know, they came on the scene pretty--and they both were on the corporate side.  So Bill was Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management] on the corporate side.
Speaker 1: But Marianne was--she's probably the one who had the--had gone the further--right, she went the highest around that time, right or later?  'Cause I wouldn't call her technical, but she (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) She wasn't technical, she was a marketer--she was a marketer, yeah.  She wasn't a technical banker.  Neither was Don, Don was a marketer.  I--I'd say Bill, myself, Garland were technical in addition, you know, to marketing.  And Wardell was probably more of a marketing guy too.
Speaker 1: And what about--oh he's always talked about, he had his own firm [Daniels and Bell Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Travers Bell?
Speaker 1: Travers Bell, uh-huh.  So was Travis--were people looking up to him at that time?
Speaker 2: Very much so, so I, I looked at Travers and--at what he was doing and how he was doing it and I knew that it was not easy, it was a struggle.  But he was out there on his own, you know, out there and he was doing what I wanted to do.  The month that I decided to launch [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York], he died.  And I remember thinking, you know, this might be an opportunity for us to merge my new firm with his existing infrastructure, but his son [Darryl M. Bell] was an actor and his son didn't wanna do it.  And so the firm eventually closed down, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  But man, he was, he was really talented.
Story_ID: 653629
Speaker 1: Now are you, are you on the street [Wall Street, New York, New York] at all looking at Reginald Lewis [Reginald F. Lewis] and his, his deals?  I mean is that--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, is that, I don't wanna say factoring in, but he's doing what no one else--
Speaker 2: He was amazing.  So, I--when he did that deal I called him to congratulate him on doing it and you know, he--he--he basically said, "Look if there's a way that we can work you in on deals that I'm doing, I'm happy to do it."  Now, we never figured out a way to do it, but yeah, it was amazing when he did that.  First he did McCall's Patterns [McCall Pattern Company, Inc.] and--
Speaker 1: And Singer [ph.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He did--did--he did Singer or some--or--
Speaker 2: I don't remember Singer.
Speaker 1: I know he did--I don't know (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I know he did McCall.
Speaker 1: Oh he did McCall, I don't know why I'm thinking it was Singer all this time.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember Singer.
Speaker 1: I may be wrong.
Speaker 2: He did one other.  He did some tool company or something, and then he did TLC Beatrice [Beatrice Foods TLC; TLC Beatrice International Holdings, Inc.], which was like a big deal, huge, huge.
Speaker 1: It'd never been done before?
Speaker 2: Huge, huge.  I mean like blew people's minds.  I mean it was just like a mind blowing experience.
Story_ID: 653630
Speaker 1: And so, you know, there were definitely possibilities out there.  You know, when I started the firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York], and the firm just like took off like a rocket, I mean it just like.
Speaker 2: So you--so you op- can you tell me though why you always wanted to have your own?  See because this is the thing, most people, they're not thinking, but you've mentioned this several times, you know, how you've wanted to have your own?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm an entrepreneur.  It's what I am, you know.  I, I, I like starting firms, I never really liked running them all that much.  But I--it, it never occurred to me, you know, looking back at it, you know, I might wanna think about it.  But I looked at kind of the trades that I was getting and the second year that I was--I guess the second year that I was in the business I made a lot of money, but I kind of did the calculations, said yeah I'm only getting like a third of what I'm bringing in here.  I wasn't thinking about their overhead and everything else.  I was really well compensated.  I just always kept looking at the other 65 percent and thinking, you know, now I have my own firm and I'm, I'm happy if I bring 10 percent down.  But you know, it's--I never doubted that I would have my own business.  I wanted my own business and I wanted to be able to kind of call the shots and determine what I work on and what I don't work on.
Speaker 2: So you said Don [Donald E. Smart], he came in, you went--he came in at $5 million when you started?
Speaker 1: Scott Pierce, yeah, Scott, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Scott, yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I only had like--I think I put in--well, I didn't put in enough.  Without him I would've--it would've been really bad.
Speaker 2: Now Valerie [Beal's wife, Valerie Lancaster-Beal] comes in, does she help with the start or not?
Speaker 1: No, no.  Valerie was expecting my daughter.
Speaker 2: Okay, Erica [Erica Beal Barnhardt].
Speaker 1: Erica.  So, and Valerie was--she had been working at Citibank [Citibank, N.A.], and she then moved over to Drexel [Drexel Burnham Lambert, New York, New York] where she was working with Ken Glover [Kenneth Glover].  I don't know if you know Ken.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, I know Ken.  But Ken Glover is al- with Maynard, you know, Maynard Jackson? And--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, so that.
Story_ID: 653631
Speaker 1: Maynard [Maynard Jackson], his whole--he was very important in terms of black mayors I thi- in the public finance area, or that's what I'm told?
Speaker 2: He was vital.  The great story about Maynard is that he, you know, when he was doing Hartsfield Airport [William B. Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport; Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, Atlanta, Georgia] and doing the re- redevelopment of it, he wanted 30 percent of it to go to minority firms, 30 percent across the board, 30 percent of everything, the legal work, the financing, the concessions, everything, construction, jobs.  And people came back to him and said, "You know, Mr. Mayor we've tried this every way we can and we just can't do this.  It just cannot be done.  You cannot get that kind of 30 percent across the board stuff." And Maynard supposedly said, "Okay, you can't do it, you can't do it.  I appreciate your efforts and I appreciate you telling me about it."  He said, "Oh well we're gonna make every effort to try to have the highest minority participation possible."  He said, "You just told me you can't do this.  So if you can't do it, we're not gonna do it.  So, we're not gonna do anything with the airport, we're gonna stick with the airport we have."  They figured out a way to do it.  And so, yeah, Maynard's a hero.  Maynard's a great guy.  But honestly, as much as I like Maynard and I eventually ended up acquiring his company even though he and I tried to do that together while he was alive.  Yeah, we never were able to get it done alive.  Maynard was a big man with a big ego, and justifiably so in every case.  He asked what we could call it and I said, "We can call it Jackson Securities [Jackson Securities LLC], as far as I'm concerned we can do whatever you want."  But, you know, there was, you know.  So Maynard and I never got that done.
Story_ID: 653632
Speaker 1: The guy who really kind of helped me in so many ways was [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry.
Speaker 2: It's--you know, it's--you know, this is--I hear this with people who say this--he was very significant when it came to black business?
Speaker 1: Well, when it came to business that's for sure, but in my personal life as well.  Marion Barry is someone who I consider a mentor, a friend, and there is very little that I wouldn't do for Marion Barry.  Yeah, he--I think Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] and I had been only been married like two or three years, maybe, maybe.  I know Michael [Michael Beal] was here.  And I sat up a little business on the side with Dick's [Richard S. Locke] permission to develop multi-family housing, 'cause I wanted to do multi-family housing.  And I had two projects going down in the District of Columbia [Washington, D.C.].  The New Amsterdam Apartments [Washington, D.C.] up on 14th [Street] and Fairmont [Street], and the schoolhouse project up on 16th [Street].  And I had a business partner who has passed, but he basically set up a separate company and took the money that we had for building this project and it was really a lot of money.  I mean it was like a good significant chunk of my personal life savings.  And you know, telling my new bride that I had lost all of our money through some unscrupulous guy just sounded horrible.  So I went down to D.C., I happened to go to a party, Marion Barry was there.  I walk over to him, I didn't know him from a hole in the ground and I said, "Mr. Mayor, you know, I'm developing these two projects in the District and I've had a problem that the--my business partner took the money and I don't have the money to complete the project."  And he told me to go see a guy named John Moore [ph.], and he said, "Just tell him that I told you to come see him."  And I go over, I see this guy, Moore, and the guy tells me he's gonna make me a soft second loan to complete the project.  We completed the project and because the guy had stolen our money, I had to end up selling the project, but I got my money back.  And you know, Marion Barry never asked for one cent.  He never asked for a favor.  He didn't ask for anything.  He met me at that party and he did those things.  Now he happened to know Valerie, so maybe mentioning Valerie had helped because he knew Valerie, he knew their--her parents.  And I felt like a fool, you know.  And as the business grew, Marion, liked Wardell [Wardell Lazar], but when Wardell passed, a lot of that business came to us.  And so when Marion went to prison, I stayed in touch.  And when he came out of prison, he ran again, as you know.  But I always stayed in touch.  And so when Marion lost the last time, I approached a bunch of people who Marion had been very helpful and had made a lot of money for, and I said, "Why don't we all get together and endow a chair for him someplace so he can go write a book and just kind of do what he needs to do."  And no one wanted to do it, which just shocked me.  A couple of people said they didn't want to take the publicity hit for helping him out.  And so I said, "Well why don't we do it anonymously, you know.  And if we just put up a few thousand dollars each, we can come up with enough money to endow a chair for him to go study somewhere."  But no one wanted to do it.  So I said I would hire him, and I did--I hired him.  So he worked here, and he did great work while he worked here.  But politics was in his blood; and--
Speaker 2: Politics is in--you know, the, that--
Speaker 1: And he was so good at it.
Story_ID: 653633
Speaker 1: I'm telling you something.  I--this is a--this won't take long.  So I'm in Denver [Colorado] with Marion--we--we're on business.  We're going out to Denver to pursue business.  We meet with the mayor at there, [HistoryMaker] Wellington Webb.  And Wellington is really proud of the new airport [Denver International Airport, Denver, Colorado] that they're building, and he's like really proud.  And you know, when you got Marion with you, people roll out the carpet for the guy.  So, you know, no way if I'd gone there by myself that Wellington Webb would've taken me to the airport and shown me all around the airport, it's because Marion was with me.  So Marion's with me and there's an--there's this amazing mural in the airport, it was painted by an African American.  And Wellington was very proud of that, and so he wanted to take us over to meet the artist, who was there.  And as we approached, the artist put down his brush and he said, "[HistoryMaker] Marion Barry," he goes, "I owe everything to you."  He goes, "I got my start in arts in your Washington [Washington, D.C.] youth summer arts program, and if it hadn't been for you having that program and coming to visit us and praising the work that we did, I would've never had this passion for art."  And he goes, "I just really wanna thank you personally."  And he goes, "What, what brings you here?" And so Marion said, "Well I'm here with the mayor," and the guy turns around to me and he goes, "good to meet you Mr. Mayor."  I and I go, "I'm not the mayor, he is" (laughter).  But he knew Marion Barry and where--wherever we went, people would invariably come up to Marion Barry and say how much he meant to them, but that they were in some program or something that happened in Washington or their mother or father--people would call up their spouses and get them to come from work to come meet and shake his hand.  I mean people like him, I like him.  I, I, I, you know, and a couple of people had asked me to, you know, get rid of him when he worked for me and they said basically if I didn't get rid of him they weren't gonna do business with me.  And they didn't.  But I just--I have a very emotional spot in my heart for that man.
Speaker 2: Well, he did a lot for the black--I mean he did a lot.  You know, in terms of be- knowing how to be a good politician for the--for the black community.
Speaker 1: And he was one credit away from getting his master's [degree] in chemistry--
Speaker 2: I know!
Speaker 1: --one credit, okay.  And the man is brilliant.  And you know, you know, he's got--he's got--he had his demons, okay.
Speaker 2: But he needed like that chair position that you were mentioning.  I wish that could've happened because when the problem with black politicians often they don't--they wanna be pol- they have no place to go and it's just--I want to enlarge the focus on what is a public servant, so there're different pathways.
Speaker 1: I tried to convince him to stick with me.  I know what he makes as a politician, I know what he was making as a banker and he was making a lot more money, but it's not--that's not his thing, that's not his thing.  And that's why when the government tried to get him for taking bribes or all that stuff, that's not him, that's just not who he is.  I mean so, they had to get him on something else, 'cause they could not get him on that, 'cause it's just not what he.
Speaker 2: Well he, I think he just likes the whole process--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --you know.  And I'm telling you, it's har- it's like being an entertainer.  I don't know, you know, you have that audience, it's very seductive (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, no I couldn't understand it, but it made total sense to him.
Story_ID: 653634
Speaker 1: So your--so who--so you come on, let's talk about who else is starting firms?  Before you, are, is Napoleon Brandford [HistoryMaker Napoleon Brandford, III]?
Speaker 2: Grigsby Brandford [Grigsby Brandford and Company] was a firm.
Speaker 1: They've already--they were already started (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were already there--they were already--
Speaker 1: Who else was?
Speaker 2: So, it was--it was Wardell Lizard, Grigsby Branford--
Speaker 1: Pryor, McClendon [Pryor, McClendon, Counts and Co., Inc.]?
Speaker 2: Pryor, McClendon was definitely there.  Daniels and Bell [Daniels and Bell Inc.] but he, he had just died.  There was a firm called United Daniels [United Daniels Capital Corporation], which is Willie Daniels [Willie E. Daniels] from Daniels and Bell had set up his own firm.  And then there was one other firm, I'm trying to remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: Later comes Chris Williams [HistoryMaker Christopher Williams], right?
Speaker 2: Chris was later, yeah.  Chris came later.  Jim Reyonolds [James Reynolds, Jr.] came later.
Speaker 1: Later, Jim was later.  Isn't he much later (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Not much later, but later, yeah but not much later.  I'm gonna say probably, 'cause I met Jim through Donna Sims Wilson, so Donna was at Pryor, McClendon.  Jim probably came ten years, maybe '93 [1993], somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Afterwards, right?  Right, that's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah.  About '93 [1993] somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: Okay, I don't know.
Story_ID: 653635
Speaker 1: What are you finding about the business; and let's talk about the first ten years before others enter in, you know, what those first ten years are like--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --and what are the significant deals that you do?
Speaker 2: Sure, sure.  So, I found two things about the business, the first was really, really, really frustrating.  And that was that I started this business with eight other people, some of whom I'd known beforehand, some of whom I didn't know.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: One of whom was a woman named Diana Taylor [Diana L. Taylor].  So when I started the business [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York], very much like the way I went at a--I see a pattern here that I didn't see before.  Very much like the way I wanted to get married when I was leaving college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  One of the things I wanted when I started the business was I wanted a woman as my partner, preferably a white female.  And so I asked a few people if they knew any really talented female investment bankers.  And I was given three names.  And the first person I approached was Diana Taylor.  I said, "Look, you don't know me," blah, blah, blah, "but would you have lunch with me at--," I think I chose Tavern on the Green [New York, New York], yeah that's what I did, chose Tavern on the Green.  "So could we have lunch at Tavern on the Green?"  And I--I'd written the business plan for the firm when I was in business school [Stanford Graduate School of Business, Stanford, California], so I had the business plan already.  And I had also a one page schematic of what I wanted to do with the business, what lines of business I wanted to be in and everything else.  And I remember showing it to her, and I said, "I'd like you to be my business partner in this, I really would like you to be my partner."  And I said, "I think our combination would be really incredible quite frankly."  And she goes, "Yeah."  I said 'cause you know at the time there weren't minority firms with technical bankers, they just weren't, they were mostly marketer guys, and they basically took a piece of the action, but they weren't capable of running deals.  And I said, "Look, I've run hundreds of million dollar deals, and you've run hundreds of million dollar deals, and we have excellent reputations in the business, and so that combination where we're keeping 65 percent and it could be amazing, you know, the two of us."  And then there was another woman by the name of Karen Valenstein, who I'd known from Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.], and I asked her to join as well.  So I sit there with two--and Diana signed up.  So Diana and I ran the business.  And just really smart--I mean like off the page smart.  She's like a--I found out stuff about her that just blew my mind, she's just an incredible human being, and exceptionally successful now.
Story_ID: 653636
Speaker 1: But, you know, the, the two frustrating things that I found were that a lot of the people we hired--remember we [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] started in '88 [1988], there had been a financial--
Speaker 2: Meltdown.
Speaker 1: Right, and so Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] had gone out of business, which was one reason--
Speaker 2: They just blew up, they didn't just go out of business.  They--what ha--
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well two things happened to Hutton.  One, they were very aggressive in cash management and so--
Speaker 2: It's been--these are the--
Speaker 1: Check kiting.
Speaker 2: Right, check kiting, but wasn't it the derivative (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No, no, wasn't derivatives.
Speaker 2: Wasn't derivatives, wasn't derivatives, okay.
Speaker 1: Wasn't derivatives, wasn't derivatives.  They were kiting checks.  They noticed that when they deposited checks in small banks they got credit for the money right away and that they didn't have to cover that, so they could interest credit in two places.  They could get in the small banks that they put the money in and since they didn't have the checks to cover it, they could basically move funds over to cover checks later.  And some--occasionally they had some bouncing checks.  What, what really took Hutton down were two bits of hubris.  The U.S. attorney [Albert R. Murray Jr.] assigned to the case was an African American, I don't know his name.  But, he was going up against Hutton's white shoe law firms and they basically thought he was an idiot.  And they, they would not--they wouldn't cooperate with him, they were dismissive of him, they did all--everything you could possibly do to piss somebody off in power, they did.  And so when it came time for them to admit to their wrongdoing, rather than let them plead guilty to a single misdemeanor count the way it would happen today, or having pay a fine, but nobody'd be charged, he charged the firm criminally with two thousand felony counts of wire fraud, which they plead guilty to and paid, I think, not a lot of money by today standards, but I think it was $50 million.  But that was the end of the firm.  That was really, that was '86 [1986] and the firm limped along, and then the financial crisis came and the firm blew up.  We just ran out of capital at Hutton.
Story_ID: 653637
Speaker 1: I went to Lehman Brothers [Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.], 'cause I basically, you know, I had a young wife [Valerie Lancaster-Beal].  I was still--I was planning every minute at Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] to start my business.  But then I had a young wife, pregnant with our second child [Erica Beal Barnhardt].  I went to Lehman Brothers when Lehman acquired Hutton's assets.  I had a good friend there who, you know, took me in.  And I remember going in and saying I'm not staying long, you know, 'cause, 'cause when I got there it was like starting over.  I had--you know, I had gone up the chain at Hutton and I was pretty close to the president, you know, the chairman and the CEO.  And at Lehman I didn't know--I didn't know anybody who ran the firm.  So I thought I don't wanna go through this again.  So I talked to Diana [Diana L. Taylor], we started the firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] and you know, the two bad things that we found, was that a number of people that we had join our firm didn't join because they believed in the cause or anything else, they needed a job and they weren't really--they didn't really want to work that hard.  They didn't have contacts, they just didn't, they were looking for a port in the storm.  And that has happened to me more than once where, you know, the most recent meltdown I got some really talented people in here who just needed a job 'til things cooled over.  But they needed--they needed a job, and they weren't a hard worker--they weren't--they weren't.  And the other thing that was more frustrating was that, it was like a scene out of the 'Watermelon Man.'  I had--last year run a $300 million deal as the lead banker for an insurer.  Diana had run a $400 million deal as the lead banker for an insurer.  I'd done it at Hutton, she'd done it at DLJ [Donaldson Lufkin and Jenrette, New York, New York], okay.  Now we start up our firm.  We take off their uniforms, put on our uniforms and suddenly we become idiots.  And no one is comfortable that we can really run a deal, and they're not really sure that we can really run a deal and they're gonna put us down in this low, low bracket where we can't make any real money.  And we bring them ideas, but no one wants to hear our ideas.  They can't hear--they can't--it's as if they can't hear what we are saying because our faces are screaming at them so loud.  And it was ju- it was like, "Chris [ph.] we just--I ran it--I ran this deal for you, you know, I put this together."  "Well, you know, you know, nobody gets fired for hiring IBM [International Business Machines Corporation], you know, nobody gets fired for that.  We're choosing GM [General Motors Corporation; General Motors Company], nobody gets fired for choosing Xerox [Xerox Corporation], unh-uh.  But you know, I don't know, you know, it's different."  And so that was a rude awakening that what I thought was gonna be kind of a falling forward because I had all these clients.  And actually it took almost a year and a half before we got a senior managed deal.  And then, it came from Frank Borges [Francisco L. Borges].  And I remember telling Frank, I said, "Look we'll do any deal except resource recovery.  We can do anything you want other than a resource recovery deal."  And he gave us a resource recovery deal.  And I said, "Frank, you know, didn't I say anything other than resource recovery." And he goes, "Well do you always wanna say that?"  And I thought, well, no, I guess not.  And he says, "Well who else is gonna give you a resource recovery deal?  So now you can say any deal, I'll run any deal including resource recovery."  So we did that and that was our first senior managed deal for Frank Borges, who is A Better Chance person.  And you know, but after a while, slowly, surely we began to get deals.
Story_ID: 653638
Speaker 1: And then business just (makes sound) took off and you know, we [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] started getting more senior managed business.  Chicago [Illinois] was a great place for getting business, you know.  Jane Byrne was amazing.  We didn't do so well under Harold Washington, but we did better with Street and we did amazing with Daley [Richard M. Daley], Daley was just off the chart.  And you know, so the business picked up.  I started, because I like starting businesses, I started an asset management company with the help of Scott Pierce.  I started a leasing company.  I started--I, I acquired an insurance company in Africa.  I did all of those things and I, I just thought, it's just--there's nothing that we can't do.  This is like '91 [1991] or '92 [1992], and then I decided you know what, I'm gonna break into the corporate finance business.  Never been done, nobody's ever done it, I'm gonna do it.  And I hired some corporate finance bankers.  I hired some research people.  I got a front page article in the business section of The New York Times about breaking Wall Street's lucite ceiling ['Piercing Wall Street's "Lucite Ceiling,"' Diana B. Henriques], because I was gonna break into corporate finance, I was gonna make it the bulge bracket plus one.  And I couldn't get arrested in corporate finance, I got nothing.  I was totally completely shut out of the business.  And I couldn't even get in the syndicates.  Which I just, I just never anticipated that.  I just didn't anticipate it.  And we spent all our time--millions of dollars just going around trying to break into that business.  And it just wasn't possible.  And eventually I licked my wounds, got out of that business.  Because of the hits that I'd taken there, I had to sell off a couple of our companies, you know, it was just kind of horrible.  But eventually, when I hired [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry I got into a couple of corporate deals.  Not because of me, and honestly it was a couple of white guys who said that they really liked Marion Barry, so they put us in their deals.  And eventually Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson] got involved with the Rainbow PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] project.
Speaker 2: And, and the Wall Street [New York, New York] project, right, right (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Right, and the world changed.
Story_ID: 653639
Speaker 1: In 1990--where are we, 19--?
Speaker 2: So, I tried to break in in '91 [1991].  I abandoned the break in in '93 [1993].  We're [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] only five years old, okay.  But we were--we were roaring, I mean it was just like (gestures) and I remember telling my, my wife, I said, "You know, there's really nothing we can't do, you know, we could really, whatever business we wanna get into, we can get into it and we can do whatever we really want to.  You know, we could get into the real estate development business or we can get into the media business, or we could just stay here and run asset management and financial advisory," 'cause our asset management company was growing real fast too.  And you know, for I can't remember whether it was Christmas or my birthday, but one of those days she gave me a little needlepoint pillow that said don't confuse brains with a bull market.  And she said, "You know, we're in the middle of a bull market and everything's going up."  And she goes, "If you keep putting out," 'cause I think we had almost 280 employees with the life insurance company and everything else, she says, "if you keep taking all this--all of these things on, when the crash comes," she said, "not if, but when the correction comes, it's gonna be like musical chairs and you're not gonna have a chair."  So I thought about it and I really didn't pay much more attention to it.  And then I happened to be watching one of these financial shows at night and there was a guy named Alan Abelson, he worked at Barron's.  And he was talking about--they did a piece on young people working on Wall Street [New York, New York] and they--he was showing some guys who had Ferraris, Porches, and they were like living large.  And you know, they talked about some guy who was twenty-eight years old and he made $28 million, and you know, he was, you know.  And they turned to this guy, Alan Abelson, and they said, "What do you think of these guys?"  And he said, "You know, a lot of these guys in about eighteen months, you're gonna be saying, 'oh waiter,' and those guys are gonna be coming over."  He said, "Because they're gonna get blown out."  He said, "They're living beyond their means, they're highly leveraged," blah, blah, blah, blah.  "Their, their, their dividends aren't covering their margin interest on their accounts.  And what they don't understand is that they're living off margined money and when the stocks go down, that margin debt is gonna stay there and they're gonna have to cover it.  And if they can't cover it, there's not gonna be a lot of warm fuzzy feelings coming from their margin brokers.  They're gonna claim everything they got and that car, and the house and the boat, and all this other stuff" (makes sound).  So, I thought well, you know, I ought to look and see where I am.  And I looked, and I was like holy moly, I'm overleveraged.  I mean like I'm major league overleveraged.  And so over time, I just sort of started working it down and working it down and surely enough Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] was right.  When the correction came, boom everything we owned was like (gestures)--down, below where our margin--our debt was--where, where it had been.  And had I not done that, I think we'd got blown, got blown away.
Speaker 1: So she was right, oh.
Speaker 2: She's very smart, she's very smart.  She only made one mistake that I can tell (laughter).  She ain't getting out of that one (laughter).
Story_ID: 653640
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So what happened then?  So you--so when--the melt--you're talking about the meltdown in the mi- in the late '90s [1990s]--
Speaker 2: Nineties [1990s], late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause we've had two.
Speaker 2: Well, we've had more than two.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.
Speaker 2: Right?  So we had the one in '81 [1981], there was one in '81 [1981], there was one in like '87 [1987], there was one in like '98 [1998], there was a minor correction in '04 [2004], and then there was a big correction in '08 [2008] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In '08 [2008].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was a big one.
Speaker 1: So you were, were you able to get it--get--you're saying that you went down, so had you not done that you would've been gone?
Speaker 2: I would've been out--I would've been out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You'd been history.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would've been out.
Speaker 1: So what did you do to get it down?  What did you divest and?
Speaker 2: I sold some of our [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] companies.  I sold the life insurance company.  I sold the asset management company.  I absolved the leasing company.  I got out of the corporate business 'cause we were--we were getting no--and we were writing research that people were praising.  I hired some II research types and you know, 'cause people said, "Well you don't have research," so we went out and got research.  "Well you know, we need you to have five years' worth of research tracker."  Well, you know, we don't.  We're never gonna--we're gonna have that five years from now (laughter).  But, so yeah and then I on the personal side just de-levered.  Started paying down debt and you know, just tried to get back to the things my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] taught me.
Speaker 1: And now did--was Diana [Diana L. Taylor] still on [at M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] at this point?
Speaker 2: So Diana had two tours of duty here.  She stayed on for a while.  You know, she and I were both working like dogs and it took a toll on both of our personal lives, it really did.  And I think she suffered a little bit more than I did.  And so she left partially to kind of rectify.
Speaker 1: She left what year?
Speaker 2: I didn't see a picture of her in the '85 [1985]--sorry in the '95 [1995] picture.  We used to always take a picture, so.  I didn't see her in '95 [1995], so I'm gonna assume she left around '94 [1994].  And she went to work for a firm called Smith Mitchell [sic. Muriel Siebert and Co., Inc.] that was out in Seattle [Washington].  And I'm not making this up, but when Diana left, 'cause Diana was really the inside person and the inside staff.  As I said, I like starting business, I don't really like running them all that much.  So Diana was really running the business and she was keeping everybody, you know, moving in the right direction.  She had been a coxswain at Dartmouth [Dartmouth College, Hanover, New Hampshire].  She was the first female coxswain at Dartmouth.  And that's on a crew team (gestures), I don't know if you know.  So, she's really good at getting people to row in the same direction at the same time.  And I missed that when she left and I didn't realize how much I would miss it when she left.  And so I tried to convince her to come back, I wasn't all that successful.  So then, I bought the company that she worked at.  And I bought it with the understanding that she would come back, that she was part of the deal.  And you know, she did for a while and then she just said, this isn't what she wanted to do.  So that's not what she wanted to do.  As much as she enjoyed everything, she didn't wanna do that.
Story_ID: 653641
Speaker 1: And so I found--do you know Raoul, who Raoul Carroll [Raoul L. Carroll] was?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, Raoul Carroll was a--he's a brother.  He was president of Ginnie Mae [Government National Mortgage Association], he's deceased now.  And I went to talk to him and I said, "I really need you to come run, run, run my company 'cause Diana's [Diana L. Taylor] gonna leave."  And he was telling me how, you know, these guys at First Boston [First Boston Corporation, New York, New York] are calling him all day for advice and this guy at Goldman Sachs [Goldman Sachs Group, Inc.] does- doesn't make a move without talking to him and he's probably gonna do one of those things.  And I said, "Well listen brother, you know, what I think is you think they're kissing your ass, but they're kissing the chair, all right.  Your ass happens to be in the way, all right."  And I said, "When you take your butt out of that chair, they're not gonna talk to you anymore."  I said, "I just know these guys, they're just not gon- they think you're great, they think you're jokes are funny, they like your advice, they call you about their kids, I know all that.  But when you get out of that chair, they're not gonna call you anymore."  You know, maybe I was right, maybe I was wrong, I don't know.  But, Raoul came and he ran the company [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] and he's the guy who oversaw the African investments, and he did a lot of other things for us and did a really good job while he was here.  And then he decided that he really wanted to go off and do more stuff in Africa, and quite frankly I was sick of Africa, because--
Speaker 2: Africa's complicated?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I just didn't--I did not like it.  I had to go to the--to the state department [U.S. Department of State] to just kind of get my basic money out, and I still haven't gotten all the money that I've put in Africa out.  And I just, you know, the returns are high, but there's a reason they're high, because the risk is high.
Speaker 2: So people are looking at it again now seriously, but--
Speaker 1: I will not, I will not.  I, you know, you never write off a whole continent, so I've written off like three of them, ju- just to be fair.  I'm gonna stick with the good USA, where I know the law, I kind of know how things work and I know that if I drop this it's gonna fall that way.  So I'm gonna off to the side or go that way.  So, Raoul did that and then after Raoul left, I tried running it for a while by myself and that wasn't good.  I really like doing deals and going out and getting deals, and stuff like that.  I don't really like the--and--and because of my attention span one of two things happened.  So either I gloss over things or I focus so intently on them I can't get anything done.  Like I might go through the phone bill and go through every single line, and that's not good.  So, Stan Grayson [Stanley E. Grayson] who had been deputy mayor under Koch [Ed Koch], was working at Prudential [Prudential Insurance Company of America; Prudential Financial, Inc.], he was running public finance.  And I would go to his office, probably, I don't know, once a month or so, sort of like that pattern from high school [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut]--from college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  And I'd say, "Look, I really want you to come over here and run this thing" (laughter).  And you know, he would (makes noise), "Why should I do that, that's a headache," blah, blah, blah.  And I was like, "Man, stop being so selfish come over here and run this thing."  And eventually I talked him into it back in 2000, so we've been together for twelve years, yeah, yeah.  And that's really, I think, that allowed us to kind of weather some storms that other people didn't make it through.  So you talk about those firms, that I, that start--that were around when I started, they're not here.
Speaker 2: They're not--they're not here? They're gone (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They're all gone.
Story_ID: 653642
Speaker 1: I mean and you know what I al- found so interesting either you were offering to purchase or you were wanting to merge?
Speaker 2: Every time with almost every one of them that went under.
Speaker 1: Now why, why--what do you think is, you know, you had mentioned with Maynard Jackson was just ego, but has that?
Speaker 2: So, having done this more than a few times, I could say that within about a week you could work out the economics of a deal.  So if, you know, XYZ firm, minority firm, and my firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] wanted to merge.  We could look at the numbers and in a week's time, we could come out with economically what makes this deal work.  We could never figure out egonomically what makes the deal work.  And I'm not just talking about I'm not blaming other people, I'd say that's the same for myself is kind of figuring out how do you handle egonomics of a trade.  You know, what is my role, who am I, how is this going to look.  And so, on many occasions I've tried to put this together with other firms and most guys don't.  And so what tends to happen in our business is very much like what happens to the politicians that you talk about.  They had nowhere else to go.  And so, you know, most guys in this business, their exit strategy is either jail or death, okay.  So guys go to jail or they die.  And once they go to jail or die, the business dies.  And you know, quite frankly I had always assumed that eventually we'd grow the business and sell it to a bank.  That's the model that I've always seen.  But most banks will tell you, "Oh no you guys, this is an MBE [minority business enterprise] and so there's no--it has no economic value and because with that status it has no value."  And I go, "What, what are you talking about?" I just did a deal today, $61 million deal.  It was an idea that we came up with, with the help of some lawyers, they had nothing, I don't think, actually I'm positive with these guys, some of those guys don't even know it's an MBE firm while we were on that trade.  I mean I, I remember.  We'd come up with an idea for financing leases, like securitizing leases.  There's--this is done now routinely, but we were the first to do this commercial lease securitization.  We're the first to do it.  A guy at Kidder Peabody [Kidder, Peabody and Company] called me up and said, "Look, there's a deal over here at Kidder.  We've been struggling with it, I can't get kind of the institutional will to get it done.  I think you guys could get this done.  I would like to send the people over to you to transfer the deal to you to get it done."  So, great.  We didn't realize how hard this deal was to do, we just didn't realize it.  And we got it done, and I remember some professor from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] or something called up and said, "Hey bud, what did you--how did you guys structure around this?"  We, we didn't even know about that problem, are you kidding me.  We just, we just did it.  So, you know, we did--I almost said the name of the company, that wouldn't have been fair.
Story_ID: 653643
Speaker 1: So we did a number of things for that company securitizing leases.  So basically the company didn't have credit, but their tenants were credit worthy, and so we securitized the tenant lease and raised capital for the developer company.  It was a great structure, it worked really well for them.  And I think we did probably four or five deals for them and we never met the people.  These were all done over the phone, it was no big thing and luckily we didn't have the Internet back then.  So, we, we did all these deals and then the general counsel for the company said, "Hey I'm gonna be in town, I'm in New York [New York].  You know, we got a much bigger deal, we're gonna do a $90 million deal.  I'd like to stop by your offices and just shake your hands and say, you know, hello and thanks, you know, it's just fortuitous I'm gonna be in New York."  So said, "Sure, come on by."  The guy comes in the office, you know, all pleasant stuff.  And he goes, "Is this a minority owned firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York]?"  And I said, "Yeah, yeah," I said, "you know is that a problem?"  He goes, "No, no, no, that's great."  He goes, "Are you kidding me, that means, you know, you know, people often ask us if we're working with MBE [minority business enterprise] firms and all this other stuff."  He goes, "That's great."  Well, whatever he said when he went back, they decided that we, we couldn't handle their deals anymore, that the deals were getting too big for us.  And they were gonna move the business to another firm, a majority owned firm.  And in my heart, I believe it's because of that.  So, you know, that's kind of the rude awakening that I hadn't expected that once you come into this lane it's hard to get out of the lane.  And, you know, I've seen one firm do it, but I haven't seen any others.
Story_ID: 653644
Speaker 1: So, let me ask you, you made it through 2008, so what--what have the 2000s meant to you, you know, so far, with the--and what 'cause you expanded some contractions, right, the markets that you were (unclear) market--the markets that you were in?  So tell me what--so Stan Grayson [Stanley E. Grayson] comes on?
Speaker 2: Right.  So Stan comes on [to M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York].  I said I liked starting businesses, right.  So, I had this weird stupid idea of setting up a electronic bond exchange, 'cause right now bonds are traded by voice.  They're traded today the same way that they were in the 1920s, by voice.  Now we have a few computers out there and we can do all this stuff, but it's mostly a guy talking on the phone to another guy talking on the phone.  And I had this idea of why don't we make the muni [municipal] bond market more like the corporate bond market, or like the stock market where things are traded electronically.  And it's a harder issue, because on the stock market there are probably five thousand different securities, companies that trade.  In the corporate bond market there may be eighteen to twenty thousand.  In the muni market, there are 3.2 million.  So it's a much more difficult market to computerize.  But I'd hired a company to computerize all this and got everything going.  And I had it up and rolling.  I then went around the street trying to get people to buy in.  You know, that was during the height of the internet craze, getting people to buy in.  And I had two firms that expressed an interest.  J.P. Morgan [JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and Morgan Stanley [Morgan Stanley Wealth Management], both expressed an interest in buying in.  And there had been another brother who had been working on something similar, but not identical, it wasn't in the muni space, and he blew up for whatever reason, and ended up going to jail.  And that made it a little more difficult for me to get people, like look at it seriously.  But, to my shock and amazement, one of those two firms made me a cash offer for the business.  And it was a significant cash offer, it was at least five to eight times what I put in.  And the guy explained it to me.  He was like, "You should take this offer." And I was like, "Well what percentage of it will I own?"  And he went, "Zero, we're gonna by 100 percent, we're gonna buy 100 percent of it."  And I said, "Well, you know, no 'cause, you know, I really have a higher evaluation on it then--," and it's sort of like what I did with Dick [Richard S. Locke], that's not the number I had in mind.  And he said, "Look, I, you know, we really like you here, we think you got something here.  We could build our own and it probably would take us six months and we could probably do it for less money, but you've got something that's up and operating, it works."  He said, "I, I, I think you should take the offer."  And I said, "You know, I just don't feel comfortable about it," blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  He said, "Sleep on it and come back in the morning and you know," he said, "it's a really good offer Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal], take it."  So, next day I didn't ev- I didn't even call him, you know, I figured well he's gonna call me and sweeten the offer or something, or give me, you know, some percentage of, of the business 'cause it's my idea and you know, I've put a lot of money into this.  And Stan was on board and he kind of said, "Okay well, you know, you know," he said, "I'm with you whatever you decide, you know, if you decide to take it or not take it.  But it is a lot of money."  And I, I said, "You know, Stan, I think they're trying to rip us off, you know, I just think they're trying to rip us off."
Story_ID: 653645
Speaker 1: So the guy calls me back.  He goes, "Bernard [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal]," he said, "I was thinking about this last night."  He said, "You know," he said "you've got a, a waterwheel."  He said, "What you really have is a waterwheel.  You have something that takes water, energy and coverts it to electricity."  He said, "That's what you have."  He said, "But your problem is you don't have any streams and we've got the water, we've got the streams, and we can build our own waterwheel, but you can't build a stream."  And he said, "You really have to think of it that way."  And he goes, "I'm telling you, you know, I'm, I'm telling you these guys are not gonna let you own a piece of it, it's just not gonna happen.  We don't, we don't invest in companies, we don't buy pieces of companies, we buy the whole thing, and it's all or nothing, okay."  And I said, "Well I guess it's nothing."  And I think, oh man do I regret that, but I said, "I guess it's nothing man," I said, "it's nothing.  I'm, I'm just gonna--I'm gonna try and figure out another way to do this."  And you know, I really only had two people who were interested in it and, and one made an offer.  And there's a saying out there that your best offer--your first offer is your best offer.  And I didn't take my best offer, and so maybe about four months later I came back to the guy.  They had already gotten their prototype up, it wasn't quite working.  But it was damn close and it was much more sophisticated than mine.  And I asked him, "Well what if I put my software in, what kind of deal could you offer me."  And he said, "You know, I don't think we can get a deal for you period.  But I'll check."  And he came back and they said, "Well, you know, you can give us the software and we will give you 1 percent of whatever we make as a result of that software," which was nothing.  And the guy said, "It's only, you know, it's not gonna be anything."  And you know, he said, "It's really just a way of you saving face so you can say that you sold it to us," but he said, "honestly we're not gonna use it, we don't care about it."  And that company went bust.
Speaker 2: Their company?
Speaker 1: My company went bust.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that company that I had went bust.  Couldn't, couldn't, couldn't--he was right, he was absolutely right.  Now it hasn't, it hasn't taken off the way I thought it would.  There've been two or three companies that have tried to get into that business, nobody has really gotten traction because there's, there's really a vested interest in keeping the business less than transparent and not so computerized.  People don't want that.  They want--they like the lack of transparency.  They're making money off the lack of transparency.  They like the fact that you don't know how much your bonds are worth and if you wanna know you've gotta call your broker.  They don't want you to be able to look on a screen and figure out what your bond is worth.  They don't want, so.  That one, you know, Stan [Stanley E. Grayson] helped push down.  I'd gotten into kind of a movie production business for a while, Stan got us out of that.  I had decided that I was going to just spend more time working on like rap music, 'cause my kids had kind of gotten me into the rap music, so I produced a rap music piece for Keith Sweat.  I, you know, this thing didn't work out with the Internet thing, but I had decided I wanted to get into the golf tee times online.  We were well ahead of our time, unfortunately.  That's finally beginning to come around, but I invested in that.  And Stan just took us back to focus on this.  And you know, we ha- you know, sometimes I wish I hadn't gotten off those sidelines and just stuck in the lane.  But I am easily distracted.
Story_ID: 653646
Speaker 1: So where are you--well maybe because--well you also spoke just a little bit of limitations placed on minorities or MBE [minority business enterprise], the perception of the MBE so you want--
Speaker 2: But that's changing though.  I mean--
Speaker 1: No it's changing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is changing.  So there's a couple of things that are--that have--that happened, that is like I wish, I wish someone would write about this.  You talked about writing a book.  I wish someone would write about this.  So, when the crash happened in '08 [2008], a very strange thing happened in that the bigger firms were paralyzed, they were like deers in the headlights, they couldn't move.  And there was a good, I'm gonna say six weeks, but it could've been three months where most of the financing in the municipal sector was being done by minority firms, or most of the big deals.  And so I remember before Bear Stearns [Bear, Stearns and Company, Inc.] went under, we were on a deal with them and the--there, there had been those rumors that they were teetering and it was for an issuer in Texas, or was it Connecticut I can't even remember.  It was Texas or Connecticut.  But it was for an issuer.  It was Texas--in Texas.  And they weren't comfortable with Bear Stearns, and so they were gonna flip the deal to us.  They were gonna take from them and give it to us.  And they had worked all this out with me on the phone that, "Listen, we're gonna call up Bear Stearns and unless they can guarantee us that they can get this deal done, we're gonna give it to you."  Well, they called Bear Stearns, the guy on the other end of the line was a guy who I really, you know, he and I had butted heads a few times, but once I needed a favor from him and even though I didn't ask him for it, Stan [Stanley E. Grayson] did.  He didn't hesitate, to help us out of a ti- tight jam.  He just--I always thought the guy couldn't stand us, but he just did the right thing and helped us out.  And that that just kind of struck me that he did that.  And so he said, "Look I'm giving you my assurance that we can get this done that, you know, we're very close to working something out with J.P. Morgan [JPMorgan Chase and Co.] where they're gonna guarantee our positions.  We're a day away from getting this done, the deal is next week, don't change horses now," and that was supposed to be my cue to say, you know, we stand ready to take over this deal and we--you know, we'll vouch for Bear Stearns.  Instead what I said was, "You know, I've know this guy for a thousand years, if he says that they got the way to get this done, that's good enough for me, and if it's not the case, we can do something again next week."  And that was one instance.  But then, you know, like there was--there's a major firm that was working on a New York City [New York, New York] deal that, you know, they just, the city just wanted them to underwrite 25 million in bonds, and they said no.  They walked away, they said, "We're not underwriting 25 million--we're not underwriting five million, we're not underwriting bonds."  And so we ended up doing the deal, $500 million deal.  And Siebert [Siebert Cisneros Shank and Co., LLC] started doing deals, and Loop [Loop Capital Markets, LLC] started doing deals, and Ramirez [Ramirez Asset Management Inc.].  And so there was that one period for six to--weeks to maybe three months, where all of the large deals were being done minor--minority firms.  It was like something out of 'Breaker Morant' you know, where you know, they're now using you and you know, once everything cleared up they kind of forgot that they used us.  But, you know, we ran a billion-three sixty, $1,000,360,000 deal as the lead, it's the largest deal ever done by a minority firm.  Largest deal done in New York by a minority firm as well.  But we also had the tightest spread to the benchmark of any deal done, which I kind of like.  And you know, we routinely run large deals, others run large deals.  You know, it's been tougher, you know, tougher--for us, I can't say for everyone, but tougher for us.
Story_ID: 653647
Speaker 1: You know, I did tell you that most guys, their exit strategy is prison or death.  I really would like to be the first guy to leave my firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] and have it continue after me in some iteration.  And whether that's through a merger with a younger, smarter, stronger group or whether, you know, it's that my son [Michael Beal] or someone from his generation comes and takes things over, those would all be good things.  I say my son, because my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt] really doesn't have an interest in the business.  But, you know, somebody like that--that would be my goal to see the firm continue after I step off the stage, you know.  And the--I hear the music warming up for me to get the hell off the stage.  So, you know, who knows, I hadn't thought of it I might go call up somebody and go see them and say, hey look, you know, I don't--we don't really know each other, but I want you to run my company (laughter).
Speaker 2: It's worked (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's worked before, it has worked before.
Speaker 2: So now let me ask, what is your--you--I mean you really--you have what you wanted to do you did.  So, I'm not saying all of it, but you were very, not all of it--
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, no I didn't do all of it because I got sidetracked.  I got sidetracked, you know, my personal life had some issues so that kind of took me off track for a while.  But business, at one point in time I just thought it was on automatic pilot and businesses are not on automatic pilot, they just are not.  And so I really, don't know, maybe about six or seven years ago I basically retired.  I was just off playing golf, having fun, you know, just goofing off, not really coming in, you know, just to spin the wheel once in a while.  But, you know, so I did not get the business where I wanted it to--if you looked at the original business plan, there were a lot more aspects of it that should have worked, could have worked, I just didn't, yeah.
Speaker 2: I know--I mean there's--there's been a cataclysmic change in the world in tho- in that time period that was a lot of--out of a lot of people's control.
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 653648
Speaker 1: But let me ask you this: when you look at the history of the black investment banker, and especially black investment banking firms, what do you think people will say of that history?  And when would you even measure that history?  What would you say--?
Speaker 2: I wouldn't take a measurement for another ten years.  But I think what people will say is that here are firms that started with a really--almost, if you look at almost all of us, we have one strong entrepreneur who is really most of the revenue and the driving force behind the firm.  And if that one entrepreneur is taken off track for any reason, any reason, the firm suffers and that what we have failed to do.  Although there're two guys who I think are really doing it--that I think are really doing it.  I think that Jim Reynolds [James Reynolds, Jr.] and Suzanne Shank are really spreading out kind of the old--and Chris Williams [HistoryMaker Christopher Williams], so three, spreading out kind of the old Wall Street [New York, New York] partnership idea where people have a vested interest in running discrete portions of the business.  And people are incentivized to do that.  The rest of us, myself included, haven't done that.  And you know, hindsight is 20/20, and I can see where I--things I could have done or should have done to incentivize people.  You know, I basically made the assumption, which was false, that most people are motivated by the same things that I'm motivated by, and that's not true.  You know, people have different levels of motivation.  Some are motivated by greed, some by fear, some by the need for--of love or affection.  And you know, you have to kind of take those things into consideration.  So, I--I think that or I hope that ten years from now, people say hey those are really stand up firms and you know, we can go to them to do anything we'd go to anyone else to do.  But right now I think people would probably say they're all kind of opportunistic things and it's all BS and that if you really look at them, they're not minority firms at all, they're mostly white guys working at these firms anyway.  Most of our labor force is.  And you know.
Story_ID: 653649
Speaker 1: But do you--let me ask you this though, but what would be a win-win in terms of a possible legacy, 'cause see I guess, I mean that--that's probably an (laughter) inaccurate description, there was a lot of individualism in the, you know, because investment banking is a lot of individualism, I mean just period or this street is really a lot about me, you know, 'cause people get their bonuses, you know, it's a lot of that, so--
Speaker 2: It's actually the right way to look at things and it's--it's really, I know it's not politically correct, but self interest is really the best way to run one and I did not do that here often--I did not put self interest first, because I was having so much fun and there was, you know, there was lots of money to go around, and I didn't have to.  But it does clarify things, it makes it a lot easier.  You get paid for what you do and not for how much I like you or how much you need the money, or you know, your kid has cancer or any of those other things, you get paid for what you do.  And if you get away from that, which I did, it takes you off mission.  And so, you know.
Story_ID: 653650
Speaker 1: So let me ask you, what do you feel--and I wanna ask this in terms of--well let me, let me ask the question.  With your, your son is following in your footsteps, I mean--
Speaker 2: (Gestures) Much higher.
Speaker 1: --much--
Speaker 2: Much higher, he's going much higher.
Speaker 1: Okay, but he's following in your footsteps, okay.
Speaker 2: He's taking the same path.
Speaker 1: He's taking the same path.  What, what are your hopes for him and especially because you're saying much higher.  What are your hopes for, for the new generation?
Speaker 2: I think my son will, you know, he's exceptionally smart and he's so driven.  I mean, I've rarely met anybody as driven as he is.  My gut is my son wants to run something really big, he wants to run a big company, a Fortune 500 company or he wants to, you know, go into politics and be an elected something or other.  He doesn't wanna run anything small.  He really wants to take his talents and move a mountain.  And I applaud it honestly, well I put that there so I should applaud it (laughter).  So, but yeah that's what he wants, he wants to, you know, he originally wanted to come in here [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] and he had some great ideas actually.  He came in here and he did an analysis of everything and he made some spot on great recommendations, great, I mean just amazing.  And whenever, you know, my son is a remarkable human being and so when he does analysis or he talks about something, I'm always amazed at how sharp and perceptive he is.  You know, just, just a, you know.  I remember talking to him once and saying you know what, I've decided I'm gonna--I don't--I'm not a fan of television.  I don't know if that didn't come through or not, but I said, "You know, I've decided I'm gonna get rid of the cable, I just don't think I need cable, I'm just gonna have Wi-Fi, you know.  But no cable, no phone, just Wi-Fi and myself."  And he goes, "You know, all they're gonna do is charge you more for Wi-Fi."  He said, "You know, people who think the cable companies are in trouble, they're not, they're not, they're just gonna buy more Wi-Fi companies."  I said, "Well that's ridiculous, you know, that can't do that."  But he was right and that's exactly what happened, that was exactly what happened.  He said, "Yeah they, they don't really care, you know, whether you, you know, use cable to watch television or you use Wi-Fi to watch television, you're gonna buy it from them.  It's like you don't have a real choice, you know.  So, if you want this you're gonna have to pay and if you don't, read a book."  So, or he talked about the airline industry, or he, you know, just telling me stuff about different things.  It's always really quite, quite remarkable hearing it come back from him, and then you know, watching him.  You know, I'm proud of both my children [Michael Beal and Erica Beal Barnhardt], but sort of watching him navigate his way through the treacherous waters, and you know, honestly I'm loving watching him work his ass off, I am.  'Cause man he gave me a headache about working so hard.  So just watching him work.  As I've told him many times, it wasn't that I didn't wanna be there, yeah I know.  Work demanded that I do other things.
Speaker 1: And did you say he married [Ashley Jackson Beal]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he got married in September.
Speaker 1: Oh he did?  So you have one, one, one, one off--I mean one offspring that--that's started their--
Speaker 2: Ready to blake- break his plate baby, ready to blake- break (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --ready to break his plate (laughter).
Story_ID: 653651
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then your daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt], you l- the fact that she's an--she's--you said she's very smart also?
Speaker 2: She's exceptionally smart.  My daughter is a schoolteacher down in Washington, D.C.  And you know, she--I--who knew that she had this passion and, or even the talent.  I knew she was a gifted writer, I knew that.  I mean just incredibly gifted at writing.  I wish she'd be a playwright or a novelist or something like that 'cause I think she just has so much talent.  But she's decided to teach and she's gotten teacher of the year a few times.  She's about to become a vice principal or assistant principal, I don't remember what they're called.  And she's very sought after.  She has not been--my daughter decided and I've told her this is not the way the world works, but my daughter decided she was teaching here in New York [New York], she decided she wanted to move to Washington, I think it was because the boyfriend was down there, her then boyfriend, she's not with him anymore.  But I think it was because he was down there.  But she didn't say that.  And so she decided she was gonna go down and look for a job in Washington.  And she went down on a Thursday, she had a job offer that day.  She notified her employer that she was taking a new job, luckily it was during the summer and she was at work at her new job on that Monday.  And she got her apartment on Saturday, moved in on Sunday.  I mean it just doesn't work that way for most people, and she's never--people are always calling to try and get her to come work.  'Cause she, she took the worst performing seventh grade class in her school and in a year turned them into the top performing class, and it's just because of her sheer willpower and determination and hard work, and I've watched her and she works just as hard as my son [Michael Beal] does, for a lot less money.  But just as hard, for significantly less money.  But she works really hard, and you know, hopefully she'll go back to grad school and get that--and decide what she's gonna do.  You know, obviously, you know, not that she's taken my advice.  I think she should go to Yale drama school [Yale School of Drama, New Haven, Connecticut], but she's gonna probably go to some Ivy League educational school and do, do what she will.  But I, I just think she has--you know, part of what you do is what she should do.  You know, what you're doing is sort of telling our stories first person, but--and it's happening more, it's happening more than it was when I started trying to get my daughter to move in this direction.  But we really need people who can tell our stories in kind of the way that Motown [Motown Records] did for the music area, it kind of told our stories through music so that everybody could understand our stories and we could understand and speak our stories.  There ought to be someone who can do that either through literature or the arts or the entertainment area and you know, whether its television or movies.  I mean there's more of it then there was before, but she has just a gift, you know, given by God really quite frankly for explaining things and painting a picture with her words.  She can tell you a story and you'd swear you were there, you know.  She can really put the layers of complexity into a story.  And I just, I just love listening to her talk and work things through.  And you know, I--she--she's, she's, she's a real special person.
Speaker 1: It's wonderful to hear you talking in terms of your love for your children.  You know, it's like your [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] and your, your gran- [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] you know, loved you.
Story_ID: 653652
Speaker 1: And I, I wanna ask you--two questions remaining.  One, what are your hopes and concerns for the black community as one?
Speaker 2: Well, because of my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt], I really know a lot more about education than I ever did.  I mean, she has really opened my eyes to the problems of education in our community.  And you know, we have, it's almost like an educational apartheid in this country.  And there are two separate and unequal education systems.  And my daughter was part of this Teach for America program, which is fabulous.  And she really tried her best to--within the confines of, of the structures that she worked in to kind of bridge the gap between the kind of education that she received and the kind of education that these kids are receiving.  And my daughter doesn't teach in the worst schools, she teaches in charter schools, which are a little bit better.  But the simple answer is my, my real fear is a lack of parenting in our community.  And you know, I'm just gonna say two things on this and then I'll shut up.  These--you know, I'm always remarke- you know, like struck when things happen around the same time.  So I normally ride to work, but one particular day I decided to take the subway.  And as I was standing at the street to kind of cross, there was a man and his son, and his son was probably about six, I--you may probably have heard me tell this story, but, his son was about six.  And his son pointed to the lines of the crosswalk in the street, those two lines.  And he said, "Dad, what are those--what are those for."  And he said, "Well Jake, those lines are so that people can tell where to cross the street."  He said, "You know, they're, they're the safety lines that when you're inside those lines and you have the light in your favor, the cars have the red light and you have the walk sign, you know it says walk over there, you can walk across."  He said, "They're parallel lines."  He said, "If they, they're the same distance apart everywhere and if they went on forever they would never touch."  And he said, "And you see the line that's going the other way, that's a perpendicular line so perpendicular lines touch, parallel lines never touch."  And I remember thinking to myself that was a damn complicated answer to a very simple question that this kid asked.  He just asked what these two lines are for, you answered it, you didn't have to tell him about the sign that says walk, or red or green lights, or parallel lines or perpendicular lines, makes no sense.  I mean it's crazy.  Get on the subway, there's a woman there with her son who's about the same age as Jake, about six years old.  And he points up to the emergency brake and he says, "Mom what's that, what's that for."  She said, "I told you to sit your ass down and stop asking so many damn questions."  And I thought that's the difference, that's the difference in parenting.
Story_ID: 653653
Speaker 1: And so, you know, no one teaches parenting, okay.  Parenting is learned by example and by necessity.  But there's a real difference between over answering a question and not answering a question at all.  And then expecting Jamal to compete with Jake.  Jamal doesn't even know what the emergency brake is for on the subway, Jake has already been exposed to the concept of parallel lines and perpendicular lines, and colors and reading, and understanding the difference in traffic flows.  And my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt] says that she can definitely tell the difference between a student has--who has been parented and a student who hasn't been, and the lack of parenting in the black community is troubling to me.  And you know, I will often ask people who the male role model was in their life.  And I, I, I still haven't quite figured out what it is that men do in raising children, I really haven't.  I know what women do, and that's pretty easy, you know, they give birth, they breastfeed, not to get too sexist, but they prepare the meals, they kind of do the reading at ni- you know, they do all that stuff.  Men, it's not as clear what a man really does in raising kids, but whatever it is, it's damn important.  And so, I know that for me had I not had the male influence of my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] who really kind of was teaching me stuff, who was giving me lessons, who led by example, you know, he wasn't perfect, he ha- he had his failings, but who--who kind of did that stuff for me.  I don't know where I would've gotten if I hadn't had kind of those other male parental figures like Don Schwartz [Donald Schwartz] who helped me out when I was at Wooster [Wooster School, Danbury, Connecticut] or Scotty Pierce [Scott Pierce] who helped me out both as an adult and on.  I don't know what I would've done.  And so, the fact that at first it might have been as my grandfather thought, a government plot to destroy black men by forcing them out of their house and so the government becomes the man of the house.  And you know, I don't know whether you remember Pat Moynihan's [Daniel Patrick Moynihan]--yeah.  So, he was right actually, okay.  He got a lot of crap at the time, but he was right.  They destroyed--whether it was bu- by design or benign, it was a tragedy for our community and we haven't really gotten up off the canvas.  And you know, so there are a lot, you know, if you ask me what's my fear, what's my concern is that even in the black community we're becoming separate but--and unequal, but there are like two classes that for all the good that integration and liberties have done, it's allowed the haves and the have not's in the black community to be almost as wide as it is in the whiter community.  And you know, male responsibility is I, I--I'm looking, searching for the word, it is not discouraged, but irresponsible behavior is encouraged.  And you know, you see these guys walking around with their pants around their fricking ankles, I know I sound like a crotchety old guy (laughter), but you see this and you go this is not good, okay, this is not good, you know.  I would be devastated if my daughter [Erica Beal Barnhardt] came home with a guy like that, absolutely devastated.  And I don't care how much money he makes, I don't care whether he's, you know, some rap guy or athlete, I don't care, you know.  I want my daughter to marry a man--a man.  My da- my son [Michael Beal] has married a fabulous young lady [Ashley Jackson Beal], absolutely fabulous.  And my daughter, the guy she's dating seems like a good guy, I like him a lot, he's a man.  But, you know, I would not want--I, you know, it would break my heart if I found that my daughter--not--I don't think she would, but was involved with somebody who was--wasn't serious about life and family, and taking care of business, you know.  I, I, I don't want her to end up with someone who is a schemer, you know.  I don't mind if she ends up with a dreamer, but certainly I don't want her to end up with a schemer.  And you know, that I think is our greatest challenge: getting men to be men.
Story_ID: 653654
Speaker 1: And then, and I want--I'm asking this question in the context of your wonderful story and your journey, but what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I would be very, very, very happy, and it's beginning to happen more and more that people describe me by my children.  I--I notice this is happening more and more, people go, "You're Mike Beal's [Michael Beal] dad, you're Erica's [Erica Beal Barnhardt] dad, you know.  Your daughter's this, your son is that."  I think the best investment I've made, you know, my daughter was born the day we started this business [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] and I am really, really pleased with her development.  And my son has done great things too, and that's so, you know, I don't need much more than that.  I--I--I think the two of them are gonna to do great things and if I had some small role in that, that's more than enough reward for me, and that's the honest answer.  I don't really care about the other stuff.  I--you know, my kids are really important to me, you know.  I have never--I can honestly say I've never raised my voice to my daughter, not even to call her for dinner.  I've never, ever yelled at my daughter, never.  I've had to yell at my son a few times, you know, I had to, you know, he's a, he's a little more knuckleheaded then she is.  But you know, I enjoy being around them, so.  I know that's not--that doesn't sound like a ruthless answer I know, but that's it.
Story_ID: 653655
Speaker 1: And just one (cough) one last question, your [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.], if he could've seen your--where you are now, what would he say?
Speaker 2: I think he would be pleased with some of the things I've done.  I certainly think he'd feel good about my--his great-grandchildren [Michael Beal and Erica Beal Barnhardt].  I think he'd be concerned about the level of risks that I've taken in my life.  That even I, you know, I, I have a preference for risk I don't really understand it, I don't really get it.  I should go talk to somebody about that.  But maybe, that might be one of the things that he'd say, you know.  Why are you--why did you, you know.  I can remember, this is the last thing I'd say 'cause this would probably bother him.  But I remember there was a time back in like, I'm gonna say '95 [1995], but it could've been '96 [1996], I'm kind of getting the years blended together, where people in the City of New York [New York] co- accused me of bribing someone.  It wasn't true.  What I had done, which is what I was trained to do at Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] was something that I should not do with this color skin.  But what I'd done was I had done a $360 million deal for the State of Wisconsin.  It was the largest deal ever done by a minority firm at the time.  It was the largest deal our firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] had ever done, and it was the largest deal ever done in the State of Wisconsin for the first five years.  So they were going to do--they were gonna refinance Brewer [Milwaukee Brewers] stadium [Milwaukee County Stadium; Miller Park], they were gonna do something with the stadium in Milwaukee [Wisconsin].  And at Hutton, I was trained that you get people in the legislature to write legislation that really only works for you, okay, nobody else.  So I contacted a couple of people up there who I knew, who were legislators and I said, "They're gonna finance this stadium, they're gonna out for RFP [request for proposal] for underwriters, we should put in there that the state can only use a qualified underwriting firm and qualified underwriting firm should be a defined term, and it should be any firm that has financed a single bond issue of $350 million or more in the last five years."  And the answer was, only us.  Nobody else had done that.  And the governor [Tommy Thompson] signed it into law, and so when they were going to go out for this financing, my friend up in Wisconsin he called up and he said, "Hey, look the RFP's coming out, you know, I just wanna let you know there's gonna be minority participation," blah, blah, blah.  And I said, "Okay great, but why are you--why are you sending it--who you gonna send it to, why are you sending it to anybody other than us?"  And he said, "Well you know, we can't just give you this deal."  And I said, "Well, you know, I read the legislation and I don't think these guys are qualified, because the way I read it you have to have 350 million or more."  So, you know, shortly thereafter people from the FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] came around asking lots of questions about how I got these politicians to do what I asked them to do.  They subpoenaed my records and I'd been at Hutton, so I was used to getting subpoenas and it was no big deal to me.  And then I got a call from a reporter, I now know that somebody had put her up to it.  But I got a call from a reporter and she said, "I understand you've gotten a subpoena for your records related to a bribery case in Wisconsin," and she said, "they've subpoenaed you and Wardell Lazard's firm [W.R. Lazard and Company] and Travers Bell's firm [Daniels and Bell Inc.]."  And I said, "Yeah, but the only thing is I'm the only one who's still alive, you know."  And I said, "I did get a subpoena."  And I didn't think much of it.  That Sunday there's an article in the Daily News [New York Daily News] it said black broker bribes or something like that, I think that was it.  And it was about how I had bribed these guys and you know, I, you know, and I was under suspicion and people started running from me and the business.  You know, just people stopped doing business, started, started snaking away from us.
Story_ID: 653656
Speaker 1: And two things happened, one, I stupidly decided I was just gonna tough it out.  I hadn't done anything wrong and I was just gonna tough it out.  And so, I was prepared to do that.  And I pulled the whole management team [of M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] together and I said, "Hey, can we come up with what do we do to stem this tide of losses 'cause people are stopping to doing business with us, I mean.  And all I got was a subpoena, I mean I wasn't indicted and nothing happened.  And one person, a woman who worked there, Nancy Hensey [ph.] who's a really good friend, she, she said, "You know, why are we going around trying to talk to the press and you know, kind of write letters to the--why are we doing that?"  She goes, "You know, we should just figure out who the, you know, seventy-five people are who really matter to us who are keeping us alive and we ought to over communicate with them.  Just tell them everything we know, when we know it, how we know it, what's happening," blah, blah, blah.  And you know, our competitors were just feeding this thing.  And you know, so the City of New York [New York] decided to stop doing business with us.  Well it turned out Nancy was right, there were probably not seventy-five but fifteen people that mattered.  One was a guy named Walter Knorr [Walter K. Knorr] in Chicago [Illinois], who is now at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Champaign-Urbana, Illinois].  And you know, and we just communicated with them.  I remember I'd lost millions of dollars, like millions of dollars on this because it was just BS.  And I was feeling so sad and I was feeling so bad, and I went up to see my [maternal] grandmother [Essie Williamson Beal], so you asked me what would my [maternal] grandfather [John H. Beal, Sr.] think.  I went up to see my grandmother and you know, she was big breasted old woman by that time and I just put my head down in those breasts the way I used to as a kid (laughter), you know, I was like, "Grandma I lost more money than I thought I'd make in my entire life, I've just lost so much money."  I said, "I'm so, so bad."  And she said, "Well," she says, "look, you know, we can always get your [maternal] aunt [Ariemae Beal Lonon] to come and move down here, and you and Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal] and the kids [Michael Beal and Erica Beal Barnhardt] can move upstairs and your room is still there, you know, we'll, we'll get through this."  And I went, "No, no, no, no, no, no, we don't have to move, our house is fine, my--I don't have a mortgage."  So she goes, "Well, what? You gonna sell your house out at Sag Harbor [New York]?"  And I'm like, "No, no I'm not gonna sell my house."  So, she said, "Well you gonna have to take your kids out of private school and put them in public school?"  I said, "No, no, no, kids school--I--I've arranged for my kids school that's not, you know."  She said, "So what you're gonna sell one of your cars, what are you gonna do?"  And I said, "No I don't have to sell any cars."  She said, "Well Bern [HistoryMaker Bernard Beal] I don't have a lot of money but what I have I will lend to you."  I--, "I don't need to borrow any money from you."  She said, "Well son, I'm confused.  You told me you just lost more money then you ever thought you'd make in your entire life.  Yet, it doesn't seem to be changing your life, so you must've made more money then you ever expected to make in your entire life" (laughter), "'cause you didn't have any money."  So, I said you know, she's right--she's right.  And yes, so it didn't go exactly the way I wanted to go, I made more and I made money, I lost money, I could've done this, I should've done that.  But on balance, I'm healthy, my kids are great, I got a woman who's not so smart and has put up with the same BS for over thirty years.  And so she's very smart--she's just not smart in that way.  So, I think it, it's okay.  I think he'd probably say I'd get a B, I think I'd get a B.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's it.  Thank you.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Story_ID: 653657
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay go ahead and tell us about this picture.
Speaker 2: Okay, so this picture is my grandfather on the left.
Speaker 1: Wait, wait, go this way (gestures).
Speaker 2: Go from left to right, on my left, yes.  My grandfather on the left, my grandmother--
Speaker 1: You have to give names.
Speaker 2: My grandfather, John Henry Beal [John H. Beal, Sr.], on the left, my grandmother, Essie Mae Beal [Essie Williamson Beal], in the middle, and my Uncle Jake, Jake Williamson [ph.], which is my grandmother's maiden name, her brother on the right.  And the thing that's significant about this, in my terms, is that my grandmother and my grandfather raised me, and my Uncle Jake who later came to adore me, I guess, I'm not so sure, really didn't like the fact that my mother was expecting me and encouraged them to end the pregnancy.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my grandmother, Essie Mae Beal.
Speaker 1: Mae is M-A-E?
Speaker 2: M-A-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And this was taken at a little party that we had for her.
Speaker 1: That is my great-grandfather on my grandmother's side, Willis Williamson [ph.].  Not sure of when it was taken.
Speaker 2: This is my Aunt Eloise [Eloise Beal] on the left, my grandmother, Essie Mae Beal, my biological mother, Virginia Mae Beal [Virginia Beal], and my aunt, who raised me, Ariemae Lonon [Ariemae Beal Lonon].
Speaker 1: How do you spell Ariemae?
Speaker 2: A-R-I-E-M-A-E.
Speaker 1: Oh they liked Mae?
Speaker 2: Mae is the middle name of every woman in my family, including my daughter.  My daughter's name is Erica Mae Beal [Erica Beal Barnhardt] (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, (laughter) that's great. A whole lot of Mae going on?
Speaker 2: Yeah, everybody has the same middle name.  It's very country.
Speaker 1: This picture is of when I went back to Paul Laurence Dunbar Junior High School [Paul Laurence Dunbar J.H.S. 120; Paul L. Dunbar M.S. 301, New York, New York].  That's me on the far left, I don't know the name of the woman in the middle, I apologize.  That's my friend, William Holmes [ph.] who lived across the airshaft from me.  That's next to him, to his left, my right, is Mrs. Hollingsworth who got me in the A Better Chance program, and I don't know the name of the last person.
Speaker 2: I went back to my high school.  This picture is of my friend, William Holmes, who ran the program at the high--at the junior high school for me and my wife, Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal], is at the far right.  And she and I sponsored these kids for The Stock Market Game and we got tutors for every kid who wanted one.
Speaker 1: Year?
Speaker 2: That would've been--
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 2: No, that was in the height of this crap that I was going through and I was trying to figure out how to get the public relations image up.  So this was probably like '95 [1995], '96 [1996].
Speaker 1: Here I'm serving with the commencement--I was the commencement speaker at my junior high school and the fellow to the far right is Mr. Silverstein [ph.] who was the principal.  That would've been '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: Mrs. Ellis, here I am with Mrs. Ellis.  This probably was in 1998, she was the librarian at our junior high school, I stayed in touch with her.
Speaker 1: This is my high school football team.  I'm number seventy-two in the back in case you couldn't guess that.  And this is probably like 1970.
Speaker 2: These are my classmates from my high school that I stayed in touch with, and I actually can name, I think all of them.  But I was the senior prefect, these are my classmates from the Wooster School [Danbury, Connecticut].  There's Fred Balsem [ph.], the guy I talked about with the derogatory name that I called him.  There's Susan Goodman who is the person who changed things around for Jews on campus.  So Fred Balsem is seated right below me, Susan Goodman is holding his hand to his right, my left.  Elma Harchermer [ph.] is in this picture.  Guys, we were very close, our class and we still chat and talk to each other some forty years later.
Speaker 1: Here I am with Tracy Chapman, who is A Better Chance student.  And Sandra Timmons, who is the president of A Better Chance, who I had recruited as president of A Better Chance.  And I was chairman of A Better Chance at the time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is me in college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota].  That was my job interviewing suit.  I had a jacket, a reversible vest and two pair of pants, so it was like nine outfits in one.  But you couldn't tell me that I wasn't a good looking guy in college.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I believe this is our firm [M.R. Beal and Company, New York, New York] on it's--
Speaker 2: Wait a minute, hold up.  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is our firm on its fifth anniversary.  Well, it might be--yeah, fifth anniversary.  So this would've been 1993.  And the people in the front row were the people who helped me run the firm.  And some of the people sitting in the next row, it was sort of done on a hierarchical basis, but we'd grown from the original eight to about, I don't know, I'd say we had about fifty or sixty people, not everyone from around the country was there.
Speaker 2: This is me opening--running The Stock Market Game.  I was the chairman of the Foundation for Investor Education and we had a meeting in New York [New York] to bring teachers from all around the country to talk about teaching children to invest in the markets.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you mentioned that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, SIFMA [Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association].
Speaker 1: SIFMA.
Speaker 2: I had the good fortune of ringing the opening bell on the NASDAQ and having my--I don't know, out--of shape body roaming over Wall Street [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: What's that?  Is this 9/11 [September 11, 2001]?
Speaker 2: This is 9/11.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) 'Cause I was going to say.
Speaker 2: This is 9/11.  So, 9/11, I was actually on top of a building when the planes flew in. And--
Speaker 1: You were on--
Speaker 2: I was on top of a building on West Street and flames flew over and flew into the building.  We lost two of our former employees in 9/11.  And that was because I couldn't tell what was in the air and for some strange reason, I had those mask and gloves and t-shirts in my office, I didn't know about it, but I gave them to all the employees and we got out (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That was weird.
Speaker 2: Yeah, have no idea.
Speaker 1: This is 9/11 also walking across the Brooklyn Bridge [New York, New York], you know, masses of people walking across the bridge right after the attack.
Speaker 2: I know that looks like a snowstorm, but that's the dust that settled on Wall Street about an hour and a half after the 9/11 attack.
Story_ID: 653658
Speaker 1: So people who have been influential in my life, I'd have to put [HistoryMaker] Marion Barry right up there.  He, both personally and professionally, Marion Barry has been a truly good friend and mentor.
Speaker 2: Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.  I threw a party for--to celebrate his hundredth birthday and invited a hundred men to have dinner, to celebrate Adam's birthday.  Charlie Rangel [HistoryMaker Charles B. Rangel] came, Mayor Dinkins came, Governor Patterson [HistoryMaker David A. Paterson] came, lots of people came to celebrate his birthday.  He was an inspiration to me and so I wanted to bring in some men of quality to celebrate with me.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is Scott Pierce who was the president of E.F. Hutton [E.F. Hutton and Company; EF Hutton, Inc.] and who invested the $5 million to start the firm, and also all the other things, he has been one of my best friends.  His sister is Barbara Bush.
Speaker 1: His sister is Barbara Bush?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why I like the Bushes, all right.
Speaker 1: This is General Colin Powell [HistoryMaker General Colin L. Powell], and this is the day that I had to go pick him up at the airport and drive him to give a speech.
Speaker 2: The man to the far left is Governor Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin, and with him is Nick Hurtgen [P. Nicholas Hurtgen], who was an advisor to the governor and later became an investment banker.  And the governor had given us the largest deal that we've ever done.  I am--I'm narrating these, I apologize.
Speaker 1: Just the year.
Speaker 2: Just the year.
Speaker 1: So this is a picture of the people who started the firm with me.
Speaker 2: Okay so you have to go--
Speaker 1: I will. Starting with me standing down at the bottom of the steps, we have to my immediate right, Suzanne Shank who's now sta- who's now the CEO of Muriel Siebert and Company [Siebert Cisneros Shank and Co., LLC].  Karen Valenstein who was at E.F. Hutton with me.  Diana Taylor [Diana L. Taylor] who started the firm with me.  Next is Michael Jeffrod [ph.], next is Ruby Brown [ph.], and finally at the top of the stairs is Robert Warndorf [ph.].  This picture was taken when we started the firm in '88 [1988].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of Diana Taylor.  We had her serve as the honoree for an A Better Chance function in 2009.  And as you can tell, the years have been much kinder to her than to me.
Speaker 1: The gentleman to the left is Charles Rangel, congressman, and this is at the Adam Clayton Powell dinner, along with myself and the gentleman to the right is Stanley Grayson [Stanley E. Grayson], the chief operating officer.
Speaker 2: This is my family.  Myself and Valerie [Valerie Lancaster-Beal], my daughter Erica [Erica Beal Barnhardt], and my son Michael.  And this was taken at the fifteenth anniversary party for M.R. Beal and Company [New York, New York], so that would be 19-- 2003, is that right?  Yeah, yeah, '88 [1988], yeah.
Speaker 1: These are our kids after my daughter's christening.  So my son Michael and my little daughter.
Speaker 2: This is a home scene before the arrival of my little daughter.  Just Michael and myself, Valerie is expecting at that time, and we're at home.
Speaker 1: This is my Boule [Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity] chapter.  This is at our Christmas party, these guys are very special to me.
Speaker 2: This is me dancing at my daughter's graduation from college [Carleton College, Northfield, Minnesota] with my daughter back in 2010.
Speaker 1: This is the Honorable Denise L. Nappier, the treasure of the State of Connecticut.  Very important client and that is her photo.  She is one of the triplets.
Speaker 2: This is the Honorable Carl McCall [HistoryMaker H. Carl McCall] who at the time was the comptroller of the State of New York.  And during all of that crapola, if he had walked away from us, we wouldn't have a firm.  So he did stick by us and if he hadn't we would've been toast.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: This is my son, Michael Beal, playing basketball at Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts].  He played one through four there.  And this would've been in 2005.
Speaker 1: The family again at my daughter's graduation.
Speaker 2: Wow, I don't know why that's in there.  That one's not a--that's Maurice DuBois, the television anchor.  It's not that--I don't know why that's there.
Speaker 1: This is my wife Valerie, my son and my daughter at my son's graduation from business school [Harvard Business School, Boston, Massachusetts] in 2012.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me in my office and the thing I like about is it does have those paintings behind me of the four hundred people that I admire.  You'll see Charlie Rangel and W.E.B. Du Bois, and I see George Washington Carver and some of the others behind me.
Speaker 2: This is the same Adam Clayton Powell event.  Myself, my son, Michael, and the fellow in the middle is Mayor David Dinkins [HistoryMaker David N. Dinkins], a hundredth anniversary of Adam Clayton Powell's death.
Speaker 1: And here's one that I didn't give you, which I think you should have.  So, this is one of the few pictures of me in my childhood.  And I do know all the people.  So I'm the last guy in the back of this photo.  The fellow with the sunglasses, his name is Curtis Harris [ph.] and he became a police detective.  The guy below him is Bobby Bosman [ph.] and he chose a career on the other side of the law.  To his--to Bobby's right, the fellow wearing the hat, his name is Ritchie Garland [ph.].  And I was really friends with him because I wanted to meet his sister.  And unfortunately, he passed.  The two girls are Candy [ph.] and I don't know the other girl's name, but they are Curtis' sisters.  Annette [ph.] is taking the picture. And the guy with the glasses with his hand up in the air is my little brother, Larry [Larry Beal].
