Story_ID: 35614
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm Denise Gines; I'm the interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Sharon Russmark [Brown's daughter] is observing.  Would you please state your name for me, and spell it please?
Speaker 2: David W. Brown, D-A-V-I-D W. B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what does the W stand for?
Speaker 2: William, W-I-L-L-I-A-M.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: August 26, 1920.
Speaker 1: And where were you born?
Speaker 2: Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is August 20th, 2003.
Speaker 1: 2013?  Okay, and the location of this interview?
Speaker 2: Is--it's the ahh--something, I don't recall.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is The HistoryMakers' office in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--HistoryMakers' office, yes.
Speaker 1: And what is your occupation, or former occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation was air conditioning contractor.
Story_ID: 35615
Speaker 1: Okay, now I'm gonna ask you what I call People Magazine-ish type questions, okay?  What is your favorite food? What do you like to eat?
Speaker 2: Ice cream.
Speaker 1: And what is your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Christmas.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: And where do you like to go on vacation?
Speaker 2: Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35616
Speaker 1: Okay, let's begin by talking about your mother; tell me your mother's name and where she was born.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mamie Ella Brown; she was born up in the Indian Village up in the northern part of New York State--Mohawk Village.  She's an old Mohawk Indian; we called her the "last of the Mohicans."
Speaker 1: Okay, and did she share any stories about her growing up?
Speaker 2: Not really, because she was--her parents passed away when she was six years old, and she's been the youngest of the--of the family and the females.  She was brought down to her only sister, and that's where she grew up with her only [older?] sister.  She being a kid six years old and not much--she can't remember too much about her, her family.
Speaker 1: Do you know about where she went to school and how much education she had?
Speaker 2: No, I don't; she never talked about that.
Speaker 1: So you never knew your grandparents?
Speaker 2: No, I only knew who my parents are.
Speaker 1: And what about her sisters and brothers?  Did you know them?
Speaker 2: Well, not really 'cause they was all spread all over; the one sister she lived with lived down in Texas, and that was--yeah, actually when I was young, she didn't talk too much about that 'cause see all this come about when--in the beginning, when I was old enough and during the [Great] Depression, and the Depression took up a lot of--more than just your past history.
Story_ID: 35617
Speaker 1: Well tell me about your father [David Budlam (ph.) Brown].
Speaker 2: My father was born down in the Eastern Caribbean Islands.  From what he mentioned when I was--I must have been six years old, and I do remember him saying that if he finishes school down there, imagine running out (unclear) in Grenada.  And I think he graduated from school there, and he worked on a fruit boat; brought fruit to these southern states like Louisiana and Alabama.  That is about as much as I can (unclear) 'cause I was six years old when he was talking about that.
Speaker 1: Did you know your grandparents on your father's side?
Speaker 2: No, know anyone, no.
Speaker 1: Did you--do you know their names?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't know.
Story_ID: 35618
Speaker 1: Is there a story about your mother [Mamie Ella Brown] and father [David Budlam (ph.) Brown] met?
Speaker 2: They--I know when my mother lived in Texas-Texarkana [Texas], I believe it was, and her sister she was in business there, she had a contract with the railroad, she furnished the place in front of the railroad.  People who--the Pullman porters who come down--see in the south, you had no place for the Pullman porters to stay in so they--she furnished the rooms for the Pullman porters; she stayed and she had a restaurant there.  So it was pretty handy for the Pullman porters at the--that was the end of their run for the railroad coming down from the south and she furnished the room and restaurants.  That's where my mom stayed because she was six years old when she went to stay with her sister, and my dad somehow worked up in that neck of the woods and that's how they met for some--or the other, I have no idea.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so--now your mother and father meet and get married, and where do they live?  Where did they move to?
Speaker 2: Well, after my dad and mom met there, they moved to Memphis [Tennessee], and my dad--in Memphis he worked for a milk dairy there, and my mom was--she was a regular housewife; in fact, my mom she was the engineer of the family; she did all the electrical work and did all the plumbing.  If a faucet leaked, she went to the dime store, she got the washers and taken the faucet apart and she put new washers on it and if the electric iron need repair, she put new wires in the electric irons.  I think I copied after her.
Speaker 1: So you're very handy as well.
Speaker 2: Well, I was an air-conditioned contractor.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35619
Speaker 1: Alright, now tell me about the house in which you grew up [in Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Well (laughter).
Speaker 1: Describe it to me.
Speaker 2: It was only during the [Great] Depression, mind you.  And it was a three-room house and you had a bathroom with just a toilet on the back porch, and the kitchen stove was a coal fired--wood fired stove, in the center room was a heater there where the kids slept and mom [Mamie Ella Brown] and dad [David Budlam (ph.) Brown] slept in the other room.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And I don't think that you told--what was your father's name?
Speaker 2: David.
Speaker 1: David.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.  Budlam (ph.) Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay, and did you have siblings?
Speaker 2: I had one sister--at that time I had one sister and one brother, and later on I had another brother and another brother and another sister (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay.
Speaker 2: There were six kids all together.
Speaker 1: Okay, well let's go ahead and name the kids in order, and where you fit in.
Speaker 2: Well my sister was the oldest; she was named--was Mary, and I was the next one--David, the kid next to me was named--his name was Grover.  Too fast?
Speaker 1: No, go ahead.
Speaker 2: And the next one's name was Rudy--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the next one was George; the baby girl was Leola.
Story_ID: 35620
Speaker 1: What was your earliest--what is your earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Well, it's when I was--must have been six years old or seven years old and memory--Grover [Brown's younger brother] was my dad's [David Budlam (ph.) Brown] pet 'cause Rudy [Brown's younger brother] was a baby.  I remember well because when my dad would come home from work, Grover used to crawl on my dad's lap.  See, during the [Great] Depression, food was main subject in the house as far as I was concerned, where my next meal was. And Grover used to crawl up in my dad's lap all the time, so this one night, my dad told my brother Grover, said "Sonny, you look fat enough to eat."  But me being the kinda inquisitive kid, I began to get ideas; well if he looks good enough to eat, how can you get this clown and put him in that pot that my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] cooked beans in all the time.  I have a long history of eating there, you know (laughter)?  So I was gonna do this kid--this brother in (laughter); this kid that was six years old I was, you know?  And he was about three [years old].  That was my memory of back in those days.
Story_ID: 35621
Speaker 1: So tell me--if you could think of a sound, a smell, or a sight, what would take you back to that time [Brown's childhood]?
Speaker 2: Well the sound was most likely an aircraft flying overhead, those days it was reciprocated engines and, and they would fly overhead, and I wondered what would keep 'em up.  That was the sound; and the smell was as I walk through a neighborhood where kids wasn't--they was more of an Italian kid and a Jewish kid or German kid or Greek and Irish kid, the smell that's coming from his house would be like bacon and eggs, coffee; in my house, you would smell the biscuits and gravy, and that was really fascinating, that aroma would come in.  You walk through the neighborhood, you know.  I remember that well, you know, just--small kid.
Speaker 1: And what about a sight?
Speaker 2: Sights not too much; it was the river I liked--I wondered why the river flowed like it did, and that was specially--the main sights were the waterfall and the snowflakes, wonder what makes the snowflakes, why it come down like they did, and once they hit the ground, why it flare out, why the water falls when it--raindrops fall and it hit the other water, why it would bubble up like it did, and I wonder what it would take to make that water do that.  And I'm a young kid--that was my imagination.  I had a great imagination back then.
Story_ID: 35622
Speaker 1: So what was it like in, in your household?  What was family life like with your, your siblings?  What about holidays?  Was anything special that you did on holidays?
Speaker 2: No, a holiday was just another holiday.  Really didn't mean much 'cause Christmas that I recall, it was--a lotta times it was no Christmas because back in--during [Great] Depression you know you're depressed and everything; you get laid off from work and where it wouldn't be much for Christmas so we just--my sister [Mary Brown] and I, we were the oldest, we would always wonder what Johnny would do; he's the kid from up the street there, he was the only kid; we hoped that he would get a yellow wagon or a red wagon for Christmas.  We hoped the other kids got things for Christmas, but we didn't get anything for Christmas.
Speaker 1: And so were there any family traditions in your household?
Speaker 2: Any what?
Speaker 1: Family traditions.  Was it something that you all did every day or--
Speaker 2: No, no.  We did the same routine every day.
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Getting back to Christmas, one thing more.  When it was Christmas, my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] would always have one of these crepe paper type Christmas bells she would hang up at the entrance from the bedroom to the living room; it's the only reason we knew Christmas.  Well, the other thing that fascinated me that I remember so well now, living in Memphis [Tennessee], and then you had the company newspaper--that a lotta people was unemployed back then during the depression--that it would be a Christmas gift given out to the Christmas kids, to all kids whose parents was out of work--would be at this building in the downtown area so my dad [David Budlam (ph.) Brown] got together my sister [Mary Brown], my brother Grover and myself, we walked Christmas Day down to this building; I recall it 'cause it was pouring down raining, reason I remember so well because Grover was next to me and Rudy was the baby; he was born that August, and this was Christmas so my birthday was in August--makes me seven years old at that time.  And we arrive at this building, this fellow come out and he says "Oh, you're a colored kid; wait outside until the white kids finish with their program inside."  And it was pouring down raining.  And I was wondering why I was getting wet on my left side, and standing next to this building I was dry.  And I was wondering that for years and years I was wondering why I was dry on my right side and on my left side I was getting wet.  Then it dawned on me, the air was blowing in this direction and had an overhang on this huge brick building; took me about two years to figure that out, and as we got inside, about twenty minutes later, we got--I got a red jacket, a bag of nuts, a bag of fruit, and I got a red airplane--a little wind-up airplane.  On the bottom of this aircraft it says "Made in Japan."  This was 1927; I'll never forget that.
Speaker 1: Great story, great story.
Story_ID: 35623
Speaker 1: So now tell me about the street that you lived on [in Memphis, Tennessee].  If you could walk a square block, tell me who lived on the street, and what merchants were in the area.
Speaker 2: The street we lived on was just a dirt street--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --no cobble stone, no bricks, and the street was--just a block away where Johnny and Joe and the Italians and Jews, Germans, Greek kids--they had paved streets, we had dirt streets; not gravel, but dirt streets.  And we had gas lamps.  'Course everybody had gas lamps in those days, it was no electric lamps back then, only for utilities along the streets.  And were no sidewalks where we were, until you left; you go one block and the next block was where you had concrete streets and sidewalks.  You could really walk down those streets you could have a grocery, grocery store to the ice store where you bought a block of ice because there was no refrigeration in those days.
Speaker 1: So tell me more about the merchants in the area.
Speaker 2: Well, the merchants in the area was corner drug--grocery stores and corner supermarkets; well, they wasn't supermarkets but they were corner grocery stores, about a block away and you pay the same price as everyone else.  And my dad [David Budlam (ph.) Brown], for extra work, he'd work there on the weekend, like on a Saturday did janitorial work; he would clean up the grocery stores and he would bring home the over-ripe fruit and past due eggs, and many a night and many a day I remember cracking these eggs and hitting an eye in these eggs (unclear), still living; and the over-ripe bananas and over-ripe peaches, over-ripe grapes, we ate 'em.  At the grocery store they were gonna throw it all away anyway.  This was during the [Great] Depression.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Who were some of your friends in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: That's hard to remember.  Fred was a kid who went to school with us because--in my family--my mom--(unclear) it was none of this business of going, running the streets with other kids; you got brothers and sisters you played with so you didn't run the streets; they were my mom's [Mamie Ella Brown] rules.  She was (unclear) Mohican; when she says "no," she meant no.
Story_ID: 35624
Speaker 1: So where was your school in relations to where you lived [in Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 2: Now the grade school wasn't that far away, but the high school was approximately three miles from where I lived, and it was another two miles past the white school to where the kids and I--you go through their neighborhood, sometimes play ball with them, they would ride a school bus to school, I would pass their school, they getting off the school bus; there was no school bus for the black kids.  I would pass their school another two miles from my school; this was in the '20s [1920s].  But in the high school I was in the early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay, and in your ele--what was the name of your elementary school?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Maybe it was Carnes, I believe it was, C-A-R-N-E-S.
Speaker 1: And do you remember any of the teachers?  Was there anybody that was--that might have inspired you or influenced you in any way?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Were all of your teachers black?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: In grade school, there was no such thing because most of our teachers would come up with poems in grade school.  I liked the poem "Let Me Build My House by the Side of the Road," but then I used my imagination about the house by the side of the road and be a friend to man, but that don't make sense because the guy coming along there--I picture myself--has a glass of lemonade with a ham sandwich giving this kid or this fellow passing the street, and give him a part of my sandwich.  I mean in this day and age, he would take it away from me, so I didn't like that.  But the same poem begins to develop in high school.  It's one history teaches you, you always come up with some idiotic history about the gold bug (unclear).  Who in the heck is the gold bug?  This was more of a history that goes back in the 1700s to '80s [1780s?], but he was the type of a teacher that wore--he wore a new suit every day; a different suit every day.  But being in--I'm going up to about the tentn or eleventh grade now, and the girls they're beginning--everywhere they're paying attention to guys and here this girl is--bring up "Oh he looks good in that seat."  But heck, what I like to do is have a, a lunch that I can take to school.  In my whole twelve years of going to school, I can count on one hand the number of times I've taken a lunch to school, and that lunch was peanut butter and biscuits, and if you didn't have water, you're in trouble.
Story_ID: 35625
Speaker 1: So that was out--so this particular history teacher [high school in Memphis, Tennessee] he uhh--ooh, ooh, ooh, ooh seemed to have an essay one time where we had to do on our vacation when school was out.  About this time, I had--I was in the eleventh grade I think, I had bought myself a bicycle by working at the dry cleaners, we took a ride out to the airport--I'm very fond of these aircraft out there, and he drew this aircraft on the board since I put on my essay about this aircraft.  So he 'gone call me to the--in front of the class to ask me about this 'cause I had up there on my papers about this aircraft.  He said "Well, you know so much about it you come up and point it out to me, the finer points of it."  So I got up, I said "Number one, you got this wind sock pointed the wrong direction.  In order for the aircraft to take off, you gotta take off against the wind; you got this aircraft pointed with the wind."  The kids laughed.  Well that kinda upset him.  (Unclear).  I erased the--this part (DEMONSTRATION) and turned it around.  Now the wind is blowing against the aircraft, then you can take off.  I say "Now here, now in the back side you got this part here, you gotta put it up in the ten degree, that's supposed to be pointed down in ten degrees 'cause you lift the back side up."  I said "This is elevated; it's supposed to be down so you lift the tail off.  In a tail (unclear), you don't have a tail-wheel, you'll have a tail skid."  "Well that's enough, Brown."  So I upset this, this, this history teacher; and the next one I upset was the chemistry teacher.  We had the Bunsen burners that our chemistry lab some way burned in a nice little blue flame; the other burned a long dark yellow flame.  The yellow flame had the (unclear) and the secondary air hose was plugged up; they all came from the white school.  All our equipment came from the white school, so I got a piece of a unit out of my mom's [Mamie Ella Brown] sewing machine kit and I came to the school and this sharp edge--I would point these holes to open up these holes that was bent, and these ones that had the yellow flames they started having blue flames, and I pointed this out to my instructor and he just looked at it and walked away.  Then I assumed that he didn't care too much about what I had advanced about it.
Story_ID: 36686
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's talk about--I just wanna go back a little bit because we were talking about high school, but before getting to high school, as an elementary school student, or at age, did your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the church that you attended.
Speaker 2: Well in church--in those days, people go to church often--three and four times a week.  And took the whole family to church and as I get older and I look back, to me people in those days, especially minority people, church is--I think they're looking for a miracle to happen because minority people are always at the bottom of everything, the last of everything; a lotta people don't like to hear those words, but looking back at it then and exactly where it was--usually the last of any job to be let--you're the first one to let out.  So we go to church and--I think that bugs me still to this day.  We go to church, the church we went to they purchased a (unclear) furnace, and as these people would (unclear), they went and installed the furnace (unclear), they came back this Sunday to build a fire in the furnace.  It's a kid my age, you always like to see adults work.  I'm standing back fifteen feet from this--people who were installing this fire in this furnace; they put the paper in, they put the wood in, they light the paper, smoking cigarettes, the fire started burning, they put more wood in, they put coal in, I'm standing back fifteen feet, I'm seven--maybe eight years old by now, then there was some lady--people in those days dip snuff or chew tobacco or whatever, she sticks her head and she says "Boy, you come from down there 'fore you get in the way."  I'm fifteen feet away.  I detest this; still do.  I'm just looking at these people start a fire in this furnace.  My dad [David Budlam (ph) Brown] and my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] start a fire in their heater at home in the cook stove every day, no difference.  It just so happen this is a larger furnace.  This is Sunday; they go to church every week except Friday and Saturday.  It's Wednesday, we're at church and it's cold; nobody there.  I sneaks down, I do exactly what I see these fellows do.  I put the paper in this stove--in this furnace, I put the wood in there, I take some paper, I light the paper and I stick it in there and I watch trough this vent hole; boy, I'm proud of myself 'cause this fire is burning (laughter), and I gets a piece of wood and I put some coal--enough of coal in it, slide your hand, stick it in there 'cause I'm too small to put it on this shovel; lump of coal, another lump of coal, another lump of coal, I got everything burning.  The same snuff-dippin' lady she sticks her head in the basement "Boy, you come from down there 'fore you break something."  Well, I'm a kid, I obey an order.  So I go upstairs in church, sitting up there with my mom and dad, and I'm sitting on my little hands 'cause I don't want them to see my dirty hands.  Then the preacher says--after a few minutes the blower comes on in this furnace and the heat started coming up, then the preacher says "Folks, you can thank Brother Brown--Brothers and Sister Brown's son David for building us a fire."  And she said "I thought I told you to come from down there."  My dad say "Well, if he know what he's doing, what difference does it make?"  And then the heat begin to come up in the stove.  (Unclear).  It's one thing you shouldn't do--make sure you're, as a kid--you're doing the correct thing but don't just stop him completely.  You may stop doing anything and you grow up, first thing you know, you don't do anything.  That's one thing I got against them.
Story_ID: 36687
Speaker 1: And another thing I got against this one church, my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] sent my sister [Mary Brown] and I to another church; it was a Catholic church, and the reason we was in this particular church because we had to cross this main thoroughfare, and she runs across all this traffic.  We get to this Catholic church, this fellow says "You kids supposed to go to this other church."  Well, we crossed this main thoroughfare, we got there alright, and we sit there, and we sit there, and we sit there; this preacher says "Well, the white man got his heaven here on earth, and we black people, we 'gone get our heaven, get all our things we want when we die and go to heaven."  And I made my mind up, I'm gonna get more than what I want before I die; as a small kid (laughter), I wanted to do that.  And that was my motto about these churches; nothing against them, but it was the people that was in the church.  It's like that.  And I made it my business to help churches as I grew up and got in the business; made it my business to do the right thing for the church.  When people come to me with some cockamamie story, I believe I'd be arrogant to these people and straighten them out big time; they didn't like it, but that was tough.  Okay, let me go back to where we started before the church.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)
Story_ID: 36688
Speaker 1: We were just talking about you as an elementary school child, you know--age.  But tell me more about the school that you attended.  What school did you attend?
Speaker 2: In Carnes [Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee]?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.  Elementary school.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--it wasn't much there.  Of course you get your writing, your arithmetic and your reading.
Speaker 1: Tell me about the school building itself.
Speaker 2: Well it was a frame building--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and dirt, play grounds; the bathroom was off in a distance from the school, the boys on one side and the girls on the other side; all outside bathrooms, and I do remember there was a basketball court; it was dirt.  I think most of the girls played basketball and the boys played softball, all dirt playgrounds.  They went from first grade up to the eighth grade.  The high school started from ninth grade up to twelfth.
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?
Speaker 2: Beg pardon?
Speaker 1: What type of student were you?  What kind of student were you?
Speaker 2: I guess I was average schools--student 'cause my dad [David Budlam (ph) Brown] and mom [Mamie Ella Brown] made sure we got our lessons every day.  It was none of that monkey business of going out playing, you know?  We would get our homework, yet all our text books was secondary school text books; they come from the white schools.  We never got new text books, but a book is a book, you know?  Some of the pages was torn out but we made it.
Speaker 1: And what type of child were you?  Were you well-mannered or rambunctious or mischievous?
Speaker 2: Was no angel, wasn't no question about it.  My mom got no monkey business; she was no Mohican.  When she say "Stop," she mean stop; when she says "Move," you move.  She was just that type of a gal.
Speaker 1: Well, at that time, what were your dreams or aspirations?  We're talking about while you're in a grammar school age.  What did you think that you might wanna be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: I wanted to be an engineer of some type because back then, it was construction going on in the streets, you know?  One thing that fascinated me--my mom had me to take my dad a lunch which was cornmeal and gravy; it was about three blocks from the house.  The city was building a general electric generating plant and a black men was pushing a Georgia buggy.  The kids' dad, the white kids, were pulling electric cables through conduit, and I was wondering why my dad wasn't pulling cables through conduit rather than pushing these Georgia buggies full of concrete.  I says "Ain't no way in the heck I'm 'gone push a Georgia buggy; I'm 'gone pull cables through conduit."  And I pulled cables through conduit; that was--I'm a small kid, less than ten years old.  Yeah, then what fascinated me most about electric cables being pulled along the street then being put in, and as a gas pipe began to be laid, to watch these people thread these pipes, put 'em together, put 'em in the dish, telephone people run these cable--telephone cable lines; how they spliced these cables; they pulled--put a coupling on there and they put a (unclear), and they sealed these cables up.  I stood and watched them from a distance.  Now they're stringing these electric cables along these high tension lines; I watched that.  All this fascinated me.  I wasn't the type of kid that wanted to play ball on the street corner.  My mom didn't allow that, but I'd get pass the house down the street there, she'd tell me to push down Washington; I wanted to do that.  As I grow older, that's how I was doing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 36689
Speaker 1: So now, back at home when you're talking about electricity--just the cables coming to laid electricity, did you have a radio at your house?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what did you--was the whole family involved in listening to specific programs?
Speaker 2: Well to start off with, I made a--one of these new crystal sets [crystal radio receiver]--well, you're too young for that.
Speaker 1: What kinda set?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: A crystal set.
Speaker 1: Crystal?
Speaker 2: You gotta be my age to know what a crystal set is.  It's a radio, it's a--you have to have an antenna for it--a wire, and you put it in a cigar box.  It's a lead [?] piece, got a little--we call it whiskers, and you keep picking around this lead piece, you pick up the local radio.  Then--I'm in high school now, and then in high school General Electric and General Motors come to our school about every two months, I think it was, and they brought films--and interest me in this.  So after I got this crystal set goin', my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] had a radio there, a six-tube crystal set, a six-tube radio.  A six-tube radio you can short-wave, and I would dial it and I'd dial it and it says the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], London [England], Rome [Italy], and it had Berlin [German].  If you had an antenna, you could get those stations, so any neighborhood, I'm away from school, it's a fellow there had a repair shop; he repaired electric iron and electric lamps so he had a lotta junk there; he took interest in me because I was asking about this--what I saw at school when General Electric and General Motors had came there.  He interested me in it, and he told me to get some antenna wire, and I got a antenna wire at the dime store for a quarter, I put it on top of my house and hooked this up and started picking up the BBC and Berlin.  When the Italians was fightin' the Ethiopians in 1936, that's how I got interested in radio, and I got together some more kids, and we put together with this other fellow who had this radio repair shop--we built radios.  'Course the war [World War II] began to come on there and I got interested in what General Motors and General Electric was saying on these film they was givin' us.  I've been through electromagnets and this was the same thing as a doorbell, and I built my mom a doorbell; my mom had the only doorbell on the street, you know.  I was--almost burned the house down (laughter), but I built it.
Story_ID: 36690
Speaker 1: So now, with radio--I'll go back to the question again.  I know that you got the BBC, but was there a specific programming that your--that you and your brothers and sisters listened to locally?
Speaker 2: Well, listened to the war [World War II] news from the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation]; the war was going on then.
Speaker 1: Right, but did you listen to any programs like Amos 'n' Andy or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, my brothers and them probably did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-'The Lone Ranger', or anything like that.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--wasn't interested.  I was interested in the war--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because the Germans were putting out these magnetic floating mines, and magnetic corresponded what the BBC--what the General Electric was saying about a magnetic relay; it makes your relay--makes your aircraft flap--wing goes up and down, and those kinda correspond--that's my interest in them.
Speaker 1: Okay, and how did you originally get interested in aircraft, because as you're growing up and when you get to high school, you told us the story about how you were able to correct the teacher about how, you know, how he had the parts of the aircraft incorrect.  How did you begin to get interested in aircraft?
Speaker 2: Well, I had bought a bicycle by working at a cleaners, and I was (unclear) a steam boiler at a--in a cleaners, and I, and I bought a bicycle.  We used to ride out to the airport and we save our money and for a dollar, they would take us up and fly over the air--over the air field and back again, and all summer long we did this.  That's how I got interested in aircraft.  Much later, they had this regular engine, and General Motors was--say the difference between a two-cycle engine and a four-cycle engine and a radial engine.  A radial engine was for the aircraft; that's how I got interested in aircraft.
Speaker 1: I see.
Story_ID: 36691
Speaker 1: Now you talked about the fact that you were growing up during the [Great] Depression.  Did you really understand what the depression meant as a child?
Speaker 2: Sure, because there was just no food, and it was no things available like electric lights; you couldn't afford electric lights, you had to use gas kerosene lamps.  That was the main (unclear) that I remember during the depression. And the other thing I thought was just this morning--before the depression which we--I was in grade school, I believe, during--in the '20s [1920s].  In 1926 or '27 [1927], some type a program where grade school kids would--your parents would give you, I think it was twenty-five cents, to take to the school, and this was some type of a club you would invest in after so long, you get paid so much but during--after--between 1929 this all disappeared.  I thought about that this morning.
Speaker 1: So you invested the money but you never saw the return?
Speaker 2: Oh no, nothing.  It's all--that--it was in the school district.  And me and all the kids was takin' money to school--I think it was twenty-five cents, ever so often.  And every so many months you--or every something like that; just--I think I was 26, 27, 28 years old then.
Story_ID: 36692
Speaker 1: Was there anyone or even a teacher or someone that might have inspired you or influenced you in any way as a young adult?
Speaker 2: No, no, because I'm looking now, and back then 'cause I don't approve of nothing what they was doin' then because to me there was strictly books, poems--I can't make a living off of poems, can't make a living off of history unless I'm in the library business; I wasn't going into being a librarian.  I wanted to be an engineer, and nothing in grade school [Carnes Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] pointed to that.
Speaker 1: So what about when you got into high school?
Speaker 2: High school?  The only thing close to that was geography.  I liked the geography of the world; that interested me, and when we got in the lab, it started out with bisecting frogs and bisecting snakes; I wasn't going in that part of it but when we had brought in the Bunsen burners, one thing different was the electrostatic disk, but it didn't work because when we got it from the white school it was partially bent up, but I took an interest using the, the, the North Pole from the South Pole.  If they would have been too close together, you didn't get that static spark.  I took and I straightened 'em out and some got it, some didn't.  But nobody took interest in it.  So I just passed right on.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Mostly in this class, they was talking of building flower box and building steps for, for building for houses (unclear).
Speaker 1: But that's not what you were interested in.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.
Speaker 2: Have I used that--later on 'cause I built my own house hundred years later.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about the, the friends that you had in high school, and were there any other extra-curricular activities that you participated in in high school?
Speaker 2: No, only thing we--in high school we--a lotta friends we took interest in those film that General Motors and General Electric brought us.  It was two years of this they continued to bring it to us.  And a lot of us built radios, and a lot of the fellows did that or--what happened to them I don't know 'cause now it's getting close to the war and a lotta kids was getting drafted; some was older than I was, and they were--it wasn't draft time at that time but a lotta them were being volunteers for the--something called that they was--some kind of a military you could volunteer for.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: It wasn't the [U.S.] Army, it was something else and I can't recall what it was.
Speaker 1: The Coast Guards maybe?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: The Coast Guard maybe?
Speaker 2: No, it was something else beside that; it wasn't the Coast Guard, it was--I can't recall what it was.  It was something right next to the military, and you would go and you spend--for about seven or eight months, and you would get out.
Story_ID: 36693
Speaker 1: So you graduate from high school in about 1938 or so?
Speaker 2: '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: '39 [1939]?  Okay.  So what happens after high school?
Speaker 2: The war [U.S. entry into World War II] started immediately after I graduated from high school, and I went to work for a--a fellow who was a general--a lieutenant colonel in the First World War, and he was a piping contractor but I just--he had a heart attack and I just drove him from his home to his office.  He had a lot of blueprints in his car and I sat there until he got ready to go home--look at these blueprints of piping work, and shortly after that, I applied for a job at this--at an engineering store, and I got a job there at the Electrical Distribution Department.  I'll never know why I got a job in the electric department; all we did was when a request come down for electric parts, you just fill this order and put it on the escalator and ship it away.
Speaker 1: So this was right after high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 36694
Speaker 1: So the war [World War II] is going on, and what makes you decide or do you decide that you want to go into the military?
Speaker 2: I didn't want to go in military; I got drafted.
Speaker 1: You were drafted?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was working, and now I'm making sixty-two dollars an hour.
Speaker 1: How many hours--how many dollars an hour?
Speaker 2: Did I say dollars?  (Laughter)  I'm making sixty-two cents an hour and that was the going rate, I think.  And I, I worked eight hours a day; it was the night shift.
Speaker 1: So since you didn't want to go into the service, what were your thoughts about the war?
Speaker 2: You had no thoughts.  When the war is going on, if you didn't have a job, they gave you a job; this was the going thing.  The cops would stop you on the corner, if you were waiting for a bus. You had to show them your draft card or your registration card.  You had to register before you left school.  If you hadn't registered, you were real high in making being registered, and if you wasn't drafted, they would put you in a--on a job, and you would work.  Was no unemployment back then; they put you in a job where you would be working during a war material.
Speaker 1: So what was it like when you received your draft notice?
Speaker 2: I think it hurt my mom [Mamie Ella Brown; more than] anything else because I got married on a Saturday, and Monday morning I got this letter "Greetings:  United States Army."
Story_ID: 36695
Speaker 1: So you got married.  So tell us about how you met your wife.
Speaker 2: Well, I met my wife--my brother, he was a ladies' man.  He ahh said "Let's go swimming."  Okay, I'm listening to the war over the radio so alright, I went swimming with him.  In swimming, come a bunch of kids in his graduation class; he's two years behind me.  These girls graduated with him.  So he's yaking with these girls outside the swimming pool; he calls me over and introduced me to these girls.  Well I didn't wanna be bothered with these yakers, these yakety yakety yakers (laughter), so I'm trying to find out where to get to leave these girls, up drives an ice cream vendor.  Well girls, when they see the ice cream vendor drive up, they all 'gone want these ice cream vendors to give 'em some ice cream, so they stopped talking to us and start talking to the ice cream vendor, and my chance to get away from 'em.  So I left and went back into the pool.  One month later, I'm in--I'm working at this engineering depot, I go to town and I get my paycheck, I go to town--I don't know what I went in town for, so I go in the dime store to get me a--some chocolate covered peanuts, as I come out, I walkin' in this young lady.  She say "Aren't you Grover Brown's brother?"  I say "Yeah."  She say "You don't remember me do you?"  I say "No, I haven't seen you before."  She said "I went to a group (unclear) at the swimming pool; you didn't have time to talk to us."  "Well, sorry about that."  She says "Are you going home?"  I say "Yeah."  She say "You mind dropping me off at home?"  "No, I don't mind."  And she suggests we take a ride because it's early.  I said "You wanna go for a ride?  I'm 'gone show you an airplane."  I took her out to the airport; she wasn't interest in the airport.  I'm 'gone show her the Piper Cub.  On the way out to the airport--I just put a radio in my car--(Unclear) to have radios in those days you had to put one in.  I turned the radio on, Bing Crosby singing "I don't wanna set your heart on fire."  "Oh, I don't like that kinda music."  She turned it off and turned on the yakety yak music.  I almost put her out; if it hadn't been so far from home I would have told her to get outta my car (laughter).  But she's so far from home and I'll be a gentleman.  "Okay."  I turn it off and I go to the airport, we see the Piper Cub.  She could kill this.  "This is a prop; it's a real engine, this is a joy stick, this is, this is" (laughter)--everything.  So the guy walks up and he says "You're one of the kids wanted to get a job out here."  She said "Will you tell this kid he's too small to work out on an aircraft?"  I knew she was having no interest and I took her home.  And then she says "I'd like for you to come out here and meet my parents."  "Well, alright, I'll meet your parents."  A week later I go and I meet her parents.  But meeting her parents, as I'm sitting there with the old man and her mom and six other kids.  Well I got, I got brothers and sisters at home.  But they're smaller than my brothers and sisters; they're looking--and you don't need me (unclear) yakin' and yakin' and yakin', so I quit.
Story_ID: 35636
Speaker 1: Okay, so continue telling us the story about--so you met your wife's parents--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and what happened next?
Speaker 2: After I went out and met my wife's parents, well I didn't get a chance to talk to them 'cause she had six--six sisters and brothers there; they were small kids.  They look at me and they'll laugh, they look at me and they'll laugh.  Well you know how young kids are; three, four, five and six years old.  So after my wife come home from work, she invited me in the kitchen and had sliced pineapples and lemonade I think, and mom goes over these containers, comes in, she dips, she gets a container of sugar out and it's strange to me; that much sugar in about a thirty-gallon container.  And I asked my wife, I says "Your family have that much sugar?"  She says "Sure, my parents got (unclear) out on the farm; they got meal, they got flour, they got sugar in thirty-gallon containers."  But this is strange to me.  She goes "I can get a whole container of butter."  It wasn't butter like I see in sticks--in a great big (unclear), but this is all Greek to me; I didn't know anything about it.  They got a big laugh outta me, you know?  But they live on the edge of town; so anyway, I says "Well, she's an interesting kid but that's about all as far as I wanna go."  So anyway, I--she said "Well, when will we meet again?"  I said "We'll go to a movie."  She says "Well you come out; I get off of work at a certain time, come out and we'll go from here to a movie."  So I'm out there waiting for her at her parents' house, she walks up with another young lady and some guy, and this guy is a fellow that I remembered seeing when I was going to high school; we all went to the same school--high school.  And this clown was a guy who stood on the street corner waving at the girls, drinking beer and smoking cigars.  Well, this type of a crowd we didn't associate with.  This guy didn't go to school with her; I was done then.  She come and sat on this--on the porch; I get up and I leave.  She walks out to the car "Well I'm sorry."  I say "Well, if that's the type of (unclear) you wanna deal with, go for it; it's not my type of people."  I left.  She calls me up, it's Sunday morning and she say "I'm sorry."  I say "Well, don't be sorry, that's your type of people, that's not mine."  She say "Well I'd like for you to do a favor for me and you can do it if you just say 'yes.'"  I'm always a hand at helping people.  I thought maybe her dad wanted me to help him fix a faucet or something.  I drive out, she comes out the door with a picnic basket; I'm stupid, I don't know a picnic basket from a shopping cart.  She walks down the side of the house; in the back of the house is a river but I didn't know this, and there's a shed there--is a old man with a rowboat; she gets in this rowboat, we row across the river, and it's a picnic grounds there; nothing but picnic tables; no automobiles, no bicycles, just picnic tables.  She is putting this spread--she made us cheese sandwiches and lemonade.  She said "I just wanna have time to apologize."  And I say "Don't apologize; if that's your speed, go for it; it's not mine."  She say "I wanna apologize because he was just there at the bus stop."  I say "Well, you come home with him; I'm done with it."  She couldn't change my mind one or the other.  So we left, and I was telling these old men at work about it and they jumped all over me.  Says "You left that kid, and now (unclear) who walked down the street with her."  I say "Well, I do; I don't pick up any tramp walkin' down the street with me."  "Well, you're too hard on her."  So I finally give over to these old men; they was older than I was, so I give over to her.  So--come back, I say "Okay, I apologize; I'm too hard on you."
Story_ID: 35637
Speaker 1: We went to a movie. You go to a movie, you buy your ticket, a black person has to go to an alley, walk up in the alley, go up a fire escape to the top of the building; any movie there in Memphis [Tennessee]--same, same movie.  The white person seats; same price.  It's what we had to be content with.  Whatever you buy, you pay the same price they buy.  It's what I had to buy.  So having this young lady you, you resent that but you had to do it (unclear).  I think we went to a movie four times the whole time we was together and we--I knew my wife about eleven months before we got married.
Speaker 2: And what's your wife's name?
Speaker 1: Well, she just didn't like it but the only time we could be together that's all we had time to do was go to the movie.  No other place to go.  She worked in the day time and I worked at night.
Speaker 2: What was her name?
Speaker 1: Willie Mae Childress.
Speaker 2: And where did she work?
Speaker 1: I didn't realize this until I got overseas--worked at the draft board, at the same draft board that I was inducted through.  We talked about this after I got overseas but it was no big deal.
Story_ID: 35638
Speaker 1: I wanna go back just a little bit.  You know, when you were talking about this--about going to the swimming pool and tell me what it was like.  Was this a city pool [in Memphis, Tennessee]?  Where was this pool?
Speaker 2: City pool, yes.  It was right behind this grade school I went to [Carnes Elementary School].
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell me about the merchants and the stores and how did you shop?  And you said you went into the five and dime to buy nuts or--whatever.  Tell me what the race relations was like in your town.
Speaker 2: You go into the dime store you had a counter you stood at, you know--white counter and you had a colored counter you stood at to get waited on.  And the corner drugstore which always bring back a memory to me--when I went through the neighborhood with these white kids, we'd play ball together for about three or four minutes, and we all go to the corner drugstore--then you bought ice cream cones and milk shakes at the corner drugstore.  They go to the counter and I had to go around to the side door to get my ice cream cone--for the same ice cream.
Speaker 1: And then how did that make you feel?
Speaker 2: Back then I would feel lousy.  Well, you know, as a kid--you're just a young kid.
Speaker 1: So it was just everyday life for you?
Speaker 2: It was everyday life, yeah.  You think about this once you got in the service.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then tell me about the car that you purchased.  You saved your money to buy a car.  What type of car was it and do you remember how much you paid for it?
Speaker 2: I paid $125.00 for it; it was a 1920--1935 Oldsmobile.  And I think I put down twenty-five dollars, and I paid five dollars a month toward it.  No heaters and no radios.
Story_ID: 35639
Speaker 1: Okay, so let's now move on to--we can continue on that you get your draft notice right after you get married that Saturday, and Monday you have the draft notice.  So tell me what happens next.
Speaker 2: Well, I--I got that draft notice, my brother got a draft notice the same day.  Well, it really shook my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] up, you know, and my wife [Willie Mar Childress] had just left and went to work and the mail come around about nine o' clock in the morning.  Well I'm figuring that before I open this letter, that I'm 'gone have at least another six months.  As I opened the letter, it says "Be on the train December the--January the 28th [1943]." That would be that Thursday, for Fort Benning, Georgia.  Said you be no later than 2300 hours at Fort Benning, Georgia. So that Thursday we get on the train and everybody is on the train together; got no, no mix, no, no shepherd, nobody in the back of this car, nobody in the front; everybody's all together.  The train rolls on about--early or later on in the day it rolls into Atlanta, Georgia.  This fellow comes to the car he says "All them black kids downstairs in the basement, all the white kids up in the dining room."  On our way to Fort Benning, Georgia.  After we finished eating this--food--we called it garbage, you board the train, we wind up in Fort Benning, Georgia long after midnight.  We're all in the same dining room all sittin' together now.  After we finished eating milk and coffee and cold cuts, they march you down. So he says, "Everybody in this line go in this barracks."  My brother and I were walking side-by-side, and that's how we got separated 'cause he was in this (DEMONSTRATION) line and I'm in the other line; that's how we got separated.  If we had been in front of each other--behind each other, we'd been together.  So he, he was put in his barracks 'cause we was together for about three days until about the third morning I went back to pick him up and he was all gone; I don't know where they sent him.
Speaker 1: And which brother was this?
Speaker 2: Grover.
Speaker 1: Grover.  And was this the first time that you were away from home?
Speaker 2: First time in my life; any of us.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35640
Speaker 1: So now that you're at Fort Benning [Georgia], did you have any expectations of what it would be like?
Speaker 2: No, 'cause you were busy.  For about twelve hours a day you--"let's go, let's go, let's go, let's move it, let's go."  You get shots, you get examination.  "Open your mouth, open your eyes, do you hear this?"  All kinds of ammunition there.  You try this on, you try this on, how this fits.  And you, you're frightened to death 'cause now I'm alone; I got a thousand kids there, you never seen 'em before.  My brother's [Grover Brown] gone now; my brother and I been fightin' like dogs, ever since we've been born (laughter), but now he's gone.  One thing I wanna mention, the day we left, I looked back at the house in January [1943] and I saw my mom [Mamie Ella Brown] standing on the porch in January seeing the two of us leave home the same day together; that must have been an awfully bad feeling for my mom to see her two oldest sons leave the same day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what else do you remember about--how, how was boot camp?  What do you remember about boot camp?
Speaker 2: Well now, Fort Benning is a--it's a induction center; they just tell you--they swear you in, hold your hand up and "Do you swear to do this?"  Everybody said "Drop dead."  But after we get all our gear issued to us like shoes and whatever--get your shots and examination, you're put on a train.  After about four days, ship us to boot camp which is in Newport, Louisiana.  So we arrive in about four or five days later; that's summer time down in New Orleans--Camp Harahan they call it--in February and the flowers are bloomin' and the (unclear) is nothing but seashells; it's just like looking to the mirror down there, and they tell you every day "You got a left and a right foot; left, right, left, right."  For three weeks, that's all that's goin' on.
Story_ID: 35641
Speaker 1: So when we're in [Camp] Harahan, Louisiana and kids are getting rambunctious, you wanna know how long it'll be before we go to town and this drill sergeant says "Ain't no town" (laughter).  And we hate him because he got that remark about "You in this Army the duration plus six; I'm your drill sergeant for duration, for the next five months."  Real arrogant about it, you know?  He treated us like you're a criminal, and every day is "Left, right, left, right."  Somebody says "Don't this clown know we got a left and a right foot long before we got here."  "Who said this?"  "I did."  "Report after chow."  And after chow, he got his (unclear) back up and down the camp all by himself, so he learned how to keep his mouth shut.  So now we go to this wooden structure, it says "Land Ship;" they teach us how to operate a cargo ship.  Everything aboard this cargo ship is aboard this land ship; I'm familiar with it because I was a Boy Scout in grade school.  You learn how to handle pulleys and ropes and tie knots in ropes, and I worked at this, this cleaners fryin' this boiler; I knew all about steam boilers.  So I was always ahead of the class when they asked questions.  "What is this?"  "Pull this rope down through this pulley, what's that called?"  "It's a pulley, and you pull it down and this is called--you reduce the stress when you pull it up; you call that workmanship."  "Right;" and he goes on naming names.  You get to this--this is a steam-operated vessel.  "What's this called?"  "Show me a hundred pounds of pressure."  "Psi--what does Psi stand for?"  "Pounds per square inch."  "Right, what's your name soldier?"  So I always was ahead of the class in that type of thing.  So we finally forget--then we were taken down to the Port of New Orleans and then I see a real ship, a 10,000 ton cargo ship.  When we get down there to the Port of New Orleans, it says "Allow you permission to come aboard ship."  "We don't want no niggers come aboard our ship."  Now this person on this ship says--guy say "We can take that ship and shove up your mother's blankety blank blank" (laughter).  "Now we better take these kids back to camp."  So that settled that deal.  We went back to camp and they says that ahh we're all goin' to the rifle range.  They take you to rifle range, they give you the Springfield rifle.  I never shot a rifle before in my life.  "Now I want prone position."  Not missing the target, he say my (unclear) rifle--he bring up his white flag.  It's impossible--I'm shootin' at the rifle--at this target, and I'm looking at this fellow on the right, I see this smoke from his cigarette, it's blowin' towards me and I'm thinking this wind is blowin' this rifle bullet away from this target; did I move this rifle's pointer away--towards this, this target?  And each time I do that then this white flag come up closer to this round circle 'til I got to the circle and I fire away.  So then they take us away, and then they brought us back for this M-1 rifle; it had sixteen rounds in it.  So now I use the same procedure, and every time I fire this practice rifle, I finally got this target and emptied this sixteen rounds in this target.  When we got back to camp, they would call out everybody who, who, who profit--who had a good score.  Say "Dave Brown, Marksmanship Medal;" some guy that got sharpshooters.  Guy say "You gotta go be in infantry."  America is not 'gone like no black man bein' in the infantry because they don't want no black man killin' no white man.  So we're a little worried about that because we're the port battalion; port battalion, you work aboard cargo ships all the time.
Story_ID: 35642
Speaker 1: Then they moved the company to Charleston, South Carolina.  Now we had no officers in [Camp] Harahan, Louisiana.  No officers there--had one captain, and that was that company commander; he stayed in Louisiana when they moved us to South Carolina.  We had these company officers; they'd come out of Fort Benning [Georgia]; they was, they was just regular, just, just, just regular grounds troops.  They had no training of troops--of ships at all.  They come with the idea--with all these southern ideas, but when they come to 490 (ph.), they was warned, say "You don't have to raise your voice because as you get older, you're 'gone need your voice box."  Say "Everybody in the 490 got good hearing, so keep your voice down."  'Cause they wanted to raise their voice--think they can frighten the troops 'cause they would fight in the 490; we started off that way.
Speaker 2: Before you go on, let me ask you about the names.  Who was your drill sergeant?  The one that, that you had at--
Speaker 1: You want me to go that far?  The drill sergeant was Sergeant Green.
Speaker 2: Green, okay.
Speaker 1: And he was nothin' to look at.
Speaker 2: And who was the captain, do you remember?
Speaker 1: No, I don't--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --'cause we never was involved with 'em that much.  Most of 'em was just drill sergeants.  I remember the first sergeant because I had problems with the first sergeant.  I don't know if you want me to that far with him, but--
Speaker 2: Sure, tell us, tell us about it.  Who was--what was the first sergeant's name?
Speaker 1: Doberson.  First sergeant--he was a big heavy-set guy, and he was with the first--or the first--he was the first war [World War I?]; he was left over from the first war.  So when I run into him was after four weeks come around; they're holding (ph.) married soldiers can have their wives to come to town--have your wife to get in touch with the Red Cross and let the Red Cross get in touch with your company commander.  The rule is your wife come to town on a Friday, Saturday and Sunday; nothing else because you're in training five days a week--Monday through Fridays.  She come to town on a Friday afternoon, get a pass, go to town Friday afternoon, come back Saturday morning, turn in that pass, go to town Saturday night, come back Sunday morning, turn in that pass Sunday morning, pick up that pass Sunday noon.  I did this.  My wife's [Willie Mae Childress] in town Friday, Saturday and Sunday.  Sunday morning, I come to the camp, turn in my pass and go back Sunday noon, pick up my pass and coming--commander wasn't in the office for assigning (unclear); he don't even know my name.  I say "Good morning Sarge."  It's at noon Sunday, now.  I say "I come to pick up my pass."  He said "Get the hell outta my office, I'm not 'gone issue your pass."  I say "Hold on there, Sarge."  I says "My wife's in town, and if I don't show up, she won't know what happened."  He say "I'm goin' in town and I'm 'gone pick up your wife, I'm 'gone spend the night in town with your wife."  It's no way in the world--it's no cotton pickin' first rate--first sergeant 'gone talk to me that way.  I walk across the street to B Company--I'm in A Company; I go across the street to B Company and reported this to the B Company commander what this first sergeant just told me.  The B Company commander issued me a B Company pass.  The wife and I is in town, we decide to go on a ferry boat ride and low and behold, on this first sergeant--on this ferry boat, this stupid first sergeant is on this same boat on the, on the automobile--on the lower deck.  He looked up and he saw me with my wife.  He shook his fist at me; he assumed I was in town without a pass.
Story_ID: 35643
Speaker 1: Monday morning, I say goodbye to my wife [Willie Mae Childress], she went home, I went back to camp [Harahan, Louisiana], he [first sergeant] called me in the office, he tells my company commander, "This soldier was in town yesterday without a pass."  My company commander looked at me and he says "Aren't you Dave Brown?"  "Yes."  He say "Well you have a pass."  "I know."  I say "But the first sergeant wouldn't give me my pass."  He say "Well how you get to town?"  I says "After the sergeant told me he would issue my pass, he 'gone spend the night in town with my wife, I walked across the street to B Company and reported this to the company commander, he issued me a B Company pass."  The company commander says "Good thinking; I'm happy to know I have a soldier in my company who can think on his feet; I wanna shake your hand soldier."  He shook my hand and he said, "Dismissed."  I salute and I left.  When I left, he jumped all over this first sergeant; he cursed him up and down from one end to the other, and everything he called this first sergeant, nothing connected with the military; everything was southern words from A to Z.  Now I knew that this first sergeant was gonna take his punishment out on me, so I stayed outta his way.  Being this monkey's a southerner, he is dumb as a bucket-a-rocks (laughter).  And for four months straight, I stayed out of his way.  For four months, every evening--every afternoon.  See, he can't touch me from after 4:00--after 4--after 5:00 in the evening, but from 5:00 in the morning 'til 5:30 in the evening, he can't touch me because I'm on duty, but after 5:30, he can come and get me and do anything he want with me.  So I, I knew this.  And every evening after 5:30, here he come looking for me and I'm looking straight at him and he can't see me 'cause he's stupid, dumb and crazy.  So I stayed out of his way for four months.  He come through-- I'm in Barrack Two; he come in Barrack Two, he look in every bunk there.  I'm in Barrack Three.  He gets in Barrack Three, I'm in Barrack Four.  He gives up, he goes to the recreation hall; that's the last place I go.  He that stupid to think I'm going to the recreation hall.  Four months later, they send the company to South Carolina [unclear].  Now they taking us down to the ocean to swim and I drank too much of that water, I guess, and I got sick.  The next day, I went to the doctor and he gave me some medication and told me to go back in the bed, stay in bed.  Now we're in tents here in South Carolina.  They put the black kids in tents, they didn't put us in barracks there.  Now I'm sick as a dog, doctor says stay in bed so I'm in bed and here come this first sergeant--first time he'd seen me since Louisiana.  He jerks me outta the bed.  "I knew I'd finally catch you with--you smart blankety blank."  And I walks away from him, went down to the doctor's office, the doctor walks me back up, put me back in bed, he walks up to the office, he jumps all over this first sergeant.  He told him he ever look at his patient again, he goin' back to Louisiana in a wooden box, and it won't be anything connected with the military.  He say "All you're good for is a fat target."  He say "And you're goin' back to the that wooden box; that's not a threat, that's a promise" (laughter).  And he walked back to my tent and he says "You hang in there, soldier."  Now this is the second time this first sergeant's been in trouble because of me; one more, he 'gone lose his stripes.
Story_ID: 35644
Speaker 1: So now in South Carolina--
Speaker 2: So what part of South Carolina is this?
Speaker 1: Charleston, South Carolina.
Speaker 2: Charleston, okay.
Speaker 1: On August the 20th [1943].  Seventy years ago today, they put us on this train headin' north.  The next morning we wind up in Newport News, Virginia.  Oh, by the way, I gotta tell you this.  On this train, somewhere between South Carolina and North Carolina, August 20th, about one o'clock in the morning, the train stopped to refuel; during the refueling stops, some rocks was thrown against this train.  As the MPs [military police?] chased these people away, heard a voice says "What's goin' on over there?"  And that voice says "There's a train load of niggers."  A few minutes later, after this train was finished refueling, the train pulls away, we wind up that morning in Newport News, Virginia.  So now we go to this mess hall eatin' breakfast.  Now we notice in this mess hall everybody's sittin' together; all the blacks and the whites are all together now.  All we're interested in is how far did you guys come?  How long was you on the train?  Did they tell what you 'gone do once you get here?  And everybody's buddy-buddy now.  Down in Louisiana, you sit blacks on this side and whites on this side (DEMONSTRATION).  Still in the United States Army--in America.  The reason that is, everybody says "Well that's what happens in a democratic country."  So after breakfast, we go back to our barracks, this one guy come along--we don't know who is--he's just attached to Newport News, so we named him Mack.  Mack says "Okay fellows, we're going to get some new clothing," so we go get new clothes and they're all winter clothing.
Story_ID: 35645
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were talking about you being in Wales [Cardiff, South Wales; February 1944] and you're just waiting.  Now--so what happens now?  When do you get the orders to move, or what happens next?
Speaker 2: South Wales--was there (unclear) from February, come March, April, and when we get to May [1984], I got a notice from the captain who wanted to see me in the office; this is May the 8th.  He says, "Sergeant Brown, I wanna transfer you to the [U.S.] Navy temporarily."  He said, "Just wear your ODs (ph.), your helmet and your back pack and your rifle (unclear)."  See, you don't--you don't ask questions, you just receive your orders and go with it.  Navy picks me up, I go to the Naval--Naval officer hands me a .45 [gun] and another cartridge belt and I'm thinking this is a lotta fire power on the--with the (unclear).  So he introduced me to another fellow name Mike; he's a Naval guy.  So he says, "You two fellows walk up and down this waterfront in front of these tea houses.  See, they have no military people in this town at all; no Navy or no Army; they all been removed.  You're the only two Navy or Army people in this town; nothing but British people."  So we walking up and down this waterfront; boy, I hope the war will be over, I hope it won't be no invasion.  Boy, if I was home, I'd be getting' ready for this, be getting' ready for that.  Out step a young lady outta the door of a tea house.  She says, "This is the love of my life; the cream of the Irish and the chocolate soldiers."  She said, "Why don't you--" she told us to come in and have a spot of tea.  We looked at each other and said, "Well heck, there's nobody in town, why not?"  We step inside the tea house, first thing I notice it was two men on the far end of this tea house.  Well, we figure it was two British people; we didn't bother about 'em.  Standing at the bar, she poured us a cup of tea in the cup there--a real small amount; it wasn't sweet and it wasn't cold.  She started talkin' about how the weather changes as soon as the sun goes down, and that's how the debris come outta these hills; you gotta wash your face and your arms because this debris would damage your face; just something she wanted  to talk about.  Then she turned and walked to the door.  As we walked to the door, she turned and she kissed me right on the forehead twice--smack, smack.  She turned and kissed this other fellow right on the forehead--smack, smack.  He figured that's an awful strange way of kissin' a person, then she say, "Cheerio, chaps."  As we walked away, a weapon-carrier rushed past us with five military police in 'em, rushing this tea house, and brought these two men out; they was German spies.  This whole thing was set up to catch these two German spies; this young lady she was a spy agent herself, and we were set up--they set this whole program up to catch spies.  And this was like--along this waterfront they were pickin' up spies 'cause the invasion was comin' up close.
Story_ID: 35646
Speaker 1: They had taken us back to our camp.  This was the 8th of April--of May, 1944.  The 28th of May, an officer came to my camp, said "490 [Port Battalion], you will be in the invasion; you will land on Utah Beach [the code name for the right flank, or westernmost, of the Allied landing beaches during the D-Day invasion of Normandy, as part of Operation Overlord on 6th June 1944].  You will not write any more letters, no phone calls, no telegram, no newspaper."  The newspaper people were completely in a lock-down mode.  They have no telegram, no newspaper--no newspaper, no radios, no typewriters.  The only thing they have is what they're wearing.  They're not allowed in, they're not allowed out.  And that's sad; since the news was locked up, we knew we would be able to get where we're going without being molested.  But we wondered "Where the heck is Utah Beach?"  Utah Beach could be anywhere; it could be in Norway, it could be in North Africa.  But that was the (unclear).  It was the 28th of May.
Speaker 2: Before you go on, can I ask you what was your captain's name at that time, and what was the name of the town that you were in--that you walked along the waterfront?
Speaker 1: Well, we didn't know the town that we was walkin' along from, it was just a waterfront.
Speaker 2: Okay, alright.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And our captain--I think was Captain MacNally (ph.), I believe it was--was our captain there.
Story_ID: 35647
Speaker 1: Alright, so--now May 28th [1944].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so what happens next?
Speaker 2: Then after May 28th, they issued our--they were rationing our fuel rationing, our ammunition and I had about a hundred rounds of 30s and I had about--I had eight pineapples--pineapples are hand grenades, and eight days of fuel (ph.) rations.  Not everybody could lay that rifle on the bed, or desk--the only thing that's 'gone keep you alive.  The only thing that faced us now is two things:  You 'gone live or you 'gone die, that's the only thing that faced us.  The only thing we was sayin'.  The first of June come around, we get orders that a general was comin' to have a word with us about our portion of the invasion.  What the heck a stupid general know that we don't already know?  We don't want no pep talk.  We got this rifle, we got our helmet, we got our ammunition--it's the only thing 'gone save us; stupid pep talk not 'gone do it so you can leave that back--the stupid people that live back in America.  That's how we were back then; 'cause you know we 'gone die or we 'gone live, it's all that matters now.  So we're waiting for this general to arrive so this captain come to me, he say, "Sergeant Brown, when the general arrive, I want you to do a clown act for me."  He said, "When the general arrive, I'll call your name and you say 'Yes sir, captain.'"  I looked at him and I say "Captain, I'd rather not do that."  And this Georgia boy looked at me with those Georgia eyes; I could tell when he looked at me, it was saying 'court martial.'  And I looked back at him and these Mohican eyes looked at him and says 'Kill him.'  And the only way I could get outta gettin' a court martial, I have to kill him.  We're goin' into an invasion--everybody; either you 'gone live or die, it's just that simple.  So we goin' along, he walks down the road and he gets another guy named Jackson to do it.  So the general arrived, and Jackson did this stupid Georgia boy clown act.  The general turns to this captain, he said, "Captain, you are a disgrace to the American Army; you're not fit to wear that uniform; if I had the time, I'd remove that uniform from you.  We're going to Germany to kill Germans; the act you're going on with will get all these American soldiers killed.  I don't wanna have any more to do with it."  He walks away, he never said a word to us.  Now this stupid captain stood there like an idiot; he said "Dismissed."  And that evening late, I heard some soldiers singin' some religious songs.  Says, "You clowns must be gettin' frightened--gettin' scared now."  So I walked up there, now all these soldiers who was from Georgia were circled around this captain; he's sittin' in the center of this circle, like some chief.  They sittin' around him singing these religious songs.  Well, it's kinda late now and they kinda--'course any day now--we still don't know what day we're going to the invasion, but we know--this is just like the first day of June.  The second day rolls around, then morning the word comes down, "Off and on, fall out and load up."  They mean you get up off your rear end, fall out on the trucks--fall out on the company street (ph.), and load up on the trucks.  We get aboard the train, train starts moving.  After two hours, I began to walk through the train and I say, "Where are those officers?"  He say, "They didn't get aboard our train."  I say, "How you know?"  He say, "When the train left, they still on the--on the platform."  Well, then I missed these monkeys.
Story_ID: 35648
Speaker 1: We rode on 'til about midnight and a strange voice said "490 [Port Battalion], fall out and you 'gone sleep two hours, you 'gone fall out and you sleep--ready to roll."  Now I figure we 'gone--this is a strange guy--we're 'gone be here 'til sun up; this time I was dead wrong.  One hour late--later, "Fall out and load up."  We was loadin' both of these trucks, daylight come around, we was along the waterfront and thousand and thousand landing craft; this is the Third of June.  We got aboard this landing craft, in fact this strange voice says, "Fourth Platoon, go aboard Craft 525," and that's me--Fourth Platoon.  I got aboard this landing craft and it's loaded with ammunition from top to bottom.  It's about--more than six feet high, so I gotta crawl over the top, and I walks in the rear of this landing craft, there stood two sailors and they says, "Welcome aboard, Army."  Says, "We'll get you across to the other side safe; problem is you need to take care of yourself after you get there."  I say, "Now you got a deal."  So that sided (unclear) with me with these sailors 'cause they--I could hear what instruction they be receivin'.  So I sits down on top of these 155 mm. shells, 105s, some 90s and some 40s, and to my left there's some crates of one gallon cans of sliced peaches.  I'm thinkin' "what a combination."  Well we backed away.  With the Army, that's the way they shipped things--food and ammunition and fuel is all together.  Now we join a lotta the other ships movin' down this river going towards the English Channel.  When we get to the English Channel, there's these thousands and thousands of landing craft, all the same type.  By about three o' clock that Saturday afternoon, all headed out towards France--all headin' east.  We still don't know where we're goin' but this sailor told us we're goin' across the other side; the other side is France, that's how I knew we were goin' to France.  Nobody ever said, "Yeah, we're going to France."  You use your common sense.  Saturday evening was pretty nice; the sun's shining, weather was nice and--as far as the eye could see over the horizon, landing crafts; 340s in front of you to the left, to the right and behind you; as far as you can see nothin' but landing crafts.  Nightfall a storm comes up.  Sunday morning comes around and--goin' up in the air and down under, up in the air and down under; now the waves are comin' across the top of the craft, everybody's layin' flat on the stomach, and the chin is glued to the ammunition because ammunition is all in crates, and they're a lot heavier than you are and the waves can't wash them off; they will wash you off 'cause you're a lot lighter, so you hold on to the ammunition for dear life.  The winds are comin' across the top of these waves--these landing crafts and they're watchin' you die 'cause you got your face down onto the ammunition to keep from swallowing this water.  It goes on all day Sunday, Sunday night.  Monday morning, the Navy comes along so they make a 180 degree left turn, keep they craft in trail (ph.).  The invasion is postponed; America has taken Rome [Italy].  And that's sad; everybody come to the conclusion the war 'gone be over in a few days 'cause 180 degrees is the direction we just came from England.  So it means we're goin' back to England and that the invasion is postponed; sure, the invasion 'gone be over in ten days, and that back in Rome--in Italy the Americans taken Rome.  All the picture shows where we--the war 'gone be over with.  So we're in good luck but we're still fightin' these waves--all day Monday morning.  Monday night, I decide to take a nap layin' on top of these ammunition.
Story_ID: 35649
Speaker 1: Tuesday [June 6, 1944] morning, some guy say, "Hey Sarge, they're bombing the beach."  "You're crazy, they're not bombing the beach."  And I wake up, they were bombing the beach; from the right to the left, from the right to the left, from right to left--all Tuesday morning.  So as the daylight begin to appear over France, all the ships that go in the same direction, everybody--are stopping at disorganized rotation; some goin' east, some goin' west, some goin' north, some goin' south.  And we were going north; we kept goin' north.  Now the waves begin to settle down; it's still choppy.  Now I notice up ahead of us was a striped war ship; he was shining (unclear) ashore.  I didn't pay attention where these waves--where shell was falling, but I notice we have these--shell--leave these guns on this war ship; these flame burners, go down and hit the water level.  I'm thinkin' 'I hope we don't get too close to this war ship 'cause if that flame hit these shells, we are suckin' duck.' As we got mid-ship, he made a U-turn to the right, in his U-turnin', I turned my head to the left and my chin is still fastened tight against these ammunition, and I spotted that building that you see now in History Channel, two-story building that's on the top of that hill that you see on History Channel, and the gunfire was goin' galore.  It was no firing from where we were, but you could hear it on the beach over there.  It was Omaha Beach.  But we weren't going there, we were goin' back to Utah Beach so we kept goin' south now.  As the daylight approaches, I saw that (unclear) stickin' out in the channel like a sore thumb, and along--parallel this was these landing craft that goin' beside of 'em--these two-stage landing craft, and they was already goin' on to Utah Beach unloadin' their vehicles, the tanks and their troops.  They're goin' onto the beach through the--through this opening that was in the beach head.  Well, there was no gun firing going across; true, we're goin' across at a fast pace but they weren't runnin', 'cause when you're sure--we were pretty sure they were goin' right parallel beside of it and he go right through there and there was nobody on that beach, and this went on all morning.  At eight o' clock, we was supposed to go ashore, and we kept goin'--move up a little bit, and we move up a little bit and stop and move up a little bit and stop.  All at once, the sailor says, "Go short."  So we stop, and there was a whole bunch of ships in front of us--landing craft rather.  Then all at once, four landing crafts blew up in front of us; we never did find out who it was because in World War II, information didn't pass like they do today; if you saw it, then you just kept it to yourself.  So we didn't bother about it; we kept waiting, kept waiting, so finally our sailor come along and says, "The beach master step on a landing craft because the tide was going out and the beach master didn't want the landing craft stuck three or 400 feet from the beach 'cause the land vehicles gets bogged down in this soft sand unloading these landing crafts and when tide comes back in, they'd be under the water, so they didn't that; they'd stop us that far; they're waitin' for the tide to come back in.  Same time--every once in a--maybe five minutes, a shell would come out from the beach.  This was a (unclear) box; a gun was fired from a (unclear) box--a German (unclear) box.  So we couldn't find him but the Navy was lookin' for it.  Navy finally find this gun in the gun slot and it kept firing at this pure box.  As it got to five shots--'cause we could see this fireman's shell comin' from this Navy ship hit this pure box and bouncin' off his pure box just like a tennis ball.  Now we figure we're in bad trouble 'cause if that shell don't penetrate that (unclear) box, we in trouble buddy.  It was shelling down the (unclear)--the beach; it wasn't shelling out to the water, just straight down the beach, which we gotta cross.  And this went on all day long.
Story_ID: 35650
Speaker 1: At the same time, the 8th Air Force and the 9th Air Force--the 9th Air Force was patrolling the beach [Utah Beach, Normandy, France; Allied Invasion of Normandy, June 6, 1944; World War II]; in and out, in and out, all day long.  And occasionally, I think about fifteen or twenty of these craft would go down and (unclear) something about 100 or so feet inside the beach shed, and they come back and join the craft.  Altogether, this was about forty or fifty of these craft together, and if a higher altitude, it was a B-17 and B-24s furthering (ph.) land for about fifty miles.  And we figured they was blocking the troops that 'gone come up to back up the troops that was on this beach that was supposed to be comin' to chase us off.  We had all the confidence in this world this fight was over with.  We were 'gone have no problem, which we didn't.  So right after this Navy got a shell--this fifth shell went into this (unclear) box, then that was over with that (unclear) box.  Then come the (unclear), we called 'em.  They're pullin'--pullin' these, these troops and these craft; they jump outta these landing crafts.  Anyway, they landed in these gliders behind this (unclear) box; it had about five minutes of gunfire from the 50 calibers that went in.  After that, it was no more gunfire.  So we had this--like clockwork; we had it made.  This is a milk run, we figure.  We almost didn't--the tide begin to come in.  Now, the land craft I'm on become number one for the beach, and lookin' at this beach head, I say, "Boy, is this where I'm gonna die at?"  Begin to move up; if we movin' up--the word come from the Navy, says "All you craft to fall left; do not go any further to your left, there are mine shifts floating in that area."  "Then what the heck we doin' over here?"  We move in and the tides kept comin' in, we kept movin' up, look at the sea wall, and goin' in this sea wall, you could (unclear), 'But am I 'gone die in this sea wall?'  That's all you're thinkin' about.  Either you 'gone dig a fox hole, or you 'gone die, so you got this rifle in your hand, you got everything ready to go.  So just as the land craft struck bottom, it's still about a hundred feet from this sea wall.  You step off this landing craft and there was water up to my chest, and sometime it touches my chin.  I got this duffel bag in front of me and I'm followin' this fellow in front of me 'cause I don't wanna dip--try to get any further left.  Just as I find this fellow, something bump my duffel bag and I thought sure it was a mine.  It was another soldier floating face down, then when I saw he was a soldier, I pushed him to my left; he was dead.  He had struck a mine or something; pushed him out to my left through that mine field, we got--come up out the water, a Navy guy standing there and he say, "490 [Port Battalion]?  Stand tight against the sea wall."  He made great emphasis on us standing against the sea wall, and I wondered why.  And when I got to the sea wall, I turned around and looked; the quarter master was all over these landing crafts.  Soon as the last person left this landing craft, they had all that personnel and the equipment on this landing craft, and in about two hours, this landing craft was empty.
Story_ID: 35651
Speaker 1: In between these landing craft, out there in the channel, hundreds and hundreds of floating bodies was out there.  And that strikes you; you think 'that's somebody's son's out there floating.'  Well, I been thinkin' about this for about a couple of seconds--everything changes.  You think about how lucky you are; you send up a prayer, 'Thanks for holdin' me together' 'cause you're soakin' wet; all this oily water runnin' down on you.  You gotta think about the harsh scene when you're traveling back in the [United] States along the highway and the farmer is pulling down wind and you see these horses standing on the farm; he's just standing there.  That's where you are--with this water runnin' down on you.  But you think you're alright; you don't dig or nothing 'cause you stand there 'cause the engineer say "Stand tight."  If you move, you may step on one of them mines.  You know this, you're trained for this; you don't move until the engineer says move.  You stand there the rest of the night.  Next morning, the medics bring down the wounded from the night before.  We help them unload the wounded from the vehicles and put 'em on the empty landing craft and the landing craft take about ten or twelve of 'em out to the hospital.  Ships are anchored about five miles off shore, and after they get all loaded off, about a couple of hours later, the infantry brings down about four or five of the captured German prisoners, put them on landing crafts.  The sad point about it, up against the sea wall is a stack of young American soldiers.  None of 'em are killed by small arms fire, all by high explosions; their arm is gone, half their bodies are blown wide open, the leg or the hip is gone.  Kids are 17, 18, 19 years old--all dead; 50, 60 of 'em.  Engineers goes down to the small part of the beach and they blow a large hole in it.  But the engineer takes the bulldozer with about six of the kids at a time and they push 'em down by the blades, dump 'em in this hole.  So we're standing there, salute these kids as they fall in.  This one kid--I remember we looked at these kids as they fall in, and one kid I'm looking at, his body fell in with his body turned face up, and I remember this kid to this day--young kid, 17 or 18; he was no more than eighteen years old, half his body gone, face still intact.  You often wonder, this kid's parents, she's the only one that suffers; everybody else forget about him--eighteen years old, and she probably be the one that take him to his school when he's young--first starting to school and was six years old, and this is all she gets.  Sure, back in the [United] States she'll get a flag and a stupid medal, stupid this--it's a lotta garbage to her; that's her baby.  Back in America, that's all they get.  "Oh, he was great, he fought for his country."  That's a lotta garbage.  He died for his country--like this guy on CNN says, "Somebody killed her."  When they put you aboard that ship, you forget about that garbage they're talkin' about back in the States, "Oh, he's doing this for his country."  You're doin' it for that guy in front of you.  There's two guys in front of you and a guy behind you so if he take care of those two kids in front of you--the guys in front of 'em--that means you 'gone be--stay alive and goin' home.  That's just the way the ball bounces.  All this other stuff you hear about in Hollywood--about in the newspaper and find in the magazine, that's hearsay.  When they put you aboard that ship, it's altogether changed.
Speaker 2: So these kids never made it home; they were just buried right there on the beach.
Speaker 1: They're still there.
Speaker 2: They're still there.
Speaker 1: All their bodies are not there, their legs are gone somewhere else; that's what's sad about it.
Story_ID: 35652
Speaker 1: So I wanted to ask did you understand the mission or the whole strategy, or the American strategy in how you fit in [D-Day; Invasion of Normandy, France; June 6th, 1944; World War II]?  How did this fit in?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You understood everything; that was no problem; you knew exactly what you was supposed to do, and that's the reason I knew when you was supposed to do it.  Everything was a team; back in this country it wasn't.  Once you got over there, everything was a team, and everybody knew exactly what they were supposed to do and they did it--as a team.  I was there, I know; I was a part of it.  I was just about to come to that when I stopped--after we buried those kids.  I'll tell you when you start over again.
Speaker 1: Yes, you can go ahead and, and, and tell me about that because this is D-Day--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you watch these kids [young American soldiers] who have died in--and they're being buried on the beach and so continue with the story.
Speaker 2: Just as we was buryin' these kids, then the engineer come to me and says-one thing about it, everybody got one name; it was no Joe, no Jim, no Mike--everybody was named Mack (laughter).  "Hey Mack," says "We finally got a place cleared away in the mine field for you fellows."  He says, "Just be careful, don't cross over on that tape area."  I said, "No problem."  He say, "Take care of yourself, you hang in there."  Just like that.  So I go up, I lay my gear right along the side of this mine, just like this (DEMONSTRATION), just sittin' beside this tape.  I'm sittin' it on my tape--the war is just about over with.  Just then, suddenly, I heard an explosion and a bone fell just to the side, in that mine area; somebody had went over to manufacture himself a bathroom and I guess he put himself on a mine.  I don't know if it was a leg bone or an arm bone--I know it was a bone; it didn't pay attention to me 'cause you're used to this by now.  You don't get used to it but then you do; you're just alive, and you're doin' everything you can to keep that note from goin' to your parents' house sayin' "Regret to inform you."  This is the goal by now; do not let that note go to your relatives saying "We regret to inform you."  This was the goin' around back then.  So I just looked at it and--no big deal.  They even start diggin' a foxhole.  So when it's--the war is about over with.  All at once, I hear the gunfire and I see this (unclear) comin' towards me in the sand.  The (unclear) rolled right against my duffel bag.  As I looked up, the aircraft right over me; I could count the rivets (ph.) on the bottom of this aircraft.  Well he crashed out into the channel, then I got my helmet off and start diggin' this foxhole, then it dawned on me; 'What do a foxhole look like?'  I never seen a foxhole; we didn't dig foxholes back in the [United] States 'cause we 'gone be aboard ship all the time.  But here we are on the beach; this is no ship.  Our ships are 500 feet off shore; they can't come no closer 'cause they're seagoing vessels; they're 10,000 ton vessels.  I dug this foxhole, and I dug this foxhole twenty-four inches wide, five feet long, four feet deep; I'm down inside this foxhole.  Two and a-half hours later--boy, I give thanks; I'm in the safest place on earth, nothin' can touch me 'cause all explosions go up; explosions don't go down.  I'm giving thanks, 'Well, thank you, I'm safe."  Now I gotta start complainin' now.  For the nine months I've been overseas, I always had to bathe and shave outta this stupid helmet, but now I can't do either one 'cause I'm down in this dirty hole, you got no water, you can't shave or bathe (laughter).  But you give thanks.
Story_ID: 35653
Speaker 1: Darkness falls.  All of the American aircraft, all of the British aircraft go back to England.  It's dark; ten minutes later, the Germans come around for a visit; they drop their flares, they light up the beach and drop their bombs.  Each time they drop their bombs, the sand begin to fall in on you.  Why don't these people go home and go to sleep?  They drop the bombs and all the ships--it was a thousand ships out there in the bay; they shootin' up this aircraft.  Shells are (unclear), and these shells burst and the fragment comes back--the size of your hand and they sharp as a razor and they're about a quarter of an inch thick.  And if they fall on you, they can do damage, but you cover yourself with, with your, your blankets; you got two blankets, and your head is the only part of your body that's vulnerable; you have no protection with your head, only your right arm and your helmet.  Your head has no protection; your body got flesh, your head don't have anything, just a skull.  And once your head get punctured, you're done, so you keep a helmet on.  You lay there in that foxhole and you listen--for two and a-half hours.  You see bombs fallin' and these fragments fall, your bombs fall.  I'm sittin' there thinkin', 'What did I do to deserve all this?'  And I think about--I was a pretty good kid when I was a kid; only thing I did do, if you can call it wrong, always wondering where my mom's [Mamie Ella Brown] cake--the bottom hole in this cake--was always larger than the top part.  So when she left, I inverted the cake and enlarged the small part of the cake to the bottom cake (laughter).  So I did.  Well, you think of these things when you're a kid, but I lived through it.  The day come--the next morning comes along, I'm still alive, I look around, the medics pull out the wounded, take 'em out to the beach and send 'em out to the hospital ship, pull out the dead and take 'em down to the beach and bury 'em.  That moment still goes to my mind every day; we talk about it, my Army buddies, sailors--we talks about it.  And when I go back to the beach, which I been back three times, I make it my business to stand there at that beach, just were these kids was buried, and I'm sayin' to myself, "Buddies, I wish I was with you;" frankly enough, sometimes I do.  But, that's human nature, you know.  You never forget 'em.  I never knew who they were, know where they come from, or who they was.  First time I'd seen 'em--well you remember 'em.  From the day you saw them, and I still remember 'em right today.
Story_ID: 35654
Speaker 1: So the, the next day comes; is that when you get to leave, or what happened?
Speaker 2: You never get no relief.  You're in this foxhole and we were waitin'--our job is--everybody has a job; the one job everybody has, even the five on this aircraft--everybody following this aircraft, that's where the air raid is.  Well your job is--our job is to unload these seagoing vessels.  Well they now, they can't come any closer; they're four or 500 feet from the shore; only the landing crafts come ashore.  The beach master they're the traffic jam--traffic cops; all landing crafts come to the shore first; they get unloaded first.  The quartermasters, this is their job.  (Unclear) don't do this; quartermasters drive their vehicles on these landing crafts, unloads it, all these supplies on these landing craft, drive 'em in shore to the fuel dumps, ammunition dump, to the water dumps.  A dump is a supply area, in the Army, they call it a dump.  But you got fuel rations, you put on (unclear) and as your front line needs this, front line have their own people comin' to these dumps to get what they need and go back to feed 'em.  Now Americans think the minority soldiers are there to feed the Caucasian soldiers.  I straightened that out--a writer down in Bloomington [Indiana] about this.  It sounded good to the writer.  I tore it out of his book; I say "You got it all wrong; I was there, you wasn't."  "Well this makes you look--" "I'm not here to make anything to you look good; I'm the one that suffered the consequence over there."
Speaker 1: So, so what was the correct--what did you correct him about?  I'm unclear about that.
Speaker 2: He had on his book "the minority soldiers' job was to furnish supplies to Caucasian soldiers."  That's not true.  The quartermaster was the supply area, and you got--black soldiers was in the quartermasters, white soldiers was in quartermaster--foreman (ph.).  And as the front lines told you who was your infantry, they needed guns or they need food, they need ammunition, they need fuel, the quartermaster delivered it to them--to that dump.  Whether they're white or black, the delivered to 'em.  Then the infantry soldier had their own people come to their particular dump to pick it up and take it to the front lines.  Just as simple as you own a business; you go to this company over here to pick up your supply of goods that you need.  No, he's not working for you; you go to him to get it.  That's the way that went; the Army was set up just like a business.  So that's why I had to take it out of his book.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So how long were you on Utah Beach [Normandy, France]?
Speaker 2: Five months.
Speaker 1: Five months?
Speaker 2: Five months--from June until November [1944]; Thanksgiving Day.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35655
Speaker 1: So what happens when you're finally able to leave [Utah Beach, Normandy, France in November, 1944; Brown was there for five months during World War II, from D-Day in June, 1944]?
Speaker 2: Well, when we left there, we left--we all thought we was goin' home because the ship come up--come within 500 feet and we loaded a duck; a duck is a (unclear) truck--unloads from--we was the last ones to leave Utah Beach.  We get aboard this ship and it--over the coast of France all day long; we left there about nine o' clock in the morning.
Speaker 1: How was it determined that it was time for you to leave?  What happened that, that made it, you know--so that it was time to leave?
Speaker 2: When the Army decides (simultaneous)--the war condition was goin' on this way.  The war was goin' on up into Belgium, right on the German border, and now--see, the beach is open instead of a port.  See a port is where ships come in and unloads the goods.  But you don't have a port during an invasion; a port is a target.  If you come in and disable this port, your invasion is a failure; but on a beach, you can move around on a beach.  But in a port, you can't move a port around; you're done.  So by now, Omaha Beach is ready to be closed because Antwerp Beach--port is open up in Belgium.  Now the Americans and the British they're gettin' all supplies from England to Antwerp Beach and Utah Beach--not Utah Beach but Antwerp Port up in Belgium is open, and Belgium is close to Germany.  So now that's why they closed Utah Beach and they moved 490 [Port Battalion] into Rouen.  Rouen is an inland port and Rouen, France is about sixty miles I guess from Belgium; I don't know for sure 'cause we had no way of knowing.  But we're on land now; we don't have to do everything by amphibious, so we're unloadin' tanks and sendin' 'em up to Belgium.  So we get--Thanksgiving Day, we leave Utah Beach and we get to Rouen, France, R-O-U-E-N spells Rouen.  And we get to Rouen and we start sending up supplies to Belgium.  The 18th of December [1944] is when the Germans start the Battle of the Bulge.
Story_ID: 35656
Speaker 1: So when the Battle of the Bulge started, then the Germans began to capture the American soldiers and stripping the American soldiers of their uniform and marchin' the soldiers into open field and killin' 'em with no clothes on 'em.  Now the Germans began to wear American uniform; this way, they can march behind the American lines so you don't know an American soldier from a German soldier.  So as Germans are beginning to sabotage American vehicles, American rail lines, communication lines--so now the rule come down now, soon as the Americans find out the Germans are wearing American clothes, the rule is now if you find an American that's not wearing a dog tag, shoot him in the head.  Behind this is if you wound a soldier, he has to occupy a bed; you don't want a German occupying a bed where a wounded American soldier could be in this bed, so shoot him in the head and he's dead.  So you throw him in the river.  Now Americans frown on this, so you--forget the Americans; they are nobody.  They're back in America, sleeping in a warm bed, eatin' three hot meals a day and laughing all the way to the bank.  Now we're downing Americans because Americans seen all this as ridiculous; so in America, they're actually giving us a hard time, but we find out that Americans are treating us like we're nobody.  What happened was the Americans--the Germans who was captured in North Africa and in Sicily, instead of keepin' them down in a hot desert, they sent 'em to a southern part of America--Arizona.  And in those German camps there in Arizona, the American girls was datin' these girls.  Now the Stars and Stripes printed this out.  Now the Americans over in Europe were really up in the air about this.  They're datin' and some of these girls are havin' babies by these Germans.  What goes on here?  That's why we so uptight about this now; then they find out these Germans are wearing American uniforms here in Belgium and France, and then killin' American soldiers and moving their clothes away from 'em and marching them to the fields and killing 'em, and when the Americans find 'em, they got nothin' but dog tags.  So that's how we knew if the Americans have their dog tags on, the Germans were wearing them uniforms, not having their dog tags; that's why you shoot 'em in the head and this way you didn't have to be bothered about 'em bein' in the hospital.  I used to walk and get in a fight (unclear).
Story_ID: 35657
Speaker 1: So tell, tell me what your perspective is of what it's like to be an African American soldier at this time in this place.
Speaker 2: By now, all this is kinda washed under the cover; nobody makes a difference.  Back to the beach [Utah Beah, Normandy, France], it was a couple of incidents there that happened that I'll bring up.  One individual--we had an air raid which we very seldom have during the day time, and it just so happened, this second lieutenant--after the air raid was over with, he spotted three black soldiers not too far from each other; and everybody know when an air raid is, everybody opens fire on this aircraft.  This aircraft got shot down, layin' out there in the bay, and that sailor--as this German soldier tried to get outta this aircraft, some sailor shot this soldier, he fell back in the aircraft and the aircraft sunk.  Well, this second lieutenant was walkin' along this beach there, and he spotted these three black soldiers, about 50 feet apart, everybody's all scattered all around--blacks and white all together; nobody payin' attention to anyone, they're waiting their turn to move up, that's all.  This second lieutenant told us, "Now you boys don't have to worry about shooting at this aircraft; after all, those are white people flying those aircraft."  The whole beach went up in "Boos."  Ten minutes later, the medic brought this second lieutenant bounded on a stretcher, taking him down the beach and buried him.  A few months later, we was lookin' and we noticed there's a (unclear) being dropped about twenty miles from Utah Beach; must have been up on Omaha Beach.  It was quite a distance awaya--just about dusk-dark, and these flares are being dropped; we're standing inside of our foxhole.  This stupid lieutenant comes along, the sun was down all the American aircraft on the beach--the aircraft was gone, sun was down, and still kind of a halo on the ground, we're standing inside our foxhole.  Out of the foxhole it was nothin' there but--it's open ground; no trees, no beaches, no buildings or nothing.  This second lieutenant comes along and says, "You boys should come outta the foxhole and act like soldiers."  Say, "Those Germans not 'gone bother anything down this way; they're after those boys up there on that beach up there."  Just as he said that, a German plane come outta nowhere and cut this clown in half.  So one soldier got up and say.  "Alright you Georgia monkey, now what you 'gone say?"  (Laughter).  So his body laid up there all night and the next day, a medic come along and buried him.  It was kinda stupid, American ideas, you know; you should leave 'em in America.  When you get out of America, those trainings don't get you anywhere but a lotta trouble.  But that's what I witnessed there.  But it's only two things that I witnessed there.  "Hey Mack, you got spare cigarettes?"  "Hey Mack, you got any spare laundry soap?"  Everybody was a Mack; nobody was Joe or James, Joe or anything (laughter).
Story_ID: 35658
Speaker 1: Okay, so now tell me about how you exit from Omaha Beach [Utah Beach, Normandy, France].  You said it's Thanksgiving Day [1944].
Speaker 2: Thanksgiving Day we got aboard these ducks, which is the entry of a truck, road out five miles out to the ship.  We climb aboard ship by cargo net, and got 'em going and we run along the coast of France until we got to Le Havre [unclear], the port of Le Havre; you gotta board the trucks there going into France, about nine o' clock at night.
Speaker 1: And what happens next?
Speaker 2: As we get to France--to Rouen [France], we see one of the mess halls up the street.  Now, we thought sure we was 'gone get turkey; this is Thanksgiving night.  We get to the mess hall and the mess sergeant say, "Well, fellows, the only thing we got is spam sandwiches."  Well we feel like killin' the mess sergeant (laughter), you know?  Spam sandwiches and coffee; well, and then we sleepin' on concrete floors.  These beds were built by Germans; we've seen better barracks but they're alright; they're better than tents.  And we put our (unclear), empty our duffel bags in it and folded it over; that's our mattress; put our blankets on top of that, that's our good night's sleep.  That officer didn't show up, so the officer didn't go with us; they was in the weapon carrier.  Second day rolls around, no officers; third day, we got a message there's a 10,000 ton cargo ship down in the port with some cots, Army cots on 'em.  So we commandeered some quartermaster trucks and went down and got our own cots, come back.  Stupid office--the fifth day calls out, "You could be court martialed; you're supposed to wait for a requisition."  Then the quartermaster told us, "We send your officers in those buildings downtown."  So the guy said "We knew you were downtown sleepin' in beds."  "Go ahead and court martial; if that's your thing, go for it; condition arises, we'll do it again.  Put that in your book."  Told these monkeys that, and they never said--"Dismissed."  And that's all it was.  I mean the whole company was down there.  We had Army cots then.
Story_ID: 35659
Speaker 1: So we unloaded ships, we send troops up, pick the cargo equipment up.  Now, it's really gettin' bad 'cause the Germans are pushin' the troops back into Belgium.  Now, so many quartermaster troops gettin' killed, you borrow troops from our outfit to drive equipment up to the front.  So they did that and some of the kids didn't come back.  So now, Christmas Eve, our troop--our company is so thin now, and the Germans are beginning to blow up rail lines and rail bridges, so we couldn't choose this night, and they said, "You mean Lieutenant Blankety Blank"--whatever his name was down in--to meet this--to guard this rail bridge with 3500 soldiers.  So we're in this guard houses talking.  This lieutenant--he's from Iowa--Des Moines, Iowa.  I know he kept lookin' at his watch, he kept lookin' at his watch.  I figured this clown wanna get off his duty; he wants to get out of it.  Later on, he said, "Well, sergeant, you have to kinda take over 'cause I don't feel good; I'm goin' in town to see doc; if I feel good, I'll come back."  I said, "Go right ahead."  And I told him, "I got thirty-five other guys on guard duty there."  We're guardin' this rail bridge.  Soon as this chow (ph.) truck comes along, gives (unclear), and he go back to camp.  The guy come off the bridge says "Buckley went back to camp with that chow truck and leaves one guy on the bench."  Now this is a no-no because if you leave your post in a combat zone, you will be shot on sight.  But I'm not 'gone even report him; I'm 'gone take care of him myself.  I take his place, I get my gear, I go upon the bench there.  Some of the guys was--"What we 'gone do for Christmas--Christmas Eve?"  And I hear something up on this hill overlooking this bridge.  Somebody's walking on that bridge, and none of our people up there.  Say, "You get any closer, we 'gone have open fire over there."  Got real close, got real close, I kicked this guy with open fire; we put thirty-two rounds in that heel.  The next morning, we clear the snow away, two dead dogs.  "Sorry, Mr. Dog, we didn't know it was you."  Three nights later, we're back on this bridge.  We're talking about what we did for Christmas, what we're gonna do for New Year's Eve--it's three of us on the bridge now, and the first man put freight cars on this bridge and left 'em there.  Now we got good protection; we're up against these freight cars; the snow will not bother us now; it's snowing like heck.  It's snowing and we heard some noise up on this hill again.  I said, "Well those are animals up there."  I kept talking--I heard somebody coughing.  I said, "Animals don't cough;" he kept talkin', I said "Be quiet."  Cough again.  I said "Look, you remain on this end of the bridge, two of us go on this other end of this, this, this, this, this rail car; we go up to the other end of this freight car.  If I hear another cough, I'm 'gone throw two pineapples--pineapples are these hand grenades.  We go up there and we listen and we listen. Heard the walking back and forth, breaking these branches, going back and forth.  So I heard a cough, and you heard a second cough, so I threw this second pineapple.  And everybody, everybody opened up sixteen rounds of ammunition; each one got sixteen rounds of ammunition.  So we couldn't take a chance at that.
Story_ID: 35660
Speaker 1: The engineer come along and bury 'em [Brown and his fellow soldiers shot at intruders while guarding their post at Rouen, France].
Speaker 2: Okay, okay, okay.  So you have relief the next day, you said?
Speaker 1: Yeah, once the--when daylight came, then the one guy went up to see what that was up there we shot at.  Shot about fifty-two rounds of ammo--went up in that hill, you know?  We couldn't take a chance, and it was five Germans, and one was wearin' an American uniform.  I called--rifle--I called down to the guard house and I called the Provost Marshal.  He (unclear) with my group; since they come up, they weren't interested in these Germans.  They take a quick look at 'em, they walk and see where they were comin' from 'cause somebody had to house these people 'cause we're about forty miles from the German border and that's what's interesting.  Who housed these people?  That's what they were interested in.  So when we left there, the people who were leading us--the next night when we come in, the fellow who lead said--the people who lead them says the infantry people brought up about ten German prisoners, had them to load those dead soldiers--the German soldiers, in the truck, took 'em down to the river and dumped 'em in the river.  'Cause the Frenchman don't want them buried there on their land.
Story_ID: 35661
Speaker 1: Now, the--let me--before we go on, let's just clarify a few things, and I wanna know about--during this time that you're in the service now, you only told me about one promotion.  What was your rank at this time now, here on Omaha Beach [Utah Beach, Normandy, France; World War II; June-November, 1944]?
Speaker 2: Well, I got promoted again back in England. European Theatre of Operations [U.S. Army], and I can bring my officers.  When we got the boat at--once at sea, Technician Fifth Grade; I got promoted to Technician Fourth Grade by European Theater of Operations back in Liverpool [England].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  And how many black officers were there at this time?
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--I saw one officer that was in our outfit; he was a minister (ph.)--the only officer I saw.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sorry; another officer, he was a supply officer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35662
Speaker 1: And explain about the bodies that were buried on Omaha Beach [Utah Beach, Normandy, France' World War II; Brown was stationed there from D-Day in June, 1944 to November, 1944], and you say they're still there.  How were their families notified?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Utah Beach.
Speaker 1: Utah--I'm sorry, Utah--I'm sorry, on Utah Beach.  How were their families notified?  Explain what happens when a body--a dead body is found by the medics.  What, what, what happens?
Speaker 2: When you get killed--you're examined by the medic when you're injured or you're dead.  If you die, they pull your dog tags off; you got two dog tags.  And he pockets that dog tag, and as it get much later, they turn that dog tag--maybe two months later, then your family is notified--missin' in action or whatever.  But that body can be anybody; you don't know who you are then, and you're never removed.  We was there five months, and these bodies still were there, about ten feet down in the hole, and these--six or eight hours, the tide comes in over this hole, back out again.  Each time the hole was (unclear), streaks of red (unclear) comes out.  I was there five months, and they're still there today.  They--up in the cemetery, the names are up on these monuments 'cause the dog tag says (unclear).
Speaker 1: I see, but their bodies are not there.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: If 'cause it wasn't dug up from June until November.  And each time we leave there--when we left there, snow was on the--covered the beach.
Story_ID: 35663
Speaker 1: And also, you said everybody was called Mack, but you didn't tell me why everybody was called Mack.
Speaker 2: Well, it was just an easy name for everybody to know--know you, you know?  See, the Army--become one person, you become one number one; it's a team.  And so--of course I can remember it's a comfortable thing, whether you're in town or whether you're in camp or what.  "Hi Mack, have you got an extra cigarette?"  "Have you got--" your, your, your gas mask works (laughter), which our gas mask didn't work once we got ashore.
Speaker 1: It didn't work?
Speaker 2: No, ma'am.  One kid thought he saw--an aircraft released its reserve tank, and he thought it was a gas; he yelled, "Gas, gas," and the whole beach reached for their gas mask and it never worked 'cause it got wet.  Three days--four days later, everybody had a waterproof gas mask.
Story_ID: 35664
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me now when you--you've left, and you're on the ship going back.  Where did you go to?  Where are we now?
Speaker 2: You say I'm on the ship goin' back where?
Speaker 1: That's what I'm asking you.  After you leave--
Speaker 2: Well, we're in Rouen [France], and we was--we stayed in Rouen from 1944 until September of '45 [1945].
Speaker 1: And what was your mission there?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well we unloaded the ship from the time we were there--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and after the war was end--we ended in May [1945], I was sent on a special duty back towards the beach--to the port of Rouen rather.  And there were (unclear)--it's just Germans and they're stringing electric circuits into the electric (unclear)--puttin' electric current in there now.  So then that way, during the war, all those buildings on the port of Rouen was bombed out and damaged.  So we had installed electric cables and everything back into there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you stay there until September, 1945?
Speaker 2: September '45 [1945], back in Rouen, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'd like to put one thing in there that happened down on that beach--down on that port there, as we had Germans down there, and as the war was comin' to an end in March of '45 [1945], now who was in control of these German prisoners who was working with us was infantry soldiers.  Infantry soldiers was the ones up in Belgium doin' all that fighting.  Now if we was waiting and sittin' in this sunshine there 'cause it was warm sun in March, one of the soldiers says, "Hey Saperstein (ph.), throw me one of you cigars."  So one of these German soldiers said to the other soldiers, "Jew," and he spit.  He says, "Nickspreama (ph.)" and one of these American soldiers got up, walked down toward him, got him by the arm, walk him to the edge of the water, took his BAR [Browning Automatic Rifle?], took it to the head and blew his brains out; he took his foot and pushed him off in the river, his body floated on down the river.  Other soldier says, "He tried to get away."  End of that.  See, these soldiers, you know, they went through heck, but all the American soldiers did.  You're over there because some clown didn't like a certain class of people; the reason that World War II started, and this is the reason we're there.  And when somethin' like this come up, put an end to it 'cause you doesn't fit too good in America 'cause America don't see--go that way.  Well, who's askin' the Americans?
Story_ID: 35665
Speaker 1: So now after this was over with, I went back to camp company there; see, we was--wasn't--we left our company (unclear), we slept and eat there; went back to our camp there in September [1945], and after September, then we got a bulletin from Channel Bay Section [unclear]; Channel Bay Section controls everything from the English Channel to Paris [France], and they had a whole group of--I think I got this list, in that group my daughter got, I brought here with me.  A whole list of people's names on there; my name's on there.  They were to go to back to [Cherbourg, France?].  The reason to go back there was that some German prisoners somehow had commandeered (ph.) a four-hole [unclear] ship and they were 'gone blockade this Cherbourg entrance to this harbor.  Cherbourg entrance--harbor was--had a lotta sunken ships in it, and we was tryin' to get ships outta there.  As they raised the ships outta the bottom, they 'gone blockade this; at least we thought they were.  They sent a whole bunch of us there, sent me there 'cause I was the only technician.  So they put me--when we get there, they put me in a rowboat with a French explosives expert; it was a female.  During the war, when Germans were in control of Germany--of France, she was with the undergrounds; so they put me in the rowboat with this female.  I noticed she had a big bag with us, so we rode--these other people who were with me, they put them somewhere else.  Now we rode past the port side of this ship and they was on the (unclear) side of the ship arguing with these six prisoners aboard this ship to come, come and get on this ship, and they wasn't 'gone come; they was 'gone sink this ship at the port of this port.  As this woman and myself, we rode back--I'm pullin' this front port, she doin' the back, we pass the ship and these German soldiers get down in the ship with me--in this boat with me, they whistle at this gal, you know, all women--they whistle at her; they thought it was another soldier out for a boat ride.  Went past the ship and we double back under the ship with small ships like this, four-holers, the rudder and the, and the propeller is under the overhang and she put this explosion under this rudder--remote control rod, she had me put this battery pack up higher, and wire it from this battery pack down to her.  She put the timer on it, she wound it around and it didn't wanna come back to the, to the port.  I said, "Soldier, help this off this ship"--off this boat "onto the dock."  We waited fifteen minutes, all at once, explosions went off; all this smoke goes up.  They run back to the ship--the back part of the ship where the smoke was.  As they're running back, then they got a hustler (ph.) of buzzards--this front part of this ship above this--the cargo, and that's with all the gear--all the weapons.  As they're comin' back, it was too late to have 'em covered, then the tug boat--where the cutter cut this anchor chain, they pulled this ship into shallow water.  Now they captured this ship and went on back to Rouen [France].  In fact, goin' back to Rouen, we hit a shell hole and busted the front spring and we pulled in the shop there and had the prisoners to put a new spring on it.  We didn't get back to camp 'til about four o' clock in the morning.  We was a bunch of dead monkeys, but it was kind of a enjoyable trip that time.  "Hey, you was the only guy that rode in a rowboat with a French gal."  "Suffer, you monkeys" (laughter).  But you make it something outta nothing, you know.
Speaker 2: okay, okay.
Story_ID: 35666
Speaker 1: So now we're back to September '45 [1945] and what happens next?
Speaker 2: Well, we moved the casualties goin' back and forth in town, and you're comin' back (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So what's the next move for you?
Speaker 2: Pardon?
Speaker 1: What is the next move for you?
Speaker 2: We're seein' September and then we're moved--the end of September we're moved to an area close to [Cherbourg, France?]; it's a wooded area and now we have no officers.  And there's nothin' but tents and colonel says, "Who's your technician?"  "Sergeant Brown."  Says "Sergeant Brown, you are filing for supplying the communication and all the supplies for the supply sergeant, the mess sergeant, the first sergeant?  These are your supplies; you take 'em down--" they supply the trucks free; I'm gonna go down to the shipyard (ph.) and get the equipment.  Now I got the (unclear) help put up tents--or electric cables to all these tents.  The guy say, "You smart blankety-blank, and now you 'gone go to work."  He said, "Just for that, you 'gone be the last guy get elected."  They got these generators, got these alternators and we gotta crank like heck to get this thing to goin'.  Now I gotta get up early in the morning to crank up this generator so the mess sergeant can have electric to have--to cook by.  The war [World War II] is over on the 8th of May; now this is September, '45 [1945]; war is over with.  So I'm the last one to go in the chow line 'cause I been up since four o' clock; I take a nap in there, and the chow line foreman, he--I hear him say, "Tighten up the chow line, here come [chowhound?] Brown."  They (laughter), they wanted me to cut in the chow line, and I never got in the chow line; and I go on and I curse out everybody in the chow line.  See, the theory is you gotta dip your musket [?] (ph.) in this sterilized solution first, before you get in the chow line.  So I go and get my musket dip in this solution, and I'm cursing out the guy who always in the front of the chow line.  Well, I'm pretended to (unclear) while I'm cursin' him out, and I dropped my musket in front of him when I picked my musket up in front of him, see?  Now the mess sergeant get on me.  Now he can't get rid of me so he takes his food and dump it in my musket.  Now my musket--when I look at it, now it says "This kinda garbage you were trained in; you cook, or you must have a stupid mother; she must be stupid."  And the guy says, "What have you got in that musket, Brown?"  I said, "I don't know what this is; I've never seen anything like it before, but I stepped in a lot of it" (laughter), and everybody laughed.  This'll keep you here by laughing, you know; in case you might--barricaded (ph.).  It makes a happy day out of everything (unclear).
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 35667
Speaker 1: So when do you start to transition to get ready to go home [from Europe, after World War II]?
Speaker 2: Well, that's where I'm comin' now.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So along come about--another week comes a bulletin.  The bulletin says "Only the following EM" (ph.).  The whole company has their name on this bulletin except seventeen of us.  There's a first sergeant, the mess sergeant, supply sergeant, my name and a lotta others--say.  Seventeen of us are not on this, on this bulletin.  I mean it's the whole company--shipped away, somewhere into Belgium.  We figure we're the smart guys 'gone stay behind--'gone get shipped away.  So by--in November, another bulletin comes along.  "The following EM."  The only EM on there is Dave Brown.  "You are requested to turn in all equipment in your possession."  And I turned everything--we're sittin' in the dark.  Now, another bulletin comes along.  All seventeen names was on this bulletin.  Get on the train, we go to Paris [France]; you spend one night in Paris, go to Paris--to Belgium.  We get to Belgium, in fact, the first sergeant--'cause we got no officers now.  We get to Belgium and the first sergeant says, "Now everybody meet here at this hotel tomorrow morning; we get on the train and we go to Belgium."  Next morning, we get to Belgium--get to this hotel.  He say, "I gotta idea."  He said, "This lady owns this hotel where we live at, she said if we give her all our cigarettes and our laundry soap and our chocolate [?], she'll type us up a new traveling order or have the ability to sign the company commander's signature, so if that's your responsibility, you can do it."  We stayed in Paris ten days 'cause we intend to stay in Paris so we can spend Thanksgiving in Paris 'cause we never had Thanksgiving since we've been in the army.  Since we go to the--we couldn't go to no USO [United Service Organization] in the [United] States; we could go in the one in Paris.  We spent three days in the USO--turkey dinner in Paris; boy, that was great.  After spending ten days in Paris, we went to Belgium; nobody heard of us, so after we went to the Fire Department, they give us a ride to the hospital.  Doc says, "Where you guys heavy weather gear?"  "It got stolen."  "Sure it didn't; you sold it in Paris."  So he took us in and examined us.  He say, "We're gonna put you guys in the hospital."  I said "Look, we're goin' home."  He said "You got pneumonia."  We're all coughin' and covered with snow 'cause we gave out heavy weather gear in Paris; we've got no heavy raincoats or nothin'.  So he put us in the hospital, he took our blood pressure, our temperature, put our head over this soup bowl with our covers over something and inhale it; the head is opening up and he take us to the mess hell.  Sergeant had some kind of a soup there and some kinda spam sandwich, and he had marmalade and peanut butter sandwiches; I'll never forget that.  Well, it's been damn good.  He said, "Now you guys spend the night here; tomorrow morning, you get on the train and you go back to Paris.  You should make that six o' clock train outta Paris, you go back to Cherbourg."  Man, we goin' right back where we come from.
Story_ID: 35668
Speaker 1: We get back to Paris [France], we went back to Cherbourg [France], we get back to Cherbourg--we got new barracks there now.  The French have built new barracks for us.  And here comes these French people with free whiskey rations for 47 men--47 people.  So now, I don't drink.  Sittin' there and I got this kid's radio; you only can get the BBC [British Broadcasting Corporation], you can get the Armed Forces Network.  So I'm in the corner in this construction material over there, I find some wire and I stretch it out, I got me an antenna out of it, it picks up NBC News, New York.  He says, "Long Island, New York, the temperature is 74 degrees, the Bronx is 26 degrees and cloudy, and Staten Island is" such-and-such.  "Man, that's New York," and everybody got slap happy and start drinking this whiskey, pouring drinks out of it.  I'm a greenhorn, I never drank before, but cognac, Caradose (ph.), Benedictine, scotch--anything you name in my cup; top it off with grapefruit juice.  I got sick as a dog; oh, I was sick.  To the latrine, to bed, latrine, the bed and back to the latrine and bed.  After the next morning, I got alright.  We went to the mess hall and this sergeant had spam and, and powdered eggs and powdered milk; I had it before, but this time it looks delicious.  I promised myself I'd never take another drink; up until this day, I never drank again.  So now, another bulletin comes along.  Only seventeen of us.  "The following EM," with all our names on it.  This is the 5th of June--5th of December, 1946 [1945].  Get a train out of Cherbourg, train goes into Paris, spend one night in Paris.  Spent the 6th of December in Paris, 1945.
Speaker 2: 1946.
Speaker 1: This is 1945.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 35669
Speaker 1: In 1945, December the, the 6th, the train from Belgium.  December the 7th, spent one night in Antwerp, Belgium--December the 7 and 8th you spend in Ann Arbor, Belgium.  Camp New Yorker.  Okay, this is all good.  December 6th, we get to Paris, December 7th we get on the train, we're go to Ann Arbor [ph.], Belgium.  The 7th and 8th; on the 8th, I goes down--the bulletin says we're goin' on December 9th we're 'gone get on the ship (unclear) for New York.  Well, I know we gotta go there.  On the 8th, I'm 'gone get a ride down to the port to set this ship.  We crossed [unclear] Victor--brand new ship.  The first trip over from the shipyard, there's a steam ship and it hit a steam--you call it the steam--the fast, the fast one.  Now I know he 'gone be there on time; I know we 'gone be--on the 9th, we 'gone leave Belgium on the 9th and we 'gone be in New York on the 20th; I'm countin' this; it shouldn't take this ship no longer than twenty days to--ten days to get across the ocean since this is a fast puppy.  And this is the way that my figure--so the 9th--the 6th, on the 7th, we sit there the 10th day in this camp and this ship--the tent collapsed from the snow.  I climbed outta this ship--outta this tent, I go get me a hot dog 'cause this camp is set up like Times Square, New York--hot dogs, hamburgers, coffee, hot coffee, hot chocolate and everything.  Music--big band music playing.  I go get me a hot dog and coffee, a guy say, "Across the street is ice cream."  I go across the street and get ice cream, come down the street and it's snowing like heck now.  I hear over the camp PA system Bing Crosby singing "I'll be Home for Christmas."  I'm the happiest camper in there (laughter).  I go back and I get in my bed fully clothed; I'm not 'gone pull nothing off.  So I go down to this, to this port watching this ship 'cause when this ship move one inch, I wanna be aboard it, and I did not watch this ship--steam turbine, I'm tryin' to say--what this ship is--that engine is.  You know, this is a fast puppy.  And I go down on the 9th, ship 'gone leave at two o' clock in the afternoon.  I go there at eight o' clock this morning, on the 9th sittin' there, and this young lady comes through there and says, "You guys, you like to take home to your mademoiselle some wooden ship--some wooden shoes?"  No, I'm not 'gone take no American woman no wooden shoes; not to America, no way.  In Europe, there are people wearing wooden shoes because they don't have no metal, no leather or no rubber; shoes have wooden soles on the shoes, but American women are not 'gone see this, I'm not 'gone get involved with that.  Said "No."  She offered me some--wanted to know if I--to go home with her.  I said "No, I'm 'gone stay here 'cause that ship 'gone move, I'm 'gone be on it."  I get aboard the ship.  Two o'clock, the ship leaves.  Now all the people left aboard they're waving, throwing kisses at us; even the puppy dogs rubbed him (ph.) down.  We leave, and we left two o' clock on the money; ship leaves up in the North Sea, in the English Channel.  The evening, he made that right turn outta the English Channel into the North Atlantic, and this puppy opened up the steam throttle the 9th and the 10th and the 11th, full speed.  On the 12th, it hit a brick wall.  It was stormin' and boy, I knew we was done--in the storm up until the 20th of December, 1945 and I know we're not 'gone be home for Christmas.  So we got to New York the 26th of December, and we went to Fort Knox, Kentucky.  In about three--two days, on the 28th of December, I gave up goin' home for Christmas and I do whatever.  So we're in Fort Knox and he made me all kinda promise, and I says, "Drop dead."  I wasn't goin' nowhere.
Story_ID: 35670
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about when you finally get to Fort Knox [Kentucky] and your travel home to Memphis [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: When I arrive at Fort Knox, right away they wanna give me a ninety-day furlough, and after furlough, they wanna send me back to Europe for sixty days, and then after sixty days, they want me to come back to the [United] States for another ninety days then I'll be promoted to first lieutenant and I immediately told 'em to shove it, I want no parts of 'em.  So then, a few days later, I got my [U.S.] Army discharge with $300.00, and I asked 'em, "Is this all the country is worth, $300.00?"  He nudged his shoulder and I got my discharge and he shook--when shook my hand, I told him to shove it I walked away with this other group of kids.  They put us on a boat--on a, on a bus; we went to the train station in Fort Knox.  After we arrive at the train station, there's a sign on this train station says "White waiting room; colored waiting room."  Now we didn't see this in England, France, Belgium or Germany--nowhere.  But we saw this in America, at Fort Knox Station there.  So we get on the train and arrive in Memphis-two o' clock in the morning on January the 2nd, 1946.  And as--you get off the train and get on the bus, and this bus driver look as if I'm not supposed to ride the bus, and that you--there's a sign that says "Colored to the rear."  Now all those buses I rode in England and France and Belgium, you didn't see that but back in America you see this; the greatest country in the world.  You could see that anywhere you can read was--you can believe it if you wanna, but I don't believe it.  But anyway, I arrive at home, so I'm walking--get off the bus three, three blocks from my wife's [Willie Mae Childress] house and I'm thinkin' 'Boy, I'm 'gone start with number one--the plans I been makin' for three years, what I'm 'gone do soon as I get in the house.'  'Cause I been married two days now.  I step on the porch, the door opens, "Hi, David."  Whole Cox Army is up, two o' clock in the morning.  There's my wife, mom [Mamie Ella Brown], my dad [David Budlam (ph.) Brown], all six brothers (laughter) and sisters greet me.  So my wife, my mom, my dad sit on the couch, and all six brothers, readin' me the Riot Act, "What's this?  Why is this?"  "Who is this?  "Who is this for?"  "Who put this there?"  "Why you put this there?"  This goin' on from about three o' clock in the morning until 5:30 in the morning.  So I give up from my plans.  Mom cooks breakfast; after breakfast I go see my friends.  My mom was glad to see me; I'm the last one to get home.
Story_ID: 35671
Speaker 1: So now my wife [Willie Mae Childress] and I spent the rest of my time there [Memphis, Tennessee] with my parents [Mamie Ella Brown and David Budlam (ph.) Brown] 'cause there was more room and more privacy there.  One week later, my wife bought me new clothes; one week later, I went to this same Army engineering depot where I worked before, for some employment.  When my Army discharged what I had--what I did in France if the war [World War II] was over, about this generator and this electric equipment that I serviced.  This fellow in the employment office looked at me and looked at my discharge and he says, "All I can give you is loadin' freight cars."  I felt like pushin' that tobacco he was chewin' down his throat, but after talkin' it over with my wife a few days, went back and start loadin' freight cars.  Now about fifty feet from where I'm loadin' freight cars, there was a half-a-dozen German prisoners doin' the same job that I had applied for.  Of course, what else do you expect?  This is America.  So I loaded freight cars for a few months and then I found out in the news there was--the Veteran Administration was opening up some trade schools all over America.  So I took that consideration, the wife and I decided to move to St. Louis [Missouri].  There were schools there; none in Memphis.  So we went to St. Louis; a week later I went to this trade school to enter, and I was advised that this trade school was strictly for white veterans.  Three days later, I looked into the newspaper and there was an advertisement in there where there was a mechanical contractor was gonna open up a trade school with refrigeration and air-conditioning for their veterans, and I went and applied and I was accepted immediately.
Story_ID: 35672
Speaker 1: And this trade school [teaching refrigeration and air-conditioning for veterans] was very comfortable 'cause everybody there had been in the [U.S.] Army or Air Force or Navy or Marines--every part of the armed forces; they had been all over the world.  About a month later, class was going good and each class had seven people in it; thirty-seven people all total, and each instructor had seven people under them, so it wasn't crowded.  About a month later, a stupid politician come to the office and told the manager he couldn't have black veterans goin' to school there.  So the manager led this person to the front of the building and literally pushed him out on the sidewalk, told him he had no jurisdiction over this program; this is a government program and if he comes back, he would be arrested.  A few days later, the city inspector comes and says, "Now you got too many people in the building; you're only allowed twelve people in the building."  He too was thrown out the building, just like the city inspector was--like this other inspector was.  A month later, six people came to the building, says "You veterans gotta get out of the building; we are taking over this building."  So now these six people start throwin' our oil on the floor, our paint on the floor, our tools on the floor; we veterans decided to get in on the act ourselves.  We got a hold of these six people and ten minutes later, these people couldn't walk.  These six people was--put 'em on a stretcher, taking 'em to the hospital, and weeks later they were arrested and, and they was prosecuted by the federal government for--got 'em for entering without permission on a government property.  And that was the end of that whole problem.
Story_ID: 35673
Speaker 1: Went along--I was there seventeen months [trade school teaching refrigeration and air-conditioning for veterans], and when graduation time come along, I graduated and this lady says, "I have an announcement to make."  As she's handing out a different diploma, "Dave Brown's average is 98.8."  Due--all due applause goin' off, this one fellow shook my hand, he says, "I'd like for you to go to work for me.  My name is Nick Hummel (ph.), I'm the owner of Hummel Refrigeration Incorporated."  And I agree to go to work for him.  The next day, we went to the Union Hall, I got my union card.  The next day we went to the City Hall, I got my license and my certification certificate the next couple of days.  I had everything you needed to do refrigeration work and air-conditioning service work anywhere, anywhere in America; that's if you wasn't a certain--if you didn't have blond hair or blue eyes.  So after about a week, I went to work for Nick, and the first assignment went on which was alone.  This plumber come and ask me "What are you doing?"  I says, "I'm servicing refrigeration equipment."  "You're not supposed to be doing that."  I said, "Well that's your opinion."  He say, "Well you have to leave."  Say "I'm not leavin' until I finish."  By this time, the female walks out say, "What's going on?"  He say, "You have this nigger workin' on this refrigeration equipment, and niggers not certified to work on refrigeration equipment."  She said, "I want you to leave my building with that type of an attitude."  He says, "I'm not leaving--this nigger 'gone leave."  She calls a cop and she called his boss.  The cops come; immediately he wants to talk to me.  She say, "You have no reason to talk to him; it's the plumber I want outta my building."  The plumber arrives, the boss arrives, the plumber's boss says, "What's goin' on?"  The plumber said, "Boss, will you tell this bitch that niggers not supposed to do this type of work?"  Now this is no way 'cause this building is a customer of this plumbing company, so the plumber's boss grabs this plumber and kneed him in the back with his knees, pushed him outside the building, and he's outta the building.  So this female tells this cop, "Now you can leave.  You were called to remove the plumber, now he's out so now you leave."  And he left, and that was the first job of twenty-eight years--of fifty-eight years of me starting refrigeration.  And I handled it just that way, and I--a second assignment I had, I used my refrigerant to carry me right through for fifty-eight years; I had no problem whatsoever.
Speaker 2: What union did you belong to?
Speaker 1: The Operating Engineers, Local Two.
Speaker 2: And how long did you work for, for Nick?
Speaker 1: Pardon?
Speaker 2: How long did you work for that company--Nick's company?
Speaker 1: Nick's company--I worked for him five years, along with Central Refrigeration; it was two in the same neighborhood and they did the same thing; I worked for both of 'em--each one three days a week.  Both had sulphur dioxide equipment.
Story_ID: 35674
Speaker 1: And tell me about your brother [Grover Brown].  Let's go back because you said you were the last one to come back.  Your brother--he came back before you from the--
Speaker 2: He came back about a month before I did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he was in the railroad--in the army, so he got hooked up in the railroad there in Memphis [Tennessee].  And then he worked--from there, he got with the editorial--with different religious organizations; different states.  Printing paper, printing on the newspaper and some magazines--different religion, because railroads were goin' down then, you know.
Story_ID: 35675
Speaker 1: So did you raise your family in St. Louis [Missouri]?
Speaker 2: Did I?
Speaker 1: Did you raise your family in St. Louis?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, so tell me about your--about your children.
Speaker 2: Well, I raised two kids--a boy and a girl.
Speaker 1: What were their names--what are their names?
Speaker 2: Sharon and David, Jr.
Speaker 1: Tell me about them.
Speaker 2: Well, they're excellent kids.  I was accused of raisin 'em like they was in the Army and well, nothin' wrong with that.  You have discipline, you have discipline.  Nothin' wrong with discipline; nobody died of being disciplined, right?  And I made sure that they saw what was--the world was made of.  You don't do somethin' because it was easy to do, you do somethin' because you're qualified to do it and if you have an initiative to do it, do it.  And I made sure I was there to help 'em.  The daughter was, was, was no problem whatsoever; she, she had a head on her shoulder from day one.  'Course the boy was momma's baby and he was--he wanted to take the easiest way out, the way I looked at it.  Goin' to college, he wanna take communications and to me, communications--you got a track that goes along but you got an end to that track, and the end of it is somebody can come outta high school and do the same thing you're doing; you don't take no effort to do that.  But he got into communications, he got into broadcasting and his mom was proud of him.  Well, so was I because his mom says, "Such and such heard my son on the radio."  Well, sure.  Then he did come to me and says "One of these days, I'm 'gone be one of these guys that's on NBC News."  Well, good enough.  You gotta remember, you don't need a college graduate for that, the way I'm lookin' at it.  My theory is do something everybody really don't do--can't do; they give up.  (Unclear) of 'em goin' out in my trade school, people start in that school like twenty-five, and when I graduated--talking about blacks, five graduated with me.  Lose interest in it.  One thing--well, one thing or the other, I don't know; but I was determined to stay.  But anyway, gettin' back to my son, he got into broadcasting after graduation, he got good in broadcasting, and he got into television and television got into advertisement.  Now I may have mentioned to him once, I say, "You know, a kid can come off of high school and do what you doin'; you don't have to graduate from a college to do that."  He started goin' to different places, and he went to a railroad office one day and the railroad fellow says, "How much education do you have?"  He says, "Well, I graduated from Southern Illinois University."  He say, "You know son," he says "a person graduating from high school can do the same that you're doing."  He told this fellow, he say, "You know, my dad told me the same thing."  And this fellow on the railroad got an idea, he says, "Why don't you come work for the railroad?"  And if this fellow at the railroad had an idea that his (ph.) kid's dad had told this kid the same thing, he could rely on this kid's dad to back what he 'gone tell this kid.  So he said, "Why don't you tell your dad about this railroad?"  Kid come to me and I says, "Go for it."  He said, "Dad, you know I'd be out in the rain, out in the snow, and hot sun."  I say, "Look at me;" I say, "you see anything wrong with me?"  "No."  He didn't know what I was gettin' at.  I say, "You remember me tellin' you I slept in the foxhole, in the rain, in the snow?  Me tellin' you how my feet was frozen to the ground in the foxhole?  Anything wrong with me?"  "No."  I say, "Well is anything 'gone be wrong with you if you're standing out there switchin' these tracks in the rain?"  (Laughter).  He say "I'm not 'gone let my dad out-do me."  He went back and started workin' for the railroad.  One month later, this guy come along he says, "How long you go, go to engineering school?"  He said "Before you answer, go back and talk to you dad."  He got me, he talked to me and I had railroad--as a training, I had a railroad there in my house there.  I got two cars and I hooked 'em together.  See, one had coupling (ph.) open, one had coupling closed.  So the coupling goes together, it closes; the same thing you 'gone have on the railroad.  "But you 'gone ride with the engine."  "And what if I fail?"  "So you start all over again."  He joined and went to school, he passed it, he's a railroad engineer for thirty years.  Today, he thanks me for it.
Story_ID: 35676
Speaker 1: Okay, and tell us about Sharon [Brown's daughter].
Speaker 2: I had no trouble with Sharon.  She was--well, when I'm in my--when I got into the air-conditioning and refrigeration, I got up with Carrot (ph.) Corporation after six years, and I--each time I went to a seminar, I stopped and bought her a doll back, and I noticed she would make the clothing for this doll and a lotta my air-conditioning work was around medical buildings.  So I was talking to one of the nurses one day about my daughter making clothing for dolls, and she--"Why don't you buy the kit--a sewing machine?"  Say "Where you buy a toy sewing machine from?"  She say "Buy a real sewing machine."  And I went to Macy's and I bought her a real sewing machine.  And the first thing I knew, Sharon asked me for some type of machine--sewing machine that did a double stitch (laughter).  "What are you talking about, a double stitch?"  And she went from there on up. First thing I know, she was goin' to some place in California, south of San Francisco; she won second prize on modeling--on designing clothes; she won second prize on designing some type of clothing there with, I think it was 'Seventeen Magazine'.  And I had took her to Seventeen Magazine on Fifth--there in--on Fifth Avenue in New York.  I was the only one--male sittin' there in these--amongst these seventeen year-old girls (laughter) at this office there in New York there.  I take her there about a couple of times, and she went from there.  And one day she came home from school, I think she was in--I don't recall if she was in grade school or if she was in college then--I mean high school or college.  I often told her, I says, "Now when you go to college, I don't want you comin' back home to St. Louis; I want you to keep goin' and when you run outta ground, then you can come home."  I know she didn't understand what I was talkin' about.  Anyway, she come home and I was doin' some air-conditioning work at a place where they did--they carry these boats (ph.) of cloth; they wear these--people come in and get these boats of cloth and pick what type of cloth they have and they make clothing from, I guess.  I was air-conditioning this particular building one day and I saw it, and I thought 'I wonder would Sharon like--' anyway, Sharon come home from school break and she come home and she went to this place to get a job there to, I guess to--because these people were goin' there; some people was makin'--taking these cloth here and make dresses, put 'em on display.  To my idea, that's what she was doin'.  I think this lady told Sharon, "One thing you can do here, you can keep the floors clean and put these boats of cloth back in place."  Then Sharon come out with tears in her eyes and I knew then, she understood what I meant by "don't come home."  She went from there on up.  As she got in school, she told me "Designing clothes is a political deal," which it is.  You can do so much and then you know somebody, somebody know somebody and then you outta the picture.  She went to whatever she was doin' and there she goes.
Speaker 1: Okay, great.  So now (Simultaneous)--Okay, I'm sorry--.
Speaker 2: I didn't make mistakes on, on that (unclear), but little mistakes (unclear) one thing now, I'm in the air-condition business; Sharon always a mechanically-inclined kid.  "Oh, help me work on my cars."  And my son [David Brown, Jr.] made one mistake in his life; as I said, he was a momma's baby.  This is not--this is just a part of my life.  He says "Dad," he says "you work too hard; once you come home and change clothes, take a shower, take us all out to dinner."  I says, "Tomorrow evening, you come home, you change clothes, you meet me at 12th and Rolley (ph.)."  And he met me there, took him to this dark basement; this is a bank building, it's a 800 ton centrifugal air-condition machine.  And he climbs upon this scaffolding, which is twelve feet high off the ground--off the floor.  Kid--nothin' but 17, 18 years old, it scares, you know?  I says "Don't look down, I gotta get this air-condition ready in two days."  I think that was his downfall; he never said another word about this.  Well, Sharon went there the next fall, helped me overhaul this compressor.  I had to use a--eight foot stepladder--six foot stepladder, open that compressor, take the top off, hand it to her, she takes it, takes it over to the bench, takes it--she takes the, the, the (unclear) cleaner and cleans it off, she cleans it off, sits it over here and I hands her another part and she cleans it off; never say a word.  But he (laughter)--oh, he was, he was somethin' else but he, he changed his--now, he's at home, calls me three or four times a week.  "Oh, this compressor, what do I do with this?"  Now he done actually got into it now, but he's sixty years old; but it go to show you.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But I determined--the streets are not for you; the street's for idiots.  And I didn't go to school--I didn't go to--go to all this time to raise money to send you to school for you to be an idiot; I'm not 'gone have it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 35677
Speaker 1: Let's move on to the 1960s and a lot was going on with civil rights.  Did you have involvement with the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Now you remember, that started back in 1946.
Speaker 1: Right.  No, I understand, but I'm saying you're now living in St. Louis [Missouri], and what's going on?  What is the climate there, and how are you involved?
Speaker 2: I didn't get involved.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See, I'm 'gone straighten you out there because you remember Jackie Robinson [first African American player in major league baseball]?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: He and I started the same time.  I started servicing refrigeration the same time he started with the Brooklyn Dodgers; same thing was happening to him was happening to me.  And I fought it my way, the Army way.  I took no back (ph.) from no one; care who you are, where you came from, I'm still doin' it the Army way.  I didn't ask you whether you like it or not; I was fightin' both people, white and black.  I'm goin' to the City Hall which is where we all pay taxes to, and he tells me, "Niggers not supposed to do that kinda work."  City Hall, next admissions office, comptroller's office.  Now, I go 'cross north side where the blacks are just to talk like I'm talkin' to you; I don't want nothin' from it, I don't want you to pat on the back, I don't need your pat on the back.  I don't want you to agree with me; I'm just 'gone tell you what I'm facin'.  This is 1940--'48 [1948], long before civil rights come along.  My point is I'm fightin' to get the blacks in the union 'cause that kid goin' to school gotta have a kid--dad that can make a livin'--union wages.  Follow me?  That's my idea.  So now I go north side, well you're doin' the wrong job; everybody got a different job, you better--I was going to the, to the newspaper people, insurance people, and the people--the service station people, the, the food paper people, high school principal, church people, NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People], Urban League, all told me the same thing--to my face; happen to me, I didn't read this now.  "You're doing the wrong job."  Everybody got a different job.  Well, you're 'gone get hurt, you're 'gone get some serious business--serious trouble.  All this didn't matter to me, but what do you mean by 'I'm in serious trouble?'  My paycheck says the same thing everybody's paycheck says who works inside the city limits.  If you work inside the city limits, you're paying the same taxes--city tax, state tax, federal government tax; my check say the same thing.  I'm not doing nothin' crooked.  NAACP said the same thing.  "One day you can go the post office or the record center."  I think I insulted 'em by sayin' those jobs are common labor; I'm strictly skilled labor.  I don't want no common labor; but they didn't go for that, they didn't like it.  I'll get back with you later.
Story_ID: 35678
Speaker 1: Okay, so in the 1960s was [Dr. Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and [President John F.] Kennedy's death.  What were your thoughts about that?
Speaker 2: Well, (unclear), none of us was happy about it but they was--at this time was in the '60s [1960s] and I'm working at this ten-story medical building.  They couldn't get to me one iota because I wouldn't say good morning to them; they wanted to say "Good morning" and they wanted to start a conversation; ain't nothin' I wanna say to 'em; far as I'm concerned, you're nobody, 'cause they're from Europe; they come over here from Europe after the war, and this one fellow, he's a head Nazi as far as I'm concerned.  That's why I treat 'em that way.  You know, I was in the [U.S.] Army and I didn't pull no bonus [unclear].
Speaker 1: Okay, so do you have an opinion about King's work or Kennedy as president?
Speaker 2: Well they did an excellent job, yeah.  That's the only way you can turn this country around, but it's a fight 'cause you got too many people oppose you and you hardly got any behind you.  But you gotta take precautions because when you do something like that--anytime you're doing something for the working class people, you got problems--for the minority people, you got problems.  You don't--you're not old enough to remember, this old president durin' the war (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)-[President Franklin D.] Roosevelt?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt.  He come up with the--this work project, WPA [Work Projects Administration], the people is against that--they didn't want that; they didn't want these low-class people on their highway--on their roads diggin' ditches, that's all the WPA was for--dig draining ditches.  They shot at him and missed him; they killed another guy; I remember this as a kid.  I was a young kid back then; this was in the--1933, '34 [1934].
Speaker 1: Who would--who did you say?
Speaker 2: Roosevelt.
Speaker 1: Roosevelt.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was pushin' the WPA; now that started back then, that's how this country is.  See, you gotta remember who this country is built of; you don't remember this and nobody in here remember--that's old like I am, remember the '20s [1920s], the late '20s [1920s] and the '30s [1930s].  People comin' from Europe, like Ireland and Germany, Italy, and those other countries.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: They was bootleggers, prostitutes, bank robbers.  New York, Cleveland, Buffalo, Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia, St. Louis, Kansas City, Milwaukee.  It's over the headline--newsworthy (ph.), went far.  As a kid reading, all this was fun.  That's why I remember this.
Story_ID: 35679
Speaker 1: Let's move on to maybe the Vietnam War.  What was your thoughts about the Vietnam War?
Speaker 2: Politics; that's all it was for--politics.  Why was it startin'?  I mean what can these people do to this country?  They had no Navy, they had no Air Force, just like today.  These people don't have no Air Force.  You get in the Navy, you get in the Army, this country would be so strong, people would be afraid to say "Good morning," to you.  But no, the monkey suits wearin' people up in Washington [District of Columbia], they make too much money out of it.  Who is gettin' out if it?  These kids are gettin' chopped up, and they come back here and you're not gonna do anything for them; they'll be crippled the rest of their life.  I see this all the time, I hear about it all the time.  Why do you--says, "Well, we're runnin' the budget is short" and the first thing to go, you close down the veterans hospital.  Why you do that?  You don't close down the dog hospital.
Story_ID: 35680
Speaker 1: Okay, let's move forward a little more and let's talk about when you begin to get notoriety about the work that you have done in the military, the History Channel and 'A Distant Shore' is produced about African Americans in D-Day [World War II; invasion of Normandy, France, June, 1944].  After all these years, how do you feel about now you finally getting recognition about this?
Speaker 2: Well, I like it, I'd like for 'em to tell more about it because it keep from--steppin' on a lotta people's toes.  They gotta be a little easy-goin' with it; they did a--quite a bit and I like it but it's a lot that they, they leave out 'cause I was there.  But I'm satisfied the way they goin' about it.  I met this guy Ken Burns [American director and producer of documentary films, known for his style of using archival footage and photographs], and I like his attitude about it; I hope he keeps it up.  But it's so many people didn't like that 'cause you got so many people from other countries--their parents started this war; I meet 'em every Friday.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And I don't bite my tongue 'bout it.
Speaker 1: How, how did you feel before this all came about when movies were made like 'The Longest Day' or 'Saving Private Ryan', and there were no blacks portrayed at all in any of the--in the movies about, about the war [World War II]?
Speaker 2: Well that's the--Private Ryan, that's all Hollywood.  See, all that garbage built up to make this country think they're superior above everybody else, and that would give these young kids the wrong idea when they have to go into real life combat.  That guy on the other side of that, that road is just smart is you are, and you hear the kids talkin' today, "Oh, we're goin' over there to train 'em to do this."  What the heck you 'gone train 'em for?  They'll blow your brains out in the split of a second.  What you 'gone train 'em for?  That's the big mistake they get, but that's politics for you.
Speaker 1: Right.
Story_ID: 35681
Speaker 1: The Legion of Honor Award [2010].  Tell me about that.
Speaker 2: Well, that's--that was presented to me but that's for all those kids I left over there on the beach; thanks for them--the kids who came back with me and the kids who was there, but it's a shame that it had to be this late and I wanted to--think that come to me two days after that was awarded to me, I got a phone call says people in my building, in fact who went to Mass with me, says they're not going because it be too many niggers and Jews there.  And that's, that's Americans for you.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: That's what you have to contend--anything you bring up, that pops up like that it's different from England and France because those people over there, you go there now, they grab you and just hug you and they never--they weren't even born then.  I been back there three times, and each time I'm there, they come and thank you and they, they weren't even born--they, they're great grandkids--meet you in the airport there to do that for you.  You don't get that here.
Story_ID: 35682
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Just like I am--arrogant, disagreeable, whatever people wanna tell me.  I am just like I am; I says--when I say "Good morning" to you, I mean that.  When I says "Drop dead," I mean that.  It's just the way I am; no different.
Story_ID: 35683
Speaker 1: Now, because this is gonna be shown to generations in the future, if you could send a message to the future generations, what would it be?  What would you say to them?
Speaker 2: That's hard to do, you know.  The generation today is so mixed up, pro and con one way or the other; so many people sayin' this, some sayin' that.
Speaker 1: Well what would you say to your great, great-grandchildren?  What message did you wanna send to them?
Speaker 2: Main thing I say to any young kid is be sure you be able to think on your own feet; treat people like you wanna be treated; don't get in the habit of making people feel like they not wanted; you can't make a person smile, don't say anything.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Can you tell us what values you consider to be most important, and why?
Speaker 2: Self-respect.
Speaker 1: Okay, I guess that's self-explanatory.
Story_ID: 35684
Speaker 1: Tell me what your hopes and concerns are for the African American community.
Speaker 2: That's a long, long way; I mean--number one is stop bein' a clown to the world; stop bein'--leave the clown to the circus; nothing is funny today, everything is serious--serious world now.  Everything you take in consideration, very serious, to the heart; don't make jokes out of people's life; stay your own; have respect for other people.
Story_ID: 35685
Speaker 1: Mr. Brown, we've met and interviewed so many people who were reluctant to talk about what happened in World War II, and what the experience in terms of racial segregation.  Why do you think there's so much reluctance to talk about that or, or why are you so willing to talk about it?
Speaker 2: I think because it's really, it seems--since it's really embarrassing, you know (unclear) when you compare this country to other countries, why so in this country?  My answer to that is most countries pretty much solid; over here you got a mixture of a lotta places and they come over here and it's still--from way back in the '20s [1920s] and '30s [1930s] the riff-raffs and the bank robbers and bootleggers; that's still going on, that's still--some of the people--that's still in their blood here.  Like some of the bank robbers; some of their relatives still live up in the northern part of Minnesota and Wisconsin--still up in that neck of the woods, and the people akin to them still live there.  And the war didn't help any.  So why they do that, I have no idea, but I'm at Mass every Saturday, and it's one gal there she's, she's from Germany and she don't like Jewish people, and she's in the room--in the building with Jewish people, and I don't let her get by with it.  I mean, I often tell her, I say, "The way you goin' at it would cause World War II, and World War II to cause me not to have--have me be going blind, or have no teeth and have a broken neck."  She tried to get to runnin' and I won't let her get it (ph.).  My daughter [Sharon] tell me say, "Oh, go easy on her."  Well, those easy days are gone now (laughter).  I'm an old Army brat.
Speaker 1: Thank you, Mr. Brown.
Speaker 2: Alrighty.
Story_ID: 35686
Speaker 1: What's this photo, Mr. Brown?  What is this?
Speaker 2: Well, that's an aircraft gun there; firing up at the aircraft, and that's some ships out there that--while we hit a mine or something that's burning.
Speaker 1: Now where did this photo come from?
Speaker 2: That's Omaha Beach there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is it a personal photo of yours?
Speaker 2: No, no, that was there in property--the army gave me that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--one of the ships that you were on--one of the ships--they took the picture from the ship.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Just try--we're gonna try one, Denise.  If you just--like at the very edge with your fingers, just try to hold it flat; just to see if we can improve on what I got a minute ago.  Or, you know what?  Let's try something.  Do it like this, let's do two up and two halves, and then we can put it together.  It's not ideal, but I think we can actually come out with a better result in the end if we do this.  Okay, and then just the other side--the other half.  Okay, let's move on.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Okay, tell us about (simultaneous)--even though it's obvious, just tell us who--about this photo.
Speaker 2: This was taken when?
Speaker 1: You got that on one side, don't you?
Speaker 2: SHARON [Brown's daughter]:  He wants to see it up close.
Speaker 1: So this is you in your uniform?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I can see it from here.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  It's easier for us to do it sideways (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: So tell us who that is.
Speaker 2: That, that, that's me; that picture was taken in France.
Speaker 1: Okay. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: And this is you when?  When was that taken?
Speaker 1: That was taken the day before and the day before I got married.
Speaker 2: Oh, the day before he got married, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I had a lotta hair then.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: I'm takin'--that's in England.
Speaker 2: Okay, good; next.  What about this one?
Speaker 1: In (unclear); we're on the beach there.  And my buddy, this guy is still livin' in St. Louis.
Speaker 2: Remember his name?
Speaker 1: Hubert--Hubert Harris.
Speaker 2: Okay, next. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: At the top of that monument there, you see the 490 Port Battalion, and the second line (ph.) is my company 226 Port Company.  That's the only monument there on Utah Beach.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: That's it.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Give us a second here, while we put the lights on.
Speaker 1: (DESCRIPTION OF VARIOUS WORLD WAR II ITEMS)
Speaker 2: Tell us about that one, Mr. Brown.
Speaker 1: Now in the second row from the front and the third from the left is me.  I was a young kid then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now, Mr. Brown, you did not tell us that you started your own company, and this is the equipment that he (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Oh, are we gonna--okay, wait a second.
Speaker 2: You did not tell us, so now you need to tell us 'cause your voice is still on tape.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--When did you incorporate and start your own business?
Speaker 1: In the '80s [1980s].  I didn't incorporate (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What was the name of your company?
Speaker 1: Brown Industry, Incorporated.
Speaker 2: Which photo are we shooting?
Speaker 1: Either one.  This is the equipment that he--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Bring back a lotta memories.  See that fellow there, near the bottom there?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: He's, he's dyin' of cancer and he's one of my (unclear).
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Okay, so we're rolling and we're gonna do the uniform, so let's talk about that.
Speaker 1: Okay, Mr. Brown, tell us about your uniform.  We had you change into your--that's your original uniform, and tell us about your, your badges and--on your uniform.
Speaker 2: Well, this uniform--the jacket I have on now, this is my second one 'cause the other one got ruined in the invasion, you know, where all the oil and the debris that's floatin' around and dirty.  This is my second one, and we got this one in France so when it deteriorated--the one that's injured in England.  And all these other stuff was issued later on, we never knew what they were from, we just--call us out and issued it to us.  All we wanted to do was go home.  Medals didn't mean nothin' to us.
Speaker 1: But you had--you know the significance of them; explain the ones that you know.  You have one for the length of time that you were in France, right?  For the length of time you were serving in the European Theater?
Speaker 2: You talkin' to me?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I can't hear.
Speaker 1: One of your stripes refers to the length of time you served in the European Theater, is that correct?
Speaker 2: I didn't hear you.
Speaker 1: One of the stripes refers to the length of time you spent in the European Theater?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was six--six months, each one.  (Unclear).  It was six months representing a stripe.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Hold your arm--hold your arm out.
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
SHARON:  He can do it; he's probably getting tired.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
SHARON:  Why don't you point to it, daddy--the ones that refer--yes.  Explain those.
Speaker 2: Every six months, you're overseas.
Speaker 1: Alright, and then what's the T bracket--badge for up on your shoulder--your fore-arm?
Speaker 2: The T is for First Army.  And the other shoulder is Transportation Corps.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you know what the middle is in the front with the red and the green?
Speaker 2: The what?
Speaker 1: The red ribbon?
Speaker 2: The ribbon?
Speaker 1: On the side.
Speaker 2: The Legion of Honor Medal?
Speaker 1: This one? (POINTING)
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Legion of Army, yeah.
Speaker 2: When did you receive that?
Speaker 1: It was June the 10th, wasn't it?  In June in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--2010
Speaker 1: 2010.
Speaker 2: Yes, okay.
Speaker 1: And what's the cross beside it?  The black four-bladed cross.
Speaker 2: That one is a marksmanship medal.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then how about the three colored bars across the top above those?
Speaker 2: Across here?  (POINTING).  Some is Northern France, and Southern France, European--ETO and so forth.
Speaker 1: And what's the one on his--above his--the right chest pocket?  The diamond with the circle?
Speaker 2: This one? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Above his pocket (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Can't see it.
Speaker 1: I know it's really up on your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's right there.
Speaker 1: That's a French--French call it a rubber--a dead duck, or somethin' like that.
Speaker 2: And on the other sleeve.
Speaker 1: I don't recall what that is.  So long ago, I done forgot.
Speaker 2: Okay, no problem.
Speaker 1: Now if you wanna just one-by-one hand him the three items.
SHARON:  Describe that for them.
Speaker 1: Hmm?
SHARON:  Take this, and describe that for them.
Speaker 1: This was issued to me in Camp Harahan in New Orleans.  The old meskis [ph.]; you put everything in there, needed.
Speaker 2: Tilt forward so we can see inside.  Is that your one that you brought back with you?
Speaker 1: It's the only one I ever had.
Speaker 2: Okay.  You kept it pretty clean.
Speaker 1: Well, you don't wash it; you eat out of and you take a hand full of sand and clean it out, close it up.  Some lady asked me says, "Now what happened to the germs?  Don't leave those germs in England."
Speaker 2: Alright.  And then do you wanna tell 'hem about the commando kit?
Speaker 1: This is a kit we kept all our needles and thread in and all that kinda stuff; our personal items--
Speaker 2: Turn it around so we can see it; turn it around towards the camera so they can see it.
Speaker 1: Was that issued in Camp Harahan also?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Kept our needles and threads and little personal items and stuff like that in it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now that's fine; just keep going.
Speaker 1: Alright, you wanna explain that one?
Speaker 2: This is a money belt, I think.  It's our money belt; well, see your purse--your bill fold is just too small for French money and English money, so we got a money belt--put that around your waste.
Speaker 1: Okay, you wanna explain where you got this from?
Speaker 2: We was on the Utah Beach there, and they were bringin' in the captured German soldiers and--
Speaker 1: Turn it around and hold it up.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there you go.
Speaker 1: Go ahead, keep talking now; tell us the story.
Speaker 2: --we was turnin' around the German prisoners there and they had this in the infantry kit, pulled it off of 'em, say "Sarge, what do you think I should do with this?"  I was takin' it away from him.  I got another one there somewhere, I don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay, that's it.
Speaker 2: What about the--
Speaker 1: The awards; yeah, let's do that.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
SHARON:  Leave it right there, daddy and explain that to them.
Speaker 1: Was it about the History Channel, was it?
SHARON:  That was the History Channel Emmy Award Plaque, yeah.
Speaker 1: Say what?
SHARON:  This is the Emmy Award you received (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--for 'A Distant Shore'.
Speaker 2: Oh, 'A Distant Shore', oh yeah.  This guy that went throughout the country and got information from different black fellows who was in the service, and they were in different parts of the--whether it's Africa, Italy, France, Belgium and places--got information from 'em.
SHARON:  Okay, alright, we have one more.
Speaker 2: You remember anything else that you forgot to tell us before?
Speaker 1: You forgot to tell us that you started your own company, your air-conditioning company.  And tell us the name of it again.
Speaker 2: My corporation--well, once I was workin', my company was Brown and Company, but as I got into the '80s [1980s] and I retired from the--being a subcontractor, then I formed a corporation which was Brown Industry, Incorporated, where it was registered with the State of Missouri.  And then I took initiative and hired who I see fit, which was--they didn't like if you didn't hire females.  Well, no one tells me what I can and can't do, just like they didn't tell me when I couldn't work, so I hired a females and males.  And we worked at it real good until I retired.  So some of 'em are there workin' now.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this last piece is the official award that they gave you in addition to the ribbon for the Legion of Honor Award from France--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I'll just take your picture with that.  Is that tilted good?
Speaker 2: That's good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Can't see it.
SHARON:  Look up to the camera, dad; look up for the camera.  There you go.  Smile.
Speaker 2: Hold it up now, a little higher; hold the award up higher.  High as you can, right up by your chin.  There we go.  Okay, that's good.  Alright, anything else anybody?
Speaker 1: No (simultaneous)--I think we got it all.
