Story_ID: 3259
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe. I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers. Our videographer is Scott Stearns. Observing are Scott Mohammad and Valencia Humes. Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is James Luther Bevel, J-A-M-E-S, L-U-T-H-E-R, B-E-V-E-L.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth?
Speaker 2: 10/19/36 [October 19th, 1936].
Speaker 1: And what is your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Itta Bena, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: I-T-T-A, B-E-N-A, two words.
Speaker 1: All right. And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Minister.
Speaker 1: All right. And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: 01/14/03 [January 14th, 2003].
Story_ID: 3260
Speaker 1: Now before we get in to depth, there are five, kind of lightweight 'People' magazine-ish type questions that I'm compelled to ask you, and the first one is: what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably avocado.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I don't use it much now, but I used to use it. "He's on the case." Referring to God, you know. That he's still on the case.
Story_ID: 3261
Speaker 1: Well, let's talk about your family background. Do you know much about the origins of your family and where they came from, your ancestors, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Three origins. One is Zulu and one is the Irish and the other one is Choctaw.
Speaker 1: Okay. Can you elaborate on the connections?
Speaker 2: Well, on my mom [Illie Murphy Bevel] and dad's [Denis Bevel] side both was predominantly Choctaw. Then on my dad's side there's three generations of the Irish, for instance. His grandfather was Irish and his mother, for instance, is a--was a Choctaw-Blackfoot Indian. So then you had the African-European son marrying a full Choctaw-Blackfoot Indian woman. And then on my mother's side, it's predominantly Cherokee and not a whole lot of African because that's where the Zulu comes in at, and Cherokee and Choctaw.
Speaker 1: Now it's interesting you should mention the Zulus because they really didn't figure prominently in the slave trade, but, I mean, why do you--I mean how do you know that your ancestors were Zulus?
Speaker 2: Just in terms of my mother's discussion. In terms of my grandfather. I don't know--he was not a slave because he was sort of like a merchantman, something like that. But they weren't part of the slave trade, but I don't know what he was doing. He was like a merchant seaman or something.
Speaker 1: And in terms of the Choctaw, there's a lot of the Choctaw history in Mississippi, and I don't know if you could elaborate on some of that. I know Greenwood Leflore was a Choctaw who owned a plantation so they named Greenwood, Mississippi after them--a lot of Leflores down there with the Choctaw background.  Can you elaborate on that a little bit?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, see, if you go through most of the small villages in Mississippi, most of the people there are the Choctaw people who's still there. After the war [U.S. Civil War] and after they had this great migration to Oklahoma, most of the Choctaws didn't migrate to Oklahoma. Many of them just passed off as Africans or the colored people because the Indians you see in the movies with the wigs on talkin' 'bout "Woo woo woo" are the--what they call it--the Apaches, which is like the Hispanic looking Indians. They're not like the Choctaw. The Choctaws look more or less like African people. There are a lot of Choctaws with hair like mine and you can tell because we have those long heads with the sink in the center, two knots on it. Most of those guys are Choctaw guys, so. But they're not Apache-looking Indians. They're more or less African looking type people, see? So you go back and get some of the older pictures, most of the Choctaws are African types. They're not Hispanic types.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now did you know your grandparents?
Speaker 2: I knew my mother's mother. She was the only one that was alive, but all my other grandparents had--and my mother's father--they passed when I was a little boy, but my father's people was passed because--well, my father [Denis Bevel] was in his sixties when I was born, so his people had passed on.
Story_ID: 3262
Speaker 1: See, we got introduced not so much to genetic history as we did to biblical history. In terms of we see ancestry in relationship to scientists rather than biology, if you know what I mean. In other words--see, there are two history approaches.  One is the racist European approach where they think of people like you breed horses. One is the Christ approach where you think of people in terms of the consciousness of thought. Okay? So I basically perceive myself as a Hebrew, you know. When I go all the way back, and all these people that comes out of the northeastern African people who were driven out, and some of them identified with the Choctaws, some identified with the people in Ghana, etcetera, etcetera. But they was basically Hebrews and northeast African people who was mostly brought over here. So we identified with that strand of history primarily, as a consciousness of who we are. So it has to do more or less with a God consciousness rather than a biological genetic strand.
Speaker 2: Okay, well. All right. I'm just trying--.
Speaker 1: Let me give you another straight thought of what I mean. If you ask me, say, "Well, who are you?"  I say my ancestors are all of the people who engaged in the bringing man back to consciousness. See, I'm conscious now, right? I'm this government scientist, okay? I say, well, since the fall of the race when we went into unconsciousness. See, the whole race went into unconsciousness when they started eating animals. I say, then, historically, man started back to well, what happened? Why did we lose consciousness?  Then out of this consciousness come your reemerging of the science of government, the science of education, the science of economics, and the science of marriage. I say, okay, now my ancestry, me being a God child, is the evolution of that consciousness back to my consciousness, see? So I see my ancestry predominantly see--you look at the guy Yeshua, or what you call Jesus, is predominantly--is a big brother in our family, in that sense. He is the one who brings us to the science of consciousness. We can trace our history back through this consciousness all the way back to Abraham, see? So that's what I mean. So we don't get into the genetic because we don't perceive ourselves as animals. We perceive ourselves as a man creature, which is totally different from an animal creature. And so we trace ourselves through consciousness rather than through genetics. This genetic tracing of the self has to do with guys breeding animals and start thinking of themselves as animal breeders and breed themselves as that.
Speaker 2: Sir, do you think it's valuable or that anything can be learned from looking at your biological ancestors and looking at their lives and what they had to do and go through?
Speaker 1: Yes, certainly it can, but it's not the dominant issue, though, see? That's where all this insanity come from. This is where all this animalism come--that's all this gang stuff and all this military stuff come from. Turf fighting and arguing over, you know, the special breed of horses and this special breed of--and are you intelligent? Can you process thought? Can you define and reason? That's the questions we ask. Well, can you define and reason? Let me give you an illustration. We will ask about the science of self-governance that doesn't violate. Now, of course now if you can't manifest self-governance without violation, then we can't claim sanity and civilization, see? You know, we don't play about that in terms of who we are, you know. So if a guy come to me and he's telling me about his ancestry himself, and we say, well, if in your ancestry there any governance without violation, then were your people sane and civilized?  Because we have to have a standard of sanity and civilization, right? So we say if a person is self-governance and economically independent don't violate other people and animals, then we can say this man is sane and civilized. So we look for our ancestry in relations to those people.
Story_ID: 3263
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us and her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was Illie, maiden name, Murphy, and she was--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry, what was her first name?
Speaker 2: Illie, I-L-L-I-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she was born in 1902, and I forget exactly the birth date.
Speaker 1: And what did she do? I mean what were, you know, what was she like?
Speaker 2: Well, she was a housewife--I'm from a large family. And it's--there's seventeen of us in the family. She was the mother of fourteen of us, and she was a housewife. She had a principle that if she had a garden, none of her children would have to see a doctor, and of course she had a garden and she studied herbs and she studied plant life, and of course none of us ever went to see the doctor. And when she moved to Cleveland, Ohio, then she came back and kidnapped me from my dad [Denis Bevel] because I wouldn't go with her. And that was a good thing in that she got me involved in East Tech[nical] High School [Cleveland, Ohio] and she made me go to East Tech. And then she also had me to care her every night--not every night, twice a week--to study Old Testament. But that's how I know her. She do two things for me. She got me to study the Old Testament, which really grounded me in the science of history. And she got me to go East Tech, which at that time was mostly for European guys.  They didn't allow women in it and they didn't allow too many black people in it, but it did get me to understand what an education was. That if you don't have theory, lab and apprenticeship in sciences, you cannot learn a science. I learned that at Tech see, and then I found out this is what they do systematically in America to keep African children out of education. They have them in training programs and put their sons in educational systems, and keep us in training systems. So I discovered that. And so she's responsible for me knowing about this.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now can you give us your father's name and spell his name for his and give us his place of birth.
Speaker 2: Denis Bevel and he was born in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Dennis, D-E-N-N-I--
Speaker 2: D-E-N-I-S, B-E-V-E-L, Bevel.
Speaker 1: And he was born in Itta Bena [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Thereabouts, yeah.
Speaker 1: All right. Do you know his birth date?
Speaker 2: He was born in 1880 and I think he was born around November, maybe the seventh or something.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a carpenter and a farmer and a teacher and he built schools. Well, one of them he got into building schools--the schools in Mississippi for African people would start in December and get out in April, and so he was contesting that, and so then, in their association that he was a member of, they built a school called Palo Alto St. John's School, and he was the builder, but he was also like one mental builders. That is he organized the idea, but he also did the physical building.
Speaker 1: Can you say that name slower for us and spell it for us--the name of the school?
Speaker 2: P-A-L-O A-T-L-O [sic], Palo Alto St. John School in Itta Bena, Mississippi. It was like an elementary school that they set up as the association, but the association of the Baptist Christian people in several counties, like Leflore County, Sunflower County, Humphreys County, was called the Palo Alto St. John Association, and so they built a school for their children so their children could go to school nine months a year.
Speaker 1: Now that's powerful. That's organizing for your own, you know, basic interest. Did you attend that school when you were younger? All right. So he was a farmer, a carpenter, also was a member of this association. Was he a minister as well?
Speaker 2: No, he was just a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay. So did he teach in the school?
Speaker 2: No, he taught ministers, but he was not a minister, but he was a teacher of ministers.
Speaker 1: So had he had much schooling himself?
Speaker 2: Not much formal education, about to twelfth grade, but he didn't go to college.
Story_ID: 3264
Speaker 1: Now did he [Denis Bevel, Bevel's father] ever talk about what his grandparents were doing in the nineteenth century, you know, about the [U.S.] Civil War or any of that stuff?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah. Well, his parents were slaves and they had only been out of slavery fifteen years when he was born [1880]. They'd only been out fifteen years when he was born, so he pretty much discussed that era with us, its impact on his dad and his mom and all that.
Speaker 1: What kind of impression did he make with you when he talked about that? Do you remember any specific stories that he told or lessons that he--?
Speaker 2: Well, see, here again. See, once you go through the metamorphosis of dying of the lie that perpetrates slavery--see, it's a lie that perpetrates slavery, and once you are free of that lie, then slavery is like a side thing for you.
Speaker 1: What is that lie?
Speaker 2: That lie is that man can own the earth and that God is not the father of all people, and once you reject that lie, then you become a free thinking person because then you connect back to God. And the science by which that is done is in the New Testament.  And once you do that, then it's like, well, you become a self-governing, self-regulating institutional development--institutional developer. So he, in that sense, was a teacher of enlightenment in terms of if you trace my leadership, most of it comes from my father. The one reason I could accept Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] so readily because he taught exactly what my father taught, that you shouldn't hate people and that if you don't hate people, you can generate thought. If you hate people, you can't generate thought. That you have to be self-governing and self-regulating and that if you don't keep the law, women and white folk will supervise you. So it's like this is embedded in me. If you break the law, white people and women is going to supervise you, so do not break the law; therefore, you have to be intelligent. When you go to any situation, you have to be the intelligence. You can't let nobody else be intelligent. They can be intelligent in concert with you, but they cannot predominantly be intelligent over you; therefore, you have to be intelligent, which means you got to persist in being truthful, otherwise, you're going to be governed by people who are not as intelligent as you. So if you don't want to be governed by people who are less intelligent than you, then you got to be right all the time. That is, you got to figure out right conduct in relation to whatever it is, particularly in relation to people, particular in relation to work, see? So you have to be excellent in your work, see? Otherwise you can't determine the value of your product on the market. Then you can't violate people. Otherwise, then you're going to fall under the administration of somebody who's going to be trying to punish you. So if you don't want those problems, like, for instance, when I went to school, he would say, "Okay, you don't want the teacher to supervise you, right? Well, then don't have her to have to ever discuss with you bad behavior. Then if she don't have to discuss with you bad behavior, the only thing she can do is teach you.  Okay. If you don't get into fights, then you don't fall under the administration of the principal.  See? If you don't steal anything, you're not going to fall under the administration of a judge. You don't violate nobody's property, or nobody's person, see? Now if you don't violate no property or persons, can't nobody do anything to you or have anything to say to you, you know?" So he taught that and that's a true principle. Therefore, if someone come up on you with some foolishness, then you don't have to go along with it. So that's why, for instance, on segregation. It's like, no, these guys are claiming that I'm not a human being, so they are insane. I don't have to go along with an insane person, but however, I shouldn't violate an insane man. But I don't have to go along with the insane man, see? Same thing on the Freedom Ride: well, no, I'm not going to let insane people determine that I am not a human being and therefore should sit behind a curtain. That man is obviously insane who come up with that. Now should I kill him? No.  Should I tap his bus? No, I should just sit on the front of the bus and don't go to the back, and then challenge his insanity and prove that he's insane because he's going to start acting insane when I start acting sane. Now if I go along with the insane man, then his insanity becomes the law. See, my daddy taught all these things, see?
Story_ID: 3265
Speaker 1: His [Denis Bevel, Bevel's father] grandfather left all--because he had all these colored sons and he left them land, and that's how my father came up with land. Then when he insisted on sending all of his children to school, you know, they came upon him and worked-- made sure he didn't have land because they said it would create a bad--make all the black folks in the area rebellious and want to go to school. So he started having problems with his land.
Speaker 2: So your father's father or his grandfather was white?
Speaker 1: His grandfather.
Speaker 2: His grandfather, okay. And I've heard these stories enough times to, I guess, know on some level that this wasn't that uncommon where a white man would help colored children, black children, and then give them pieces of land and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: It's something that we don't really read about in history and we don't really understand in terms of popular culture history, but--
Speaker 1: Yeah. Well, for instance, When sons of Bilbo. Bilbo's daughters went to school with my sisters and they were all colored, and they all had land. So that was very common.
Speaker 2: Just for the record, Senator Theodore Bilbo was one of the arch segregationists of the south--
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: --in the 1920s and '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Right. So like around where we lived [Itta Bena, Mississippi], the Denmans, the Loves, all these guys fathers was white and they had land and properties, and Greenwood, the guy who owned the hotel and the businesses there, one of the businessmen, his daddy was a white guy. I mean so we had a lot of those people.
Speaker 2: This kind of, you kind of played at this. I mean, I don't know. Just looking back on it, if somebody looking at history, it seems just crazier than I thought it was, you know? People have their own children are being discriminated against, yet given privileges above others. Essentially, never allowed to reach their full potential in a system supported by--
Speaker 1: Well, see, what happens when you look at the American system. I mean you look at the world. No males in the world would just get ready to do it has really supported the integrity and the dignity of their children because they haven't said, "No, we must have school systems wherein children graduate being institutionally sovereign and economically independent." And if a father didn't establish that as a right and a state of affairs for his child, he does not respect the divinity and dignity of his child. So no men have. You practice war where you let your boys go out and kill other folks' boys.  That's an insanity. So human beings have just not been sane and civilized. Now we can characterize one group as being more perverse than others, but when you look at the whole crop of mankind so far, they have not practiced government, they have not practiced economics, they have not practiced education, and they have not practiced marriage, because they've been unconscious. You see, you can't eat animals because it's going to cause you to fantasize because--that's not a nutrition for you. That's an aphrodisiac hallucinogenic. So if you eat animals, you're going to be crazy. You going have something equal to a mad cow disease.
Story_ID: 3266
Speaker 1: Let me go back to your childhood here a second, and can you take us back and kind of reflect on some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Itta Bena, Mississippi because we don't know what it was like, and people watching this in the future won't know what it was like? So can you tell us?
Speaker 2: Yeah. It was a cotton town. It had cotton gins and it had compresses. It had what is called a cottonseed mill where you process the cottonseed oil because it produced a lot of cottonseed oil. Livery stables, saw mills, because in those days they was cutting down a lot of trees, so you had saw mills and lumber companies, and you had, you know, rail--the train coming through, and mostly cotton and corn and beans. So it was just a regular--it's interesting because I was a boy, they had just started bringing in tractors because when I was a young boy, it was mostly you'd have just horses and wagons and etcetera, and all the farms were mostly horses and mules, and then it gave way to tractors. The locomotive train gave way to the diesel, you know. And when I was a boy, no one in town had a telephone and the telegraph was how you sent a message if someone passed or you got a message from your kin people had died off someplace. You had to go the railroad depot and get your message. And you'd hear the crowing of roosters around because even though it's a little village, all people had livestock, you'd see their goats and their cows and their chickens and their pigs, and so you'd hear all of these sounds of, you know.
Speaker 1: You basically were in a town--in the town of Itta Bena? Or a farm on the outskirts.
Speaker 2: At one point we lived on a farm, and mostly we lived in the village.
Speaker 1: Was the village divided? You know, I guess, segregated--black side and a white side.
Speaker 2: It was interesting because, yes, black side, white side, but right in the middle of the white community was a black community. It was interesting. And the black people who lived in this village, all of them were independent black people. For instance, guys who owned the meat markets were all black, or the guys who--so you had black businessmen--the guys who would sew and the tailors and the seamstress were black, and they sewed for everybody, you know. But it was a very caste system that you didn't cross the racial line in terms of social life.
Story_ID: 3267
Speaker 1: So you were describing the sights and sounds and smells of growing up in Itta Bena [Mississippi]. I asked you off camera what Itta Bena meant and you were telling me. Can you tell me?
Speaker 2: It's a little town in the woods. It's an Indian word.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, I mean, where you aware as a child of the racial--I mean of the racial stratification of the place you were living in and some of the--because it's the scene of a lot of atrocities and stuff, that little part of the country?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I think the first thing you learn is protocol and order because it's like living in a rattlesnake pit. Okay, for instance, you learn early on you do not play with, nor tell jokes, around white people, and that you defer all discussions with them to your father because what you do, you give them no occasion to set you up, see? So you learn that early on and then you practice that and you be very direct in terms of what you do, and you know, and so you learn discipline. What you learn in that discipline is that you really learn the law of cause and effect. That is, if you do not put out any negativity, you can't pick up no negativity. So you live a prayer life all the time, see?  So it's not a time you don't pray because these guys are crazy. I mean it's like they just conjure up stuff. Just like [President George W.] Bush over in Iraq; he just conjure up stuff. Said, "Well, he got some stuff."  I mean everybody know the man's lying. There's nobody don't know. Everybody know Bush is lying and he's carrying on just like white people in Mississippi. That's they way they carry on, saying, "Well, look like he got this, this, and the other. Well, we don't know this," and you always pushing and pushing, but he's lying. That's typical white people, see?  We know that, see? We know that man is insane. He is acting just like a Mississippi Delta white man--Bush.
Speaker 1: Now did you have any personal contact with, or did you know or experience, any extreme racial violence in Mississippi when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess my first experience was seeing a bus driver kick a black woman in the stomach, who was pregnant, because she wasn't moving fast enough behind the bus. And then there were some incidents where guys had shootouts and was caught and killed, yeah.
Story_ID: 3268
Speaker 1: My daddy [Denis Bevel] was a marksman and he and a lady--name is Minne Nelfort--put on displays where he could strike a match that she would hold in her mouth. But people were afraid of my father and there was like a principle. Like he introduced me to all white people. He said, "Now this is my son. Don't bother him. If you got a problem, you come see me."  So everybody referred to him as "old crazy Denis Bevel."  So it was like they just wasn't going to bother. Now white people said, this is what they said, that if you bothered his children that a tornado would tap your place. Now he said that that wasn't truth and that was just a rumor, he said. But (laughs) I remember when Miss Fannie Lou Hamer got beat up and in jail in Winona [Mississippi]. The Mr. Green who owned the compress in Greenwood [Mississippi], he was over there. He says, "Hey, that's Denis's boy, don't bother him. Cuz we'll have problems." (laughs) But it was rumored that he could do this. Now he said he couldn't, but they would not bother his children because he was straight up about that, you know? He was straight up about it, "Do not bother my children."
Speaker 2: Did they suspect that he had supernatural powers or--or going to--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah. Well, he actually did in relationship, because once, for instance, a tree was falling on my brother and he stopped it, and like I told you, if you study my history, you'll actually study the unfolding of the psychology of my father, see? The way I think strategically in terms of opening houses here in Chicago, or stopping the war in Vietnam, or continuing the Freedom Ride that developed in the Mississippi project, or organizing the children in Birmingham [Alabama], all this stuff comes from my daddy. That's the way he thinks and his position is that if you obey God, then when you ask God to do something, he's going to do it. Well, that's true. The problem with most guys, they don't spend time meditating on that definition, nature, and purpose sufficient to be about that purpose.
Story_ID: 3269
Speaker 1: What kind of a little boy were you? What did you like to do, and you know, what did you do on a daily basis basically?
Speaker 2: Well, I picked cotton, went muscadine hunting, picking berries. See when I grew up in [Itta Bena] Mississippi, it was like wild, a lot of still, and growing up. So you had all these wild places and persimmon trees and muscadine and blackberry vines, and you had all this stuff, and you had all this wild fruit, and we used to can this stuff. Then you had all these ponds in the forests and they'd be full of fish. We'd go fishing and stuff like that. It hadn't been contaminated with petrol, fertilizer and pesticide and herbicide in those days, so things was pretty--was virgin territory. And then I would work with my daddy [Denis Bevel], and my daddy would be building houses and I would hang out with my daddy, and then he'd be farming; I'd be doing that with him, see? But I never did play much because I never did care much for play because I liked to work with my dad.
Speaker 1: Now how many siblings do you have and can you name them for us?
Speaker 2: My dad?
Speaker 1: No, your brothers and sisters, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Denis, Earl, Mattie, Rose, Dorothy, David, Otis, Victor, Ottomese, Mary Alice, Otis, Clarence, Florzella, myself, Charles, Helen, Eldon, and Johnny.
Speaker 1: That's how many altogether? How many altogether is that?
Speaker 2: Seventeen.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you came from a family of seventeen? And you were number?
Speaker 2: Thirteen.
Story_ID: 3270
Speaker 1: How did you like school and tell us about school.
Speaker 2: Well, I had a theory in school that girls shouldn't make better grade than boys, so generally I stayed on the honor rolls.  That was part of that. That was my theory: that girls in the class should not make better grades than boys. One of the things that I sort of detested guys allowing girls to make better grades than themselves. In most classes, the top students would be female, and I didn't particularly like that. So, you know, I'd encourage guys. It's like, no, I'm not going to be in no class and girls make better grades than me because then you don't have anything to say. You got to be listening. So the way you deal, you have to make better grades than girls. You can't be second class to females. So that incentive. And the same thing when I went East Tech[nical High School, Cleveland, Ohio]. It's like, no, I'm not going to let white guys make better grades than me. That's not going to work. That's not going to work. Same thing (laughs) in the [U.S.] Navy: you're going to make better grades than me. I'm not going to let white guys and women make better grades than me. That's always been my position. So when I was in college, I was always on the Dean's List because I had the position I am not going to let people make better grades than me. That's not going to work. That's not going to work out. I guess that's crazy, but you know. Now nobody told me this. This is just how I felt about that, you know what I'm saying? So.
Speaker 1: Okay. So what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: I guess my favorite subject was geometry, and the reason is that there is no way not to make that A in geometry. I mean it's like it's the easiest subject in the world. You know, like you get into English and sociology, there's room for arguments, right? But in geometry, there is absolutely no arbitrary nothing; it's strictly science.  So it's no room for error. So you can always predict that you're going to make an A on all your papers and all your exams because it's totally mathematical. I mean it's totally logical and so scientific that there's no room for error, and that's why I liked it. See, I always made straight As in geometry. Anything else I had to sort of decide what the teachers was going to give me, but in geometry, I always knew what I was going to make before I turned my papers in on the exam, 'cause I could say no, I could test all my stuff, and this is correct based on the law, see?
Speaker 1: Now are there any particular teachers that stand out as teachers that were particularly interested in you or said something or do something that you really focused in on?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Growing up it was like, at our school, like at Palo Alto St. John's School [Itta Bena, Mississippi], our teachers were teachers chosen by our school and they had a sense of Christ consciousness and they had a sense of the history of African conscious people, so I was always introduced to African consciousness thought with Phillis Wheatley all the African revolutionary people and Frederick Douglass and all that. That was the strand of consciousness out of which we functioned, and then all of our religious leaders, we were introduced to that as our history, see, so. So we weren't allowed to do this Amos and Andy stuff now like a lot of the children could go to carnivals and what they call these--they had these shows that come around in tents. We couldn't go to that kind of stuff. Or, for instance, we weren't even allowed to go to these cowboy movies because we were introduced to a consciousness that didn't allow for us to get involved in the buffoon Negro stuff, so we weren't allowed to do Negro stuff too much. That's what these people do, but you can't do that. Like you can't go out on Saturday night and get with these Negroes who go to jail and all that kind of crazy stuff. And you have to study. You have to study history and you have to study science. You were created for a purpose. So we was always introduced to that principle.
Story_ID: 3271
Speaker 1: You went to grade school at Palo Alto--[St. John's School, Itta Bena, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, and then I went to--yeah--
Speaker 1: (simultaneously) --In Itta Bena. Now you said that you ended up moving with your mother [Illie Murphy Bevel] to Cleveland [Ohio], and how old were you when that happened?
Speaker 2: I was about eleven or twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now why did your mother move to Cleveland?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was a very attractive female so--and my father [Denis Bevel] was very volatile, so a lot of white guys would be making passes at her, so she didn't want to talk about that, but she didn't be in that kind of environment. So then she don't tell him about it because she feels that he and the guy that--because he was direct. So she said, well, she tried to persuade him to move, but she never give her reason for her moving, so he wouldn't move. So she moved. And so she says, "Well, we should move because schools are much better."  Well, that was true. He said, "Well, what we can do, we can have a school moved here to the city." That's how MVC [Mississippi Vocational College, Itta Bena, Mississippi, now Mississippi Valley State College] got to Itta Bena. My daddy and a guy named Mr. Gammage and Mr. Raymond, they went to a man named Miller who owned 5,000 acres of land and got him to give the state 500 acres so they could build Mississippi Vocational College because the government had given--they were in the process of giving Mississippi the Air Force base at Greenville, Mississippi [Greenville Air Force Base], which is about forty miles west of Itta Bena. So Daddy and these guys went out and met with this guy named Miller and persuaded him, said, "Look man, you should give the state the 500 acres and they would build a school over here." And he told my mother that. He said, "We don't need to go up north to get an education. You can get--God will bring you a school to your town if you ask them." (laughs) So he downright convinced this guy to give 500 acres, and so when he gave the 500 acres, then the state decided to build a school right there at Itta Bena. That's how it got there.
Speaker 1: So you'd say your father's really a catalyst behind the establishment of Mississippi Valley State [University]?
Speaker 2: In Itta Bena, yeah.
Speaker 1: Itta Bena.
Speaker 2: The state was going to put it down into Greenville [Mississippi] on that air base, on the Air Force base down there, yeah.
Speaker 1: The 'Delta Devil' they called it.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now the devil's established by the church--I mean, the catalyst for the church.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But that's the school that Jerry Rice went to.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That everybody--most people associate that school with him.
Speaker 2: Yeah
Story_ID: 3272
Speaker 1: So your mother [Illie Murphy Bevel] moves to Cleveland [Ohio]. Did she have relatives in Cleveland already?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. My oldest sisters were there and then she had cousins and stuff there, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah. Was your mother the mother of all the seventeen?
Speaker 2: No, she was the mother of fourteen.
Speaker 1: Okay. How did you--can you describe the move to Cleveland? You said she stole you.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah. One night see, what happened, she wanted--you would have to know my dad. My daddy [Denis Bevel], in any situation where there was conflict, he could bring peace, and he said that the principle was--like, for instance, he would tell me, he said, "Now if you don't lie to me about giving me a report about any incident, I don't care what it is," he said, "I can bring peace." Well, at that time, I didn't understand that. So he could just bring peace. Now my mother couldn't bring peace, so she'd get into arbitrary arguments and she was violent, okay? Like she whipped children. She whipped me, but my daddy never whipped nobody. He'd always ask questions and find out what caused the conflict and then address the conflict. So I enjoyed that level of peace, that level of precise thinking, see. If there was a problem, he could solve the problem, whether between white folk and black folks, or man and his wife, to preachers in the deacon. It didn't matter because everybody come to him because he could solve any problem between people. He'd always use the Bible to do it, but he could do that. So I enjoyed that level of peace, and so I enjoyed being with him.  So I wouldn't go. So with all the children, and she's moving, I wouldn't go, so I stayed with my dad. So one night, I was in a school play. Coming home from practicing and this car pulled up and this man stepped out of this car and dragged me into this car and she was in the car. So they took me to Winona [Mississippi] and that caught a bus and the next morning we was in Nashville [Tennessee], the next afternoon, we was up in Cleveland. So I didn't particularly like that, and so she and I was not particularly good friends in that sense, so. But after we stayed in Cleveland for a year and a half or so, or two years.  She passed. See? So then I went back and lived with my dad.
Story_ID: 3273
Speaker 1: When you were there [Cleveland, Ohio], you went to Cleveland East Tech[nical] High School [Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah. When I first got there, I went to Rawlings Junior High School because I wasn't in high school; I was junior high school. And then after I graduated from Rawlings Junior High School, I went to East Tech.
Speaker 1: Now what's the name of the junior high school?
Speaker 2: Rawlings, R-A-W-L-I-N-G-S, Rawlings Junior High School.
Speaker 1: All right. You were at East Tech before it became all black?
Speaker 2: Yeah, when it was all male. It was all male and just very few blacks. When I went there, they didn't have--they wouldn't let women in. It was an all boy's school.
Speaker 1: So it later became like famous for basketball teams--they won the championship.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah. That's because Central [High School, Cleveland, Ohio]--well, when it was all white, it was known for football, but then when they made it co-ed and they put it with Central, and then it became a basketball powerhouse, when all these guys, all these basketball players, so.
Speaker 1: That's just a sidebar, but. Yeah, so you were there a year at Cleveland East Tech?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes). Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you learn in that year that you studied?
Speaker 2: Well, it was about two years. I studied printing and pattern making. So that's what I was studying--printing and pattern making--and I was good at that. Pattern making, in those days--we had no computers, every moving part of a car had to be made in the woodshop. But they called it pattern making shop, and so it's most like exquisite furniture making, but where you have to learn to make all these curves and moving parts on every moving piece of a car. So you have to make it out of wood first. So East Tech produced most of the engineers for Case Tech [Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] and for [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio]. So the produced these science students for those two schools.
Story_ID: 3274
Speaker 1: After your mother [Illie Murphy Bevel] died, you went back to Mississippi, and where did you finish school?
Speaker 2: Leflore County High School in Itta Bena [Mississippi].
Speaker 1: When did you finish? In 19--
Speaker 2: Fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Fifty-four [1954], okay. I think in '54 [1954] you joined the [U.S.] Navy?  Now why did you choose to join the Navy? Well, let's go back even further here. When you were a senior in high school, did you have an idea of what you wanted to do with the rest of your life, or did you have a?
Speaker 2: Not particularly. I knew I should go to college, you know, but I didn't have any particular thing as to what I was going to do. I went to the Navy because at that time they had what is called a kiddy cruise, so if you went to the Navy at seventeen, you could get out before you were twenty-one and you could get all the benefits to go to college. So I decided to do that.
Speaker 1: So what was that like? I mean going to Great Lakes [Naval Training Center, Great Lakes, Illinois], here, outside of Chicago, and training and all that?
Speaker 2: Well, it was good. It was good for discipline. It's good for comprehending military policing. What it does, it allows you--in the adequate use of weaponry, you reach a point where you're not afraid of people with weapons. When you're competent in the use of weapons, you're not afraid of weapons. You know like if you're on a competent basketball team, you're not afraid of guys on another team, you know. They may win and they may not, but you know you have enough discipline and the discipline to deal with them in terms of whatever eventuality or contingency that come up. So when you're trained militarily, you're not afraid of people and you're not intimidated by people, see, so. So in that sense, I would say the military's good, and, in fact, I think all boys should be--even in high school--should be in the military  training, see? If they did, they wouldn't be as irresponsible and use guns, see? That's one of the reasons they get in gangs. They haven't been trained militarily. They should be trained militarily so they'd be competent with guns and go around. They use guns because they're intimidated, see? You competent and trained to use guns--like swimming. When you competently know how to swim, your ship catch on fire and you're not afraid of drowning, hell, because you know how to swim. You know all the precautionary methods for floating and swimming and making buoys out of your shirts and stuff. So, you know, you're comfortable. So in military training, you become very comfortable with people, mean people. You're not afraid of them because you know if you are competent with weapons that they're not superior to you if you know what you're doing.
Speaker 1: Okay, now 1954, the Navy was basically hadn't been integrated that long. So maybe it was five or six years as such. I mean what was it like? How were you treated in the Navy?
Speaker 2: They--most of the stuff--there was not a lot of racial antagonism. Like, for instance, in our process, we had black guys go into every facet of our service. They basically did it by grades, and they did it by need and grades. You know, if guys good in mechanics, they go to mechanical school. If they was good in clerical work, they went to clerical school. So they generally assigned you out in terms of your competency and what the needs were. So when I came along, they didn't just assign black guys to cooking and that kind of thing. They assigned them to everything.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of assignment did you have in the Navy?
Speaker 2: I was a seaman, and at first I was into radar, but I was more or less interested in gunners, artillery and stuff like that. I was interested in warfare. I was interested in the actual fighting aspect of war. I liked guns, so that's what I wanted to go into.
Speaker 1: Now that's interesting that you had that interest at that point, and now you're, you know, basically in life, nonviolent, direct action.
Speaker 2: Well, see, I'm saying the same principle. See, my thing is if somebody bothers you, it's best you stop that. You know what I'm saying? So it's like, no--because direct action and military's the same thing. You can--see, my thing, when we was boys, we had this rumor out about Mao Tse-Tung with this hell of an army and he may cut it loose coming across this way.  Or my thing was, well, we better make sure he can't come all the way, so we need some guys in the Navy who could stop him out at the Pacific Ocean, see, 'cause we don't know what he's set up to do, based on what we heard about him, see.  So, you know (laughs). It was interesting our boys think this kind of stuff. You know because of Genghis Khan, and Mao and his long march and his hordes of troops and--.  So, you know, we said, "Well, man, listen, this guy, see, who going to stop him?"  So our opinion was, "No, we better not let him get to California because who could stop him?"  So you got to have people out there to stop him out in the ocean.
Speaker 1: So were you deployed out into the Pacific?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was out of San Diego [California]. I was on two ships. One was the LSMR [Landing Ship Medium Rocket].
Speaker 1: I'm sorry?
Speaker 2: L-S-M-R, the Landing Ship Medium Rocket, which was a rocket launching ship. And the next one was a destroyer.
Speaker 1: Do you know the names of the ships, sir? Do you remember the name of the ships?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the McDermott's DD677 and then the LSMR was just called LSMR43.
Story_ID: 3275
Speaker 1: Are there any particular incidents in the [U.S.] Navy that stand out that you want to relate to us? Any stories?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, one of the things that really got me out of the Navy was on the ship there was a young black man. I guess he was about in his late twenties, but he had a Ph.D in Physics and he was a cook. He was what you called the Mess Sergeant for the officers.
Speaker 1: And he was a Ph.D. in Physics?
Speaker 2: Yeah. So I was kind of chiding him about this, and he said, "Well, I think a man should serve his nation, but I don't think a man should kill people."  See? Because then it's like, well, why don't you go into boo-boo-boo-boo. He said, "No, I don't get into that. I don't want to get into no part of that stuff. I will feed people, but I'm not going to go around fighting with people."  And so then he gave me a book, 'The Kingdom of God is Within You,' which the book written by Leo Tolstoy of Russia, which was the same book that Mahatma Gandhi read that got him started in South Africa to putting together his movement. When I read that book, I lost all interest in military conduct because it was obvious to me it was not correct. That's not a sane way to go about doing business as a human being. So it's like then I informed my captain that I couldn't serve anymore, that I would have to go home because what that man said was true. That if you operate at any instance beneath the principle of love and truth, you're foolish, you're insane, and you'll agree to be insane, and you know you're agreeing to be insane. See, that's true. When you do not relate to people based on love and truth, you know that you're not being competently intelligent. Now you know that. And there's no reason to function at that level and attempt to solve problems because problems cannot be solved at that level, see? So I agreed with that and then I had to leave the Navy.
Speaker 1: So did you--you had to--you left early and got--got an early discharge?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And where are we now? What year is it?
Speaker 2: Fifty-five [1955].
Story_ID: 3276
Speaker 1: So did you get your Navy benefits in 1955 when you left the [U.S.] Navy?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: How did you negotiate that? You left before your term was over, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I simply refused to serve, but see, the point was, I was not a--I was a 4-0 sailor. I mean I was not a troublemaker. I had just, "No, I am not going to do this."  See?  Period. "So you can't threaten me. This is over, okay? This is not correct for me. Killing people to solve problems is not a way to solve problems, so I'm not going to do that anymore. I have information to the effect that this is not right. Here it is in the book. Leo Tolstoy is right about this. I agree with him. It's in keeping with the teachings of Jesus and with the Constitution, so I'm not going to do it."
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were a conscientious objector, I guess, so to speak.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Well, yeah, at that point I became. "I'm not going to be engaged in this."
Speaker 1: Okay. And were you close to the end of your term anyway?
Speaker 2: No. I had been in about a year.
Speaker 1: They let you go--and with your benefits? They let you go with some benefits?
Speaker 2: Yeah. I didn't violate nobody. I wasn't a criminal. I was just a fellow who had concluded that I'm not going to do this, and it's like--that was non-negotiable. It was like that's not negotiable.
Story_ID: 3277
Speaker 1: So what did you pursue next [after leaving the U.S. Navy in 1955]? I mean what happened?
Speaker 2: Well, then I started singing rock n' roll music and pursued brick laying, or started preparing myself to become a bricklayer, and singing rock n' roll music.
Speaker 1: Now rock n' roll music that seems like--because I thought that what you would say is, "I decided to pursue the ministry." But rock n' roll music, what was that about? What happened?
Speaker 2: Well, first of all, I could sing rock n' roll music--I can write it, so my brothers and I, we could sing better than most people and we'd just sing, and we was singing. And, you know, like in Cleveland [Ohio], they had a guy by the name of 'Moondog' [Alan Freed], he put on these talent shows ['The Moondog Coronation Ball'] and we would win 'em all, you know. Then they had--what's is the name of this guy--television, talent show, we'd win all those. So then people started asking us to sing in cabaret parties and the guys down to Youngstown [Ohio] would want us to come up and sing at the--what's the name of that club that we sing all the time? We'd sing at Gleason's and all these clubs and a lot of people liked to hear us sing and a lot of people--when we was going to sing, a lot of people come out to cabaret parties and clubs. So then we started writing songs, and then I got called into the ministry.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now what was the name of your group? Of the--
Speaker 2: We called ourselves the Bevelderes.
Speaker 1: The Bevelderes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 3278
Speaker 1: Tell us about being called into the ministry. How did that take place?
Speaker 2: Well, one Sunday morning I had come back from--I was at the (unclear) Club up in Youngstown [Ohio], and so I was sitting on the porch because I live right across and in front of the church, and the lady--kind of the matron of the community, Mrs. Bates, who sort of looked after people, looked after us after my mother [Illie Murphy Bevel] died, was sitting--she came to church and it was I guess about 9:00, 9:15 [a.m.] because Sunday school hadn't started and Sunday school started at 9:30. And I was sort of just sitting on the porch because the sun came up and I was kind of like sunning out because--well, I got home about, I guess, 3:30, 4:00 [a.m.], and so I got up about 8:00. So, you know, drank some juice and was sitting out in the sun, but I was still kind of groggy from drinking gin because when you do those late shows, you start drinking, see, because the folks get high and they give you drinks and before you know anything, you and the folks high. So she came out and told me come to church, and I said, "Well, I can't come to church because I've been drinking and I smell like alcohol, the woo woo." And so she said, "Well, you know, you should come to church because," this and that and this and that. So I finally got one word in then the preacher preached. "In the year that the king Uzziah died, I saw the Lord high lifted up and his train filled the temple" and the issue that he raised was, in light of all the complaints you see in all of the things you know about, that you complain about in the black community and among black people, the question is who is going to do something about this? And I sat and listened. And one of the things that he did was interesting because every complaint I had, to the complaint, he spoke to it, and then he said, "Well, who's going to address that?"  So after that, I couldn't shake that, you know. Well, who's going to deal with this? And then the question was then, yeah, well, who is going to deal with this? And then it's like, well, since the voice wouldn't go away, who will go? Then I said, "Well, if you just don't say this anymore to me, if you don't bother me no more with the question, I will go. Just don't say it no more, okay?"  So stop it it was stopping me (laughs). Every incident, man, the voice would speak, "Well, who's going to go?"  So I asked the Lord, "Well, what do I need to study?"  I didn't know whether I needed to go study--you talking about liberating the people, study the military science, study city administration, study the law, public administration--what should I study if I'm going to liberate a people? And then the spirit said, "Well, what do you think you need to know?"  I said, "Well, at least I need to know what Moses and them know, and at least I need to know what Solomon knew, who was lying and who was telling the truth," you know. And I need to know what Jesus knew because I didn't see how you could liberate African Americans in America without getting killed so you really need to get up out the grave. So then the spirit said, "Why don't you go study at the American Baptist Center [American Baptist Theological Seminary, Nashville, Tennessee]?"  So I just showed up. So I got into that, and then in that process, I got really reintroduced to this book, [Leo] Tolstoy's book ['The Kingdom of God Is Within You'], by studying 'Jim' [James] Lawson and [Mahatma] Gandhi. See, when I got to Tolstoy's book, I didn't even know about Gandhi. I had never heard of Gandhi, but then when I got into the seminary, I found out that it was that book that Gandhi built his movement on, then I start studying Gandhi, see.
Speaker 1: Well, let me backtrack a little bit to that sermon that you heard in Cleveland. It seems to me in those days, and I was much younger than you in those days, but just seems as though it was unusual, it'd be unusual for someone to be discussing a liberation of black folks in a church. The churches in those days seemed to talk more about--even today-about--even today--save your soul and less about politics. Was that an unusual kind of thing--I mean did you think that was unusual when you heard a preacher preaching about the liberation of people?
Speaker 2: It was not uncommon in relationship to a whole group of ministers. There were--see, here again, in the church, there are Negro religious entertainers and there are ministers, and my father [Denis Bevel] and our family never did deal with the religious entertainers. We always dealt with Christian ministers. There is a very distinct difference between Christian ministers and Negro religious entertainers, and we know those people, and so the Christian ministers always speak in terms of salvation, education, and liberation. You know, that's what they talk about.
Story_ID: 3279
Speaker 1: How did you choose to go to the school that you went to? I mean, were they focused on social change or teaching ministers?
Speaker 2: They was focused on educating pastors, and I got into that mode of the means by which you bring a person to be socially responsible, to identify his divine nature as opposed to his secondary drives, call it salvation. So I got into that and learned that.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of the seminary you went to?
Speaker 2: The American Baptist Theological Seminary, Nashville, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: In Nashville, okay. And was it difficult to get in to that school?
Speaker 2: No. It was a school owned by the national Baptists and the southern Baptists. It was built primarily to educate pastors, so the program was designed for pastors. It was for men who was called into the ministry, were basically going to be pastors in churches.
Speaker 1: What was your experience there? Now you said you were reintroduced to [Leo] Tolstoy, then you were introduced to [Mahatma] Gandhi. And you met James Lawson there as well. Tell us about who he is.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah. Lawson was a Methodist student at Vanderbilt [University, Nashville Tennessee] and who taught workshops for the Fellowship of Reconciliation right down the street from Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and was running nonviolent workshops in 1959, and we used to attend those workshops because we were in the discussion about how do you change things without violence? You know, how do you change your present conditions and yet maintain congruency with the teachings of Christ? Like, how did Moses do what he did? How did Nehemiah build the walls back? How do you do this? How do you end segregation without killing white people? You know, we was answering those questions. The point, we can't go along with this, but how do we do it? You know? What is going to be our mode of operation? So we started studying Gandhi; how he liberated India. What would a--how do these principles work?  How do you do this? So we started studying. Then we started studying at the Highlander Folk School [Monteagle, Tennessee], Myles Horton's school, and he taught the same principle, only he taught it from the American citizenship responsibility motif.
Speaker 1: Now this is the, once again, the Highlander Folk School. Now that's in Tennessee, right?
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: They did teach some folk songs there, but it was mostly an organizing school and--
Speaker 2: So that's how I got introduced to it. Then the school I went to basically taught me how to organize and to do evangelism, community organizing. See, how do you organize people to a meeting, and how do you educate people? How do you run the order of a meeting from a intellectual dialogue, see? Because if you don't know how to do that, you can't organize the masses, you know? That's one of the reasons why guys in the North ain't organized; they do not know how to run an orderly, righteous, that's in harmony with the motif of black folks, a meeting that's relevant. Either they fall too much over into lecturing, which you can't get people to do nothing, or too much over into shouting, but you got to have a balance of energy and logic to get people to be attentive and then learn something and do something. So that's really--so I guess the Lord probably had me learn that because, you know, organizing in Mississippi and Alabama, that's exactly what we had to do because you have the masses of people. They're not scholars, but they're not idiots. Now how do you get this mass of people to combine their energies to overthrow oppression? That's something you really got to learn to do, and if you come being a black power guy you can't do it, and if you come being a religious sanctimonious guy, you can't do it, you know?
Speaker 1: Somehow, you have to--
Speaker 2: You come up with a balance where you're dealing in science and in facts, but you're doing it from an emotional state, rather than from strictly erudite state. But then your logic got to be as precise as the guys who are doing it from erudite state. See?
Story_ID: 3280
Speaker 1: Now at the point that you're in school [at the American Baptist Theological Seminary, Nashville, Tennessee], I suppose you had been following the activities of Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and the Montgomery [Alabama] bus boycott and all that because that was going on before you went, I guess, to school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: He was still engaged very much in the news in like '59 [1959].
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, see, I went to school in '57 [1957], and--
Speaker 1: That's the year right after they started the boycott, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and then King did his--gave us the ballot speeches ['Give Us the Ballot'] in Washington, in the spring of '57 [1957], and a lot of my classmates went. A lot of them went to hear King and they came back talking about Dr. King and everybody was reading about him. He had just put out his first book, '[Stride Toward Freedom:] The Montgomery Story', and then he was always in the black press, black papers, in the 'Jet' magazines. So we--
Speaker 1: But you didn't go to hear him?
Speaker 2: (shakes head for no) Because I was a freshman and I just had gotten to school, you know, but the upper classman all went, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. So how did that all affect you? Were you excited about that?
Speaker 2: No, I was--I told you I was open to the evangelical at the time. How do you get a guy--that's where I was--to stop wasting his time in triviality and to take himself serious enough to educate himself and to be responsible? How do you do this? How do you get a guy to overcome his hatred, his fears, his self-depreciation, back to functional manhood where he loved himself and loved God and is responsible to his neighbor? How do you get a man to do that? So I was into that because if you don't get a man to do that, then you don't have no help. You don't have nobody. You don't have anybody that can do any intelligent work. If a man does not love God and his neighbor, he can't do nothing intelligent.
Speaker 1: So you're thinking, like, you're trying to put together a way to organize people and develop them, and you know, so they can really improve themselves on a lasting basis, I guess, right?  Aren't you? I mean you're thinking all of this at school.
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: I mean all this influence of James Lawson and Highlander Folk School [Monteagle, Tennessee], the seminaries.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the social gospel guys, [Walter] Rasuchenbush, Martin Luther King people, and then there's a whole slew of--Harrison ['Harry'] Emerson Fosdick, and Bishop [Fulton] Sheen and all these guys, you know. These guys impacted me in terms of what the principles are and then the question is what is the strategy by which you get it done. You know, guys like Shepherd from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Adam Clayton Powell, all these guys just impacted me in terms of, you know--and then you got the whole Hebrew history. You know, Moses and then Nehemiah and all these guys, and all the prophets. These guys was real heavy dudes. Man, these guys was kicking it off, you know.
Story_ID: 3281
Speaker 1: Now did you go see 'The Ten Commandments' in '57 [1957] when it came out?
Speaker 2: Yeah. In fact, let me tell you something. It was interesting because our theater, our movement in open theater was around that issue. Are we going to go through the balcony to see 'The Ten Commandments', or are we going through the front door? How you going to go see a liberation movement as a slave? That was a real issue (laughs). That was a real issue.
Speaker 1: So what happened?  What--
Speaker 2: No, we went. We had an open theater movement.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So we opened the theaters in Nashville [Tennessee]. That's one of the things we did.
Speaker 1: So that was the result of the--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah. See, I had seen 'The Ten Commandments' in Cleveland [Ohio], see, and I went back and said, "Look, man, we cannot go see this movie as second-class citizens. We have to see this movie," you know. You can't go see Cecil B. DeMille's liberation movie as a slave.
Story_ID: 3282
Speaker 1: Tell me what happens next. You're in school [at the American Baptist Theological Seminary, Nashville, Tennessee] for how long?
Speaker 2: I actually was in school from '57 [1957] to '61 [1961]. And so in '60 [1960]--'59 [1959], we started workshops, and we did testing at Christmas to determine what we had to do. As 'Jim' [James] Lawson's teaching this, you can't never just say something is so, you got to always go and prove that it is so. So we had to go down Christmas and test all of the restaurants downtown to see whether they would serve black people. So we couldn't just take normal popular opinion that white people don't serve black people downtown. No, you got to go with concrete data. So then we had to go test at Christmas--observation and see because nonviolence start with observation, investigation, purification, education, negotiations, demonstration, confrontation, and reconciliation. You got to go that cycle, so we was going the full cycle. So we had started the observation-investigation.
Speaker 1: So at this point, you heard about what happened in [Greensboro] North Carolina [Woolworth's lunch counter sit-in], right?
Speaker 2: Well, that didn't happen till February 1, 1961 [sic, 1960].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I mean 1960. We started in '59 [1959], but we hadn't done no sit-in, in terms of a confrontation. We had only done testing. So when they--
Speaker 1: You didn't know whether you're going to do a sit-in or not, but you were just--
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, no. We knew we were going to do a sit-in. So when this kicked off, then we was just totally prepared. That's why the Nashville movement was so much better organized and so much more successful than the rest of them because we had about forty or fifty of us in serious nonviolent training starting in '59 [1959]. Like, for us it had become not a fad; it was, no, this is the principle that can be applied to this, but it can be applied to anything because what it does, in effect, it simply says that there is a right way to be in the world that's not a game for human being treated for a purpose. That right way is comprehended primarily in argonoptic [sic] law. Let's call it theologist, sociologist, psychologist. So human beings know this. Now you have social laws based on giving people privileges that interfere with that, but in our Declaration of Independence, it affirms that. Okay, so when you put Christianity up on our Declaration of Independence, you got the perfect system. Then you have to stop compromising and contradicting and violating yourself, at which time you can identify the contradictions, the comprises, and the violations.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to get to the root of this because you have very few opportunities to get to the root of a question like this, but why do you suppose that--or who do you think was responsible for, or what groups or individuals were responsible for bringing this organizing message to Nashville at that time? Because you have like Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], the Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you had the students there, started doing extraordinary things, and you know, go down in history. The Highlander Folk School in [Monteagle] Tennessee. I mean how many of these elements were working with collusion with one another?
Speaker 2: This was done primarily by the Fellowship of Reconciliation. I don't know whether you know anything about these guys. These guys are like Quaker type people: A. J. Musters, Glenn Smiley, and a lot of the social gospel European ministers. The Church of the Brethren, the American Friends Service Committee, the Quaker-type people who never did go along with slavery, and you know, never did go along with war, and they went to jail about all these things. So they have a history, and they teach their children to be peaceful and they don't fight and they don't do these things. So the Fellowship of Reconciliation is one of these groups, and most of the same European guys were ministers in this group, and so they had Jim Lawson there teaching workshops, and that's how he was there. And then 'Jim' [James] Lawson got hooked up a year or so earlier, before he got there, with [Dr,] Martin [Luther King Jr.] who was up at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] speaking, and so they had started a friendship, and Martin had told him he should come to the South and work. So he enrolled in Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and while at Vanderbilt, studying theology--and see, Jim Lawson had resisted the Korean War; he wouldn't go. He went to India and studied [Mahatma] Gandhi, and so he wouldn't go the war.
Speaker 1: But it seems to me that Jim Lawson is someone that probably should be better known than he is. I'm always impressed with what I read about him, but there's always sort of scant information about it, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, he was--he's a pastor at a church out in California. So he stayed into the ministry, stayed into the pastory.
Speaker 1: All right. So you all was conducting your study, going to the stores and after you gathered the data, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, then we had planned to come back and then put together sit-in movements and develop a whole strategic attack. But then when these guys sat-in in North Carolina, that made us step up our organizing efforts. So they asked us, "Well, why don't you all send some people over here and send us some support," and we said, "We will. We won't send no people--we will send you a contribution, but we will correspond. We will do a correspondent action and ask other students in other cities to do the same."  So then we started an action program ourselves, but our action program was much better organized than theirs in terms of our long history of discipline. They hadn't even thought all this stuff through. They had not been studying Gandhi and--
Speaker 1: Right. It was sort of spontaneous, from what I understand.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: They was challenged by (unclear) to go do that
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So there was no real connection between what was going on in Nashville and what was going on there except they did something that you all were planning to do? Is that true? So basically--
Speaker 2: That's what happened.
Story_ID: 3283
Speaker 1: So tell us about that and the action in Nashville [Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Well, we followed the general principle of nonviolence: observation, investigation, purification. Now the purification process is where you go on a fast and get all the arrogance and the fear and the ambition and the hatred and all that out of you because if you don't, your definitions and your reasoning will be inaccurate because you got to set a goal and the goal got to be right, just need it, and then you got to have an operational principle, and then you got to follow the logic that would lead you to a social dialogue about the rightness of this particular activity that is in vogue that should be changed, and then you got to have someone who is responsible for changing that. In the case of discrimination of the city, that's the mayor's responsibility to address that. He the father of the city, so if you say to him, the father of the city, "What is going on in your city is violating us; it shouldn't go on," then you act on it, see? And the point is, you act on it in the spirit so unique that you do not allow anything but that which you are doing to be the discussion. We are discussing the right to eat. We're not going to discuss broken windows; therefore, we're not going to break any windows because if we break windows, that's going to become the discussion. So we're not going to discuss police with a busted lip, so therefore, we don't want anything else in this discussion but the fact that we went to eat and you denied us. That's all we want to discuss. So if we don't get into anything else but that, that's all can be written about. That's called controlling the discussion so that the issue that you're dealing with gets dealt with, see? And it takes intelligence and honesty to do that, because you can't go out hating white people and you can't go down there ambitiously trying to get even with white people or trying to make a name for yourself. You got to be solving this problem. Here's the problem, we came to solve it, and when we solve it we're going about our business, but in the meantime, this is what we're going to do to solve this problem.
Story_ID: 3284
Speaker 1: Tell me about the action--you alls actions in Nashville. What store did you pick out first and why and what did you do?  What was it like?
Speaker 2: Well, what we decided to do: all stores that served people in other parts of the store. So we were dealing with them on the question of if you serve a person in one part of your store, you should serve these people in the store, so all of the department stores and the dime stores. Initially, we didn't go to just the restaurants. We went to all the department stores that had restaurants. We did them because they had department stores. So we chose the dime stores and the department stores.
Speaker 1: Like [S. S.] Kresge's [department store, became Kmart], and--I don't know if you had one of those, but--
Speaker 2: Woolworth [and Co.] and Kresge's and those guys, and then Harvey's [Department Store]. You know, you had these big department stores--Rich--Rich's [department store] and all the people like that. [Cain-]Sloan's [department store]. So they had restaurants in their department stores.
Speaker 1: Now a company like Woolworth's would probably be especially vulnerable in the sense that they operate in the North and they operate in the South, right? And how could they justify two different--
Speaker 2: Right. You have Walgreen's [Co.], Woolworth's, Kresge's, Kress [department store], all these dime stores types.
Speaker 1: So what was the first one you all organized around?
Speaker 2: Well, all of them; that's what I'm saying. Our first sit-in, we targeted all of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you deployed different people to all of them at one time?
Speaker 2: Yeah. Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. So there's a certain day where--
Speaker 2: On Saturdays, like--because all the students are out of school, and around noon, around 11:00 [a.m.] when you're going to have heavy shopping downtown, people downtown shopping, and we're going to be downtown eating. So we would go on Saturdays.
Speaker 1: So how many students did you have organized?
Speaker 2: Well, it was interesting. The Friday night, we have our rally, we had about 2,000 students, but it started raining and snowing that night, so the next morning we had about fifteen, sixteen students (laughs). So they're ready to decide whether we was going, so by the time we got out to the church, we did have about twenty-three or twenty-four students. And then when all these guys was about to get arrested, then I had to go back and get students from Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], the American Baptist Theological [Seminary], Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee]. Go back and get our armies, see, but we had a lot of students. They just weren't there because it was cold and rainy that morning. So we went back and all our--got enough troops to cover all our bases, but they didn't arrest no more that day. But then that Monday when these guys had to go to court, we decided to sit-in every restaurant and store downtown: Greyhound [Lines Corporation], Trailways [Transportation System, Inc.], all the drug stores that serve, and all of the restaurants. That weekend, we surveyed and counted all the seats in all the restaurants. So we deployed that many people, as many places that served and that many tables and chairs they got, that's how many people we deployed that coming Monday.
Speaker 1: Were people afraid to do that? Or were they pretty much--
Speaker 2: No, they weren't afraid to do it. We'd been in workshops. We'd been studying.
Story_ID: 3285
Speaker 1: Well, what kind of things happened [as a result of civil rights activism in Nashville, Tennessee]?  I mean did you--
Speaker 2: Well, they, you know, young white boys would be downtown rioting and going on, and you know, we--just confrontation. We'd be down there and the police, after they'd arrested the first crew, they decided not to arrest nobody else because that night, we wouldn't pay bond. The people who went to jail wouldn't pay bond, so they had to turn them out in the middle of the night on our bonds, but we wouldn't pay no money. Then when they sentenced these people, they wouldn't pay no bonds either; they agreed to stay in jail, so that create another problem. Now in the meantime, the communities are organizing and boycotting. You see, once we got to moving, then the people start supporting us, we start having the regular mass meetings every night, and the community started rallying and the people started being educated, and then shortly thereafter, the black people boycotted downtown, and about forty, fifty, sixty days, we negotiated an open city.
Speaker 1: So it only took forty to fifty days to open all that up?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was anybody hurt in the process?  I mean physically.
Speaker 2: No, but attorney [Z. Alexander] Looby's home and he lived right across the street from a house that was blown up. In fact, that's what precipitated a mass march on the mayor's office.
Speaker 1: This attorney, what was his name?
Speaker 2: Looby.  Alexander Looby.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: L-O-O-B-Y, Looby. And his home was blown up and--
Speaker 1: Was this a black minister?
Speaker 2: No, he's a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Lawyer, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yeah. He's our lawyer. He's a lead lawyer because once we got arrested, all the lawyers in the city came and served as our defense. There was only about thirteen black lawyers in the city at the time. So when this house was blown up, then we as students marched on the city hall. They went and closed down all the schools, Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennesse], Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee], [American Baptist Theological] Seminary [Nashville, Tennessee], the high school, and then we all marched on the City Hall, and the Mayor [Ben West] speaking when Diane [Nash] asked him the question. He spoke and like, "Yeah, well, you know, segregation ain't right, you know."  So that like busted things open, see. But he like stepped out the backdoor looking timid, you know what I mean? Because they was just asking him non-offensive questions and he start answering them, just logically, and then, you know, so. And then the paper came out: "Segregation is not right, Mayor West," something like that.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Mayor West.
Speaker 1: West? W-E-S-T?
Speaker 2: (Nods for yes) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: All right. Now the Diane you're referring to is Diane--
Speaker 2: Nash.
Speaker 1: Nash, okay. For the listeners and you all were married, you know--
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --at a certain point
Story_ID: 3286
Speaker 1: Did the schools put pressure on the students not to be involved in this [civil rights activism]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, some of the professors did. For instance, like Dean [Ann] Cheatam at Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] did. The President, I think his name was President [Walter S.] Davis at Tennessee State [University, Nashville, Tennessee], and our president would inform us all of this stuff because they would call the presidents of all the schools. For instance, like once they was trying to get the elected student leadership at Fisk and Tennessee State and Meharry to replace the movement leadership, and our president called John Lewis and Bernard Lafayette and myself in and told us about this. So we kind of moved on them on that because that includes Diane [Nash] and Curtis Murphy and Diane Nash and Rodney Powell from, you know, these other schools. So we had to move and say, "Hey look, they're going to try to send in handpicked student leadership."  So we had to lecture they couldn't do that.
Speaker 1: Now this story took place again and again. I mean the same dynamic takes place again and again, you know, throughout the '60s [1960s] and early '70s [1970s]. The same kind of a strategy of leadership. There's an attempt to replace leadership and train them.
Story_ID: 3287
Speaker 1: So down there with you was--you say John Lewis was there? And Bernard Lafayette.
Speaker 2: Marion Barry.
Speaker 1: Marion Barry, okay. Now all these people were students?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we were all students. Right.
Speaker 1: Okay. That's quite a group there.
Speaker 2: Rodney Powell, he was at Meharry [Medical College, Nashville, Tennessee]. Gloria Johnson, she was at Meharry. And then we had some guys from Vanderbilt [University, Nashville, Tennessee], you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I mean, it seems like when you look back at that, you know, you read about those times and read about those things and what people were doing, you're tempted to think that these were just a super generation of people. I mean I don't know. I mean what are your thoughts on that now? Do you think that it was just the times, or--?
Speaker 2: No. Well, I think education was one, and I think it was the times. I think it was the time. There was a maturity that took place in terms of people and evolutionary maturity in people as a combination of certain inputs and certain maturity. And there are things in history called when God moved into the affairs of men, and that was one of the times. You had the Little Rock [Arkansas] thing going on in '57 [1957], you had the Montgomery [Alabama] thing going on in '55 [1955], and then you had the student thing going on in 1960. It's like an awakening, you know, and what was beautiful about it was the principle that was used allowed the masses to get involved because the principle is the signs of government. The signs of government allowed everybody to get involved because everybody, being a social being, has a propensity to be involved in self-governance. That's the law. Man has to be involved in self-governance, so a self-governing unit among African people emerged at that time.
Speaker 1: Now I read once, or I saw a television special where Endesha Ida Mae Holland said that when she was in Mississippi and saw the students on television, she said that she was surprised because you all looked so well dressed and clean and smart, and it seemed to be a model. You know, you all were setting a model of behavior in the way people deployed themselves and carried themselves made black people proud when they saw, you know, clips of students sitting--in in Nashville. You know, just how they looked was--I think Bob Moses wrote about that too. He was from New York but talked about what he saw. He just liked the way everybody looked--they seemed to be people that you wanted to be with and be around.
Speaker 2: Yeah. Well, that was part of, you know, our discipline, that you conduct yourself as a citizen and a Christian citizen, and that you're not a rabble rouser. You're an ambassador for Christ and you're representative of the highest principles, so you have to conduct yourself in light of that. One of the things we put emphasis on is the whole point of dignity, which is different from pride, so we didn't come from the pride state; we came from the dignity state. What is man, see? We didn't come from black versus white arguments. What is man in the beloved community? What is man as man-to-man, see, which is a whole different basis. How is man to treat man? Whole different basis than the black stuff.
Story_ID: 3288
Speaker 1: You said, you know, forty or fifty days it was over in Nashville [Tennessee] in terms of public accommodations the struggle. And then what happened next? What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, we organized SNCC that same year--Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had put up some resource and got Ella Baker who was the Director of the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] to call the students together at Raleigh, North Carolina at Shaw University. Around April the 15th that year [1960], we organized the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee.
Speaker 1: Let's backtrack a minute: tell us about Ella Baker. She's--
Speaker 2: She was the Executive Director of the NA--I mean the SCLC at the time, and in her discussion with Dr. King, they decided to pull together all the student leaders from the South so that we could have a greater impact as students working together so we could coordinate our movements and make a greater impact in terms of awakening people.
Speaker 1: Okay. I guess I was asking you about your personal reflections about her because she was a private person, from what I've read.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was a very Constitutionally conscious person. She had overcome the illusion that females was inferior to males, and therefore she functioned Constitutionally, and she was an excellent leader, and she recognized that people needed to develop leadership skills and she did not resort to this quote personality leadership stuff. She understood principles, process and procedures for getting things done. She taught us that, and she insisted that we function like that as a group, as a sovereign organization that formulate the issues, the problem, and move on them, get them done, and that if we didn't do that, the older people wasn't going to do it. So she was like the mother of our group, so. So she taught us, you know, how to be responsible and think as an organization.
Story_ID: 3289
Speaker 1: So you were at the ground floor of the organizing of SNCC--Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee. So what did SNCC focus on as an issue?
Speaker 2: The first issue we agreed on was that we would open theaters the next year, '61 [1961], and we said to celebrate the anniversary of the city [Nashville, Tennessee]. All the cities and groups were supposed to go back and recruit students that fall, the fall of '60 [1960], and get ready. Take them through nonviolent education and get ready for fair weather first, when we was all supposed to zap. Nashville was only the group that moved. By that time I had become elected chairman, so we fought that out. In about sixty to seventy days, we opened the theaters in Nashville.
Story_ID: 3290
Speaker 1: Now in 1960, did the presidential election influence you any? Did you see, like, the election of [President John F.] Kennedy as being something positive at that point, or? Because I know in retrospect, people talk about how much they--how great Kennedy was, how much they loved him, and stuff like that, but what did you feel at that time, you know, about the election of Kennedy? Did you see it as a change, or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause Kennedy was the first European male who would speak Constitutionally with African people in public. Most folk didn't know that. He did not have a condescending language. What white guys did before Kennedy, if you told them the truth and pulled it, they play crazy as if they didn't hear you, but they would not have a dialogue with a non-white person in public. He was the first European male that did that in the country in my lifetime. They had to always pretend like they knew something you didn't know, and they had to go through that insanity with you, but he--you could discuss something with him and you and him could come to an agreement as you all discussed it in the public. Other white men couldn't do that. They had to have a package and you had to go along with it. First of all, he was a youthful person, which made the students in my area work. Second, he was Catholic, and my thing is anytime you can get anybody to go beyond any division, you're doing well. So my point is, naw, we need a Catholic guy in the White House. If you're going to have Protestant guys there, you need Catholic guys because that helped people to get beyond this boogieman theory, see. You can't discriminate against people because they Catholics, and so my point was, "No, we should work for him because he is Catholic."  Though we're Protestants, we should work for him because you got to get people--if a man is qualified and he shows qualifications, you can't disqualify him because of his religious affiliation. Because Americans got to go around and think you got to have Protestants as President. Well, well, Catholics can be president. So my thinking was that once you help people to make that step, that'll help them to even make greater steps. So that's where I was coming from.
Story_ID: 3291
Speaker 1: So we as college students and young people participated in rallying people to voter registration and out to vote. In Nashville [Tennessee], we had, that spring of '60 [1960], we was registering something in the neighborhood of 300 people a day because those people could register in Nashville. Before the movement, they seldom did. Like, when we were sitting-in, folks would come to the mass meeting and say okay, while we're negotiating, let's go out and do voter registration. So we would do voter registering every day as one of our strategies for building a power base, see, putting pressure on the elected officials.
Speaker 2: So voter registration: what form did it take? Did you all, like, do the door knocking?
Speaker 1: Yeah. We did masses. The union came in. I forgot the name of the union now. One of the unions who had been specialized came in and help us set up a massive voter registration campaign: door-to-door, street-to-street, downtown. Nashville is like a hub city where all the--you don't have crosstown buses like you do in Chicago [Illinois]; you have all the buses come to a hub, to what is called the shelter. But about two blocks from the shelter was the county courthouse and you could go and register, so we'd go down during the day and just get folks--because all they do is sign their names, and so we would go down and register people and then we would do voter registration from the communities. So while we were doing sit-in movements, when we would have a lull, we would do voter registration, and we would get hundreds of people.
Speaker 2: So you had a real movement growing now?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: What were the political results of the movement in Nashville?
Speaker 1: Well, it was the first city in the South that they voted a metropolitan government because some of the black folk in their city got registered. They had to change the boundaries of the Nashville city limits so it wouldn't have a black majority population (laughs).
Speaker 2: So they had to go out and include the metropolitan area in the voting process.
Speaker 1: Because, see, after about '61 [1961], there was more black folks registered than white people because we got so many black folks registered, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Did any black candidates achieve--
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah. Well, you had two blacks--on the school board, there was an attorney, (unclear), was on the School Board, and on the City Council you had [Robert Emmett] Lillard was on the City Council and [Z. Alexander] Looby was on the City Council. So even when we had the sit-in movements, you had two black lawyers in the City Council and you had a black man lawyer on the School Board.
Speaker 2: What was his name again? On the School Board?
Speaker 1: Enoch, E-N-N-I-S. Ennis I think it's something like that. Ennis they called him. And then Looby, and what's that guy's name? I just called his name; I forgot it already.  Lilliard.
Speaker 2: Lillard, all right.
Speaker 1: They were on the City Council.
Story_ID: 3292
Speaker 1: So where did it go from there? From the [voter] registration.
Speaker 2: Well, then we opened the theaters. That was in '61 [1961], now.
Speaker 1: Was that hard to do--opening the theaters?
Speaker 2: No. No because the principle always the same. You have a Constitutional violation. You do your research, you turn the information to the guys who in violation, you go and prepare yourself to go through a process of encounter. We will not accept this, you know. It's the will of the person, see. We will not accept this. We will not injure you, we will not lie to you, we will not destroy your property, but we will not go along with this. And you stick with your position.
Speaker 1: So it didn't take long to get that opened up?
Speaker 2: No. In fact, we negotiated on Friday before Mother's Day, and Mother's Day, the bus burned in Anniston, Alabama.  At CORE [Congress of Racial Equality].
Speaker 1: A bus of Freedom Riders.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: A bus that was full of Freedom Riders.
Speaker 2: Right. And it burned on Mother's Day.
Speaker 1: And they were sponsored by CORE.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: The Congress of Racial Equality.
Speaker 2: Right. And so it was hideous, they quit. They said, "Man, they set the bus on fire and almost tried to burn the people up."  So CORE called the Freedom Ride off, so then we called and asked them could we call it back on, and they said yes, and then Diane [Nash] was doing most of this negotiation, and then she got them to agree that they wouldn't fight us if we did it. So then we kept the Freedom Ride going. Of course, then that's the year we got locked up in Jackson [Mississippi] and spent most of the summer in prison down there, and then the ICC [Interstate Commerce Commission] ruled that September that segregation on buses was incorrect, and then we decided to stay in Mississippi and build a movement in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: So tell me about how that Freedom Ride went, you know, and how you ended up getting locked up in jail.
Speaker 2: Well, in Alabama we had a lot of violence, in Birmingham [Alabama] and in Montgomery [Alabama], so Jackson decided to play it different, real cool. They just decided to lock everybody up. So then we decided just to flood the jails with people, so that's what we did, and they--
Speaker 1: Just to backtrack a minute: Birmingham was real bad in the news, I guess, right? The bus burning in Anniston, Alabama in 'Time' magazine. 'Time' was all over the world. People saw that.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: They saw the United States as a place where they were trying to barbecue people for riding the bus together. Bad press, right? So you say in Jackson the city administration tried to--
Speaker 2: In Mississippi they decided to just put everybody in jail, and keep the people out from involved in it. Just let the officials handle it.
Speaker 1: So they didn't allow the [Ku Klux] Klan to come in and--
Speaker 2: You just got locked up. So some of us got out of jail and began to organize in Mississippi. That's how the Mississippi [Summer] Project got developed.
Story_ID: 3293
Speaker 1: So you were in jail most of the summer of 1961, you say?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: So what was it like being in jail all summer?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not too bad. A jail's a jail (laughs). They're jails, you know. They're just jails (laughs). It's not a bad place to be.  We had order. We had study groups. We didn't argue and debate. We talked and sang and worked and planned and worked, and planned the movement. That's how we got out and started organizing. We planned it in jail and then got out and organized it.
Speaker 1: You know, it's probably hard for people to imagine, who have not done what you've done. You know, what it's like to sacrifice your whole summer, you know, in jail to do something for a cause.  Or to--you know, it seems like we ought to reflect on that for a minute.
Speaker 2: Well, see, let me tell you what that is. The question becomes the thinking: following the logical thoughts. You do not discuss the consequences of rational thinking and action. You discuss the consequences of not thinking rational and logical in terms of what happened. Yeah, when we was in Nashville we went to jail, but what happened if we didn't go to jail? Yeah, we went to jail on the Freedom Ride, but what would happen if we didn't go to jail? So do you go along with insanity so that you don't go to jail? Or do you fight insanity even when they send you to jail because you know the insane man is insane, so he got power and he's going to do insane things. Putting you in jail is one of them, on false pretenses. So you got to follow the logical truth and you got to accept the consequences of what happens when you follow the logical truth, and then when that irrationality come upon you, you fight it from that perspective, from a logical point of view. Then another irrationality come up and you fight it again. So if you not willing to fight and fight and fight and fight everything that hampers your true definition, then you are going to succumb to a false definition of yourself and go back into slavery. That's just--so whatever keeps your mind working right is what you should do. You should never worry too much about what happens to your body. You got to deal with if your mind stopped thinking intelligently and you stop acting on what your mind tells you which is true; that's the danger. But going to jail or getting killed, those are not problems. Not being a human being while you live, that's the problem, so.
Speaker 1: So did people worry at all? I mean about what might happen to them in those situations. I mean, it would seem--I mean, everybody, you know--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but that wasn't the dominant issue. The dominant issue is when do you we get this stuff down? Well, look at what this stuff is doing to all these people.
Speaker 1: Did you have contact with the outside world when you were in jail? I mean did you know what the country was thinking about what you were doing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we'd get papers every day.
Speaker 1: Did the Mississippi papers report the--I mean--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah. Mississippi papers said they don't know whether they should put us in the jail, the zoo, or the crazy house, and all that kind of old stuff. So they had all kind of myths going to keep the people, the local people, from getting involved and that's why we got out and organized because while we had about--what--300 or 400 folk in jail from around the country, nobody in Jackson participated. So we said, "No, no, no. Something's wrong. Something's wrong."
Speaker 1: They would call you what? An outside--
Speaker 2: Agitator, yeah. So we got out and started organizing.
Speaker 1: But is that true? Were you an outside agitator?
Speaker 2: Well, I take the position that [President Lyndon B.] Johnson take, that any problem in America is a legitimate concern for any citizens in America, so you know, I'm an American and I was from Itta Bena [Mississippi]. It was actually a funny thing happened. They didn't have computers then. Everybody's--all these secretaries was on typewriters. Joe Brown, he said, "I'm from Atlanta," his mama's name, daddy name." I'm from Nashville, Tennessee. "Where were you born?" Itta Bena, Mississippi. All the typewriters stopped and everybody stopped, and the police said, "Now boy, you know better than that" (laughs). Why everybody fell out of their chair. "You know better than this." So they see me--"You know better than this. We've trained you better than this." Oh, boy.
Story_ID: 3294
Speaker 1: You were saying that you all that summer in Jackson [Mississippi, 1961] made the decision to organize the people in Mississippi because you felt you had all--everybody from the outside had been isolated basically from the people. The people were involved in it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it didn't make sense.
Speaker 2: Right. And it was like if you did not grasp this moment, you'd stagnate here probably another 100 years. So while all this fire's going on, you better put your wood in this fire. So we got to get the young people in the local--people involved in a national movement so they wouldn't feel isolated. We were successful in doing that because we got a lot of people out of jail to stay and become organizers. We began to organize young people in Jackson. We decided, for instance, that there was not a whole lot of restaurants and things like that in Mississippi, so what you had to do is then deal with the question of disenfranchisement. And it wasn't a question of voter registration because you just was not allowed to register, so you was going to have to now develop a nonviolent strategy to get the right to vote. So then the question was, "Well, how do you take the technology of nonviolence and redirect it toward voter rights rather than eating rights?"  So we started doing that kind of thinking.
Story_ID: 3295
Speaker 1: One of the first things we did, we organized and ran candidates for office, [U.S.] Congress. We was going run them for local office, but our young, white lawyer named Bill Higgs told us that, "Well, if you're running for Congress you're better off because then if they bother the people you had a hold in federal government getting involved, where if it's a local person, it's just--the government won't even investigate."  So then we ran a Reverend Tremayo [CANNOT VERIFY] from the [Mississippi] Delta and then Reverend [R. L .T.] Smith from Jackson [Mississippi]--candidates in the '62 [1962] election. You know, the primary election. That was a way to start the voter registration idea--getting folks. Then we opened up a newspaper called the 'Mississippi Free Press'.  Myself, Paul Brooks, and Medgar Evers sponsored that paper. Then we would buy time, time in Mississippi for political candidates. They have to sell the candidates time, and basically, TV time, at that time in Mississippi, for registered candidates would be something like $100 for thirty minutes. So, you know, so you get to put your candidates up. And this way, we start talking to the people because everybody's pretty much had a television, see. So we was off and running.
Speaker 2: Now, they allowed you to buy the time on television without a problem?
Speaker 1: Yeah. Yeah, if you was a legitimate candidate. That's the law; they had to sell you the time. In fact, you get prime time. It's very interesting. The law in Mississippi was that you could pretty much buy all the time you wanted. If you was going to buy the time, they had to let you have it.  Yeah. So that way we could start talking to people, and then that's how we started off.
Speaker 2: It's interesting that they would let somebody run as a candidate for office, but they wouldn't let people register to vote.
Speaker 1: Well, you could register to have so many ways of intimidating you and hassling you, see. They had registration questions on how many bubbles in a bar of soap and all that kind of crazy stuff, see?  So.
Speaker 2: Okay. So you could go down there. It's probably varied from place to place.
Speaker 1: Right. In some places they just out and out shoot at you. In some places they run you out of town. In some places they did different things.
Speaker 2: Okay. So you ran some candidates in the Jackson area.
Speaker 1: And in the Delta.
Speaker 2: And in the Delta. Now we're talking about the Delta. What are we talking about?
Speaker 1: You're talking about from Vicksburg [Mississippi] all the way up to Memphis [Tennessee]. About eighteen counties in the northwestern part of the state that's flat, where the river once used to flood. The Mississippi River would flood all these counties, and in late winter and early spring, they'd be totally inundated with water. So then you got to silt this topsoil over a lake, and the Delta's sitting on a lake--under that topsoil, so it's like a topsoil bed over a lake, and it accumulated for over thousands of years, you see?
Speaker 2: So it was fertile there?
Speaker 1: Yeah, very fertile.
Speaker 2: So you hear about the Delta, I wondered--so we're talking about land along the Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, how'd your candidates do--?
Speaker 1: Well, they did well. We got people registered. We got our paper launched, 'Mississippi Free Press', because we know we didn't have any support from it--local papers. It was for the purpose of educating people, getting people out of their fears. Hadn't nobody run for office since Reconstruction there.
Story_ID: 3296
Speaker 1: Then we put together an organization called COFO [Council of Federated Organizations]. NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] tried to run us out of the state, so we got to President of the NAACP to head a federation of organizations. Our position was let's just all focus on the right to vote and voter registration, and I'd get into a lot of this and that, see.
Speaker 2: Just to backtrack a little bit. This is a CORE [Congress of Racial Equality] thing. The national NAACP wasn't a lot of help to what you all were doing down in Mississippi?
Speaker 1: No, they tried to run us out the state.
Speaker 2: They--
Speaker 1: Because the local NAACP, Andrew Moore--
Speaker 2: And Aaron Henry.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were grassroots people and agreed. See, like Aaron Henry, who was the President of the NAACP, was also on the SCLC's [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] Board, so they didn't go along with Roy Wilkins and these people.
Speaker 1: What was Roy Wilkins rationale for trying to curtail the activities of the local NAACP?
Speaker 2: Nickels and dimes. Nickels and dimes. Petty Negroes with nickes and dimes mind. They was selling banquet tickets and playing like they was fighting for freedom, and he didn't want nobody to sell banquet tickets because if he didn't, he couldn't sell the banquet tickets.  If you checked NAACP record--I'm not talking about what the lawyer's name--Thurgood Marshall, which was in the Legal Defense Fund. That's a whole other organization. But the only thing the NAACP did, really, legally, was bus children to schools, which was illegal, irrational. So in relation to helping to really fight segregation, they did not do that. Now they lie about that because colored peoples generally lie.  They're pathological liars. Whatever they talk about, they're going to tell lies about it, but when you get down to--I mean that's why they're not free. That's why they can't run institutions. They're just pathological liars. They will not tell the truth. I mean categorically, across the board, if they colored people, you know they lying.
Speaker 1: By colored people, you're talking--
Speaker 2: African people in America. They specialize in telling lies. They don't tell the truth about things.
Speaker 1: But you're talking about, particularly, cultural mindset too, right, when you say that? Not just the color, but the mindset too.
Speaker 2: Right. They lie. It doesn't make any difference what it's about. That's why they can't do nothing scientifically. They tell lies. They will not tell the truth. They won't tell the truth about what happened. They'll make up shit and play like something happened that didn't happen.  So they didn't work for freedom. Now they pretend like they did, but if you base that on the facts, see, now they tried to run us out of the state. And all this is in the history books. So to keep them from fighting us, we then organized COFO and put the local president of NAACP head of it.
Story_ID: 3297
Speaker 1: Now that [COFO, Council of Federated Organizations] was organized in New Orleans [Louisiana] at Dookie Chase restaurant?
Speaker 2: No, no. That was organized up in Clarksdale [Mississippi], at (unclear)--not at (unclear), over there in Henry. It's the Council of Federated Organizations. Yeah, we organized that up in the [Mississippi] Delta because let's--see, we don't need to argue about SNCC and SCLC and CORE and NAACP. Those things are not relevant. They're like, "Why should we get into an argument about I got a Ford car, and you got a Plymouth, and you got a Chevrolet car, and he got a Volvo."  But we don't need to talk about that. Can we get the people from here to out in Milwaukee [Wisconsin] is the question. Okay, so our job is to get folks registered. We don't need to get on about about who.
Speaker 1: COFO basically pulled everybody that was working in Mississippi together.
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) Together, right.
Speaker 1: Regardless of where they're originated from.
Speaker 2: Affiliation or organization. Let's focus on voter registration and the right to vote and getting folks educated to citizenship, you know. SCLC can help in citizenships. SNCC guys can be the troopers. NAACP can help with the older leadership and getting churches open.  Put everybody to work on one project, see?  See? Don't get into arguing over who, how many folks we got, and you got and who. You joined the organization that you're more comfortable with, but let's work on this. That's how we want to have that. And we got folks convicted to that. And that's how we approached it in Mississippi.
Speaker 1: So the voter registration, this is--we're talking about 1962?
Speaker 2: '62 [1962].  '63 [1963].
Story_ID: 3298
Speaker 1: '63 [1963], you mentioned Medgar Evers, who was head of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Jackson [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the State Director. He's on the national staff. That's different from the local President. See, they had field secretary. He was the Mississippi field secretary, see?
Speaker 1: In '63 [1963] he's murdered?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was that a result of all the activity and --?
Speaker 2: Well, pretty much. That night he got murdered, three of us, four of us supposed to got murdered that night: me, Bernard Lafayette, a man named Reverend [Harvey] Cox, and Medgar. They had set up a situation in Birmingham [Alabama] for me because I had gone over to run the Birmingham movement. They had sent a woman down with cocaine and reefer [marijuana] and alcohol and all this stuff, and she'd invited me to a party, and I had planned to go. But what happened, the students got to arguing and fighting between Pearl High School [Pearl, Mississippi] and the other one--so I had to stay up all night refereeing a student war and didn't make it to my death trap (laughs).  Next day, Medgar was dead. Bernard head had got busted, but I had missed my death trap. Well, I don't know what happened to Reverend Cox. They didn't get him. The only guy they got was Medgar, so. Their theory was, "If we can knock these four guys out, we can pretty much stop the movement," and the reason was that Medgar wasn't afraid of anybody. He would go everywhere. He worked and he was totally dedicated, see?  And, you know, and so was Reverend Cox from South Carolina, Bernard and myself. Bernard, at that time, was stationed in Selma [Alabama], and I had just come over from Mississippi, from Greenwood [Mississippi], where I was directing that project to pull the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] project out of hoc because they didn't know how to run a nonviolent movement. They didn't have nobody on that staff could run a movement.
Story_ID: 3299
Speaker 1: So you were in Birmingham [Alabama] when Medgar Evers was killed?
Speaker 2: (nods for yes) Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: Now this is a big deal. This is one of the recently most celebrated aspects of your life, the activities in Birmingham in 1963. Tell us about how did you get involved in Birmingham? You were registering people to vote in Mississippi in '62 [1962] and--
Speaker 2: Well, what happened, in about '61 [1961], the state of Tennessee closed down Myles Horton's school [Highlander Folk School, Monteagle, Tennessee]. That school was so effective. This school had Rosa Parks, [Dr.] Martin [Luther] King [Jr.], Fred Shuttlesworth, myself, Diane [Nash] and John Lewis, just about every leader--Fred Shuttlesworth--every leader that made a difference had gone through the Highlander Folk School.
Speaker 1: Highlander Folk School.
Speaker 2: Right. So when the state closed him down, he gave the program and staff all over to Dr. King. That's how Andy Young got in the movement, and set the program up down in southwest Georgia at the Dorchester Community Center, to carry on the educating of local leadership. What was the question you asked me?
Speaker 1: How you got involved in Birmingham.
Speaker 2: Okay. So in the meantime, while I was in Mississippi, King would come to Mississippi and speak for us. So he said to me, he said, "Bevel, I got a problem. I don't have nobody who can," he used the word, "to take an idea from thin paper to thick action."  He says, "You know how to do that, so would you come over on Monday?  So you drive up to Memphis [Tennessee], fly down to Atlanta [Georgia], and Thursday, you catch the plane and come back, and we'll take care of that, so you can help train my staff in to direct action. You know how to do that; they don't know how to do it."  So the guy that SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] started getting hostile because they were hostile toward King, see? They say, "We don't want you doing that."  So then I said, "Well, yeah, I'd do that."  So then they started hassling me, and then King said, "Well, why don't you work with me?"  I said, "Well, I can't work with you because,"--see, the colored guys, what they do, they don't have no senses over all things. They only have things that total their personal interest. They don't have a constitutional interest. So four of them working together, as soon as one gets what he wants done, he quit because they don't have constitutional consciousness; they have only personal interest. They have no constitutional interest--consciousness. So I said, "These are the things I got to do. I got to end segregation in every facet of life, get the right to vote, open housing. Got to do all these things. We cannot have any social practices under the law that didn't hamper black folks' citizenship in America, so I'm interested in getting all those things moved."  So he said, "Well, that's what I'm interested in."  See?  I said, "Okay. Well, if that's what you're interested in, you know, we can talk. I can work with you."  And I explained to him, "I don't work for money."  You know, "We share bread. We raise money, but I'm not motivated by money. This is solving a problem."  Nonviolence solves problem. It doesn't work on being in no movement or having no job or nothing like that.  So then these guys and SNCC started to politicking against me. I was running the Greenwood [Mississippi] movement. I had set the Greenwood movement up. But when the SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] project started breaking down and they couldn't move it, King called me up and asked me would I come over, and you know, help make that thing move. So that's what happened. So I went over to get that project moving and my thing was, when I got there, they was putting people in jail and getting them out at night, then putting on some new clothes the next day to make it look like they had a movement. Doing all that crazy stuff. I said, "No, what you got to do is you got to absolute to preach and teach, and get people convicted to the principles of nonviolence."  This is the love, this is truth. This is hate, these are lies.  You act on the love and the truth, against the hate and the lies, and to maintain love and truth while you acting against hate and lies. That's a nonviolent movement. Otherwise you're telling lies. You're just playing, see? But you have to love, I mean, because you have to forgive people. Then you got to accept Christ's teachings. When is it right to hate people? It's never right to hate people. Well, then I will agree to love people. Loving people is treating people right and respecting the dignity and divinity of yourself and themselves. That's a principle. So you can't fake that; you have to do that. So you got to get the young Christian people, who a lot of them over there understand those principles, who have accepted Christ, now you teach them how to apply those principles. So I went over and just started organizing the youth, and before long, I had more young folks than they had old folks going to the meetings. And my point is let's turn the young folks loose on them. And you had twelve high schools and two colleges there, so we had upwards of ten--12,000  young people. So my point is, "Now we got sufficient forces to beat these guys."
Speaker 1: Now who was the players at this here in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Fred Shuttlesworth, Reverend Gardner [Taylor], the Wood brothers, [Rev.] Nelson Smith, [Rev. John] Porter. These guys. Reverend [John] Cross who's at 16th Street Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] at the time, and myself, 'Andy' [Andrew] Young and Bernard Lee, Dorothy Cotton. We were like the field staff, we called it. Wyatt Walker was the Executive Director at the time.
Speaker 1: Now on--for the white, I guess, the city officials--in Birmingham you have like a--
Speaker 2: [Eugene] 'Bull' Connor was the Chief.
Speaker 1: Public Safety or something like that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Bull Connor, okay. And what was his strategy in terms of dealing with you all?
Speaker 2: Well, his strategy was just beat people up and blow up homes and stuff. Under his administration, you had all kind of bombings and beatings and killings and stuff. So he was just like brute who terrorized people. So that's what he did, that's what he knew to do. That's why they called him 'Big Bull' Connor. That's what they called him. He would just turn police on people and beat them up.
Speaker 1: Now who was the mayor of Birmingham?
Speaker 2: They had gone to [Albert] Boutwell or Haynes, I forgot now--I think they had been on a mayor called Boutwell, and I think the guy--or maybe on [Arthur] Haynes and Boutwell was coming in, but it was an election year, see, when we got there. It was changing administrations.
Speaker 1: Did you all have a sense of what the business community, the white business community, wanted to do--
Speaker 2: Yeah, they didn't want to do nothing. Just like, you know, the South is the South. Segregation has always been, is going to always be, and whatever we have to do to keep it is what we're going to do; that's their position, see?
Story_ID: 3300
Speaker 1: They got a heads up at Montgomery [Alabama] and some other places, I guess. You know, about what could happen in Birmingham [Alabama], right?  So.
Speaker 2: And then by this time, you had the Nashville [Tennessee] situation and the Little Rock [Arkansas] situation, and Atlanta [Georgia] had opened and Chattanooga [Tennessee] had opened, see? So a lot of the South had fell, and the Battle of Birmingham finally crushed the whole system of legal segregation because the Kennedy--out of that movement, [President John F.] Kennedy introduced this 1964 Civil Rights Bill, which outlawed segregation all over the South. Now see, that's what our strategy was. Look, we can't be going and fighting and Anniston [Alabama] and Danville [Alabama], and Savannah [Georgia], you know, Albany [Georgia]. We'd be fighting till 2100.
Speaker 1: So the federal government had to step up and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, no. We had to create such an explosion that it become the national and international issue so we'd get federal legislation. This is a national problem. That's why we had to march on Washington [D.C.]. You know, my position with Kennedy was this, I would not be a president in a country, and my wife can use a toilet and yours can't, okay?  It's just that simple with me, so don't come up on me with no bullshit. Look, people that travel across the country got to be treated like citizens, so if you ain't going to do that, I don't need to discuss you being a damned liberal. You treat people as if they're people. Other than that, there ain't no discussion with me about that.  And don't pretend like there's some mystery about this shit, you know? You know what the damn shit is. Hell, your wife can use the damn toilet, my wife can't. So we ain't friends until that kind of shit can be cleared up. So as far as I'm concerned, you're not a president; you're a fucking peckerwood.  That's how I talked to these people, see. So don't come around me talking nice while you fuck with me. It's like, don't do that. You know, don't play politely religious man when you're fucking with people. You know? See, I don't play with white people.
Speaker 1: Did you--I know there was a group of SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee] met with 'Bobby' [Robert F.] Kennedy at some juncture. Were you part of that group?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. 'Cause I know was John Lewis, and in fact, John Lewis, I think, had really just came back from being--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, one of the guys from--what what's the boy's name? Tyrone [Brooks] from New Orleans [Louisiana]; he almost got to fighting with Bobby Kennedy (laughs) because Tyrone's position was just like mine. Like, "Look man, don't come playing like you're my friend. You know, you're the president, so you can take a position.  Just like [President Lyndon B.] Johnson took position on the right to vote. I mean you're the president. If I'm the pastor of the church, I mean, I can say, 'Well, look, you can come and tell the people who are Muslim that they got to eat in the basement. Hell, I mean, people want to eat at the table. I'm the pastor.'"  I treat everybody right so members of the church treat people right.  I mean it's just that simple. In America, the chairman sets the order. Our Constitution says this, this is what they law is and we ain't going to play about that now. I may not be back next year as the President, but while I'm President, then the chair upholds the dignity of man because that's our Constitution. We don't need to play about that.  And then whatever adjustments you need to make, hell, go on and go to church and make the adjustment, but don't come playing with people about their humanity. Ain't nothing so white about you that you need to go out and fuck everybody to prove that you're some fucking human being. Don't do people like that. They just need men among them, see, and if you don't demand that they be men, they fuck around and be a boy. See, you tell them, "You can't do that," and when you come to them like that, their senses will wake up. They just be half asleep like most colored people.
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense that confrontation, you know, face-to-face confrontation, with a person like Bobby Kennedy was effective? It seems to me, down there during the [Civil Rights] Movement, I mean, I think it was Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] in jail in Birmingham who got a call from--he called Dr. King's wife or something and said, "Well, what's going on? Why is he in jail? Don't you know we have an election campaign?"  You know, or something. His response to it was like, "Like, what's going on down there? What are you all doing?"  You know, "Why don't you all just go register to vote?"  He seemed like very naive in the discussion at a certain point. I mean, I think--you think this actual face-to-face meeting changed anything?
Speaker 2: (simultaneously) No, no. See, no that's not the point. The point is there's a question.  We meet. Now we're not chickens or dogs, right? We're human beings, so we know we're human beings. Now why should I come to the meeting and pretend like you're not a human being?  For what? And so when somebody do that shit around me, I asked the question, "Did you intend to do that or are you crazy?"  See?  I just need to be straight up about this, so I need to know what I'm going to have to do, see? You see? When I come to Chicago [Illinois], same problem. You got these little lines that said, "People with colored skin can't go across certain streets."  I need to know whether you--are you insane? Or what is your problem? Because I'm not going to live like that. Now I have never understood yet, colored males relationship to white people. I don't understand that. I don't know what you all say to them. I don't say this shit to them because I don't live in a town where you tell me that you know you have a right to live in the communities I can't. I can't countenance that. I'm a man, you're a man, we know that's bullshit, so let's don't play with it like that.  You know?  That's the only way I live with people.  You know? Don't come take the apples off my damned table and don't tell me, "What? I didn't take the apples."  Don't do that.  See? But I don't know what you guys be talking about, talking, "Did you see the violations?"  "Yes, well." "You going to go along with it?"  "Well, we don't want to get them getting mad."  I don't care about them getting mad, see, because, you know, it's like I said, you get down to a military shootout, there's no evidence they can outshoot me. They ain't no evidence of nothing like that. See? So it's like, no--my humanity is what it is. I'm not going to falsify to get along with crazy white people, okay? And I'm not going to falsify to live two days longer, okay?  See? So living a lie is not, to me, living, okay?  That's how I have to live, and it's like, that's life for me, all right? You know, I'm not going to tell you I'm a polar bear. Hell, I'm not a damned polar bear.  Shit. "Well, Bevel, you should say you're a polar bear to get along."  I'm not going to say I'm a polar bear. I'm not a polar bear; it's that simple, okay? So what you say I am, I'm not that.  So don't go rigging up in your mind something that I am that I am not, and then expect me to go along with it. Hell, you go to school just like I do; go back and change your shit. You see what I'm saying? So that's how I functioned in the Movement, and I just had no other way to function.
Story_ID: 3301
Speaker 1: So when you were in Birmingham [Alabama] engaging in this struggle with [Eugene] 'Bull' Connor, was the before the meeting with [Robert F.] Kennedy then or afterwards?
Speaker 2: That was after because we met with Kennedy during the Freedom Ride periods.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, you know, give us some of the details of what happened down there.
Speaker 2: Well, there was several areas of manipulation. One, they tried to manipulate us out of the Freedom Ride, to call if off. Two, they tried to take over SNCC [Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee]. Now what Kennedy offered was, "I will exempt you all from the army if you guys do voter registration for the Democratic Party," and our position was, "Nope, period. First of all, you can't keep me out your Army because I ain't going.  I got out of there myself. In fact, you need to come join my army, okay? So, no."  Now some of the black guys was so fascinated. They said, "Oh, man, they offered us exemption from the Army. We know somebody important."  See, I don't--no, no. We are going to apply nonviolence to get our right to vote. We are not going to register Negroes for the Democratic Party, okay? We're not getting into that.  If they want some Negroes to register people for their party, go get them some Negroes. The people we organize, we're teaching them to be nonviolent, how to apply nonviolence to get all their constitutional interests fulfilled.  See? See, so I don't--my daddy [Denis Bevel] taught me that. He said, "Look, if you go downtown to buy a bar of soap and you go downtown and the man got five gallons of whiskey on sale for a nickel," he said,  "Since you didn't go downtown to buy no whiskey, get your damned soap and come home, okay? Don't get off into some stuff because somebody talking 'bout they got a bargain. You go to get what you went to get and don't get nothing else."  Okay, that makes sense. So if I'm working on the right to vote, then don't come offering me a job registering people for your party, see? That's what the issue was.  And of course then we set up the organization because some guys--we figure you should do voter registration. And those Negroes who get along with white folk like that, maybe they should do that, but we kept our department of Nonviolent Direct Action, which was headed by Diane [Nash], see?  But that's what that big fight was about; one was on the Freedom Ride where the Kennedys tried to stop us, and the next one's on the voter registration where they tried to get--they tried to stop the [Civil Rights] Movement, and get the Movement--
Speaker 1: Focusing on--
Speaker 2: No, they tried to--what you call it? Co-opt the Movement into the Democratic Party.  Said, "No, Democratic Party don't represent the constitutional interests for black people."  It hasn't and never has, see? So you don't buy it for some personal interest and sacrifice the constitutional interests of your people. Those are two damned different things. Whether James Bevel wants a damn coat and whether black folks are being educated correctly in America is two damned  different things, so I can't pretend like these are the, you know, that my getting a coat takes precedence over black folk being educated right. That's what I mean by black folks lying--the black males. They won't ever tell the truth about anything because they always sell out the constitutional interests of their people for some fucking personal privileges given to them by white people. That's degenerate. That's homosexual bullshit.  See? Hell, everybody know the difference between your constitutional interests and some fucking interest--personal interests. Everybody know the difference between that, don't they? I do, you do, everybody else know. You know, what the hell you need then go get it yourself, but don't go around sacrificing the interests of the people for some personal shit you want.  You want some personal shit, go buy it, or go create it. Go to school and study what you need to study and go get it done, but don't go around and sacrifice the interests of the people for some crap you want. The way all these guys do that stuff. So these Negroes from, particularly from these northern schools, came here with that stuff. So, no, you can't do that.
