Story_ID: 55925
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, including middle name.
Speaker 2: Jerry Butler, J-E-R-R-Y B-U-T-L-E-R, no middle name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it Jerry or is it Jerome?
Speaker 2: Actually it's Jeremiah, but we won't go there.  It's Jerry which is how I've been known most of my life.
Speaker 1: Well we have to have the correct birth name.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Jerry.  (Laughing).
Speaker 1: And--Jeremiah, now we know it.  Okay, and then can we have your date of birth?
Speaker 2: Twelve Eight Thirty-Nine, [December 8, 1939].
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date, yeah, 6/11.
Speaker 1: SCOTT STEARNS:  [Whispers] June 11th.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, June--oh 6/11.  Oh, I'm okay.
Speaker 1: See.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Six Eleven, '02 [June 11, 2002].
Speaker 2: And our location?
Speaker 1: 1900 S. Michigan Avenue.
Speaker 2: Okay, The HistoryMakers.  And I'd like to also have your profession?
Speaker 1: I am a professional entertainer and for the last 16 years, I've been a Cook County Commissioner.
Story_ID: 55926
Speaker 1: Now we--I'd like to start out by asking you about your father and I'd like you to give his name and what you know about him and his growing up.
Speaker 2: His name is Jerry Butler.  He was Jerry Butler, Jr., as a matter of fact because my grandfather was named Jerry Butler too.  I'm the third in the line.  And all I remember really about my father is that he worked all the time.  He was one of those men who had two jobs and I saw him coming and going from one job to the next until he died, 1954.
Speaker 1: Now did he talk at all--was he not a talker?  Did he talk at all about his growing up at all?
Speaker 2: Not a whole lot.
Speaker 1: Did he--?
Speaker 2: By the time I was 13, 14 years of age, he had already passed.  And so I guess those years when fathers said, "Sit down boy, let me tell you what the world was like when I was a kid," missed those years.
Story_ID: 55927
Speaker 1: What about his [Butler's father, Jerry Butler, Jr.] family?  Do you know much about his side of the family?
Speaker 2: I know that there were six, I think, brothers and three sisters.  My grandfather [Jerry Butler], I--on his side of the family I got to meet.  He came to Chicago [Illinois] and he spent about three or four years here before he passed.  Grandfather on my mother's [Arvelia Butler] side [Amos Agnew] I visited in Mississippi on one occasion when I was very small, never saw him again.
Story_ID: 55928
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your mother, her name?
Speaker 2: Arvelia Butler.  Actually Arvelia Agnew is her maiden name and she was a very interesting woman, Taurus by birth, April 28th.  There's some discrepancy as to whether it was 1910 or 1911 in terms of her birth.  She was a very spiritual woman, Church of God in Christ and a fervent believer in that I mean.  I recall that she never wore pants because that was just part of the culture that she came out of that women did not wear pants.  And she wouldn't eat fish that didn't have scales.  There were a lot of things that were right out of the Old Testament that she considered to be as much the law as the Ten Commandments.
Speaker 1: And now you did have occasion to talk to her more and did she talk at all about her growing up and--cause--?
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, and I don't know if I should do this, but I do it because of what it speaks to.  In the book Only the Strong Survive, my brother-in-law who did the interviews for the book, interviewed her about two years before she passed away.  And in that interview she talked more about her youth and childhood than I had ever heard her talk about before.  She passed at eighty-seven years of age and so she called up all of those memories about her grandfather having been a slave and how he had bought her this little red dress with black buttons on it, and this watermelon that he gave her that she didn't a chance to eat because he told her that as an African princess she had to make sure that the people were fed first.  And I think that that was probably her mantra all through her life was that she was always looking out for other people and I think for some reason or another she probably passed that gene on through the family.  I have a younger sister, Mattie, who is involved in housing development on the South Side of the City [Chicago, Illinois], my younger brother, Billy, who is now practicing to become a minister, and yours truly who serves as a [Cook] County Commissioner.
Speaker 1: But wasn't your mother from Monroe County?  Wasn't she or her family?  No?  No, Henry Moore--well oh, that's all the story that was told.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 55929
Speaker 1: Now what is your--can you give your siblings and their birth order?
Speaker 2: My sister Dorothy is the oldest child and she is three years older than I.  So if I am born in Thirty-Nine, she had to be what, Thirty-Six.  Or maybe she's six years older than I am which would make her Thirty-Three, which I think is the right age, six years older than me.  Then I'm the next, Thirty-Nine, my youngest sister three years later, Forty-Five, and my younger brother, three years after that.  No Forty-Two for my younger sister and Forty-Five for my younger brother.
Speaker 1: So Billy is the youngest?
Speaker 2: Yes, he's--
Speaker 1: Then Mattie's next to him, okay.  Is Mattie--she's next to Billy?  She's under your--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Mattie is between Billy and myself.
Story_ID: 55930
Speaker 1: Now tell me what your earliest memory is of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Oh man, I recall my sister Dorothy [Butler] and I playing around and old potbelly stove in a little shack down in Mississippi and she's chasing me around this stove and I tripped and fell.  And I still have the scar to show from where I fell into this stove.  I recall a spotted dog by the name of Flora who contacted rabies and my father [Jerry Butler, Jr.] had to kill her.  And I recall him putting me on this wagon and he had his old mule and he grabbed his shotgun and we rode off into the cornfield after this dog.  And I heard the gun go, "bang, bang" and the dog never came back.
Speaker 1: Was Flora your friend as a young boy?
Speaker 2: You know we had several dogs and several animals on the farm and so all of them I guess were friends and pets, but not in the sense of a just special kind of pet I guess the way some folks deal with pets today.  It was painful though because we never expected that we would not see her again.  At least I never expected that I wouldn't see her again.
Story_ID: 55931
Speaker 1: Now what, if you--any other memories of that time?
Speaker 2: I remember going to a school.  Now I'm probably about seven or eight years old now and my mom [Arvelia Butler] and dad [Jerry Butler, Jr.] had some big fight.  She went back to Mississippi to live for a while with her sister and her husband.  And I recall going to school there for about a semester and it was a one room school.  All the grades were in this one room, 1 through 8.  And the older children were helping to teach the younger children and I never forgot that.  I always thought that that was as very good way to learn and to teach at the same time because I'd found in later years that those who teach learn more.
Speaker 1: So did you, you said you were there for a year or a semester?
Speaker 2: A semester, yeah.
Speaker 1: For a semester?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And that was in--?
Speaker 2: I'm going to guess now that we're talking around 1948, '49 [1949], somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: So where was it?  It was in--you said your mother had left?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went back to Mississippi.
Speaker 1: Right, back to Mississippi.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And that's Monroe County, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any other memories about Monroe County?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, nothing?  Okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I am basically a Chicago kid. I--my mom and dad came here when I was three and most of my growing up and all of that happened here.
Story_ID: 55932
Speaker 1: Let's take you around cause you really grew up around, you grew up around what is now Cabrini-Green [Homes, a housing development in Chicago, Illinois].  It was even Cabrini-Green then too, on Wells, right?  Was it on Sedgwick.  Sedgwick.
Speaker 2: Actually, it actually started on Sedgwick Street [sic, Avenue].  Lived with my aunt and uncle who owned a restaurant at Orleans and Oak.  It was called Pearl's Kitchen.  And she was my father's middle sister or right next to my father.  And she and her husband who had been a cook in the Navy opened up this little restaurant and it was the place that everybody came to.  And when we came up from the South [Monroe County, Mississippi] because they had a, an apartment building and because they were never where, because they were busy running this business, that's where we lived until my father found work and we found an apartment at 942 North Sedgwick, which was the first apartment that I lived in, in the City of Chicago.  And then later we moved over to 1139 Wells and then from there to 1117 Cleveland, which was by then in Cabrini-Green, and then from there to the South Side.
Story_ID: 55933
Speaker 1: Do you, if you take yourself back to those early years you know here in Chicago [Illinois] and I was wondering if you could you know just sort of take yourself back and think about any you know sights, smells or sounds that you would associate you know with growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, you know I recall when we first arrived here it was in the dead of winter, not too far from Christmas.  And we came into the 12th Street Station and I recall seeing these big yellow cabs and all of this white snow and all of these lights because we drove north on Michigan Avenue to the North Side where we eventually wound up staying.  But then growing up there was Montgomery Wards [the Montgomery Ward Company Complex on the Near North Side in Chicago, Illinois] where we used to go and play on the sand dunes behind Montgomery Wards.  There was always for some reason the smell of the stock yards in the city, even as far north as Cabrini-Green you could smell them.  The baseball parks, you know there was always a Wrigley Field.  And of course in those years Chicago had two football teams and that was amazing to me.  I mean it was the Chicago Bears and the Chicago Cardinals.  As a matter of fact a friend of mine, Ronald Sherman, had a brother by the name of Niles Sherman who later became an alderman in this town.  I recall going up to Northwestern University [in Evanston, Illinois] to watch them play football and I hadn't told my mom [Arveliea Butler] and dad [Jerry Butler, Jr.] that I was going and the sun was going down and I had to hurry up and get home.  And they fooled around and won the game and didn't want to go.  They wanted to party afterwards and my behind was starting to sting because I knew I was in trouble.  But anyway, gave me a dime and I got on the "L" up on the north side some place.  I don't know where I was.  Came up at Division and Clark Street in the subway and I could hear my father say, "Junior."  And that, till this day I marvel at the fact that here was a man who was partially blind out looking for his kid and just happened to be in that place at the time that I got off that train and chased me all the way home.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Any other memories?
Speaker 2: Oh there are a multitude of memories.  There was Seward Park.  That was the place where I joined the Cub Scouts and had my little yellow thing.  I couldn't afford the whole uniform but I had this little yellow handkerchief that I was just extremely proud of and shooting marbles and playing and going over to Lincoln Park [Chicago, Illinois] and hanging out in the streets.  It was interesting because in those days there were little neighborhood stores.  There was a little store on the corner by the name of LaVerdi (ph.).  He was an Italian fellow.  And right next door to him, a drug store.  I used to go in and slide the comic books up my sleeve.  One day I got caught stealing comic books and rather than call the police or anything like that, the guy that owned the store waited until my father came in one day.  And he said, "Mr. Butler, he said I've been noticing your son, he's been taking magazines out of the store.  He said I think you ought to talk to him about it."  He talked to me about it all right, gave me a pretty good whipping.  But more than that it was the fact that this man cared enough to say you know if he gets away with this now it will lead to something else later on in life.  And it was cool.
Story_ID: 55934
Speaker 1: What was home like (unclear)?  What was it, you know what was home like, home life like?  Sorry.  Can you describe that?
Speaker 2: You know my mother [Arvelia Butler] says I was never there.  I was always out.  I was always playing.  I was always working.  I was always doing something outside of the house.  My younger sister [Mattie Butler] and brother [Billy Butler] were considerably younger than me and so I was the older brother and in--after my father [Jerry Butler, Jr.] passed, I was the breadwinner.  I was the guy that had to go out and try to make things happen.  So my home life was when I was there, it was fun.  But I was big brother.  I was responsible for whatever happened I was going to get the blame or the credit.  And when I wasn't there, I was usually off someplace trying to earn some money to make a living to do something.  Fortunately, most of what I did was headed in a positive direction.
Story_ID: 55935
Speaker 1: Now I want to take you back to even before your father's [Jerry Butler, Jr.] death and I would like to ask you what the young Jerry Butler was like?  You know, we all you know maybe sort of dream or maybe we all, you know some people (unclear) fireman or you know think something--what were you like?  Were you rambunctious, were you inquisitive, were you, you know a polite child, were you, you know inquisitive, you know what were you?  Were you mischievous, what were you?
Speaker 2: All of the above.  I was, you know I, I--it's difficult to say what I was like for me.  When I talk to my sister, Dorothy [Butler], she says I was always in trouble, that I was a bad little boy.  I talked to my aunt.  She says "Oh yeah you would put your dirty hands on my wash and you would mess up and duh-duh-duh."  My mother [Arvelia Butler] used to say "Well it's--you know, you feed him and you won't have any trouble out of him."  So there was always a pro and a con about who I was.  My father would always say "If I live until he gets to be 14, he'll be able to handle it."  And sure enough, he died when I was 14.  And I, I, you know I've never really kind of gotten over that you know.
Speaker 1: Why do you think he said that?  That seems very--
Speaker 2: I don't have a clue why he said that except that maybe he had a premonition that something was going to happen to him, you know.  I mentioned earlier that he was partially blind and he died of a bad heart, you know, at a fairly young age, about 48, 49 years old, which you know now-a-days would be considered very young.  But that was his hope you know that he would live long enough for me to make it 14.  As a matter of fact the night that he died I had been bugging him about getting an, getting a car even though I couldn't drive it anyway but I was you know car crazy, wanted a car.  Just you know we talked about that.  And he said, "Well boy if I live, we're going to see if that happens."  But he didn't live.
Story_ID: 55936
Speaker 1: Now do you remember how you felt when your father [Jerry Butler, Jr.] passed away and what, you know the way the family, I mean that whole thing cause when a parent passes, it--
Speaker 2: It was numbing.  And I talk about this in the book ["Only the Strong Survive"] also because--and I probably did a better job in the book than I would do now only because I'd given it a little more time and then it was a lot closer to me.  I remember my mother [Arvelia Butler]  getting a call and the call came from my father's sister's home.  And she said, "Junior, I've got to go.  Your father is sick."  And when she came back, she said, "Your father is dead."  And the next time I saw him was in the casket.  But I kind of dreamed or felt that he came to me and talked to me after he was gone and my mother said, "Well it was just a dream, you know."  But it looked really real to me.  And he said "I'm, I'm leaving now but you take care of your mother and your sisters and brothers."  And that's the last memory that I have.
Speaker 1: And did you feel a great sense of responsibility, I mean a great--did you feel that you had to sort of step up to the plate or--I mean based on that?
Speaker 2: You know I, I have always been accused of doing what you have to do, you know?  And so I never gave a whole lot of thought to the responsibility of doing what I was doing, I just did it because it needed to be done.  I recall in--going to work at a plastic injection factory when I was 13 years old.  I was fairly tall for my age.  I guess I looked like I was 16.  I told the guy I was 16, I had a Social Security card.  He gave me a job.  I used to burn my fingers pretty good with that hot plastic, taking it out of the machine and what have you.  And--but I was always working.  I worked at the Lawson YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] as a short order cook from--well I started out actually bussing dishes and then worked in the garbage room, dishwasher, short order cook by the time I was seventeen.  So, I just did it.  And somebody had to do it.  I did it.
Story_ID: 55937
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back.  Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to two elementary schools on the North Side, the Edward Jenner and James Sexton [now Salazar Elementary Bilingual Learning Center].
Speaker 1: Do you remember any teachers there influencing you in elementary?
Speaker 2: I--there was a man by the name of Tucker who was the first African American male teacher that I ever met.  He was at the Jenner School.  There was Ms. Curry, Ernestine Curry who we used to lovingly call "Mean Ernestine", who was my fifth grade teacher over at the Sexton School.  And I lived to see her become the principal at Wendell Phillips [Academy High School].  I went to her retirement party and two weeks after her retirement party she passed away.  But she was as marvelous teacher.  I think because of the circumstances she found her in, she became a principal, but I was always believe that she was a great teacher, greater as a teacher than as a principal because I think she loved children and she loved to impart knowledge and she didn't like so much the paperwork and all of the things that are attached to running a school as much as she did just actually teaching.
Speaker 1: And how did she particularly influence you though?  You said that she was--you talked about that, that she was--she taught you history, you know--
Speaker 2: Well she taught everything you know.  When I started traveling on the road at age 18, 19 and this was the late Fifties [1950s], the early Sixties [1960s] and I heard college level students complaining that they didn't know anything about their history as African Americans in this country.  And I thought back in the fifth grade, Ernestine Curry was teaching about Mary [Jane] McLeod Bethune [former educator and civil rights activist.  Founded what is now Bethune-Cookman University] and Countee Cullen [former poet and leading figure in the Harlem Renaissance] and Prince Hall [former abolitionist and the father of Black Masonry] and Basie [William James "Count" Basie, former American jazz pianist, organist, bandleader, and composer] and Elling [jazz pianist Duke Ellington]--I mean she just did it as, well you need to know this.  It wasn't all Jackie Robinson [Jack Roosevelt "Jackie" Robinson, first African American to play in Major League baseball].  Of course Jackie Robinson was in the mix but she through in a Charles Drew [Charles Richard Drew, former physician, surgeon, and medical researcher], and some of the others that you wouldn't run into in the daily headlines.  I mean and she made it a point that we had that kind of hero and heroine to look up to, folks that were not involved in entertainment or athletics.
Speaker 1: Well you know why people say that is that that's, that was sort of, that was more of a southern educate--you know, here you know hear of people being educated in the South was taught those things, not so much in the North.
Speaker 2: Well I can just say to that, that my experience was different.  I--and, and I've always been very, considered myself fortunate to have had Tucker and Ernestine as teachers in my life.
Story_ID: 55938
Speaker 1: And now you were, as also, you were sort of the typical boy too in many ways, right?  Your, you know interest in girls and you know, and exploring the neighborhood and all that it had to offer, right?
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: Or sort of? Not, I mean that's what I'm trying to (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, you see--but my--when you're working and going to school there's not a whole lot of time to do those other kinds of things.  And you know I guess most of my life from say thirteen until the time that I went on the road with The Impressions, that's was what I was doing.  As a matter of fact when I met The Impressions, I was just going to be a substitute.  I had never intended to be in show business.  I was going to the Washburne Trade School, I was studying culinary arts.  I wanted to become a cook, hopefully a chef.  I wanted to work at the Palmer House [Hilton] or the Drake [Hotel] and wear that big, white hat and a coat with the double breast and the striped pants and the whole nine yards.  A man by the name of August Forestiere (ph.) was the instructor at the school and I was just hanging out over there one day and he caught me hanging in the hall.  He said, "hey boy, what are you doing standing out there?"  I said, "I'm just looking."  He said, "Well come on in and get a good look" and he walked me through the whole kitchen, through the refrigeration and what they were doing. And most of the men were G.I.'s who had come back from the war [World War II] and who were trying to make the best of what they had learned in the war, turn it into a profession.  And myself and a young guy by the name of Danny Terlikowski (ph), we became the first high school students admitted to this culinary arts class.
Speaker 1: I thought that you know, the fact that you even got into Washburne was a big deal wasn't it?  Because I thought that was at the time when Chicago [Illinois] with the technical schools whether it was Lane Tech [Technical High School] or Washburne were hard for black students to get in.  Am I wrong?
Speaker 2: I think so and when I say that--
Speaker 1: I'm wrong?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I say that based--well first of all, Washburne was walking distance from my apartment at 1139 North Wells, and which is one of the reasons why I chose to go there because I wouldn't have to deal with bus fare, I wouldn't have to--most of the students who came out of the neighborhood went to either Wells [Community Academy High School] or Waller [Robert A. Waller High School, now Lincoln Park High School] which were the basketball, the football, the whole nine yards.  Washburne only had a basketball team.  It didn't participate in any other sports.  And it was a highly accredited trade school.  But I think because of our history in this country, a lot of the young people were encouraged not to go to a trade school, but rather to go to a regular high school and then on to college to become teachers, lawyers, doctors, etc., because those were the respected professions.  I was trying to find a job and I guess that came out of who I was and how I had been raised and what I had seen my father [Jerry Butler] go through.  And I think I glommed onto the cooking profession because of my Uncle Johnny who was in some fashion, my hero.  He was his own business man.  He owned a restaurant.  He owned an apartment building.  He had a car, he was, you know to a poor kid like me, he was the all, be it all and I wanted to be like that.
Story_ID: 55939
Speaker 1: And basically some of the crafts, some of the skills, some of the professions that they were training for were areas that African Americans couldn't get into, stenography, lithograph, machine operators, those kinds of things.  There were very few African Americans who could get into those professions, partly because of the Brotherhood situation where you had the Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, the Brotherhood of Carpenters, the Brotherhood of So-and-So.  And so because of the racism that existed and the fact that, didn't want African Americans as brothers, they kept them out of the unions.  There was also of course the, this is our profession and we control it.  And I think even today when we look at the contractors and the builders you don't find that many African Americans in those trades.
Story_ID: 55940
Speaker 1: Did you, with your Uncle Johnny, did you find that, I mean did you--were you cooking or helping cook, assist in the restaurant as you, you know as you were growing up or how did you know that you wanted to cook?  You know, I mean what made you interested in being a chef is what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: I mean besides (unclear) your interest, did you know you had--were you helping cook at home, were you--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did some of that.  I did some of that as a matter of fact.  But actually I was interested because of what I saw my Uncle Johnny do.  But I never cooked in his restaurant even though I did work there washing dishes and pots and stuff like that.  But the real desire to do it came from visiting that class at Washburne [Trade School].  I mean that was just a whole new world that I had never seen before, commercial cooking.  I mean I said what, what is this, you know?  Soup by the gallons, you know as opposed to just a pot of soup, I mean by the gallons and the measuring and the whole concept of, it's, it was like chemistry, you know?  And I, I--and later in the years I started to tell people if you want to be a good cook, learn chemistry.  You have to mix and measure and all that kind of stuff.  But that was what really did it.  And then when I got a job at the Lawson YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] and I started to actually work in the kitchen and saw how Barney and some of the other chefs there who were both African American men would set up for hundreds and hundreds of people and the different parties and conventions that would come to town, I was fascinated by that.
Story_ID: 55941
Speaker 1: And that YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] is, that has a very historical basis here in Chicago, [Illinois] the Lawson [YMCA].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And can you, do you know much about it, it's historical (unclear).  Not that I'm putting you on the spot.  I'm just saying--
Speaker 2: No, it's all right.  When, you see it was different for me because it was the place that I worked in.  I didn't really realize the historical value of it until much later in life when they talked about all of the famous celebrities and athletes that had lived there at the Lawson YMCA.  It was the whole--it was not only "the" YMCA in this town [Chicago, Illinois], it was "the" hotel in this town for a long time in terms of where people could afford to stay down close to the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illiois].
Speaker 1: But for black people right, or people period?
Speaker 2: Just people period.
Speaker 1: Period.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 55942
Speaker 1: Now tell me when your interest in music began?  What--when do you think, you know you had--when do you, when did it become?  Because none of this is, none of this that we've said so far has music in it at all.
Speaker 2: From the womb.  (Laughter).  You know, my mother [Arvelia Butler] was always big on sing-a-longs.  I mean I recall being bounced on her knee and then she always said, "You can't remember that.  You just heard me talk about it."  But I said, "No I actually remember sitting on your knee and you bouncing me up and down and singing these songs."  They were basically spiritual, gospel songs.  Then when we would go to church of course I was in the children's choir.  The next thing I knew I was signing doo-wops on the corners with the guys, just because I loved to sing.  As a matter of fact I was speaking over at the Farren School [Ferren Fine Arts Elementary School in Chicago, Illinois] this morning.  I was telling the young people that I just enjoyed singing.  I was not doing it because I thought it would be a profession, it was just an enjoyment.  It was the way kids play basketball, it was something to do.  And fortunately for me I turned an avocation into a vocation.  I took what I had, this is a Calvin Carterism.  Calvin Carter was the A&R [artists and repertoire] director at Vee-Jay Records.  Took what I had and made what I needed and I wind up in show business.
Speaker 1: But how did you know--when do you think you knew you first had talent?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.  You--I, as a matter of fact, when I recorded my first record, I did not like the way I sounded.  I said, "That doesn't sound like me" you know because the microphones or something have a way of coming back to you differently than the way you think you sound.  And so when I recorded 'For Your Precious Love' with The Impressions, I said that doesn't sound like me.  But I saw the effect that it had on other people, how much they enjoyed it and what they thought of it.
Speaker 1: But when you were performing doo-wops with your friends you know on the corner like you know almost every--that was the thing back then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: There were lots of people performing doo-wop.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: You know if you told--it was almost like, not a group on every corner but a lot of people were performing, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it was sort of a pastime, you know, a way that people play basketball?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But did you feel in your group that you had talent or, you know I mean in that way or did you--you were just--?
Speaker 2: I felt everybody in my group had talent, in this group The Impressions there was a guy by the name of Curtis Mayfield. Arthur and Richard Brooks who were the co-writers of 'For Your Precious Love', and [HM] Samuel Gooden who was this wonderful base singer, but who was also--could have played professional baseball.  I mean that's how good he was.  But I never thought of myself as anything special in the group and I think what happened was the acceptance of 'For Your Precious Love' by the people who were exposed to it started me to thinking that you know this, this might work.  But I never thought that it would be a profession that would have longevity to it. I was always looking for someplace to land you know, cause that was, that was pretty flighty stuff.  I mean from rags to riches kind of speed.
Story_ID: 55943
Speaker 1: But even--but the guys you were hanging out originally with, your running buddies you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --who you describe, they weren't the ones who originally became, you know, were the people that you associated with the profession?  I mean people like Fred Jeter and--
Speaker 2: Oh no, no.  Fred Jeter was a neighbor and--
Speaker 1: And Fred--
Speaker 2: --Fred Hudson, he--Fred Hudson was a distant cousin.  But we just kind of hung you know.  But, The Impressions who were originally called The Roosters, came up from Tennessee, Arthur and Richard Brooks and [HM] Sam Gooden.  They were serious about trying to make--they had come to Chicago [Illinois] for the explicit purpose of making recordings.
Speaker 1: But I'm trying to get you to previous to that, to like the Northern Jubilee Gospel Singers.
Speaker 2: Well the Northern Jubilee Gospel Singers, that was a--there was a young guy, well we were both young but we were working at a mattress packing factory on the West Side of the city [Chicago, Illinois] over by Sangamon Avenue.  His name was Terry Callier--no, Terry Williams and we used to call him T.C..  Terry Callier went to school with me but that's another subject.  Anyway he said one Sunday he and I were messing around.  He said, "Come on and go to church with me.  I want you to meet some people."  So we went to Traveling Souls Christians [sic, Spiritualist] Church on the West Side of the city [Chicago, Illinois], Maple, and we meet the Reverend Annabelle Mayfield and Annabelle Mayfield's grandson, Charles Hawkins and Buddy Hawkins and Tommy Hawkins and then there was this little guy running around named Curtis Mayfield.  And that was the group known as the Northern Jubilee Gospel Singers.  T.C. and I, of course because we, again, loved to sing, we wind up in this group.  Later on T.C. dropped out, I drop out because of my father's [Jerry Butler, Jr.] passing and I go back and I start to do this work and school thing.  And when Sam, Arthur and Richard came to Chicago, a friend of mine, Ronald Sherman, said there are some guys that are looking for someone to replace some people that didn't come with them from Chattanooga [Tennessee] and I told him about you.  And so I joined the group for whatever reason, just for something extra to do and then I talked Curtis into coming into the group.  And from that, we changed the name to The Impressions and we went out searching.
Speaker 1: But now the name change came actually because of--wasn't that at that time that [HM] Eddie Thomas was involved?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And--right, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, but you know see what happened was when they came to Chicago the three guys, they had been known as the Four Roosters and a Chick down in Chattanooga, Tennessee.  It was a girl in the group.  And when they came here the girl of course, being young and still in high school, she didn't come, and one of the guys, Emanuel Thompson, I think his name was, decided not to come.  And so they wanted to replace those two voices.  So I joined and I brought Curtis in.  And then we started going around the city signing and everybody would say, ladies and gentlemen, The Roosters.  And somebody would say (makes rooster sound), you know.  And so we said now this is, this is not going to work.  We have to do something about this.  And so I think I Curtis said "Well wherever we go we want to make a lasting impression" and out of that came, The Impressions.
Speaker 1: And so now at that, so Curtis came up with--?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, oh I see.  Okay.
Story_ID: 55944
Speaker 1: But you [The Impressions] were being managed.  How did [HM] Eddie Thomas come into the picture?  He came in because--?
Speaker 2: Eddie Thomas basically came into the picture just kind of appeared you know.  One day there was no Eddie Thomas and the next day there was Eddie Thomas, had a yellow Cadillac convertible, young guy.  He was probably maybe five or six years older than we were.  Maybe a little bit more than that but I'll give him five or six years older.  And was working I think at the post office or something.  But Eddie was always a very creative thinker and very positive, was not afraid to go and ask for it, whatever it happened to be.  And so he heard us sing and he said you guys have something great and he started marching us around to the different nightclubs and places over by the Gold Coast [Chicago, Illinois].  And he would just actually say, "Hey, I want you to let my group sing."  And of course the people would say, "Well you know a little free entertainment for a few minutes, let the kids sing."  So we'd get on stage and we would sing and the people would applaud and we would leave.  We never got any money but he told us, this is exposure.  And out of that relationship we meet Vi Muszynski [Violet C. Muszynski, known as "The Record Lady"], who takes us to Vee-Jay Records which is where we had already been on our own but couldn't get listened to.  And out of that relationship we wind up recording for Vee-Jay.
Story_ID: 55945
Speaker 1: And the first song you [The Impressions] recorded was--?
Speaker 2: 'For Your Precious Love.'
Speaker 1: Precious Love.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now there's a--I thought there was an interesting story about that, about your mother [Arvelia Butler], the words that she spoke and how they came, became, sort of turned into a poem that then became the lyrics.  Is--am I wrong?
Speaker 2: Yeah, wrong song.
Speaker 1: Oh (unclear).
Speaker 2: Right story, wrong song.
Speaker 1: Oh (unclear) I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: There you go.
Speaker 1: Oops, I'm sorry.  I'm sorry. Okay.
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Speaker 1: Okay. I'm sorry.  Gees, I'm sitting here looking right at it.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now but--so wait, let's talk about that, how that song even came about, period.
Speaker 2: The, the--we were, we being [HM] Kenny Gamble, [HM] Leon Huff and myself were--
Speaker 1: Not 'Only the Strong Survive,' I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: No, I don't want to talk about that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh you--I'm getting ahead of myself.
Speaker 1: I had gotten ahead but no, I (unclear).
Speaker 2: That's all right.
Speaker 1: I want to talk about 'For Your Precious Love.'
Speaker 2: 'For Your Precious Love' was actually a poem called 'They Say,' which I jotted on a piece of paper some time in my sophomore year in high school [Washburne Trade School].  No particular reason for writing it, just sitting in the English class doodling and I said, "They say that our love won't grow, but I want to tell them that they don't know.  For as long as you're in love with me, our love will grow wider, deeper than any seas, etc., etc."  When the, the group that became The Impressions came to Chicago [Illinois], we started to sing the song.  They would go with the background and I would recite these words.  And we went to a place on Michigan Avenue where there was an old man who had a label we thought perhaps we could venture in to record us and he listened to the song and he didn't record us but he told us something that I think changed our lives.  He said, "Son, those lyrics are too beautiful to be spoken.  You ought to sing that song."  And that's when started to sing the lyrics as opposed to reciting them.  And that changed the whole feeling of the song and 'They Say' became 'For Your Precious Love.'
Story_ID: 55946
Speaker 1: And when you [The Impressions] recorded the song, how did you guys feel, you know cause this is, you know after you've had your first recording session?
Speaker 2: Well, you know that's something that's very difficult to explain you know.  I mean you go into a recording studio and you hear what happens in a studio is really kind of magical.  Your voice doesn't sound like yours anymore.  It become someone else's voice.  You hear everything from a different perspective.  When you are part of it and you are performing, you hear it one way.  When it's being played back to you, you hear it another way.  And then we were young kids and all of our expectations, all of our hopes and dreams were caught up in this moment.  And I think when we heard it for the first time on the radio, it probably impacted us more than when we heard it the first time in the studio.  And I remember all of us hugging and jumping up and down and, and Ms. Mattie Brooks who was the mother of Arthur and Richard Brooks, little lady from Chattanooga, Tennessee having come here with her sons with their hopes and dreams of recording, making a record, sat there and the tears was rolling down her face.  It was a very special moment.
Story_ID: 55947
Speaker 1: Now there was the whole story of how you know the record said, and-"Jerry Butler and The Impressions" and that--what, I, I mean I under--but can you explain how that happened cause you didn't know really at the time, you know except that it did.
Speaker 2: The--often I am asked how did you wind up getting top billing, "Jerry Butler and The Impressions?"  And I always relate the story as it was told to me.  Vivian Bracken, Vivian Carter Bracken who was the owner of Vee-Jay Records said to me, "You know I had a group called The Spaniels and in that group was a lead singer by the names of [HM] James "Pookie" Hudson who was a wonderful singer.  And I wanted to pull him out of the group, make him a solo artist, but I felt if I moved him because he had been so associated with the group that I would destroy the group."  And so she said "I promised myself that the next time someone who came through that door had a unique sounding voice, that I was going to give them billing."  And so she took a test pressing of 'For Your Precious Love' before it was released over to her record shop in Gary, Indiana and she was playing it on the loud speakers as folks will, would do back in those days and she said people would come in off the street and say, "Who is that singing?"  And she'd say, "Oh it's a group called The Impressions."  They said "No, we can hear it's a group.  Who, who is the lead voice?"  And she said, "I don't know."  She came back and she said "Who's singing the lead on this song?" and I said--she said, "What's your name?"  I said "Jerry Butler."  And when we saw the record for the first time it was "Jerry Butler and The Impressions."  Well naturally Curtis [Mayfield] and [HM] Sam [Gooden] and Richard [Brooks] and Arthur [Brooks] thought that I had made some kind of deal to get my name out in front which in fact was not true.  But that was the thing that broke up the group because everywhere we would go from that day on, "Jerry Butler" would be in great big bold letters, "The Impressions" would be in little tiny print.  Sometimes it would be Jerry Butler and no Impressions at all.  Everybody thought that "Jerry Butler" because his name was out front owned the group and that I had control when in fact, I was just one of the members and so we never got it done.
Story_ID: 55948
Speaker 1: Let's explore this a little bit because think about this.  You had--how old were you at the time?  You were what, 17, 18?
Speaker 2: Eighteen.
Speaker 1: Eighteen?  Okay, you're 18.  [HM] Sam Good [Gooden]--they were older than you right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how--so can you go through the ages I mean of people and you know, and you know and how long you had been together before you actually you know recorded the, you know the song?  How long were you going around performing in these spots around town?
Speaker 2: About a year.  I--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: We met and started working together in 1957.  Nineteen Fifty-Eight we recorded 'For Your Precious Love.'  Arthur [Brooks] and Sam [Gooden] had both been to the service and out.  I think they were probably five or six years older than myself.  I was 18, Curtis [Mayfield] was 15, 16 and Richard [Brooks] was about 16, 17.  So those were the ages as best I can remember them.
Speaker 1: And so, but I'm saying here's a group that is, you know has a--it's been together just a year, you know.  And first of all you have a rec--you know, you get--cause groups sometimes it takes longer than that--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: --to get, you know to get in and get something recorded and distributed.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you have hit--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --on top of that.
Speaker 2: First time out of the box.
Speaker 1: Right.  But things start unraveling at the moment that that's--the, the, the record is pressed--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you're--but what are your roles within the group, I mean besides the fact that you had written the song ['For Your Precious Love'] as a poem, what are--you know, cause each group people have different roles within it even with the managers.  So were there any sort of division of roles within you know The Impressions as it was first constituted?
Speaker 2: Well, we had a manager so to speak.  Arthur [Brooks], because he was the oldest member of the group, became kind of the titular head of the group.  But Jerry Butler, because his name was out front, got all the stuff.
Speaker 1: I know.  I said before, just before that happened I mean that changed the balance of power but I'm trying to get it up to that point.
Speaker 2: No, but it--that was always the power.
Speaker 1: It was always--
Speaker 2: I was always--I brought Curtis to the group.  I was the one who was running around, I knew the city [Chicago, Illinois].  The other three guys were strangers here.  They didn't know, you know, they didn't know anything about the town.  I was the one who made the phone calls, who set up--we did a show at Washburne Trade School as a matter of fact.  Well we never did the show but we were scheduled to do the show.  We put up the money to rent the building, the whole nine yards, yeah.  And we were going to do a concert and when we looked up people were around the block both ways but the building wasn't open because the person we had given the money to, to pay the deposit never, the deposit never got there.  And so--but I was always the one who was trying to find a way to get us exposed and so I guess by virtue of the name and by virtue of my aggressiveness perhaps, I wound up in that position.
Story_ID: 55949
Speaker 1: And so can you just recount that day though that here you guys [The Impressions] open up, you know you, you're at Vee-Jay Records, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And the--what do you call them, the first runs, the records come, the 40--was it 45's?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: This was--okay.
Speaker 2: Remember, there were 78's and 45's.
Speaker 1: Okay, but this was a 45, right?  Was it recorded on a 45?
Speaker 2: Well, originally it was recorded on a 78.
Speaker 1: A 70--on a 78, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: So they come freshly in and you guys open it up.  Just describe what happened.  That's all I'm saying.  You can take yourself back.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Cause it was great anticipation, you know.
Speaker 2: Well of course.  I mean we, this, we were going to get this box of records and we open up this box and the records are in there and we pull it out and instead of just "The Impressions" it says "Jerry Butler and The Impressions" and there's the silence.  And everything just kind of comes to a standstill.  And we look at the record and we look at each other and I could feel the pain and, and the disgust and the envy and I say to them, "We have to change this."  And I go back in and I say, "We want to change this just to 'The Impressions'.  We don't want it to be 'Jerry Butler and The Impressions.'"  And Ewart Abner [Ewart Abner, born Edward Gladstone Abner, Jr.], who was the president of the company at that time said, "Baby," in his own inimitable fashion, "we could change it but you know we pressed up 50, 100,000 copies of this and it will take three to four weeks and who knows by that time it may not mean anything anymore."  And so he kind of put it to us like, well if you don't go with this, maybe this will never be released.  Maybe it will never come out.  And of course we couldn't take that chance.  And he said, "And I'll tell you what, let us put this one out and we'll change it on the next pressing."  Well that never happened and about six months later I was out of the group.
Story_ID: 55950
Speaker 1: So how did you feel being out?  This was the group [The Impressions].  It really, it was the end of the group in that way.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You know just because a group is a group and then--and even other groups who've had, taken a, you know like The Supremes where it was Diana Ross and you know the other things, that's sort of the end of the group too.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So were you able to handle that at 18, 19?
Speaker 2: I had to do what I had to do.  You know, you wonder how is it going to play out.  At the time I left the group which was 1958, October, November, somewhere around in there after having released the record in April or May of the same year.  But those four or five months seemed like years.  It seemed like a real long time.  It was not until later years that I, when I started to thinking about it.  I said, you know I was really only with that group about six months and then I was out.  The following year I get married [to Annette Butler].  I'm wondering, how am I going to make this work, and we go on.  I do what we have to do.
Speaker 1: So why do you think it seemed so long a period?  Do you think it was because you guys were active, you were performing?  Didn't you go to Florida during that time?
Speaker 2: Oh, we went everywhere.  We, you know as a matter of fact, the day that I decided to leave the group I was in San Antonio, Texas and we were to fly back from San Antonio, Texas to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania for an engagement and we didn't have enough money coming from the tour to fly the entire, I think it was six or seven people back from San Antonio to Philadelphia.  And I called Ewart Abner who was at a convention here at a hotel.  And while I was talking to him on the phone, Arthur [Brooks] said, "before he hangs up, I want to speak to him."  We--I told him, "I said Abner we need some money to get back to Chicago [Illinois]."  He said, "Well baby, how much do you need?"  I said, "Probably $1,200.00, $1,500.00."  He said, "Okay, don't worry about it.  I'll take care of it."  Click.  And he was gone.  And Arthur said, "I thought I told you I wanted to talk to him?"  I said, "He hung up.  He went off."  "That's the trouble with you, ever since they put your name on the front, you (makes sounds) duh, duh, duh, dah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.  And just because of that, we're not going on.  You think you can do it by yourself, get on out there and do it by yourself."  And so, I said "Well, okay"--Curtis [Mayfield] said, well I'm going because I want to get paid.  [HM] Sam [Gooden] said, well if Curtis goes, I'm going.  Arthur and Richard [Brooks] were the two that didn't come.  The audience didn't miss them.  So when I got back to Philadelphia, I told the man who was managing us at that time, Irving [Irv] Nahan.  I said, "You know you been after me to get out of this group and I've had it.  I'm ready to leave.  Goodbye."
Story_ID: 55951
Speaker 1: But you know before we leave 'For Your Precious Love,' I'd like to--what about the story with Roy Hamilton, you know that he was going to cover--you know the whole story about how--do you--is that a story?
Speaker 2: Oh course.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Everything is a story.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, good.  Okay.
Speaker 2: What--the vernacular in the industry is a "cover record" and that is when some established artist takes a song by some unknown artist and because of the ability to get the air play and the distribution knocks the other artist out of the box.  'You'll Never Walk Alone' had been a big hit by Roy Hamilton and as a matter of fact, we used to sing it.  Everybody loved that big baritone voice and for some reason, 'For Your Precious Love' sounded to folks, reminiscent of 'You'll Never Walk Alone.'  And there was apprehension that Roy Hamilton would hear this song and that he would cover it and then that would be the end of the "Jerry Butler and The Impressions" version because we just couldn't compete.  Fortunately, we were with a very aggressive, young company, Vee-Jay Records who had a dynamite promotion team and who had the goodwill of a lot of the African American disc jockeys across the country.  And so when [Ewart] Abner got his hands on that record, he did not waste any time with the promotion of it.  He got on a plane, they say he took a bag full of money and he left town.  And when he came back he had locked up most of the major cities and the major stations in those cities with the song.  And we don't know if that deterred Roy from re-recording it.  Roy Hamilton said to me personally though afterwards that he said, "Man I heard it and I never would have recorded that song.  It was your song" and I always thanked him for that.
Story_ID: 55952
Speaker 1: Now after--I want you to talk about Vee-Jay Records because the time that you started with them, that was still very early in their, their start, wasn't it?
Speaker 2: Actually if I'm not mistaken, Vee-Jay had been in existence probably three or four years before I arrived there, which I guess in business is not a long time but again, it seemed to me being the young person that I was, that they had always been there, you know.  It seemed I've always heard Jimmy Reed and I always heard The Spaniels and The Staple Singers were on the label.  It was a extraordinary company in that it covered all of the musical genres that were popular in the day.  Vee-Jay had blues, rhythm and blues, gospel, pop and jazz, which was unusual for a small company in those days.  For instance, Motown never did jazz and gospel or blues.  They had the sound of Motown which was basically pop/R&B.  You would look at Atlantic Records.  Atlantic probably had jazz and blues and rhythm and blues, but not too much gospel.  Vee-Jay covered all of that.  And in the mid, early Sixties [1960s], mid-Sixties, they were even doing country western music which was unheard of for a black owned company.
Speaker 1: And why did--can you talk just a little bit about what you know about the start of them and the people that were involved, you know, Vivian Cart--was Vivian Carter--?
Speaker 2: Vivian Carter, her husband James Bracken who was the Jay in Vee-Jay.  Calvin Carter who was her brother and who for all intent and purpose was the A&R department, the Artists and Repertoire department of the company, and Ewart Abner who was the, I guess the, the motivating force, the brain operating the, the marketing, publicity minded president of the company.  They were unique in the sense that Abner had this ability to convince people to assist him in whatever project he was dealing with and he had that not only in Chicago [Illinois] but around the country.  And then Chicago being such a major marketplace, the assistance that Vee-Jay got out of the pride of them being black owned and operated by the communicators and the radio personalities in this town, Al Benson for one, [HM] Pervis Spann, E. Rodney Jones, [HM] Lucky Cordell, [HM] Herb Kent, I mean all of them felt, I believe, as though Vee-Jay was as much a part of them as they were a part of the City of Chicago.
Story_ID: 55953
Speaker 1: And how do you know, how had [Ewart] Abner come to know or how had they come to join forces, Abner?  Was--he was sort of a non-family member brought in [to Vee-Jay Records]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well Abner to the best of my knowledge owned a record company called Chance Records and out of that relationship I think they saw what he was doing with Chance, he saw what they were doing with Vee-Jay and they decided to make a business marriage that worked well for all of them.
Speaker 1: And what was the place like?  What--like if you came in, what was it like and what was you know going on cause you spent a lot of time, you had spent a lot of time (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  Vee-Jay was a store front located two blocks from where we now sit, 2149 S. Michigan Avenue.  Chess Records was directly across the street from us.  This strip where we sit now used to be known as Record Row.  It was where most of the record companies and record distribution companies, even some motion picture distribution companies were located in the block between Roosevelt and Cermak Road [Chicago, Illinois].  But it was a store front with several offices in the back and a rehearsal room and that was basically all that was there.  The rehearsal room was really kind of a warehouse storage space for records as well as a place to come and to practice whatever you were going to do in the studio because in those days, three hours was about all the time you got to do a session.  And so you had to go in well-rehearsed in order to get the work done and get out of there before you ran into overtime in the studio.  But that was basically how Vee-Jay looked and operated.
Story_ID: 55954
Speaker 1: Now how did Irv come into the picture, Irv Nahan?
Speaker 2: Irv Nahan was involved with the major disc jockey in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], man by the name of Georgie Woods.  He was Georgie Woods' partner and manager in producing shows at a place called the Uptown Theater which was very similar to the Regal Theater here [Chicago, Illinois] or the Apollo Theater in New York [New York City, New York].  And I think because of that and because of Irv's relationship with George Woods, Vee-Jay said you know we can have management on the east coast and we can also lock up airplay in the City of Philadelphia by making this association.  And so we became a gift as it were to the Irv Nahan stable of artists in order to have an entree to the Philadelphia market.
Speaker 1: Now Irv was very helpful to you, from an advice standpoint, wasn't he?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  And Irv was, he was the manager in, you know, I guess the motion picture sense of the word.  You know he was Jewish, looked like he might have a connection to gangsters, big pinky ring with the diamond, the Cadillac, the whole nine yards.  But underneath all of that was a very genuine kind of guy who had been--managed the [Israelite] House of David Baseball Team, had been involved with Max Patkin who is the clown, worked in a lot of baseball.  As a matter of fact, Irv, aside from managing some other radio personalities at one time had considered managing Bill Cosby. Bill Cosby had come through his cousin, a guy by the name of Del Shields (ph.).  And Irv said later that it was probably the biggest mistake he ever made not signing Cosby but he thought Cosby was too clean because from the theaters and the nightclubs that he had been associated with, the black comedians that were really getting the big applause and the big dollars had been the Redd Foxx types, the Slappy White [born Melvin Edward White] types, the guys who were kind of blue in terms of their comedy, very risque, often times to the point of vulgarity.  Whereas Cosby was All-American, apple pie kind of humor.  And I don't think Irv could see beyond the places that he was involved in, in terms of the theaters and night clubs that he had been used to working.  He didn't think, I don't believe, that the African American artist would be accepted doing comedy in other venues that didn't require that kind of humor.  And so Bill was extraordinarily unique in that particular sense and paved the way for a lot of young entertainers to do similar kind of work.  Nobody to the extent that he's done it, but--
Story_ID: 55955
Speaker 1: So now Irv [Nahan]--how did he help you and sort of take--you know, you said when I you know, when I said I was going to break off, he said, "Oh good, you know cause I've been telling you that's what you should do."  Or you said "I'm going to do what you've been telling me to do."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And why, what had he been advising you?
Speaker 2: Well, he just said you know, "Sooner or later it's going to happen and so you might as well take advance of the fact that you are now on the airwaves and on the charts.  That is not going to last forever.  And the people are buying the song 'For Your Precious Love.'  They don't care whether it's one person singing it or ten people singing it.  The engagements that you are hired to do, they don't care if it's ten people or one person.  As a matter of fact they would rather deal with one person than to deal with a whole bunch of people."  And so that was why I decided to make the move, you know that the numbers wouldn't change a whole lot and the aggravation would change considerably.
Speaker 1: Now when you decided to do that, was he still advising you at that time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: He was still acting as a manager?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Matter, as a matter of fact, Irv Nahan was my manager up until about 1965, yeah 1965, with the demise of Vee-Jay [Records].  Vee-Jay went into a bankruptcy.  I left to go to Mercury Records and Bill Matheson, a young Jewish attorney here in the City and I started working to get out of the Vee-Jay contract because Vee-Jay owed me some publishing and some contracts hadn't been signed relative to some songs that I had written and we were looking for a way to get out.  The company was being sold to the Chess Brothers [Leonard Chess and Phil Chess of Chess Records] and Bill said, "Well we can hold up the sale because they don't have these songs under contract."  And so he negotiated us out of the deal with [Ewart] Abner and out of the deal with [Irv] Nahan at the same time.
Speaker 1: Oh, he negotiated you out of both deals.  Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 55956
Speaker 1: Now I want to go--I want to stay within the Vee-Jay [Records] years though some--and really talk because are your early years as an artist.  Those were still very productive years in terms of you know the records that you had--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you know the songs that came out of that period.  But before I do that, I'd like to go back to Georgie Woods because he gave you the name "The Iceman."
Speaker 2: (Smiles).
Speaker 1: But you never say how that even happened, you know just that he gave you the name "The Iceman."  And so, why did he call you Ice--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there are always stories about how things happened and some people say, "Well he started calling him 'The Iceman' because he was going to be a chef and he was doing ice sculpture" which was--it had nothing to do with the whole thing.  What really happened was I was fresh out of the group and had gone there as a matter of fact, on my honeymoon.  My wife [Annette Butler] and I got married [June 21, 1959] and I went back to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] because we needed the money, to perform.  And Georgie had said, "Well you know if you come and perform you can spend your honeymoon and make some money at the same time," you know.  And little did I know that wives don't want to hear about making money on honeymoons.  But I was 19 years old, so what did I know.  I thought it was the wise and prudent thing to do, so I did it.  Had I lived to do it over again, I don't think I would do that.  Anyway, I'm on stage performing and the sound, the electricity goes out and so all of the electrical instruments are silenced.  And from my upbringing in the church was that you keep singing, you don't stop.  You just keep on going, let the spirit let it flow.  And so when it all stopped, I just kept on singing.  It was quiet, the theater wasn't that large and the people could hear me.  And when I finished, the audience for some reason, stood up and applauded what I had done and George ran on stage and said, that's the coolest thing I ever saw.  So cool, going to call you "The Iceman."  And the next morning he went to the radio station, WDAS, and that's what he started doing.  And it's been with me ever since.
Speaker 1: So that meant really someone who was not phased, who could handle themselves under any circumstances, really?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head yes).  Or under those circumstances.
Speaker 1: Cool, (unclear) cool?
Speaker 2: Yes exactly, the superlative of cool.
Speaker 1: For cool, in control.
Story_ID: 55957
Speaker 1: So, but I want to go back to you know some of the other recordings that had happened during that time, you know and the songs that were done during the Vee-Jay [Records] years.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: You know so first of all, you're out on your own, you know and does that take any adjustment, I mean cause are you getting--you weren't getting gigs for a little bit, right?  Were you getting gigs immediately?
Speaker 2: You know, 'For Your Precious Love' was an interesting song.  It stayed on the charts for quite a long time and it was one of those songs that people wanted to hear.  Even today, some 43 years later, if I don't sing 'For Your Precious Love,' a lot of people want their money back.  You know it's like no man, you got to sing 'For Your Precious Love.'  And so I never really hurt a whole lot in terms of being able to work, but a lot of times I had to take less than I thought I was worth in order to do it.  A lot of times I was called in to replace somebody who didn't show up.  In those days, there were packages of artists, you know.  It wasn't like it is today when you maybe, one artist on the bill and some unknown artist to open for.  In those days you had several major hit records all grouped together in one package.  And so I always found myself being in one of those packages.  The booking agents at those times used to put them together and sell them as a package because that was how they made their commission and if they had five or six artists that they could put together to make an interesting package to a promoter, that was five or six commissions that they got at one time and usually those tours as we used to call them, would last 30, 40 days.  So you would have 30 or 40 cities that you were getting exposed in every two or three months.
Story_ID: 55958
Speaker 1: Now what were The Impressions doing during this period of time?  Were they regrouping or were they ever--were they also trying to perform under the name?  I mean how did you--?
Speaker 2: Actually the--after I left the group Vee-Jay [Records] promised that they would record both acts.  That they would record The Impressions and that they would record Jerry Butler.  After a couple of records with The Impressions that didn't sell so well, they dropped The Impressions from the label.  Most of The Impressions went back to Tennessee, Arthur [Brooks], Richard [Brooks] and [HM] Sam [Gooden].  Curtis [Mayfield] went to work at Alfred Dunhill, tobacconist down on North Michigan Avenue [Alfred Dunhill Ltd., Chicago, Illinois].  And I went to work around the country.  I was in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--Washington, D.C., actually when my accompanist, a guitarist decided that he was going to leave for a better paying job.  And I called Curtis and asked if he would come and help and he said, "Well I don't have an amplifier."  I said, "You say you're coming I'll have an amplifier for you by the time you get here."  He said, "I don't have a ticket."  I said, "I'll send you a ticket."  So he came to assist me as my guitarist accompanist and out of that relationship, he and I started to write songs 'He Will Break Your Heart,' 'Find Yourself Another Girl,' 'I'm Telling You,' 'Thanks to You,' 'When Old Man Trouble Calls.'  And [HM] Eddie Thomas again, who by now had come back to work with me convinced us that we should start our own publishing company and so we started a company called Curtom Publishing.   And we started to publish those songs through our own publishing company.  When we went to Vee-Jay [Records] to tell them that we were starting our publishing company we had no idea that they were going to react the way that they did.  They absolutely went berserk.  "You want to do what?  What do you know about publishing?  What do you know?  What, what, what, what?"  And it was always interesting to me the wisdom of Curtis at 17, 18 years old.  And he said, "Well we know about as much about publishing as you all did when ya'll started."  (Laughter).  End of discussion.  I loved it.  And I said, "Right on boy, right on."
Story_ID: 55959
Speaker 1: Because that was--talk about the importance of that because that is the difference between an artist being able to make some money and not and being dead poor.
Speaker 2: Well you know, it's--
Speaker 1: Isn't it?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Especially around--
Speaker 2: You know publishing and, and--I had a songwriters workshop in the late Sixties [1960s] and the early Seventies [1970s].  And what we used to teach the writers was that the copyright was the real estate of the record business.  That record companies and artists come and go but the songs live on from one generation to the next.  And a good song lives on and on and on and on and on, and Curtis [Mayfield] and I both developed the philosophy that you try to own as much of yourself as you can because we never believed that anybody else was going to record our songs, you know.  I mean he and I would sit around and talk and say, "Well you know, nobody's ever going to record this but us," because we thought they were little diddies, you know, no major songs.  They weren't Stardust, you know they weren't Rodgers and Hart [Richard Rodgers and Lorenz Hart] kind of stuff.  They weren't the stuff of Broadway or motion pictures these were just little two and a half minute songs that we had recorded and we didn't think anybody was going to ever re-record them.  Then one day I woke up and I heard Elvis Presley singing my song, Lawrence Welk and Liberace playing 'A Brand New Me.' I said "Whoa, I didn't know all that was out there."  Then people were doing commercials and using the songs in commercials.  And so we learned that that indeed was the real estate of the business.  And as you say it becomes the value of a career, certainly the songs that you record for the record companies, the record companies own those copyrights.  But in the main, the songs that you create that make the records, the artists should always, if he is the writer or she is the writer, should always try to control that piece of themselves.
Speaker 1: And had said also that I think on another occasion that Sam Cooke was one of the first art--black artists that started doing that [start his own record label, SAR Records], was that right or am I--?
Speaker 2: He was--no, he was one of the first, let us say of our peers to do that.  Now I'm sure that Basie [Williams James "Count" Basie] and [Edward Kennedy "Duke"] Ellington and others, maybe Louie Jordan [Louis Thomas Jordan] you know, had control of their songs.  But out of the new crop of entertainers, Sam Cooke was one of the first to do his own publishing and his own label, recording label, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, so when you mention this [that he and Curtis Mayfield are starting Curtom Publishing] to Vee-Jay Records and they have this reaction, was there a lot of contention back and forth or did they--because you guys represent revenue to them they were okay with it?  That's what I'm just--you know cause they could have played shenanigans too.
Speaker 2: Well, not really because by now we had been on the road a couple of years.  I'm talking not 1958 now, but 1960, 1961.  And so they were unhappy about it but it was a big enough deal--we made a compromise as a matter of fact.  We split the publishing with them and so they said, "Well you know-"and [Ewart] Abner again with his clear thinking, he said "Well you know, I've been around young people enough to know that what--they want what they want and you better give it to them.  And so let's just, we'll split it."  And out of that we evolved into owning our own farther on down the road.
Story_ID: 55960
Speaker 1: Now Irv [Nahan] also--back to sort of Irv because at this point Irv is managing you also, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did he manage Louis Armstrong [nicknamed Satchmo or Pops, former jazz trumpeter and singer] too?  Isn't that--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Who managed--?
Speaker 2: Louis Armstrong was managed by a man by the name of Joe Glaser.
Speaker 1: Joe Glaser, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, who owned Associated Booking [ABC, Associated Booking Corp] and who was a character in his own right.
Speaker 1: Right.  But you had talked about your getting to know him, but I want to go back to Dr. Phil Moore, you know who--that was during your early days.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And how you know, he, what he taught you as a group sort of to perform because you're kids at this point, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so what did, what influence did he have on you?
Speaker 2: Well by the time I got to Phil Moore, I had reported a song called 'Moon River.'  Calvin Carter was convinced that 'Moon River' was going to win the Academy Award.  And he said "Jerry, if it wins the Academy Award and you wind up singing it on the Academy Awards Show, [Las] Vegas [Nevada], the Copacabana [New York City, New York], the Chez Paree [Chicago, Illinois], all the big nightclubs, all of the big joints are going to be open to you.  It's going to make your career."  And he said "So you have to be prepared."  And so in preparation for that event he said well you need to go and see Phil Moore.  Now Phil More was going to help orchestrate a show because that was what he did.  He did Lena Horne and Marilyn Monroe and [HM] Diane Carroll and he managed Bobby Short.  I mean he was a fine, fine musician and arranger and ghost writer for motion picture scores and the whole nine yards.  I mean he was just a special kind of guy.  And so we thought that we would go and have him to stage an act for us that would play in high society and that I would be on my way to being a major star.  As fate would have it, Andy Williams winds up singing 'Moon River' on the Academy Awards and even though Johnny Mercer and Henry Mancini took out full page ads and tried to promote as well as they could, this was a major decision by a major corporation.  Channel 2, which was owned by CBS was also Columbia Records.  And so Columbia was the company that Andy Williams recorded for.  They had done an album entitled 'Breakfast at Tiffany's,' that 'Moon River' came out of about seven, eight months after my version was in the Top 10.  And the decision was made that Andy Williams, because they were grooming him for his own television show, was going to sing 'Moon River' on the Academy Awards.  And so it was a done deal and there was very little that we could do about it.  Phil Moore then said, "Well you know okay, so that's that, but you know, you are still associated with the song.  And whether or not that happens, I think that you have enough talent that you can play all the major rooms and so we ought to get busy getting you ready for that."  Phil Moore became to me what the [HM] Berry Gordy School became to the Motown acts.  "We're going to teach you how to walk, how to talk, how to dress, how to eat, how to do, how to think."  And so that was Phil Moore's contribution to "The Iceman."  He--we recorded an album called 'Jerry Butler Folk Songs' because he was big in terms of the Odetta's [HM Odetta Gordon] and [HM] Josh White's and the [HM Harry] Belafonte's.  He thought that that was the direction that I should go in.  He said, "Yeah you need to cut that process off.  It doesn't speak to who you are.  You, you know, you're not a slick head, wise cracking kind of guy.  You are somebody and you're dignified and you ought to be proud of your heritage and so on and so the process went via the way of all flesh.
Story_ID: 55961
Speaker 1: So Phil Moore said, "Let's go see Peter, Paul and Mary.  Let's go see [HM] Odetta [Gordon].  Let's go see [HM] Josh White.  Let's go see this act, let's go see-"I said man this guy is charging me $100.00 an hour and all he's doing is taking me around to these shows.  And so one day I said "Well why, why you keep taking me to these shows?"  He said, "cause I want you to learn what to do and what not to do from the best and these people are the best."  He said "30 seconds of dead stage is a long time," you know.  I never thought about it that way.  He said, "Never do anything that's not covered by music.  If you're just going to talk, have somebody playing something in the background.  If you're walking, have some music playing while you're walking.  If you're messing with somebody in the audience, have somebody do something to emphasize what you're doing.  Little nuance kinds of things that the average person would never think of.  Let me write an ending that says this is the end.  Let, let's do an interlude over here.  Let's do this, let's do that."  And so we recorded an album called 'Jerry Butler Folk Songs' and inside the album was a tune called 'Strawberries,' which Miriam Makeba had introduced me to in terms of I heard her recording of it and I said "That's something that I'd like to do."  It later becomes a big stepper tune here in the City of Chicago [Illinois], which was always amazing to me.  But it did--none of the songs in that album became a hit song because the music was changing.  Phil was trying to take me where he was.  The music was going where I was taking it.  And so we kind of--I learned a lot from him in terms of how to present it and I think he learned a lot from me in terms of what we were presenting because I, probably to him, was what the new young artists of today are to me.  And so it was a good combination of things.
Speaker 2: So was he trying to make you like a Frank Sinatra?  Did he, or--I mean or someone, or--I'm trying to think of the other balladeers.  Was he trying to sort of take you in that direction?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The dream of the artists from my era was to work the big nightclubs of [Las] Vegas [Nevada], to work the big hotels, to be accepted in popular radio, to be on late night television, to--you know, I mean you had arrived when those things started to happen.  Along the way though, those venues became less important because now the James Browns of the world, the Beatles of the world, they were playing football stadiums and baseball stadiums.  It wasn't about sitting in Vegas for two weeks at a time.  It was about go and play Soldier Field [Chicago, Illinois] for one night and make $100,000.00.  So the, the industry was changing.  While I was chasing what I thought was there, what was there was changing.  It was going someplace else.  A few of the artists from that period, Gladys Knight and the Pips, The Temptations, [HM] Smokey Robinson, Sam Cooke, they were able to make the leap from what was Lou Rawls used to call the chitlin circuit, to the major rooms.  Most of the artists though never made that leap.
Story_ID: 55962
Speaker 1: You mean whether they start at Motown or whether they were here [Chicago, Illinois].  You know I'd like to have your comment though about Chicago's role, I'm going to have it now right now but I want to go back chronologically.  But Chicago's role in music, because in almost Chicago--before the Motown period--you know it seemed like it got eclipsed by Motown.  And yet, it was so vibrant, so much talent was really coming out of here and I'd like you to just sort of comment on that.
Speaker 2: I have always felt that Chicago was probably the most musical city in the United States.  People have, because of the publicity and because of the marketing and merchandising of Motown, when you talk about the Fifties [1950s] or Sixties [1960s] and especially African American owned, independent company, Motown is the first word that will come out of most people's mouths.  And yet, Motown was very, you know that--Motown was the only game in town in Detroit [Michigan], just as Philadelphia International became the only game in town in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  When you look at Chicago, Chicago was a bunch of different sounds, a bunch of different genres.  It was, it, it was like Vee-Jay [Records] in the sense that it was gospel, it was jazz, it was blues, it was country, it was classical.  Whatever it was, Chicago had it to offer and in great abundance.  And so nobody could ever point to Chicago and say, that's a Chicago, that's "the" Chicago sound.  It is a sound out of Chicago but it is not the whole thing.  I mean when you look at Chicago, you see Muddy Waters and Mahalia Jackson, both Chicago sounds but entirely different.  You see Thomas A. Dorsey and Curtis Mayfield, both Chicago sounds but entirely different.  You see Ahmad Jamal [born Frederick Russell Jones] and you see Maceo Woods, both but different.  You see [HM] Ramsey Lewis, Gene Ammons, Sonny Stitt and you can just go on, [Roebuck] "Pops" Staples, Mavis Staples, Earth, Wind, and Fire, and on and on and on, all of these wonderful sounds and talents that are a part of Chicago and yet none of them are all that Chicago had to offer.
Speaker 1: And why do you think, why is it such a breeding ground, Jerry, I mean in many ways?  You know there are other places that were forming as you know urban centers but I'm just saying why do you think it--?
Speaker 2: Hog butcher to the world.  The railroad center of America, the world's busiest airport, the-- centrally located in the heart of America, Chicago was all of that.  And the migration of African Americans from the South to the industrial Midwest basically came through this town.  And I--we talked earlier about the stockyard, about the railroads, about all of the things, and Chicago was accessible, you could get here.  And people came here and they brought the music with them.  They brought it from as far as New Orleans [Louisiana] and Mississippi, from every place that you can ever think of.  Thomas A. Dorsey's from Georgia which is on the east coast but he winds up in Chicago.  This was the place and 'The Chicago Defender' was part of what that was.  It--they spread the word, come to Chicago and get a good job and get away from the plantation and be part of something major. And so the music came with the people.
Story_ID: 55963
Speaker 1: Now in those, also to stay in those Vee-Jay [Records] years, what would you also consider important during that time.  Because you know I look at your career and you've had these very you know, had, you--Mercury [Records] also and your whole--that was also very productive during that time.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But this was a very productive period and I wonder what other things, who was also influencing you during that period?  What art, other artists did you admire?
Speaker 2: You know I talk about going to see Nat "King" Cole on the night of my prom at the Chez Paree [Chicago, Illinois], must have cost me a hundred, hundred twenty-five dollars.  I'm talking 1957 dollars, which mean that was a big ticket.  But you know it was Nat Cole, it was one of my idols.  He was a voice that I had listened to from the first time I set foot in Chicago.  When I could hear music being played over the loud speakers, it was Nat Cole.  Then there was Roy Hamilton who came along several years before I recorded 'For Your Precious Love.'  There was Sam Cooke who was a contemporary and yet was a major gospel star and then later became a major pop star.  There was The Five Blind Boys [of Alabama] and The Harmonizing Four and The Highway Q.C.s, all those gospel groups that we loved and admired when I was singing with the Northern Jubilee Gospel Singers.  All of them had become my idols.  Then there was a blind guy by the name of Ray Charles who was a contemporary even though he was older and from another place.  But his music had been there and then there was the reminiscences of Louis Jordan and [Count] Basie and [Edward Kennedy "Duke"] Ellington and all of this music I had the ability to draw from and to somehow or another, pull it in to make Jerry Butler whatever it was that Jerry Butler became musically.
Speaker 1: And when--what of those artists would you say was your favorite artist?
Speaker 2: Oh, Nat Cole by far.  Nat Cole was just not only a great singer but he's a great musician. You know most people remember him as a singer, never heard him really play.  I think of the great tributes to his ability to play was that Oscar Peterson did a tribute to Nat.  I mean that's great piano player--the great piano player.  But Nat Cole had a way of phrasing and delivering his elocution, his ability to enunciate the words.  Calvin Carter used to always say "You never have to wonder what Nat King Cole is saying."  And he said you should learn how to do that because people need to hear the words.  And it's amazing to me now because I was singing one day and my nephew said--I said "Hey, do you hear the words?  He said yeah, but nobody's listening to the words anymore."  (Laughter).  It's about the beat, it's about the music, it--and I said, oh okay, I missed the boat again.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: No, it's just that no one can understand the words probably.
Speaker 2: Could be.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Maybe.  Well that's not true.  I mean I'm sure the young people can understand the words.  But anyway--
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: So was there anyone else forming you as, you know or that you admired?  But you considered him the epitome of what a great songster or--?
Speaker 2: You know he was a great singer but not a great showman.  Sammy Davis [Jr.] was a great showman but not a great singer.  And [HM Harry] Belafonte was someplace altogether different.  You know we used to laugh that--because we had never been to the Islands.  We said, "What is calypso man, I mean come on, what's that all about?"  "Day-O, Dayyy-O," yeah I mean it was wonderful, it sounded great.  And then when I got to a place where I could really go and see him perform, I said "Man this guy is so-- just fabulous."  And I recall hearing Phil Moore say, he said, "You see what these people do Jerry is that they surround themselves with other wonderful talents.  And so you are watching them but you're getting the benefit of all of this other genius that they have surrounded themselves with."  And he said, "You need to learn that."  And so you were talking earlier about how tight the show was and you know that was because I had surrounded myself with a lot of really talented people who helped to make the evening more than just Jerry singing 'For Your Precious Love.'
Story_ID: 55964
Speaker 1: Now what other, what are things that, where you start even-- besides you know Vee-Jay [Records] and it's having its financial you know trouble.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Were there things that you were starting to not be happy with at Vee-Jay in terms of its positioning and where it was and you know it's management or its distribution or--?
Speaker 2: You know Vee-Jay, after the Beatles--and people should know that Vee-Jay had some of the first masters on the Beatles and got caught up in a contractual clause.  They had leased the masters and by the time the Beatles arrived on the scene here in America, the contract on the lease was just about out.  Vee-Jay had sat with those masters in their desk drawer.  EMI [Music Publishing] made a deal with Capitol Records to distribute the product here in the states.  Vee-Jay, because of its ability to not only get play on African American stations now had the whammy of the African American stations and the pop stations.  So they were outselling everybody.  They ran into trouble when Capitol, EMI placed an injunction against them so that they could not sell anymore Beatles product.  And while they were caught up in that fight, the distributors of course said, "Well let's hold the money and see how they weather the storm."  And before you know it, they were forced into a Chapter 11 bankruptcy.  But that company was a very, very powerful company in terms of the amount of artists that were there and after a while, I think I started to believe that I was becoming a piece of the furniture, you know.  Oh yeah, well Jer--you know it was like, I guess the professional jealousy or the professional envy of every new artist coming on the scene becoming the "flavor of the day" so to speak.  And "Oh well yeah, well we got to do something for Jerry, but you know Jerry's been here for seven, eight years already.  I mean we got, we can't live off Jerry.  We got to find some new talent."  And yet, my livelihood and my family and what's going to happen to us is tied up in Jerry, not tied up in--you know and I started to tell young people when we had the workshop, I said "You know a manager has 10, 15, 20 artists that he gets 10 percent from.  In those days 10 percent was the norm.  So, I said, but by the time he adds that 10 percent over 20 artists, it's 200 percent."  I said, "Artists, all he has or she has is what they have coming.  They don't have any other thing coming to them and so they have to be very jealous and guarded about how they deal with that 90 percent that they have left or 80 percent that they have left after their agent and the manager take their piece off the top."  And so as Vee-Jay started to grow, my importance to Vee-Jay became less and less.  And then they moved to California.  Now not only were--was my importance becoming less and less, the distance between us had become greater.
Story_ID: 55965
Speaker 1: But also talk about though Jerry, I mean who were--I'd like you to talk about how they [Vee-Jay Records] got the Beatles, how that even came about.  But also who were the--you know as they were growing because like I said you came during really the early years.  So who were some of the artists that they were handling during that time period that came on after you?
Speaker 2: Wow, you know, you have to understand Vee-Jay from the perspective of how it got started.  Vivian Carter was a radio personality at a show in Gary, Indiana called 'Living with Vivian.'  And because she was on the air, she had the ability to be in tune to what the public wanted.  She knew for one thing that there were very few stations that were playing music for the black family.  And so what did she do?  She started to play the music of the church and out of that she said, "You know we ought to record this."  She started to play the blues.  She said, "You know, we ought to record this."  Rhythm and Blues, the young acts, "we ought to record this."  And then as the companies moved toward integration, she saw it coming or [Ewart] Abner saw it coming and they said "Well you know, we, we've got to reach beyond just the black community."  It's interesting.  I was listening to a conversation today and they were talking about how many dollars there are in the black community and how much money we spend and how we let other ethnic groups come into the community and take the money out.  The record company was one of those few entities, all the records were black.  Who made it was not as important as what was on it.  And so you could sell it anywhere you could get exposure.  And so Vee-Jay to my mind and Motown and other companies like that were the first companies to sell outside of the community that they came from.  They sold to everybody because it was about going into the store and picking up a record.  It didn't say that Vee-Jay was a black owned company, it just said "Vee-Jay Records.  Muddy Waters," "Vee-Jay Records.  Maceo Woods," "Vee-Jay Records.  The Four Seasons," "Vee-Jay Records.  The Beatles," "Vee-Jay Records.  Dusty Springfield," "Vee-Jay Records.  Frank Ifield," Dee-"Vee-Jay Records.  The Harmonizing Four"--and that too had to do with why the company was so big was because they were selling hundreds of thousands of records on The Five Blind Boys of Mississippi, the Five Blind Boys of Alabama, the Staple Singers, the Harmonizing Four, the Maceo Woods record of 'Amazing Grace.'  And then added on to that, they had the MJT Plus Four [sic, MJT Plus Three], Lee Morgan, Hank Strozier, [HM] Wayne Shorter, all cut their musical teeth at Vee-Jay Records.  Wynton Kelly that used to be the director and pianist for Dinah Washington and the--so out of this grows, along comes The Four Seasons and The Beatles.  And so now you have all of these artists on this one small label that was reaching to be a major label in this country when they got caught in a financial bind.
Story_ID: 55966
Speaker 1: So really, yet you think The Beatles were the case of them getting caught in a financial bind or you think there were other things that were happening like you know, were there larger ones coming up?  I'm just wondering how cause they could have been a Motown in some--could they have been a Motown?
Speaker 2: I think so.  I think they could have been bigger than Motown because I said, see Motown was always one dimensional.  You know and I don't say that in a pejorative sense.  Motown had a distinct sound because most of the musicians played on all of the records.  Most of the songwriters were writing all of the songs and most of the artists were recording those songs played by those musicians and written by those songwriters.  Vee-Jay had a much broader base just by virtue of the types of music that they were doing.  Imagine if you will, had Vee-Jay survived and been able to maintain The Beatles, and been able to attract all the other artists that The Beatles would have attracted to them by virtue of their being on that label.  Imagine if you please the, the Jimmy Reeds and all of the blues singers that would have come, the Gene Chandlers, the Duke of Earl, imagine the crowd that he would have attracted to him, the Staples Singers, what they would have attracted, the jazz players, the jazz musicians, what they would have attracted and let's carry that now for fifteen or twenty years and you will start to see all of the spinoffs and all of the possibilities that would have taken Vee-Jay to a major conglomerate kind of a company.  Very much the way Atlantic becomes Warner Brothers.
Story_ID: 55967
Speaker 1: So now you--so it was [Ewart] Abner who went to California [with Vee-Jay Records], right?
Speaker 2: No, actually--
Speaker 1: Was it, was it--
Speaker 2: --Abner got fired.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) he got fired because of what?
Speaker 2: Because he went to [Las] Vegas [Nevada] with some money and lost it at the crap table and he says that, "Well I own part of the company so it was partly my money."  And they said, "but you had no right to lose it without our permission."  And so they canned him and Abner had--he was the--yes, and he had it here and they never recovered from that.  He came back as he says, "but by the time I came back it was too late.  It was gone and I couldn't save it."
Speaker 1: Now, but who opened up the LA [Los Angeles, California] branch?  Who, what--?
Speaker 2: Actually Randy Wood who became the president after Ewart Abner, yeah, who lived in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: And so after they fired you know Abner--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is when they brought in Randy Wood?
Speaker 2: Well Randy Wood was already there.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: Abner had brought Randy Wood.  Abner brought most of the--Red Schwartz, most of the people who were involved with the label had come in under Abner's administration and so it was just a matter of elevating someone out of that group to replace him and Randy Wood got the call.
Speaker 1: Do you think Vivian [Carter] and them felt that they weren't getting the respect they deserved?  Do you think it was, you know her is someone you know, the relationship between Jews and Blacks in this whole business which is you know an interesting relationship anyway, you know typically you would have Jewish managers you know black talent.  You know, sometimes positive stories, sometimes not so positive stories.
Speaker 2: Abner was a very interesting man in the sense that he perhaps could have been an Arab or Jewish.  He was that light-complected, he was very fair, very keen features, the whole nine yards.  And so he mixed well.  I mean nobody--yes, he was very much at heart African American, but he never let that stop him from thinking big.  I mean he was always looking toward the bigger picture.  Matter of fact, he started a lot of the industry organizations and chaired a bunch of them.  He was very much an aggressive, tireless worker kind of guy and had the respect of most of the people in the industry, so much so that he later goes on to become the president of Motown, hired by [HM] Berry Gordy to do what Berry Gordy was tired of doing.  He was trying to run this company called Motown.  An unusual, unusual guy.
Speaker 1: 'Cause I didn't know he was black.
Speaker 2: (Shaking head yes).
Speaker 1: Okay, Ab--cause even the name Ewart Abner--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is unusual.
Speaker 2: Yes it is.  Yes it is.
Speaker 1: I mean as a black name--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Not that they're you know (unclear)--
Speaker 2: I understand.
Speaker 1: --names but I'm just--I just, I did not know that.  Okay.
Story_ID: 55968
Speaker 1: The other thing--okay, we're going to have to change tapes in a minute.  But you know can you just talk just a second, just about Queen Booking Agency because that was an--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we can talk about it.  The Queen Booking Agency was--by now, Curtis [Mayfield] has reinstituted The Impressions.  They are starting to make records, hit records I should say.  After 'Gypsy Woman' came 'It's All Right' and 'People Get Ready' and 'We're A Winner.'  The country is in the middle of the civil rights movement. "Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud" is the theme.  We are feeling our oats.  We are currently smashing and temporarily rich and so we decide that again we're going to control as much of ourselves as possible and out of that concept comes a Ruth Bowen who had been the manager to Dinah Washington and she decides that she wants to start a booking agency.  She gets Irv Nahan, one of his young partners by the name of Murray Schwartz, Carl Davis, Jerry Butler, Gene Chandler, Curtis Mayfield, Richard Pryor and some others, we all put up some money to get this thing off the ground and we wind up with a company called Queen Booking. And that was really how the company got started.
Story_ID: 55969
Speaker 1: Yes, can we talk about Queen Booking a little bit more?  Okay, thank you.  I'm sorry I was trying to also get myself--okay, go on.
Speaker 2: Now after we get Queen Booking up and running and it becomes "the" agency of the African American artist of the day, we find out that the underworld is grabbing hold of it and so Curtis [Mayfield] and I sold our interest and got away from it.  And so I lost contact with it after that.  I don't really know what transpired.
Speaker 1: Did you know how the underworld got involved?  Was there--it just--?
Speaker 2: Nope.  Didn't know, didn't want to know.  You know it was just--I knew it happened and I knew I wanted out.
Story_ID: 55970
Speaker 1: Now you know the other thing that impresses me sort of, you and Curtis [Mayfield] seemed to have always maintained some contact even through the, sort of the, you know the ins and outs.  And I'm wondering what you credit that to?
Speaker 2: Well we grew up together.  You know when I met Curtis, I guess he was 8, 9 years old and we always had a pretty good bond with each other.  As a matter of fact my wife [Annette Butler] used to say that I would stop for Curtis when I wouldn't stop for her you know, that kind of thing.  But bottom line was I think we saw success in each other, you know.  I think his relationship with me said well you know I'm, "I've come and play for you, but you know I don't want to play for you for the rest of my life" and I said, "I want you to come and play for me but I don't want you to play for me for the rest of your life.  I want you to do as much as you can do."  And so that's kind of how our relationship was.  We, whenever we needed each other, we were there.
Speaker 1: Now when you were--when he was having the hits with The Impressions [after Butler left in 1958], was there ever a part of you said that, "Damn, look at what they're doing?"  Was there--did that ever come up, about, you know because--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, because even though they were making hit records, I was having a pretty good successful career.  And so I never felt that I was being overshadowed by them.  And then I've never been really envious of what others were doing.  I was always kind of concentrating on "Jerry, what can you do and how can you make it work?"  And so I was always busy minding my own business you know.  And usually if you do that you don't have a whole lot of time to look at somebody else's success or failures.  As one of--it says, "don't compare to your--yourself to others because it might make you vain or bitter."  That's from a thing called "Desiderata" [Max Ehrmann poem].  And I've found that to be true, you know, if you compare yourself to other people you will probably wind up being vain and bitter.  Either I'm better than them or I'm not as good and that's no place to be.
Story_ID: 55971
Speaker 1: So here you were, you know you--Vee-Jay [Records] is having its problems and the best way is to look for some other place to be, right, another record company, right?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.  (Shakes head yes.)
Speaker 1: So how do you end up choosing Mercury [Records]?
Speaker 2: Actually, W. Yale Matheson--go ahead.
Speaker 1: Oh, we need to go to--was it Samuelson--who was the--Matheson, yes, I'm sorry, Bill Matheson.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bill Matheson.
Speaker 1: Sorry.
Speaker 2: After we got out of the Vee-Jay--
Speaker 1: But no, you need to talk about that though.  We didn't really, you just sort of skirted over it.  You need to talk about that.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: Because I think it's a great story.
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It's a great story.
Speaker 2: I don't know if it's a great story.  Anyway--
Speaker 1: Even how you came to meet him cause he knew nothing about entertainment law.
Speaker 2: Right. [In late 1965] Bill Matheson was invited to my house by his brother-in-law who was an interior decorator, Raymond Diane (phonetic).  And I later found out that my wife and Raymond had gotten into an argument about a table or something and he thought that if he invited Bill to the house and introduced him as a lawyer and all that, that we would panic and pay the bill.  And Bill said, "I was not only embarrassed that he would do that to me, I just thought it was in poor taste" and so he called and apologized.  And sometime later, my wife Annette had a problem with the cleaners and she called Bill and he helped her with that problem and they got that thing straightened out.  And so when the problem came with Vee-Jay and [Irv] Nahan, we were trying to find somebody that could represent us and Bill was with a company called Stickler, Lederer & Fox, it's a pretty big law firm here in the city [Chicago, Illinois].  And so she said why don't you call Bill?  And so I picked up the phone and I call him.  I said, "This is what's going on.  Vee-Jay is going out of business, my contract with them is about six months before it's over.  But I'm worried that they're going to sell my contract to some company that I don't want to be with and I need to get out."  He said, "Well you know I don't know a whole lot about the record business but I know a lot about business."  He said, "It can't be that much difference."  He said, "So what you do is bring me everything, every piece of paper, everything that you've ever signed, anything, any kind of contractual agreement.  Get it down here to my office and let me go through it and see if we can't find a way out."  And while he was looking through all the stuff, he found that there were several songs that I had written that was in the publishing catalog of Vee-Jay that they didn't have any signed contracts on.  And so he said there-"Here's our out" and he negotiated us out of the deal by saying that "Well Jerry thinks that you know he has a relationship with your company that's special.  He thinks that the company may be able to save itself and he's willing to resign for an additional six months to see if you can weather the storm through this bankruptcy."  And so that was what we did.  And after he negotiated me out of both of those contracts I said to him, "Look, I know the business and--but what I don't know is the law.  And I want not to have to have some manager tell me, go hire a good lawyer when I get into a problem.  I said so I'm going to make you my manager and attorney and that's how we're going to go forward."  He agreed to it.  And we went forward.  He then later left Stickler, Lederer and Fox and is now retired someplace in Miami or West Palm Beach, I think, Florida because his brother-in-law used him as their attorney too and they made a lot of money in the hamburger business and with ice cream contracts.
Speaker 1: But he actually ended up leaving his firm because of the relationship with you, right?
Speaker 2: Well I, I--he said it was because of me.  I think he was going to leave anyway. I just gave him a sooner reason to go.  But yeah, he said "Well you know I, I left so I could do this" but I don't believe it.  I think he was going to go anyway.  I just gave him a little earlier opportunity.
Story_ID: 55972
Speaker 1: But also talk about what he [Bill Matheson] found, Jerry, what he found when he was actually look--you know, he found that you--you knew that there would be unsigned publishing contracts and you--at that point you were sharing publishing rights [Curtom Publishing and Vee-Jay Records], right?
Speaker 2: Well we were--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --splitting publishing but that wasn't--the deal was that these were songs that were written prior to the split that there were never any contracts signed.  I mean you know it, you go in, you record a song, they say okay, the record comes out.  Somewhere along the way they forgot to do what needed to be done and he found it.
Speaker 1: But the other part of the story was that this was the value that they--this was goodwill when a company is sold--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --that there is goodwill and so they were attaching you know Jerry Butler was a good part of their goodwill and these contracts, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, right.  I can't help you with that because you're--
Speaker 1: You're not telling the story.
Speaker 2: Well, you know--
Speaker 1: Okay, we'll go on to another story.
Speaker 2: All right, go to another story.
Speaker 1: That's not fair.
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: But--okay, it's in your book ['Only The Strong Survive'].
Speaker 2: Yeah, but you read the book last night.  I haven't looked at that book in--
Speaker 1: Oh okay, okay.
Speaker 2: --in a year.
Speaker 1: Okay. But even--okay, I got you, okay.  But, okay never mind.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now you can just tell me what you want to talk about, what you don't.
Story_ID: 55973
Speaker 1: What about the writing I've been--well no, let's go to Mercury [Records] when you got to Mercury and how that whole thing happened.
Speaker 2: Hmm, well as I was saying, [Bill] Matheson then said "Okay, you're leaving Vee-Jay, I have a friend at Liberty Records."  Matter of fact the president of Liberty Records was a guy by the name of Randy Wood.  No relationship to the Randy Wood at Vee-Jay, just a coincidence of names.  And he said, "This guy from Liberty called me up and he said they were interested in you coming to the label."  He said, "And then he tried to offer me a bribe. He says--and I wasn't upset that he tried to bribe me, I was upset at how small it was."  (Laughter).  He said, "So I'm--so we're not even going to entertain that.  We're going to do something else."  In the meantime, Irwin [H.] Steinberg called my home and he said, "Jerry we hear that Vee-Jay is going under and that you're going to be looking for a new company and we would like to talk to you about it."  And so I called Bill and I said, "This guy by the name of Irwin Steinberg called my house and said that we're interested in my coming to Mercury and I wish you'd call them up and see what kind of deal you can make."  And so he called him, he made the deal and I wind up signing with Mercury Records.
Story_ID: 55974
Speaker 1: Now the first part of your signing wasn't all that pleasant at the beginning, right?
Speaker 2: Well it was not that it wasn't all that pleasant.  Well, first of all, Mercury was an entirely different company than Vee-Jay.  At Vee-Jay I kind of had the ear of Calvin Carter.  Calvin Carter and I felt kind of the same way about music.  We had been associated together for a long time.  Now I'm over at Mercury Records where [HM] Quincy Jones has just left as the executive VP and in his place is a wonderful arranger by the name of Luchi de Jesus.  And Luchi de Jesus and I are given the task of coming up with the first album.  And we went and we found some good songs.  As a matter of fact there was a song in the group called 'Alfie' and we were going to record it.  And Luchi was interested in doing a totally different arrangement than what Burt Bacharach had done on the demonstration record.  I was interested in singing it the way Burt had laid it out mainly because I knew it was going to be in a movie [1966's 'Alfie'] and that the relationship of the sound to the movie was going to be important to the airwaves.  Luchi I think was interested in, "I want to be as far away from copying Burt Bacharach as I can get.  I have a talent that's specially my own and it ain't got nothing to do with copying a Burt Bacharach arrangement."  And so the final analysis and it was a good piece of product.  I don't think it was commercial in the sense that had it been associated more with a soundtrack, people would have associated the movie and the record to each other.  He and I disagreed on that and so that was how we got started.  We got started with a disagreement over a major song that was going to be what became a major picture and a major hit for [HM] Dionne Warwick.
Story_ID: 55975
Speaker 1: And so after that we decided to bring in another producer and we bring in Jerry Ross.  And Jerry Ross had in the bunch of songs that he showed me as possible songs for me to record a thing called 'You Don't Know What You Got Until You Lose It,' which he had written with [HM] Kenny Gamble.  I liked the song, I like what was there and I go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to perform at a place called The Pep's Show Bar which had been a big jazz room in Philadelphia but was now trying to make the transition from jazz to whoever could fill up the seats because they were getting in financial trouble.  Kenny had a record shop that was attached almost to the back door of the Pep's Show Bar.  And when I got there during the rehearsal he and [HM] Leon Huff, his partner came in and they said, "You know man we used to come up to the Uptown Theater [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] to see you all the time and we're always impressed with you and we'd like to do some music with you."  And I said, "Well what have you done?  They said well maybe you've heard some of our stuff.  We've got a hit record on a group called The Intruders called 'Cowboys to Girls.'"  I said you guys did that?  They said, yeah.  I said, "Oh man I, I--that's so fresh.  It's so hip, it's so-" I said, "Yeah let's do something." And so the next day we got together noon in Pep's Show, sitting at the piano, Leon Huff banging at the piano and we write three songs, 'Lost,' 'Beside You' and 'Never Going to Give You Up.'  And I said, "I've got to call Irwin Steinberg and tell him what I found" and I called him up and I said, "I think I have found the producers of my next album because we're doing some truly great stuff."  Irwin Steinberg said "Well, I'm--you know, be glad to talk to them."  So they had a conversation, they made a deal.  Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff produced 'The Iceman Cometh' album.
Speaker 2: And talk about some of the songs that came out of that collaboration cause you guys worked together for how long?
Speaker 1: Not long.
Speaker 2: (Unclear) wasn't it?
Speaker 1: No, not long.
Speaker 2: It wasn't (unclear)?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no.  We did two albums--
Speaker 2: (Unclear).
Speaker 1: --about two and a half albums.
Speaker 2: But what two or three years though, four--
Speaker 1: About two years.
Speaker 2: But see these short time periods are very prolific.
Speaker 1: Well you know I tell people all the time--
Speaker 2: Gees.
Speaker 1: --my career has been a bunch of peaks and valleys, real high peaks and real low valleys.  But they were straight up and down, bing, bing, bing.  We wrote I want to say about two and a half albums but 'Western Union Man,' 'Never Going to Give You Up,' 'Only the Strong Survive' and 'A Brand New Me' were all in the first album.  And all of them were not only hits by me, they were hits by other major artists.  For instance, [Elvis] Presley recorded 'Only the Strong Survive.'  Liberace and Earl Grant recorded 'A Brand New Me' along with Dusty Springfield and Aretha Franklin.  'Western Union Man' was recorded by the--Diana Ross and the Supremes or the Supremes after Diana Ross had left.  And 'Never Going to Give You Up' was Chuck Kelly and several other artists have done that.  And so those songs became really kind of major songs out of the two albums that we did.  And the reason that we stopped making music together was that Leon and Kenny decided that they were going to start Philly International Records [Philadelphia International Records].  They wanted me to come with them but I had three years left on my contract with Mercury [Records] and couldn't go.  And certainly they weren't going to hold up their deal to wait for me to show up on the scene.  And so seven years later we took another look at it and I go there and we record 'Cooling Out' and several other songs, but one album and then it wasn't working and so we left it alone.  Just too many years--
Speaker 2: That had passed?
Speaker 1: --trying to catch up, yes.
Speaker 2: To--that had passed?
Speaker 1: Exactly.
Story_ID: 55976
Speaker 1: So did--could you have broken your contract [with Mercury Records] or that would have been a major problem?  (Unclear) people have been known to do that.
Speaker 2: Yeah. I guess in retrospect we probably could have but we probably would have had a real tough fight because at that time and this is Bill Matheson and Irwin Steinberg statistics, I represented about 14% of the company's sales at Mercury Records at that time.  And that was a pretty big chunk for them to lose and so they would have put up a pretty good fight.  And we don't know how long it would have taken for it to be settled.  And I would encourage anyone not to put your career on hold for a legal fight because you never know how long it's going to take and you never know how you're going to come out at the end of it.  So my suggestion is always try to negotiate your way out of it and get on with your life.
Speaker 1: That's true.  That's with anything about legal fights, you never know.  Things--people could be dead and buried and you'll end up winning the war and losing the battle.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: But with--but that was a special, that relationship that you had with them [HM Kenny Gamble and HM Leon Huff] was probably a very--it was--was it--well, I hate to use this cause I know--this is probably a bad example.  But you know when [HM] Dionne Warwick, she talks about they were a triumvirate.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Were you--do you think that was sort of you with, you know Gamble and Huff?
Speaker 2: Gamble and Huff?  Yeah.  I'm one of the few artists that they ever sat down to write songs with.  Most of their music was written either by them or by some artist that, or some songwriter that they had signed to the label.  Almost every song that was recorded in the 'Iceman Cometh' and the 'Ice on Ice' album was written by the three of us and I think even as I listen to the album today, it was definitely one of my better projects and I attribute it to their genius.  Leon Huff and Gamble, very, very talented brothers.
Story_ID: 55977
Speaker 1: Now how would the three, how would you work together the three of you?  You know there's that great story of you talking about 'I've Been Loving You So [sic, Too] Long,' how that song sort of came about over a little J&B.  (Laughter).  But I'm just wondering how you, you know how did it work?
Speaker 2: Well let me say this first of all about 'I've Been Loving You Too Long,' because 'I've Been Loving You Too Long' preceded the relationship--
Speaker 1: Yes it did, yeah.
Speaker 2: --with Gamble and Huff.  Otis Redding and I bump into each other in an airport in Atlanta, Georgia in route to Buffalo, New York to play at a place, I think it was Kleinhans Auditorium [Kleinhans Music Hall].  And after the show that night we had nothing to do.  So we're sitting around drinking a little J&B and just talking shop talk.  And he had an old beat up guitar sitting by the bed.  And he said, "Hey Jerry, he said man, come on, I want you to listen to some songs that I never finished" and he's playing these songs for me.  And I said look, I got this idea, a song.  I said a guy gave me this title.  It's called 'I've Been Loving You Too Long (To Stop Now).'  I said "and that's all he had was just this title."  But he said, "Butler if you take it and make something out of it.  Just-" you know, so I said, "I want you to hear what I've got so far," and I sang up to the bridge of the song.  And he said "Man, that's great, I love that."  I said, "Well okay if you like it so much, take it on and see what you can do with it."  I leave and go to Detroit [Michigan].  He left and went back to Memphis [Tennessee].  I talked to him two weeks later, he said, "Hey Jerry it's a hit."  I said "Okay, sure it's a hit.  You, you--I just--two weeks ago we were messing around with it.  Now you call me up and tell me it's a-" He said "I'm, I'm telling you it's a hit."  I said, "What do you mean it's a hit?"  He said, "It's on the street."  I said, "How could it be on the street, I don't even have a contract yet for writing the song."  He said, "I know but I'm telling you man.  He said I went into the studio and re-recorded it.  He said, and the folks at Stax [Stax Records] loved it so much" he said it--two weeks they put it out.  He said, "The phones are jumping off the hook."  I said "No kidding?"  He said, "Yeah."  So now I get a copy of the record three weeks later and I felt like The Impressions must have felt when they saw "Jerry Butler" over The Impressions because my name was not even on the damn record.  I said "What?"  I call him back, I said "I'm going to take a plane to Memphis and I'm going to beat you and everybody that I--knows you."  And he said "Well, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait, wait."  He said, "I told them they screwed it up."  He said but--so anyway, we finally got it worked out.  They gave me the proper credit, half the publishing and half the writer's share and after I heard his version of it, I said this--it was his song.  You know I could have recorded it and I probably would have made a pretty good record of it but he recorded it and made a great record of it.  And it was because he just died and cried all the way through the thing.  I mean I never would have conceived it the way he sang it.
Speaker 1: But that's what you said, you said that--well you talk about his genius was that he sort of died and cried most of the song.
Speaker 2: Through everything, "oh lord, he may be weary, women do get weary."  Oh yeah, he was special.
Story_ID: 55978
Speaker 1: Do you have any other special Otis Redding stories?
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact that was, you know I mean we worked together and stuff like that.  But that to me is the--and it's great because it's a true story you know and so unexpected.
Speaker 1: You know but see that sort of flies in the face of what you also say is that people when they originate the song like you know for you, 'For Your Precious [Love]'--you know when you write the song, so they, sometimes they bring more to it than someone you know who doesn't.  Like you know you were saying your song was you know 'For Your Precious Love.'  Can you sing a little bit of your--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh come on!
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no.
Speaker 1: Just a teeny little bit.
Speaker 2: No, play the record.  You see, I can mess around imitating Otis Redding because that's not recorded.  I can mess around imitating Nat ["King"] Cole or something because that's just kind of fun.  But when I start singing myself, that's arrogant and off the--
Speaker 1: It's representative.
Speaker 2: No, it's not.
Speaker 1: Okay, well before the interview's over.  So, but no, I was just saying that you were saying that that you know when it--because that song really meant some--that was your first song.  You wrote it.  You said what, you were in 11th grade or a sophomore?
Speaker 2: Sophomore yeah, that was 10th grade.  But you know Otis was part of the creation of 'I've Been Loving You Too Long,' so it wasn't like I wrote the song and gave it to him to sing.  He was as much involved in what it originally turned out to be as I was, you know.  I mean I had the verse and a bridge or something and he added something and--but he took ownership of it.
Speaker 1: But what--with [HM Kenny] Gamble and [HM Leon] Huff, did you, is that how you collaborated?  Is that--would you get together and everyone bring something, it was sort of an organic process?  That's what I'm trying to--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I mean we would--for instance, we would walk into a room and Huff would start to play something.  And out of playing something I would maybe sing a line and, and Kenny would add a thought, a concept, a--oh this is what--for 'Only The Strong Survive,' we were talking about Otis Redding, Aretha Franklin, Ray Charles and how the fuzz tones and the wah wah pedals were starting to be incorporated into their music.  And some writer up in--a guy by the name of, I think his name is Richard Robinson who was writing for the Yale University Press was panning these black artists for using these fuzz tones and the purity of the music and the this, that and the other.  And I said "Well you know what, these artists are so strong that no matter what music they put under them, they will always sound like themselves.  That's how strong they are."  And Kenny said, "Only the strong survive."  And Huff said, wow, that's--make a title of a song and he sat at the piano and went "bop, bop, bop-bop bop, bop."  And I said "I remember my first love affair and mother told me after the affair, this is--she said son, boy" and we were into the song.  And in about 45 minutes we were through with the song and ready to go to the studio because Huff had already arranged it on the piano as we were constructing it.  Kenny had made his input in terms of what the song was about and how we're going to modem and move it.  And I had added a lyric and bing, bing, bing.  And so who could say who made the greatest contribution so we never dealt with who made the contribution we just said everybody gets a third and that's how we rolled.
Speaker 1: Through that whole period?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 55979
Speaker 1: You were gonna tell a story, but we were talking about you, [HM Kenny] Gamble and [HM Leon] Huff, you know and even the, you know, the synergies, that organic process that thing that when people come together and sort of create.
Speaker 2: Well you know, Curtis [Mayfield] and I wrote together.  It was just Curtis and I.  Curtis usually came up with a melody on the guitar or something and I would contribute as a singer and as a lyricist.  And we could write songs fairly fluently.  I never really know how good they were you know until we actually got them recorded and I could hear the whole thing.  With Gamble and Huff, we could almost hear the finished product while we were writing the song.  And I think that was because Huff was playing the master instrument, the piano and he could do the, the rhythm, the horns, you know the voicings.  He had it all in his fingertips and he was such a marvelous musician that as we were writing the songs and putting--he was orchestrating how it--and it, it just flowed.  It was, it was indeed creative genius and I say that about the two of them.  And then the interesting thing, we were all fire [Zodiac] signs.  Huff is an Aries, Gamble is a Leo and I'm a Sagittarian and it just seemed that all of the fire just boom, would explore whenever we sat down to do something.  And even the song, the last song that I recorded with them which was 'Cooling Out,' [1978] which was not a major hit in a lot of areas but wherever it was played, it was a hit.  And so I think maybe we could have done it again but it was just too much and too many people and too much time to try and leap frog that whole process.
Speaker 1: Well they--you could actually bought them into Mercury really--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --based on--so were they just feeling as--were they feeling constrained within a corporate environment?  Is that what they--or were they thinking the money was right?  I mean what was the--?
Speaker 2: I think it was a combination of things but I--you know I think the overriding factor [for them forming Philadelphia International Records] was they had been producing other artists.  They had produced Dusty Springfield.  They had produced Joe Simon.  They had produced Wilson Pickett. They had produced The Young Rascals.  They had, you know they had all of these artists under their belt that they had made hit records for and so now they were saying to themselves "You know we really need our own label and to develop our own artists" and they were right.  And I just happened to be in a situation where I couldn't move with them.  Had I been able to move with them I would have been there in a heartbeat and probably there would have been a different oh, I'm sure there would have been a different direction to my career.  I believe that I probably, had I moved with them, wound up being if not an executive with the company, a partner in the company or something because I think that was the kind of creative thing that we had together.
Story_ID: 55980
Speaker 1: Now they're [HM Kenny Gamble and HM Leon Huff] known though for creating sort of the Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] Sound, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, the Sound of Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So where does the Sound--and remember you come from Chicago [Illinois] where there is--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --no sound.  I mean or you know there are lots of sounds.
Speaker 2: Lots of sounds.
Speaker 1: Lots of sounds, sorry.
Speaker 2: Different.
Speaker 1: Lots of sounds, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what would you say was the Philadelphia Sound?  What was it known as and were you at the beginning stages of sort of creating that Philadelphia Sound?  I'm just trying to--
Speaker 2: Well you know that would be I think arrogant of me to say that I was--let me just say that I made a contribution to the sound.  But the sound of any city is dictated by the musicians and the artists that make the music in that city.  As I said earlier, the reason that Chicago has such a great variety of sounds is because it has such a great variety of musicians, great variety of singers, great variety of song writers.  You look at Chicago and you think of Chaka Kahn, Earth Wind and Fire, CTA, Muddy Waters, Howlin Wolf [born Chester Arthur Burnett], Bo Didley [Ellas Otha Bates], Etta James, The Spaniels, The Dells, The Chi-Lites, Gene Chandler, the Duke of Earl, I--where else can you find a city that can offer you all of that and, and more, you see?  And so that's why I say the sound of Philadelphia, the sound of Motown was really kind of locked into [HM] Berry Gordy, [HM] Smokey Robinson, Holland-Dozier-Holland [Lamont Dozier, Brian Holland, and Eddie Holland], Norman [Jesse] Whitfield, that was primarily the sound of Detroit [Michigan].  Kenny Gamble, Leon Huff, Tom Bell, Bobby, I'm trying to remember Bobby's last name.  I can't think of it.  I hope he'll forgive me.  But anyway, that was pretty much the sound of Philadelphia.  But when you get to Chicago you start--you got Curtis Mayfield, you got "Pops" Staples, you got Muddy Waters, you got, you know--and all of them are uniquely to their own sound because they were not created by a producer.  They were in fact the producers, the writers of the songs, the players on the session, they were the whole kit and caboodle.  And so out of that you get this great variety of sounds that make up what some people have called the "Sound of Chicago" but I call the "Sounds of Chicago."
Story_ID: 55981
Speaker 1: Now they [HM Kenny Gamble and HM Leon Huff] leave [to form Philadelphia International Records], I mean they leave and they've decided and you here, here you are, you have three years remaining on your contract [with Mercury Records].
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And are you not, you're not really particularly happy with that cause it's like your best friends and your collaborators have gone.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you go to the head of Mercury I think it was or you go to someone there and you say that you want to--you have to figure out some way to create that energy again within Mercury, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so that's how the songwriters workshop--?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: So you--
Speaker 2: You know, Mercury and I say this, they were a little greedy in the sense that they gave me a five year contract and in the five years they wanted four albums a year.  Four albums a year at 12 songs an album is like 48 songs.  On my best day I couldn't write 48 songs a year.  You know if I got up every morning and did nothing but sit down, I--I could throw some things together but you can't write 48 really good songs a year.  So I said, "How do I get a--get good songs?"  Then the thought came, well your brother Billy [butler] is a really good songwriter.  There's a guy by the name of Johnny Jones who's a good songwriter.  Terry Callier, Larry Wade, good songwriters.  But they can't really work at it because they got to make a living, they got to feed their families.  So the deal was that we would start the songwriters workshop, that we would pay them a stipend and for the songs that they write and if they ever caught a hit, we would take back whatever we had paid to them while they were working as part--and so they agreed to do it and we were off and running.  Irwin Steinberg put me in touch with North American Philips Corporation who owned Philips Phonographic which was basically the parent company that owned Mercury Records.  [Norman] Norm Weiser was the president.  They flew out here to Chicago.  They said "Yeah, we'll partner with you on this."  They gave us $150,000.00 to set up a little studio and to pay some advanced salaries and operation, and we went to work.  And we made some really good songs but we've never caught the magic that I caught with Gamble and Huff.  I mean it just wasn't there.  It, it--they--the writers were talented and the proof of the pudding is that out of the workshop comes LTD [Love Togetherness and Devotion, R&B/funk band], out of the workshop, Skip Scarborough was involved for a minute, Larry Wade and Terry Callier wind up writing 'The Love We Had Stays on My Mind' for The Dells.  Chuck Jackson and Marvin Yancy get Natalie Cole started in her career.  I even had a hit, Homer Talbert and Herscholt Polk, a song called 'Ain't Understanding Mellow.'  And so we got out of it what we set out to do.  I just believe that what Gamble and Huff and I did with--was just extraordinary and, and couldn't be duplicated.
Story_ID: 55982
Speaker 1: Now out of that--that went from--$150,000.00 in 1969 is a lot of money.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So this was really while they [Mercury Records] had this huge requirement [four albums a year] this is such a--that's a lot of songs.
Speaker 2: Yes it was.
Speaker 1: Was that realistic?  Were people producing--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --things like that?
Speaker 2: Not only was it not realistic they couldn't promote that many albums a year, you know.  If they had caught an album that had one or two hit records in it, it would take pretty much a year to get those records to the street and marketed.  And so as I said before it was basically we have got to justify paying Jerry all of this money or advancing him all this money cause they were going to take it back from whatever the sales were and that was their justification.  Well we're going to get four albums a year from him and no thought given as to how good are these albums going to be, you know.  It was just that this is what we want for what we're going to give you.  And I guess if I had been smarter and wiser, I probably would have told them, "Look I will deliver the album and you will give me the money for the album, and then the next time I'll bring you another album" you know, rather than let them lock me into a guarantee of X amount of product.  And I think everybody would have been served better by it.
Speaker 1: And you also out of that with that contract didn't you have a certain number of performances and things you had to do or is that not part of it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's strictly production (unclear)?
Speaker 2: That had nothing to do with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Basically in the early days of the music industry artists made very little money off recording.  Most of the money was made off of personal appearances.  Somewhere along the 19--as the market started to become bigger and bigger by virtue of the technology of reaching into other countries, you started to sell--when I first started [1958], a hundred thousand albums was considered a mega album.  By the time Nineteen Sixty-Five [1965] and Seven [1967] rolled around, 500,000 was considered a gold album and a million albums was considered platinum.  And you were already seeing artists hit those numbers that had been unheard of prior to that time.  And so pretty soon the music started to flip flop.  The money in the music became as big or if not bigger than the money that you made in personal appearances.
Story_ID: 55983
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you think--you know I was surprised actually to find out that [songwriter] Chuck Jackson was [Jazz critic] Reuben Jackson's younger brother.  I don't think people know that (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well, and there are two Chuck Jacksons now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But was that his younger brother, Chuck Jackson?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.  The other Chuck Jackson is a singer out of New York who made 'Any Day Now.' But this Chuck Jackson was, I think an illustrator for Playboy when I met him and he was writing these wonderful songs but he had a jazz musician by the name of Penn (phonetic) who was trying to help him put them all together.  And they put some good songs together but the music that Penn was writing was a little too hip and too slick, not quite as funky as the writer.  And so I suggested to him that he find some good Baptist church pianist to put music around what he was writing and he came back with Marvin Yancy.  And he and Marvin wrote some marvelous, marvelous tunes.  Matter of fact a lot of the tunes that they wrote, they originally wrote to, showed to Aretha Franklin but it was difficult to get to Aretha and so they came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] as a matter of fact--not they themselves but Natalie Cole came to Philadelphia, this is a wonderful story, came to Philadelphia to work in a place called the Latin Casino, which was the big nightclub right outside of Philadelphia and Camden, New Jersey.  I had been hired to do a week there and Dee Dee Sharp-Gamble [born Dione LaRue], who was [HM] Kenny Gamble's wife at the time was working with me.  We had been doing duets on 'Let It Be Me' and 'Close To You' and 'Ain't Understanding Mellow' and I was using her in the show.  So [Charles] Charlie Gerson who was one of the owners of the Latin Casino came to me and he said, "Jerry, we have a young lady that we want to put on the show to open up for you."  And I said, "I already have a girl in the show."  They said, but this is Nat ["King"] Cole's daughter."  And I said, "Then that shuts my mouth.  Let's go with it."  And she was singing Stevie Wonder tunes and what have you.  And I was talking with her manager afterwards and I said "You know why is-" he said, "Well we don't have anything else for her to sing he said, but really the reason I want it to work here is because I want Kenny Gamble and [HM] Leon Huff to come over to hear her, hoping that they would produce her."  Well Kenny and Leon never showed up and so he was really frustrated as to what he was going to do with her in the studio.  And I said, "Well you know there are a couple of guys in my workshop who write songs," I said, "that I think would fit the bill for her."  And so I produced, actually introduced them to each other and out of that relationship, Natalie Cole becomes a star and wound up marrying Marvin as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: That's a fabulous story.  So it sort of brought it round full circle since you had--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --great admiration for her father.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes, yes, thank you.
Speaker 1: That's great.
Story_ID: 55984
Speaker 1: Now also talk about, let's see, is it Terry Callier--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --that had--right.  Can you talk about him some more too?
Speaker 2: It's easy--
Speaker 1: Cause he was a character really.
Speaker 2: --to talk about Terry Callier, not that he was a character.  Terry Callier and I were in kindergarten together.  And Terry Callier was a folk singer for the most part.  Worked at the Gate of Horn [Chicago, Illinois] and places up on the North Side playing acoustical guitar and singing songs.  When I started the songwriters workshop because he had such a clever way with words, I mean you talk about a poet, Terry Callier is a poet.  I'll give you an example:  "For my opening line, I'd like to indicate my state of mind or to turn you on or let you know that I'm laughing just to keep from crying.  Pretty music when you hear it, keep on trying to get near it, a little rhythm for your spirit.  Well now that's what it's for, come on in, here's the door cause I saw a sparrow get high, wasting his time in the sky.  He thinks it's easy to fly, he's just a little bit freer than I."   You know, I mean that's pure Terry Callier in a song called 'Ordinary Joe.'  Even when he was in kindergarten he was one of those golden, gold star kids you know.  I thought I was pretty smart but he would always have one gold star more than me or one E on the report card more than me.  I mean he was just that much farther.  Anyway, he starts doing music and music and he wounds up with a daughter.  And he said, "I can't take care of my daughter and do this music thing" and so he went to work as a data processor and got deep into computers and worked at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and all of that, and sent his daughter on to college and just did wonderful things.  But he stopped by the workshop and he and Larry Wade decided that they were going to write some songs.  And of course we gave him the little stipend that we gave everybody else.  It wasn't enough to keep body and limb together and to raise a daughter but it did afford him some time to practice his craft.  And he and Larry hooked up with one of the wonderful arrangers of this town, fellow by the name of Charles Stepney.  And Charles Stepney hooked them into The Dells and they have an entire album recorded by The Dells [1971's Freedom Means] and even a-'What Color Is Love,' [1971] which is an album recorded by Terry Callier himself, just a marvelous talent.
Story_ID: 55985
Speaker 1: But at the time that you started the workshop [the songwriting workshop at Mercury Records], that was--there hadn't really been many things like that happening right, I mean in a planned way?  Were there places where people could sort of be creative?  You know I'm not talking about people getting together like you and [HM Kenny] Gamble and [HM Leon] Huff did.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But I'm saying were there places that were structured to be breeding grounds for music?  Was that--?
Speaker 2: What we were doing here was pilfered from Motown [Detroit, Michigan] and the Sound of Philadelphia [Philadelphia International Records in Pennsylvania] and Stax Records [in Memphis, Tennessee].  All of those record companies had as their foundation this workshop component where the musicians and the artists and the songwriters were basically all interchangeable.  They, you know this guy might write a song, these artists would record it and then another group of artists would record it, the musicians were basically playing on all of the sessions.  So the arrangements might change but the sound of the arrangement was always pretty much intact.  And so what we did here in Chicago [Illinois], we were trying to duplicate what Memphis, Philadelphia and Detroit had done.  And basically the other two were growing out of the Detroit concept.
Speaker 1: Now what other things do you think were important that came out of the workshop?  You had one other person.  Who was the guy who was your, who was going to be the valet?  No, he was--oh, you--he went on, he came through your workshop.  He was going to be, he was someone's--
Speaker 2: He was not involved in the workshop.
Speaker 1: No, he--but that's what it [Butler's book 'Only the Strong Survive'] said.
Speaker 2: No, it didn't say that.
Speaker 1: It did too.
Speaker 2: I think you're talking about Don--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Hmm?  He went and started his own workshop in California.  The workshop you say, it's somewhere--he started a workshop in California.
Speaker 2: Sam Brown.
Speaker 1: Sam Brown.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  But didn't he come, didn't he--
Speaker 2: Sam Brown was a journalist.
Speaker 1: That's right, but he came--
Speaker 2: Yeah, but he was not--
Speaker 1: For a hot second.
Speaker 2: No, never to be a valet.
Speaker 1: (Unclear) no?  Never?  Never?
Speaker 2: Never.  He--
Speaker 1: Oh wait, wait, Sam Brown--
Speaker 2: He was--
Speaker 1: No, no, but I'm thinking of someone else.
Speaker 2: Don Taylor is who you're thinking about, right.
Speaker 1: Don Taylor, okay.  I'm getting stories from memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah, see but I, I--
Speaker 1: So, oaky.
Speaker 2: See, now you know it's my book right?  You can't fool me even though you're trying.
Speaker 1: Okay, so Sam Brown, that's right Sam Brown went through the workshop but he was going to be--
Speaker 2: Sam Brown was a journalist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He worked for ABC, Channel 7 here in Chicago.  And when he heard about the workshop he said, "That's what I want to do," you know.  He said, "My dad was military and he told me to go to journalism school so I went to journalism school but I really love music."  He was an excellent arranger and he came to the workshop and he started writing arrangements and, and just doing all kinds of wonderful stuff.  And then he went on out to California to open up a workshop of his own.  As a matter of fact, I talked to him a couple of weeks ago.  He's interested in trying to pull together some music to record my swan album, you dig.  He said, "Well Butler we got to do one more before we leave this planet."  So I don't know if we're going to get it done or not but at least he's, he was kind enough to think about it.
Speaker 1: And what--he went on to do some very good things too, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, recorded some stuff with the, I think the Jackson Five and with Michael [Jackson] and I guess he's still working out there, you know doing sessions and copying and all that kind of stuff.  He's just--he's got all the skills.
Story_ID: 55986
Speaker 1: Now out of that, so you let your contract [with Mercury Records] go.  I mean it, it ends.
Speaker 2: We--
Speaker 1: It ends (unclear).
Speaker 2: We went to the end of it, yes.
Speaker 1: And then you go and try to do something also at that point then with--
Speaker 2: Motown.
Speaker 1: --right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: But you said just earlier that you went and did a, you tried to do things with [HM Kenny] Gamble and [HM Leon] Huff but that--
Speaker 2: Went back to Gamble and Huff after Motown.
Speaker 1: Oh after--oh.
Speaker 2: That's how the seven years got--
Speaker 1: That was way too much time.
Speaker 2: Don't you see?
Speaker 1: Okay, that's right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It's no wonder you--
Speaker 2: There it was.
Speaker 1: That's way too--okay, I thought I had missed a little interlude, okay.  So no, you went to--
Speaker 2: It was about 10 years.
Speaker 1: Right, okay cause Seventy--was it Seventy-Seven [1977] you leave Mercury?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so--
Speaker 2: Seventy-Five [1975] actually.
Speaker 1: Seventy-Five.
Speaker 2: And Seventy-Seven [1977] I leave Motown.
Speaker 1: So the workshop, but the workshop disbanded in Seventy-Six [1976] so it lasted a little longer than Mercury?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, but what had happened in the meantime?  Ewart [Abner, former president of Vee-Jay Records] had joined, right?  He had jointed Motown?  Ewart?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What's his name (pronounced U-wert)?
Speaker 2: Ewart.
Speaker 1: Ewart--I thought--I said Ewart.
Speaker 2: Well some people say Ewart (pronounced E-wart) or Ewart (pronounced U-wert).
Speaker 1: I did say Ewart and you were like--
Speaker 2: Or whatever, yeah.  But he had been with Motown almost immediately after leaving Vee-Jay and probably--he had a label called Constellation Records that he and Art Sheridan had formed and he had hung with that for a while.  So I would think, and don't hold me to these dates because they're vague in my mind.  But I would think somewhere around Sixty-Seven [1967] or Sixty-Eight [1968] [sic, 1966], he goes to Motown and becomes president of the company [from 1973 until 1975].
Speaker 1: So he says, "Jerry, come here.  You can come out to Motown," right?  That's, that's--
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact when he found out my contract with Mercury [Records] was coming to an end he called me up and he says, "Hey Jerry, he says I'm sitting in the president's chair out here at Motown and we'd like to have you come to Motown."  And I said, "If you're there that would be a good place for me to come."  And so I packed up my wife and my two kids and my mother and my dog and we jumped on a train and we went out to California to record some product for Motown and worked with some very talented musicians and writers and--but we just, it just didn't work, you know.  It was not what I wanted to do.  They were doing almost assembly line kind of stuff and I was used to being more involved in the creative process.  This was like, "Well we have a suit here Jerry, put this suit on," you know, when I was used to kind of designing the suit and stitching the suit and trying it on three or four times before I would walk into the studio and record it.  I worked with a lot of their writers and musicians who were young kids on their way up a lot of them.  But it just wasn't what I was used to.  It was, I guess it was maybe too commercial.  It wasn't, you know I was--I think what I wanted to do was a little more experimental you know.  And so finally I wind up getting control of producing the albums myself and I produce one with Thelma Houston ['It's a Lifetime Thing'] and I did one with some people from the workshop, Paul Wilson and Homer Talbert called 'Suite For The Single Girl,' [1976] which I still think was one of the good concept albums.  Didn't sell a whole lot but now it's become kind of a collector's item.  People are running around saying, "We want a copy of that album.  Why don't you get Motown to re-release it?"  I don't know if they ever will.
Speaker 1: Now Thelma Houston, that album you were proud of too, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes. She's such a wonderful singer.  You know I, I've had the good fortune to sing with some really great female vocalists, Betty Everett, Brenda Lee Eager, Thelma Houston and Dee Dee Sharp-Gamble and Patti Austin as a matter of fact.  It was kind of a remake, the track was already laid and she was already on it so they just kind of added my voice to what it was.  But I can claim that.
Story_ID: 55987
Speaker 1: So you're, you seem to work best where you can have you know, where your juices get going and you--it's a more, like you say a more creative environment?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I mean when, you said "When I was able to produce then I was able to sort of control the outcome of the product too?"
Speaker 2: And you know I think because over time my creative spirit has been in most of the songs that I've had success with.  And I think perhaps my audience or the people that buy the music hear that in some fashion and feel that this is not the Jerry Butler we know and love when that element is not there.  There was a situation and I'm going back now to the days of Vee-Jay [Records] and there was a song called 'The Walls Are Much Too Thin' written by Randy Newman who at that time was a young Jewish fellow living in New Orleans [Louisiana] writing songs.  And my brother Billy [Butler] and I had written a song called 'I Stand Accused.' And Calvin Carter was so enamored with 'The Walls Are Much Too Thin' that he spent most of the session time in the studio recording the Randy Newman song.  And then in the last five or ten minutes of the session he said, "Okay Jerry, I think we got that.  Now you and your brother, you can do your song."  And so kind of like you got one chance at it you know and we sang 'I Stand Accused' and we're not really happy with it but he says "That's all, we got to get out of here."  Time's up.  So I guess to add insult to injury or because they didn't have anything else, they take 'I Stand Accused' and they put it on the back of 'I Don't Want to Hear It Anymore' as the B side.  And they release it with 'I Don't Want to Hear It Anymore' as the A side and they send it all around-
Story_ID: 55988
Speaker 1: So they [Vee-Jay Records] send out this record with the-'I Don't Want to Hear It Anymore' as the A side and we're driving through Nashville, Tennessee, my wife [Annette Butler], Curtis [Mayfield] and [HM] Eddie Thomas and a lady comes over to the car.  And she says, "Somebody in the filling station told me you were out here in the car.  And I just want to tell you how much I love your new record."  I said, 'I Don't Want to Hear It Anymore?'  She said no that's not the name of it.  And so everybody in the car is puzzled now because we know that that's the side that the record company is running with.  And she said no, no--so finally I think my wife said "Well is it, 'I Stand Accused?'"  She said, "Yeah that's it!"  And so I run over to the phone, I call up Calvin and I said, "Hey Calvin--he said, yeah I know.  We're on the wrong side."  'I Stand Accused' became the hit and the real compliment on 'I Stand Accused' is that a few years later [HM] Isaac Hayes records it and does about six, seven minute overture and that, it just blew me away, especially because some years earlier I had run into Isaac in Memphis [Tennessee] when he and David [Porter] were writing together and they were just dying to write a song for me.  "Jerry, listen to this song, listen to this song."  I didn't like any of them.  There was one though called 'Every Now And Then I Want You to Think About It' that I thought was pretty close.  And now every time I see Ike, I go (starts singing), "Every now and then, I want you to think about it."  He breaks out laughing.  But it was kind of a twist of fate that after they were trying to write a song for me that I would write a song that he would think enough of to record.
Speaker 2: So when that happens, what is the--do they contact you and then you get--were you, did you own that or was that Vee-Jay ownership at that point?  Was that one of the things you got--?
Speaker 1: That was one of the songs that was in the Curtom catalog which we did a split publishing deal on with Vee-Jay.  But it was not one of the songs--the songs that we found out-- where contracts were never signed on were basically songs that were not that important in terms of the whole scheme of things but they were important enough to screw up the deal.  And so that's what got us out.
Speaker 2: Now, but you never told how that deal got screw--you never told that part of the story.  You only told--
Speaker 1: No, I just said that Bill Matheson negotiated our way out of it.  What it was, was that he threatened to tell the Chess Brothers [Phil and Leonard Chess] that they were selling them some songs that they didn't own and that would have probably held up the deal.  Vee-Jay was hard pressed to get their hands on the money.  I think it was like $250,000.00 or something and we're talking 1965 dollars.  That was a whole lot of money.  So they didn't want to hear about you are going to tie up $250,000.00 for three or four songs that have no particular great value when we need this money like yesterday.  And so he said "Well okay, this is what I want to keep from--and I'll get your contract signed and we'll clear it and you go ahead and make your deal.  We want out of the contract.  We want $5,000.00 or something" and that was how it went down.
Story_ID: 55989
Speaker 1: Now what about Patti LaBelle?  You've had a relationship with her some period of time.  Actually that was, that's a nice story too but anyway--
Speaker 2: Well you know, we--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --we have lots of nice stories.
Speaker 1: You do have lots of nice stories but--
Speaker 2: And they're all true, that's what makes them really nice stories.  What happened, I was hosting a show for PBS, WNET, I think it's in New York [New York City, New York].
Speaker 1: Yeah, NET.
Speaker 2: A fellow by the name of Ellis Haizlip [former theater and television producer] said, he had a--called The Soul Show.  And he said "Jerry, I'd like for you to host the show."  And so in hosting the show we had [HM] Sam Greenlee with 'The Spook That Sat by the Door.'  We had Muhammad Ali, we had [HM] Gale Sayers, we had Patti LaBelle and the Bluebelles who at that time were struggling with their careers.  And so they sang a couple of songs on the show and I said to them afterwards, I was going out to Basin Street West in Oakland, California to perform for a week and my back-up singers were out of pocket and couldn't make it.  And so I said "Hey, would you all like to go and do some work with me out at Basin Street West."  Patti said "Yeah," Nona [Hendryx] said "Yeah," Sarah [Dash] said "I'm not singing back up for Jerry Butler."  And so Patti, Nona and myself, my wife [Annette Butler] go on out to California to do the show.  And opening night we did what I thought was a very good show.  I wind up doing 'Let It Be Me' with Patti and the next morning the headline of the critic was, "What in the world is a great singer like Patti Bell doing singing back up for Jerry Butler," without understanding what the story was?  The story really was had he taken the time to find out was that these were some friends who were helping each other through a bad situation.  They needed a gig, I needed some backup singers, neither one of us was doing as well as we probably would do in the future.  And so it was not a put down to either of us to be associated with each other and yet he viewed it as a put down to her talent to be in that situation.  But the bottom line was that we made it through the week and we look back on it now with laughter and fond memories, and in my own particular sense, lots of gratitude.
Speaker 1: But you've also had, you've had some other great backup singers too that have come through your, you know, your--right, who--?
Speaker 2: I think they're all great.
Speaker 1: I know.  I mean that have gone on with names.
Speaker 2: Well now, who?
Speaker 1: I'm trying to think of--I thought I saw it here, someone else (unclear).
Story_ID: 55990
Speaker 1: Let me ask about [Robert] "Boogie" Bowles.
Speaker 2: Yes, Robert Bowles, interesting fellow.  I'm not sure what Boogie's nationality is.  (Laughing).  But let's just say that he's Caucasian, okay.  But I was performing in Boston [Massachusetts] and my guitarist didn't show up for work that night and we needed a guitarist and I see this white boy playing in the band, the house band.  And I tell Freddie Perren [Frederick James "Freddie" Perren] who was working at that time as my pianist, I said, "Ask that guy if he wants to sit in with us and see if he can read music."  And he found out that he could and he said, "Yeah and he was a real good player."  And so I said, "Well tell him we'll pay him $50.00 to sit in with us" and he told him that and Boogie was real excited.  You know, "$50.00, man, wow!"  In those days that was a lot of money.  And so he came to fill in on that particular gig and I asked him, I said would you like to go on the road with me?  I said, I love the way you play?  And so he said, yeah.  We went on the road and I guess Boogie was with me from 1964 or 5 [1965] probably until about 1975 or so when he left to go to work with [HM] Smokey Robinson.  But a fine musician and we used to always ask him to play like Wes Montgomery, you know.  He went to Berklee School of Music [Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts].  As a matter of fact, he and George Benson were in school at the same time up there.  And he was just a special kind of guy.  He's still with Smokey.  As a matter of fact, a couple of my fine musicians are with Smokey, the dirty rascal, he stole them from me, Boogie Bowles and Sonny Burke [Reginald "Sonny" Burke, jazz and funk keyboardist, arranger, producer and songwriter], just two excellent musicians.
Story_ID: 55991
Speaker 1: Now speaking of which, didn't you also tell a story about him, you know the whole encounter, I think he was with you, with Farrakhan [HM Minister Louis Farrakhan Muhammad, Sr.]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Wasn't that--okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughing).  Yeah.
Speaker 1: You were performing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --when he--did you, you didn't end up performing that day did you?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  What happened was, they had the Congress of Afrikan People [CAP] convene in Atlanta, Georgia and this was at a time when Whitney Young and some others were being vilified.  As a matter of fact they were calling Whitney Young "Whitey Young" and Roy Wilkins, they were tearing him up the back, Ron [HM Maulana] Karenga and all the guys from the west coast were coming and Imamu Baraka [Amiri Baraka, formerly known as LeRoi Jones and Imamu Amear Baraka] asked if I would come and be one of the performers.  I think he was one of the chairs of putting on the event.  And I said, "Now Imamu you know I've got two white fellows playing in my group."  I said, "I don't think that's going to work too well in this setting."  He said, "Don't worry about it.  They love you.  You'll be okay."  (Laughter).  So anyway, they sandwich us in between Whitney Young and Louis Farrakhan.  So, Whitney was to speak, I am to sing and then Farrakhan is to speak. And so Whitney goes out there and they boo him off the stage, call him Whitey Young and they throw dashikis and all kinds of stuff at him.  And so he runs off, gets off the stage.  And they say okay, the Jerry Butler Band. And so [Robert] "Boogie" Bowles and Dave Green were the two white boys, one played base, the other played guitar, head for the stage, climb up on the stage and start plugging their instruments into the amplifier and--get them (makes angry sounds)--oh they screamed and they hollered and they threw stuff.  And so Boogie said, "Jerry, what should I do?"  I said, "Get your dumb ass off the stage before you get killed!"  So he came off the stage and just at the time he was coming off, I look up the stairs and I see Farrakhan standing at the head of the stairs with this beautiful white suit on looking like glowing coming out of the east and here's the fruit of Islam coming down the steps, do-do-do-do do-do-do-do-do-do-do-do, pushing people out of the way.  I said "Oh my god, why are they doing this?"  I said, "Nobody back here is intending any harm to him, you know?"  It's just their attitude and it really did upset me, I mean to the point that I was like turned off.  Some ten years later maybe I get a call from--after I got elected to the Commissioner's [City Commissioner for Chicago, Illinois] seat and the young lady said, "This is Minister Farrakhan's secretary and he would like to have lunch with you."  And so I went over to the Mattson (phonetic) for lunch and we're sitting, talking, just he and I.  and I said to him, I said "You know I need to get this off."  He said, "What is it brother?"  I said, "I was in Atlanta once at the Congress of African People and you were to speak after we finished singing."  I said, "Well we never go to sing because--I said but the way your people came down those stairs and just pushed people out of the way without any regard to who they were and to how much respect we had for you, that, I just thought it was in bad taste."  And he said, "My brother I think you're right and I apologize for that."  And we embraced.  And his stature went up with me because he didn't have to do it.  And it was a good thing to do.
Speaker 1: Did Amiri Baraka say anything to you after that?  Did he say--?
Speaker 2: He apologized.
Speaker 1: He did?
Speaker 2: Oh of course.  I mean he was--he didn't believe that they would react the way that they did.  He was--it totally caught him off guard but I knew just from the attitude of the audience at the time that it was not going to fly, you know.  And I don't think it was any disrespect for me, I think it was just the attitude of what was going on was not the right venue for that to happen in.  And they couldn't say, "Well it's all right with Jerry and not say it's all right with Whitney Young."  So if it's not all right, it's not all right.
Story_ID: 55992
Speaker 1: Now what about--do you have a favorite [HM] Dionne Warwick story?
Speaker 2: No.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Do you have a story?
Speaker 2: Oh I have lots of stories.  I was going out to California to do the Don Cornelius Christmas Show.  And at the same time I got an invitation that said "Birthday Party.  Come by my house, fun and games."  Okay, cool.  So I go and I do Don--my brother Billy [Butler] is with me and we do the Don Cornelius Feast and I said, "Don, I'm going over to Dionne's for--she's having a birthday party."  He said, "Jerry, I wasn't invited."  I said "Hey," you know cause I'm thinking in my mind that this is a house party, you know it's friends.  "Surely you'd be welcome and let's go and we're going to play some bid whist, we're going to have a few drinks, we'll eat some food and then we'll get out of there and go home."  He said, "Jerry, I wasn't invited.  This is California."  I said, "Man will you cut that stuff out."  So we go out there to this big mansion.  It has a red carpet all the way out to the curb.  There are waiters and folks parking cars, valet parking, dah, dah, dah.  I said, "Oh, I didn't know it was going to be this kind of party," right?  I'm thinking that this is just a group of friends (makes sounds).  Man, they--she's got a tent on the tennis court in the backyard, I mean Bob Hope is there.  This is--dah, dah, dah.  I said, "Oh there will be no Bid Whist played in here tonight.  This is the place where everybody has come to be seen."  And so there's a guy standing at the door checking names you know.  He says (makes sounds) "Jerry Butler?"  "Yes."  "Billy Butler?"  "Yes."  "Don Cornelius?"  "I don't see your name sir."  Oh man, so anyway, Dionne comes out and she says "You didn't get your invitation?"  He said, "No."  She said, "Well come on in."  And I said, "Whew, thank god" for that because he would not have come had not I invited him.  And I wouldn't have invited him had I known what kind of party I was coming to.  I was just coming to have fun with friends the way we used to do in the old days, total different ballgame.
Story_ID: 55993
Speaker 1: So do you have a Don Cornelius story?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You don't?  Except he started here around the time--you remember when he started what, on Channel 26?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  So you want to do that story anyway?
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: You know Don says he wishes I would stop telling that story.
Speaker 1: I didn't know--
Speaker 2: Because that's a--I don't know.  We will tell the story anyway.  When Don was putting together the 'Soul Train' show, he had already been doing it here in Chicago [Illinois] and he had put together, lined up some sponsors, he was thinking about taking it nationally.  And I think he had contracted Gladys Knight and The Pips to come and do the show and he was going to use that to sell it.  For some reason, Gladys and The Pips couldn't come and so he was kind of stuck for having somebody that was recognizable I guess to these people at these, I think Sears was going to be one of the sponsors and Johnson Products [HM George Johnson]and he needed somebody that had some kind of visibility.  So he and another radio personality, Joe, and I can't remember Joe's last name now.  But anyway, they came by the house and asked if I would do the show, me--and I agreed to do it and they packaged it, took it out to California and here go, the 'Soul Train' show becomes a reality.  That's the story.
Speaker 1: I did not know that story when I asked you to tell that story.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: It's not in your book.
Speaker 2: Sure it is.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I'm telling you.
Speaker 1: I'm positive.
Speaker 2: Okay, it's in the liner notes.
Speaker 1: It's in the liner notes?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Don Cornelius'.
Speaker 1: I didn't read the liner notes.
Speaker 2: Well that will teach you.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  (Laughter).  Oh that's amazing.  Huh, so that was how he got out there cause Johnson Products was--if--they were important because they were going to be the underwriter--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --for the show.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And he hasn't looked back since.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Have--you have been in--have you--so you went to this party but he, was he really invited to the [HM] Dionne Warwick party?  No, she was just--
Speaker 2: No one will ever know.
Speaker 1: She was being gracious.
Speaker 2: Well, she might have been and then she might have in fact invited him.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: You never know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But however it was, I thought it was specially--well first of all it was good of him to be sensitive enough to know that this is California.  You just don't show up at somebody's party uninvited at that level. But it was gracious of her to say you were invited whether you were invited or not and not to embarrass him.  And I do believe that if he had been invited, it was an oversight more than a slap.
Story_ID: 55994
Speaker 1: Now when you look at the music--well let me see, well let me ask you, when you look at your career in the music business cause I'd like to get to your present career.  Well you have both actually now.  But when you look in your career in the music business, are there things that you would wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: And what are some of those if you could go back and re-write some of them?
Speaker 2: Hmm, okay.  First of all, I think had I known I was going to really make a life's work out of the entertainment business, I would have prepared myself better to be in it. I would have been a music student.  And by that I mean I would have learned to play an instrument, preferably the piano because I think it's a master instrument.  I think all the stuff is there.  I think it would have helped me in my song writing, it would have helped me in arranging in a whole bunch of instances it would have been good for me. The second thing, I believe I would have studied the law and accounting because those two things come into play.  I don't necessarily know if I wanted to be a lawyer or an accountant but I would have loved to have had a good working knowledge of those two professions so that I could communicate it better with attorneys and accountants.  And I think because of where the road led me in terms of business and all of that, those two skills probably would have put me by now in an executive office at a record company some place.  And I'm talking about a pretty good-sized conglomerate company cause I would have brought the ability to have been an entertainer and to--and understand the rudiments of the--would have brought all that to the table, which is rare.
Speaker 1: And you--but do you think--okay, so those are the things you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Story_ID: 55995
Speaker 1: But your--let me ask you this.  When did you, you've never said when you realized you had a special talent.  You've never addressed that during this interview.  There has to be some point.
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: I mean there has to be some point when you wrote--was it when you saw your name on the label?  I mean there--
Speaker 2: No.  No, no, no, no.  I, you know, I think I have talent.  I don't know if it's special.  I have been greatly blessed in a lot of instances.  Probably we'll talk about it a little later on.  But most of what I've done just has come out of raw ambition and the willingness to be rejected, the audacity to try and, and so I've always you know, kind of landed on my feet.  But I, you know I, I don't think I would ever--I go back again to the [Max Ehrmann's Desiderata] -"don't compare yourself to others or you may become vain and bitter," you know.  So I don't know what that is.  I think if I have--(unclear).  I'll tell you what somebody told me one day.  He said, "You have a great sense of timing."  And I, you know maybe that's a musical timing or maybe it's a life timing I'm not sure what they meant by that.  But I think if there is a talent that's one of the talents.  And I love a good story and I think that I probably have better talent at telling the story than I do at being the musician.  You know I, I view Ray Charles and Stevie Wonder, Donnie Hathaway, Nat "King" Cole, they were all great musicians who could tell a story.  I think I'm a great story teller who gets over as a musician.  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's an interesting viewpoint.  I'm not--really, that's interesting.
Story_ID: 55996
Speaker 1: The other thing, when--what do you like about performing you know cause some--you like performing don't you?  The old musicians really like it.  Some of the new ones don't know how to do it.
Speaker 2: Well you know a lot of that goes back to Dr. Phil Moore.  You know we studied performing. You know how do you walk into a room that's full of people who have come to be entertained, some who may know who you are, some who have never heard of you before in their lifetime and how do you entertain them?  Certainly if the music is good and you don't flat the notes or choke on the words that will get you so far.  But what is going to make this a memorable evening?  What is going to get you beyond the norm?  Are you going to be a James Brown, are you going to dance and do the split, turn some flips?  I mean, well no, I can't do that.  Are you going to be a Nat "King" Cole, are you going to just elocute them to death and then sit down at the piano and play and, duh-duh?  No, I can't do that.  So what do you do then?  What you do is to--you try to make your personality and your music and the people around you mold into an evening's worth of entertainment.  And often times that may be a song that you sang, it may be a word that you said, it may be a note that someone in the group played.  I mean there are a whole bunch of things that can make the evening work and you try to find all of the variety that you can and put it on the table.  It's--I'll give you a quote.  I was at the Latin Casino [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and the critic wrote the next morning, "The Iceman at the Latin Casino is very much like a real fine Chinese deal," because it had so much variety in it and little bit of this, little bit of that, little bit of this, little bit of that.  He say and you came away and in 15 minutes you want to go back and get some more because you had used all that up.  So I think that if there is a talent I'm--that's probably what I've been able to do.
Speaker 1: And how does the audience make you feel?  How do you know you're in synch?  You know there is always the performer knows when they're in synch or they--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --it's that feeling.  I mean how would you describe that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know there are--Robert Bowles, "Boogie" Bowles said to me one day, he said "Jerry, you know when you're in the groove is when all of the musicians heads start moving at the same time in the same direction."  He said, "and that's--you've locked a groove then when all of them are-" and I guess what happens is when you're on stage and you look out there and you see the expression on faces and you hear the responses from the audience and you see the feet tapping and the hands--you know when it's right.  Audiences don't fake it.  They just, they give it up if it's good and they let you know if it's not.  If you're not reaching them, there's nothing that you can do to pull them in.  And once you get them, they let you know.
Story_ID: 55997
Speaker 1: --Jerry Butler couldn't get a little music in on the side he would not be a happy camper.
Speaker 2: Oh probably not, but you know there was a song a guy wrote once, it said, said, "I take cream in my coffee, sugar sometimes in my tea, but that's not all of me, you know."  And so you know the music part of me, I enjoy other people doing it.  I enjoy doing it myself.  As I say I, I used to do it free.  I used to sing on street corners, no money involved just for the joy of singing on street corners.  It later turned into a business.  Didn't lessen the enjoyment anymore, matter of fact enhanced it a whole lot in terms of getting paid and all that kind of stuff.  But I think you could be an executive and still go out on the road and sing and enjoy yourself.  That's what I do now as a [City] Commissioner [for Chicago, Illinois].  I--Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, I'm Commissioner.  Friday and Saturday, I go sing.
Speaker 1: Now that's what I want to talk about your entre into politics.  So what--let me just tie up the Motown.  After you did Motown--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --was it that, were you going cause the beer distributorship came after that right, or was it around that time?  When was the beer distributor, was Seven--in the Seventies [1970s]?
Story_ID: 55998
Speaker 1: But the beer distributor, wasn't that--?
Speaker 2: There were two of them.
Speaker 1: You had two?  (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Not that life isn't--but go on.  So what about that?  That came, but that was in the, I thought that was in the Seventies [1970s]?
Speaker 2: There was one in the Seventies and there was one in the Eighties [1980s].
Speaker 1: So you tried it twice, right, huh?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You tried it twice, okay.  And, okay.  But really let's--let me put your career in focus.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: The Seventies [1970s] and Eighties [1980s] were a little lighter, right, Eighties, right?  I'm just trying--correct me if I'm wrong.
Speaker 2: It depends on what you mean by lighter.
Speaker 1: I mean in terms of your--
Speaker 2: In terms of show business?
Speaker 1: Yeah, show business, that's what I meant.
Speaker 2: Let's make it more specific.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Let's make it in terms of recording.
Speaker 1: Right, recording.
Speaker 2: Okay, because during those years I was not having hit records.
Speaker 1: The music and (unclear).
Speaker 2: After 1973.  Nineteen Seventy-Three we record 'Ain't Understanding Mellow' which is a gold record.  Nineteen Seventy-Five [1975], I leave Mercury to go to Motown and from Nineteen Seventy-Five to Nineteen Seventy-Seven [1977] or so, there is very little that happens in terms of hit records.  We have some records that bubbles, get on the charts, but nothing major.  Nineteen Seventy-Seven [1977], Nineteen Seventy-Nine [1979], I'm back with Philly International [Philadelphia International Records] and we record two albums, neither of which turn the world around and after that, I'm out of there.  Nineteen Eighty-One [1981], I do an album on my own label called Fountain Records which was nah, no big deal and just about the time that the record started to look as though it was going to happen, a distributor for 50 percent of the company, American Can, which owned Pickwick, went out of business, decided they weren't going to be in the record business anymore.  So we lost it.  By the time we got to regroup and--it was gone.  The radio stations that were playing it refused to go back on it.  The stores that had it still had it sitting in the box because--so we lost it.
Speaker 1: So at that point, that was sort of a low.  Was that a lot point?  No?
Speaker 2: Kind of sort of.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But you know, I've always had the--I had built up by that time a pretty good reputation performance wise and so it wasn't that I need a hit record in order to live.  I've always been fairly frugal.  I've never lived above my means.  I've always been able to kind of stay within the boundaries of what my pocketbook could stand.  And so even though I didn't have a bunch of hit records, I was not really hurting.  I think about the closest I've ever come to really being a total downer was when we lost the beer company in 1989.  And that was just a--my partners and I didn't get along so well and it was time to bar the door.  But other than that, it's been pretty cool.
Story_ID: 55999
Speaker 1: Now when did [Charles] McMillan start working with you?
Speaker 2: Mac has been there, 1967.
Speaker 1: I didn't know it was--oh.
Speaker 2: Sixty-Eight [1968].
Speaker 1: Wait, so he came after Irv [Nahan]--oh.
Speaker 2: After Bill Matheson.
Speaker 1: Okay, Bill Math--okay, okay, okay, okay.  So you--so let's see, the beer distributor.  Let's talk about your entre into politics though.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So Mac has always continued to book you and you've always continued to perform, okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But your entre into politics, it does seem like it sort of came out of--
Speaker 2: Nowhere which is probably the best place to come from.  How do we get there?  Ron Bogan who was my partner in the beer business and I, we were driving right down the street out here and we were talking about state representative [HM] Larry S. Bullock who had been accused of being a Vrdolyak [politician Edward Robert Vrdolyak] person and was obstruction to a lot of what Harold [Chicago Mayor Harold Washington] was trying to do and was involved with the street gangs and I don't know how true it was or not.  But I said to him, "Listen, somebody ought to run to get this guy out of office."  My partner looked at me and he said "It's always somebody else ought to do it."  Said, "Why don't you run?"  I looked back at him and I said "You're right.  If I think it ought to be done, maybe I ought to do it."  So I get on the phone and I call [HM] Bobby Rush who at that time was my alderman and committeeman and I said this is what I'm thinking about doing.  What do you think about it?  He said let me call you right back.  He hung up the phone and I'm assuming that he called the mayor who was Harold Washington. Ten minutes later he calls me back he said "Jerry we wish you wouldn't do that."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "Well you know Harold Washington has been supporting a lady by the name of Lovana [S.] Jones and she came real close to beating Bullock last time and we think this time she's going to win.  If you get in the race because of your notoriety as a singer, you'll probably win.  If you win, you put a loser in Harold Washington's column.  If he supports you, you make him look at though he's a turncoat."  I said, "Okay I don't want to do either one of those things.  So--but since I've decided to do this politically then where else can I be of a benefit?"  He said, "Well you know the Supreme Court is--said that several wards on the South and West Side of the city are being represented by people who are not representative of their district."  And so Ed Vrdolyak who at that time was the chairman of the Cook County Democratic Party had the power to slate candidates for the Cook County Board.  And some of his friends were being slated to fill up the seats on the Cook County Boards, kind of as a payoff for their loyalty or whatever to the party and maybe to him.  And so he said, "It would be nice if we had a good slate of independent candidates to run against the slated party candidates" cause Harold of course had this democratic reformer badge.  And so I said "Okay, then that will be what I'll do.  I will run for a seat on the Cook County Board."  Commissioner [HM] Bobbie [L.] Steele became another one of those independents and young Italian fellow by the name of Charles Bernardini.  And so we became the three reformers running against the democratic ticket.
Story_ID: 56000
Speaker 1: So tell the story.  So you go on--
Speaker 2: Which story?
Speaker 1: The rest of the story.  How you got elected, [HM] Pervis Spann included.
Speaker 2: Oh man, a funny story.  So anyway, I said well what do you do when you run for election?  He said well first thing you need is money and people.  Maybe not necessarily in that order but those are the two things that you need most.  You got to let folks know you're running.  You need a campaign manager.  So I hired Carolyn Rush who was [HM] Bobby Rush's wife, who is Bobby Rush's wife rather, to be the campaign manager.  She said, "Well you got to raise some money."  I said, "Okay."  So we have a meeting at Barbara Proctor's apartment on the South Side and Barbara Proctor says "Well you know I'll do the advertising, I'll do this and I'll do that and this--(makes sounds)."  And they said, "We got to raise $250,000.00."  I said, "$250,000.00?  The job only pays $40,000.00.  What are we going to do with all that money?"  He said, "Well you know this is an expensive game."  I said, "I don't know if I want to play.  But we're out here now so let's go."  So I said, "Well I know one thing that we can do, we can put on a fundraiser at the Arie Crown [Theater in Chicago, Illinois] and I'll call up some of my friends and I won't ask them to come and do it for nothing.  I'll just ask them to do it of the favored nations and pay everybody $1,500.00 or something to come."  So I call Pervis Spann and I said "You know you do the promotion thing and this is what I'm doing."  Because he had asked me once before if I ever thought about getting into politics and I said yes, so I knew I could count on him to help me.  So he said "Okay Butler," that--so now I've got an engagement in Washington, D.C. that I had been doing for, at that time, about four or five years and it was going to take me out of town for about a week, ten days.  So I said, "Well okay, I'll get on a plane and go.  I know Pervis will take care of this.  And when I get back all I have to do is go do the show and we'll be straight."  Well when I get back I find out that nothing has been done.  So I call Pervis, I said, "Hey man, I thought you--he said, well Jerry you didn't leave me any money." I said, "but you didn't trust me.  You didn't think my money was good?"  He said, "Well Jerry you know, you're talking about lots of money here.  I-" So the question then becomes well what do we do?  We've got the Arie Crown Theater, we've got The Impressions, we've got Curtis [Mayfield], we've got [HM] Tyrone Davis, we've got Gene Chandler and they're all coming to town in ten days and you don't have hardly any tickets sold.  So I said, um, um, um. I said, "Okay I tell you what, we've got about 500 seats that we're going to sell at $100.00 a pop to businesses and folks like that."  And so we rushed out and we sold those 500 tickets at $100.00 a pop.  I said and for that we're going to have pretty much what we had at the DuSable Museum.  We're going to have nice little hors d'oeuvres and some food and tea and crumpets and we'll invite the mayor and the mayor will come and he'll say "Yeah, we want Jerry to run" and then I said and we're giving the rest of the tickets away.  Okay, that's a plan and we ran with that.  And now Harold [Washington] has been booked to do something for [HM] Dorothy Tillman but he says, "I will stop by on my way to Dorothy's function at your function."  And so he stops in and naturally wherever the mayor goes, all the TV cameras come a-rolling.  And so the TV cameras rolled in with the mayor and he said "I'm supporting Jerry" and he held up my hand and do-do-do.  And one of the reporters asked somebody who had paid a hundred dollars, how much did you pay to get in here?  He said $100.00.  And so he did the math real quick, 2,500 people at a hundred dollars a pop, $250,000.00.  And he rushed out of there and that was the headline the next morning on the [Chicago] Sun-Times.  "Jerry Butler raises $250,000.00 one night."  So that put me in the league with all of the heavy hitters in town when in fact we hadn't made a dime.  But the bottom line was we couldn't have bought that kind of exposure and so it just--all things worked for good.
Speaker 1: So it was all meant to be?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So how-
Story_ID: 56001
Speaker 1: What has been, what has the experience been like?  You know because you--that's a different role than what you were doing.  You know you went down--obviously you had been viewed as civically-minded.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Community-minded up to that point.
Speaker 2: --you know when you lay out your credentials-"Who is Jerry Butler?"  "Well Jerry Butler is a singer. He's been with a group called The Impressions.  But he was also a national vice president for NARAS [National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences].  He has also been a businessman.  He's owned a beer business and successfully took some brands that were dying in this city [Chicago, Illinois] and revived them, put life back into them.  He was president of the PTA [Parents and Teachers Association], at the Pershing School [John J. Pershing Magnet School] while his sons [Randy Butler and Tony Butler] were students over there.  He has always been involved in most of the school around town during the career days and these kinds of things.  And his wife [Annette Butler] is involved with the Boys and Girls Clubs of America and you know he's involved with Chicago Children's Choir and he's in-" and so by the time you start rolling it all out there, I looked like somebody who cares about the community and about the country that we live in and so I stacked up pretty good to a guy or a lady who had probably just been a precinct captain.  And so the people said, yeah, I recall once a cab driver, I jumped in his cab and he said, "Hey Jerry, I hear you're going to run for public office."  I said, "Yeah."  He said, "Well I'm going to vote for you."  I said, "Why?"  He said, "Because entertainers and athletes always put all of their stuff right out front."  He said, "That's why you're going to get my vote."  I said, "Well I appreciate that."  And so I, I felt a little intimidated cause certainly I was getting into a game that I didn't understand, not up close and personal.  I'd seen it from a distance.  As a matter of fact, most of the elected officials from the African American community that were elected going back to [Carl] Stokes in Cleveland [Ohio], Kenneth [A.] Gibson in [Newark] New Jersey, [Tom] Bradley in Los Angeles [California], all of them were assisted by the entertainment community.  And so we were always there in some fashion or another.  There to attract the crowds, there with our dollars to support.  And so I never felt that running for office was that big a deal.  Serving in office had me a little bit intimidated.
Speaker 1: Now how--
Speaker 2: But the act of running for office was very much like promoting a record.  You know it was all about marketing, merchandising, in front of people.  I didn't mean to cut you off.
Speaker 1: No, I didn't mean to cut you off.
Story_ID: 56002
Speaker 1: I--but the--so you get elected [in 1985] and you're serving--you had to learn, you for six--over the past sixteen years there are things that you learned that were totally different from the business that you had been in, even from--because I say politics is its own brand of business, you know.  Even though you were helping politicians along the way, I'm just saying were there parts of things that you've learned in the process of being a Cook County Commissioner?
Speaker 2: Well, some of what you learn early on is that if you want to get things done you have to learn the art of compromise.  That if you just say, "This is the way it's going to be and I don't want to hear anything else," you will probably never get much done politically.  You have to give others room to move around, to assist you.  And you have to make it comfortable for them to do it, otherwise you won't get their support.  In the sixteen years, we have gotten quite a bit done at the Cook County Board [Chicago, Illinois].  But it's always taken at least nine votes to get it done.  And often times whoever was sitting in the chair as the president could not depend totally on everybody that belonged to his party in order to get it done.  So he had to make some overtures to people sitting in the other party on the other side of the aisle.  And so you learned that, but we've kind of, even in show business, always knew that you had to make some compromises, that you have to cut some deals, make everybody feel that they're coming away from the table with something.  Outside of that and especially at the Cook County Board--you know the Cook County Board is not as political a place as a lot of people would like to make it.  We are really kind of a board of directors like for a major corporation.  The $2.7 billion that we are going to spend in 2002, going basically for salaries and services you know and those salaries and services have been approved by the board.  So you can't willy-nilly come back and later on say we're not going to pay them.  We got to pay them and you put the full faith and credit of the County of Cook behind every move that you make.  And that's what we do, you know.  Most people don't understand County Commissioners.  They think that we are administrative commissioners like the commissioner of police or the fire commissioner, but we don't do that.  Our body is a quasi-legislative body. We make policy.  We make some laws that are not inconsistent with state and federal law.  We pay the bills and we raise the revenue and that's what we do.
Story_ID: 56003
Speaker 1: Now Mr. Butler, what do you--where you are right now in your life, what things would you like to still do?  I mean would you like to still serve as a Cook County Commissioner until you what, decide you want to retire?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  You know people ask that question often because I was the highest vote getter in my first race for the Cook County Board, the minute the race was over, people started saying well you could run to be the mayor of the City of Chicago [Illinois].  My response to that is, is that I probably could run, I don't know if I could win because the county board seat is not as important to the total as the mayor's office.  And so a lot of the votes that came out of wards that normally wouldn't have voted for me would--well why, it's not worth bothering about.  It's not worth fighting.  If I were running for the gold ring, they would have put all the troops in the street to keep that from happening.  And so those numbers that look glowing, 580 some thousand votes would have diminished tremendously.  And I think as I look at the [HM] Roland Burris races for both governor [of Illinois, 1994 and 1998] and city hall [Chicago, Illinois, in 1995], we have seen that that has been the case.  If he didn't get the support from all the quarters that he normally would have gotten support for when he was running like for attorney general or state comptroller, if those votes hadn't disappeared on him, he would be the governor of the state today.  But that's the power seat and so that power seat is guarded religiously by those who are in power and those who have the perception that a shift in that power would change their ability to do what they have been doing.
Speaker 1: So what does the Jerry Butler, what does he still see himself doing?  What are his dreams? What things haven't you done that you would like to do?
Speaker 2: You know as I--I left a school this morning coming over here, talking to some seventh graders and the more I hang out in these schools, the more I believe that I think after I finish my time at the county board that I would like to go and teach.  I think that that to me would be probably--and it's in line with what I've been doing.  You know the songwriter's workshop was kind of a teaching place.  I did an artist in residency out at Olive-Harvey College [City Colleges of Chicago, Illinois] for a year then--about the music industry.  And you know at 62, I saw these seventh graders responding to what I was giving them, you know, at 13, 12 and 13 years old.  So maybe that's what I ought to be doing in my later years.
Story_ID: 56004
Speaker 1: You know I think you had talked also just a little earlier about being blessed in many ways.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: And I was wondering what you were referring to.  You said I am-"I'd like to talk about that later.  I've been blessed in many ways."
Speaker 2: Hmm, well you know when I look around and see how many artists who started with me who are no longer alive and some who are alive who are no longer successful, what do I attribute my longevity to?  Forty-four years in the music industry is a long time.  I look at my marriage [to Annette Butler], forty-three years in show business is a long, long time.  So I've been blessed in both of those instances.  I've been successful in two areas that's difficult to be successful in.  And let me knock on wood, hopefully we can continue to do that.  Then to wind up getting elected to public office and more than wind up getting elected, to have people come to you and say, "We think you're doing a good job."  I mean that is a great blessing because you never really know how the people are going to react to the laws that you put in place.
Story_ID: 56005
Speaker 1: And we've had some really controversial things to come down the pike.  Whether or not there should be abortions at our public hospitals was a, you know, I mean the clergy and the abortion rights people and all those come running down to the county board jumping up and down and stomping on you.  And you know, "Why are you doing this and why are you doing this?"  The fact that the jail is constantly over crowded--when I first came to the Cook County Board [Chicago, Illinois], 1986, it was a jail designed to hold 4,000 inmates.  It had 6,000 or so in it.  Sixteen years later we have a jail designed to hold 9,000, it's got 11,000 in it, plus another 1,500 on electronic monitoring and eye bonds.  Our system of criminal justice is in horrible disarray and I'm not sure what we can do about it because the judiciary is a completely different branch that's basically untouchable by the Cook County Board.  The state legislature often times makes law and sets policy that just exacerbates our problem here in Cook County.  The federal government puts a hundred thousand more police on the street and a hundred thousand new policemen say we got to arrest somebody and so it backs up on us too.  And so then the court system is jammed.  I mean they've got more cases on the docket than if they did a--two or three cases a day every day for the next year they wouldn't unload their dockets.  And so you have people incarcerated for what is maybe not too serious a crime for a long time.  We have got people in the county jail now who have been there five years in a facility where they're only supposed to stay for a few months because the system has not let them out.  I've got a couple of nephews who are in court for over a year and a half.  Their lives are on hold.  Don't know whether they're going to be convicted or exonerated but in the meantime, they are out of work, unemployed and living from hand to mouth.  It's totally unfair in a country that's supposed to pride itself on a speedy trial.
Story_ID: 56006
Speaker 1: You were talking about having--if you had moved to California, that may not have worked for you, you know in your--and--cause Chicago [Illinois] is grounded.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, and you know we were grounded here.  You know we had business here, we had family here, but it, you know-L.A. [Los Angeles] was a nice place to visit but I didn't really want to live out there.
Speaker 1: Now when you look at the business, you know the music business and where it was and where it is now and some of the old that's coming back as fresh, new, sort of re, re-whatever, what do they call it?  What do they do with the songs now?  What do they call--they do something.  Anyway, but are you--well, you said when I talked to you that you know, you came along at a time when at least there was a chance--that you weren't going to be totally ripped off like the people who had come before you.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And you know, and you at least had the vantage point, vantage--advantage of having people who had come along and could show you, you know what things to do.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And so first of all, I would assume you would say that your life could not be, have been without music?  I mean, no music--if you had gone and been a chef at the Palmer House [Hilton Hotel in Chicago, Illinois], do you think Jerry Butler would be happy?  Would he have been--?
Speaker 2: You know that's a difficult question to answer because at some point in time anything that becomes monotonous gets to be a drag, even show business.  So I think you know the daily grind of up in the morning at three or four o'clock, rushing to your office as a chef or whatever and spending the whole morning preparing menus and putting food stuffs together, duh-duh-duh, to do that six, seven days a week, everyday could get to be a drag.  But now we look at guys like Emeril [Emeril Lagasse] and others who have added the whole show business function to what they do.  So I guess that adds another extension to it.  But I am glad that my life turned in the direction that it turned.  One of the fellows, Pat, Patrick McFadden who works in the purchasing department at Cook County said to me one day, "It must be nice to make a living singing."  And it is you know, I mean the fact that you can stand on a stage and sing songs that evoke passion, memories, whatever and people applaud you and you get paid, it doesn't get any better than that.
Story_ID: 56007
Speaker 1: But also when you look at the period of you know people, a lot of people talk about the Motown era--
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you know, that--but when you look at you know this is an area that black people in music, you know we've been able to have our day in court historically.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: But you came out of a period that is almost a golden era and I'm wondering do you ever sit back and sort of look at that?  I mean it was--it's--there was true genius happening there.  I'm not sure if they look at the hip hop industry.  I think they'll see genius in a different way.  I think there's genius in terms of they make--they're making money and they've sort of--some of them are, right?
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Some of them are.  But what--I'm not--I'm trying to get you to say what I'm not saying so well.  So--and I'm not asking the question but--
Speaker 2: In every generation there is the music of that time and every generation has a tendency to think that the music of their period was the best music ever.  There are some things about music that really don't change.  There are stories in the music.  There are melodies in the music.  There are rhythms in the music.  Technology has come along now and made the instrumentation sound (makes sounds) a little edgy.  And though it's an irritant to us who grew up with the acoustical instruments and--you know we have to--my sons [Randy Butler and Tony Butler] were in cribs with these little football games that went (makes screeching sounds).  So when they hear it in the music, it's not an irritant to them as it is to us.
Story_ID: 56008
Speaker 1: The culture that we live in now is more in your face, more sexually oriented than it was when we were kids.  I should say when I was younger.  When I was young, you turn on the television, you saw [The Adventures of] Ozzie and Harriet.  They were sleeping in double beds.  There was a thing in the middle. You know they came down to breakfast buttoned up to the neck, duh-duh-duh.  Now the soap operas are as steamy as X-rated movies and yet we get offended when the children express themselves sexually.  Who's to blame?  I mean we--it's on the internet.  We put it out there.  It's out there for all the world to see and yet we are trying to keep it under the bushel, you know.  I don't think you can have it both ways.  There--even today, some of this music is really good music.  The problem that we have today is that the people who market and merchandise product have found that we can take samplings of the James Browns, of the Jerry Butlers, of the whoever and we can make a record out of it.  And we pay a sampling fee and we sell it for the same price as we sold the original thing.  And so record companies have played into as much as they decried, "Oh I hate rap and I hate hip hop," but they only hated it until the sound of the cash register.  And when they looked at the bottom line and they said, "You mean we only paid this much to get it and it brought in this much at the bottom line?  Give me another one like the other one" which was the phrase that used to be used in the industry when we came along.  We chased 'For Your Precious Love' for about three or four records in a row trying to make another record like 'For Your Precious Love,' which was a one-of-a-kind kind of record.  I have listened to some of the rap stuff.  There was a group called Arrested Development that I thought was extremely clever in what they did, how they put it all together.  They kind of just disappeared but the music was good.  And I hear songs--you know the R. Kelly song, 'I Believe I Can Fly,' I mean that song could have been written in any period because the story and the melody are legitimate.  It wasn't about the gimmick or the fad, it was about a true statement and all of the wonderful things that people think that they can do and the dreams that they have about being successful, etc.  And so that works and is still happening and I believe as long as people fall in love and can hear creative thought and envision themselves in situations that good songs will be written and good musicians will play those songs.
Story_ID: 56009
Speaker 1: I have just three more questions.  One, I would be remiss to not talk--ask you about your work with the R&B Foundation.
Speaker 2: The Rhythm & Blues Foundation was started by Ruth Brown and Howell Begle who's her attorney.  And it kind of came out of a argument with Atlantic- Warner Records in the sense that a lot of the artists who recorded early on for Atlantic for very small royalties and some for no royalties at all, find themselves 40, 50 years later with their product being re-released in CD form and people buying it in great numbers and paying the full fare of today's marketplace and yet paying the artists little or no royalties at all based on the fact that they had built up all of these debits in their account by re-recording product, re-recording product and recording product.  And so they were trying to stop that as a practice in the industry.  Some of the record companies, for instance Ahmet Ertegun from Warner Brothers contributed I think a million dollars or so to get the Rhythm and Blues Foundation started.  Jim Fifield who's the past president of EMI [Group Limited] had kicked in and upgraded all of the artists' contracts on his label to a royalty commensurate with today's marketplace.  Motown just recently came in with a $750,000.00 grant in the Gwen Gordy Fund [Gwen Gordy Fuqua], which was his [HM Berry Gordy] sister, to help Motown artists that had fallen on hard times.  Then the Universal Music Group just this past year gave us $2 million that we can use the earnings from to help satisfy some of the needs of artists who had recorded for any of the associated labels that are now under the Universal Music Group banner.  And then there is the Doc Pomus's [Artist Assistance] Fund.  Doc Pomus was one of the writers from the early days who decided that he needed to make a contribution back to the music that had made him a wealthy person.  And so he set up a fund for artists to get paid out of.  And then the Artist Formerly Known as Prince put up a hundred thousand dollars several years ago to do the same kind of thing.  And so what we do is we use those dollars to help artists who have found themselves in hospitals without any medical, financial support or who have fallen on hard times who maybe have their transportation in hock and can't get it out or the rent is overdue and they don't have a gig coming pretty soon and so that's basically what the Rhythm & Blues Foundation was designed to do.  But we also give applause and along with our applause and our plaques for pioneer contribution to the music, we give the artists a financial stipend to kind of say thank you and to applaud them for the work that they have done in the industry.
Speaker 1: And that's important right, cause a lot of (unclear) have sort of never really got the applause that they deserve?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, you know.
Speaker 1: They haven't been lucky enough to be a Jerry Butler to have even a career then?
Speaker 2: Not only that.
Story_ID: 56010
Speaker 1: There was a period from 1957 when the Grammy Awards were instituted.  Up to several years ago when only certain kinds of music was even allowed to compete.  For an instance, I don't think Sly and the Family Stone were ever nominated for a Grammy.  The Rolling Stones did not get nominated for a Grammy until here recently.  The Grammy's used to be hosted by Andy Williams and most of the music was locked into that and that's not a knock on Andy or anyone else.  It was just that that was the music that the Grammies wanted to represent to America.  The National Academy of Records Arts and Sciences is where that comes from.  And so a lot of these artists, James Brown, Little Richard, you--I mean you just go up and down the list of artists who were big contributors to the music of America, who ever got any of the national acclaim other than the fans running out and buying their records who were never honored and applauded at that level.  And so what we [the Rhythm & Blues Foundation] tried to do especially with those artists from the rhythm and blues genre was to say "Hey, we appreciate your contribution and here is a plaque and here is a check just in case you need it."
Speaker 2: And what are you proud of during your tenure as chairman of the Rhythm & Blues Foundation?
Speaker 1: My tenure as chairman of the Rhythm & Blues Foundation was pretty much like my career.  It was peaks and valleys.  (Laughter).  One of the valleys was we did a big show in Los Angeles and we walked away from it almost a million dollars in debt.  One of the peaks was that last year we turned it all around and we came away with some money in the bank.  But more than that is the fact that we have been able to help some artists who genuinely needed it and who thought that they had been overlooked and forgotten by the industry.  And every time we do one of those rhythm and blues shows, there is always some argument.  One of my favorite stories is that the Shirelles were being honored one year and they were talking about how Ruth Brown had told, taught them how to dress and how to travel on the road and how to be ladies and so on and so on.  And there were only two, three of the original members of the group still alive.  And Doris [Coley], who at that time-- came, they came on stage and she said, (singing) "This is dedicated to the one I love."  And the band went, "boom, boom-boom," and everybody in the place started to sing with them.  And before you knew it, there was not a dry eye in the place.  And we looked up and they were crying and we said "Whoa, whoa, what are you crying about?"  And they said, "We can't even remember what broke us up."  I thought that was so sad and you know that here is a group that the world loved, the people loved, they broke up and it was so infinitesimal what broke them up that they couldn't even remember what it was.  All they knew is that for fifteen or twenty years they had all been traveling separate paths.  And so that's part of what we do too.  It's kind of a homecoming.  Claudette Robinson from The Miracles said she wouldn't miss one for the world because she sees artists and people in the industry that she haven't seen in years and years and those of them that are still performing sound great, look great.  And what you see on public television now in the doo-wop shows was basically an idea that was derived from the Rhythm & Blues Foundation Awards.
Speaker 2: That's a good thing.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: That's a good thing, hmm, so you can build one on top of the other.
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 2: We're going to have a HistoryMakers' version of the R&B Foundation.
Speaker 1: Sounds good to me.
Story_ID: 56011
Speaker 1: Now the other--the two last questions.  One, the legacy of Rhythm and Blues, what would you, how would you class, would you sort of sum up the legacy of Rhythm & Blues?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I wouldn't--well first of all, you know Rhythm and Blues is one of those catch all terms because it encompasses everything.  I was, you know I was listening to Yolanda Adams, she's singing a gospel but it's on a rhythm and blues station.  [HM] Ramsey Lewis was considered a jazz musician but most-"I'm in with the in crowd" ['The In Crowd'] was played on all the stations, rhythm and blues, jazz, pop, you name it, they played it.  Muddy Waters said that "Rhythm and blues had a baby and the called it rock and roll."  I mean, it's so all-encompassing that it's very difficult to say that this is the legacy of rhythm and blues.  I would say that rhythm and blues is perhaps the one music in America that everybody has contributed to.
Speaker 1: Led by black people then because it's always been considered black music.
Speaker 2: Well only because people called it that.
Speaker 1: I know but I'm saying, you're saying country and western contributed to rhythm and blues, that's what you were just saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: That's what you just said.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I said that all of the music contributed to rhythm and blues.  Or you could say that rhythm and blues borrowed from all the others.  You see when you look at a, at Ray Charles, Ray Charles was considered a blues singer until he appeared at Jazz at Newport [Newport Jazz Festival in Rhode Island].  He appeared at Jazz at Newport, he became a jazz singer or a jazz musician.  And then when he recorded 'Georgia on My Mind,' he became a country and western singer.  It's the same man singing the same way.  All he did was to move the music around him a little bit.  And on top of all of that the music was played because it was Ray Charles on the R&B stations, on the jazz stations and the country stations.
Story_ID: 56012
Speaker 1: Jerry, what do you think your father [Jerry Butler, Jr.] would have thought if he had been able to see you and your--he didn't see any of this really?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Speaker 1: And I mean, and I think about how you said that he was a working man.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You know he worked.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, but what do you think he would say and also the fact that you thought you saw, you know that you believe you saw this apparition?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  He would have said I told you so.  (Laughter).  And he would have been so happy because the one thing that he always said to me is "I never want you to have to work as hard as I do."  And oh, he would have just, he would have been really, really proud that that guy Junior is a recording artist and a county commissioner, has had several businesses of his own, a successful marriage, he would have been happy.
Story_ID: 56013
Speaker 1: And your legacy, what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: I told someone one day who asked me that question, "I don't want one.  I want to be here till the last day and all day that day."  It's difficult to say.  You know I think when it's all over the work that I've done will speak for me and I've had a variety of works to do.
Speaker 1: Well what do you want people to say about Jerry Butler?
Speaker 2: "He was a fun guy."
Speaker 1: What do you want them to say about your music?
Speaker 2: "I enjoyed it."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: "That man could tell a story."  Okay, we're done.
