Story_ID: 122163
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Observing is Ed Anderson.  Sir, can you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My name is Joe Beasley.--It's J-O-E, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a--is your name--given name Joe or is it Joseph or do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It's Henry.  Joe Henry.  One of them good ol' names from way back.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, J-O-E, Henry?
Speaker 2: H-E-N-R-Y.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Joe Henry Beasley.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born on December 27 in 1936, in Fayette County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: At the present time, I serve as a Human Resource Director for the Antioch Baptist Church North here in Atlanta, Georgia.  I also serve as a Southern Regional Director for the Rainbow Push Coalition for [HM] the Reverend Jesse [L.] Jackson.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: June 22, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: Oh, we're at the Antioch Baptist Church North in the human resource building where we distribute food to the needy in this community.
Story_ID: 122164
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that only require a short answer that we always ask as kind of a warmup.  And the first one is:  Do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I really enjoy like pig feet.  And it's one of those things that we got the leavings back in Fayette County [Georgia], and we developed a taste for things like pig feet and chicken feet and pig ears and pig guts; chitterlings.  So I do--I still lean toward the pork, even though I know it's not good for me, but I enjoy it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Well, I think probably blue.  I like blue suits.  And so blue is a favorite of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I enjoy probably the spring best.  You're coming out of the cold and you're heading into the hot summer.  So you're just in between.  I know that I enjoy the fall--I mean the spring of the year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Well, that's interesting because at sixty-eight, I don't think I've ever had a vacation and because I've been working here at the church for the last twenty-plus years as well as working with the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition.  And I do a lot traveling.  And while I'm entitled to a vacation, I--generally when I traveling abroad to Africa and South America, I usually just--I feel ashamed to even ask for a vacation I'm gone so much.  So well I guess in reality, for the last five or six years I've had a cruise every year.  Me and my wife usually would take a cruise.  And while it's not really a vacation because we do work during the cruise.  I work with a group.  We're called the Haitian Support Group.  We do a lot of work around Haiti.  And we have a group that--and we talk about strategies in the black world on our cruises.  So that in the week I take off.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, the last question is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Well, I suppose, "The Lord will make a way somehow."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You don't know how, but, you know, He made the way out of the dark days of the plantation in my life, and of course, even going back further than that, to the dark years of slavery.  So He just made a way out of--somehow.
Story_ID: 122165
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Alice Beasley.  A-L-I-C-E, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.  Her maiden name, however, is Stallings; S-T-A-L-L-I-N-G-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is her date of birth and place of birth??
Speaker 2: My mother was born on June 24, 18--I'm sorry, 1909; 1909.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Fayette County [Georgia], as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was born in Fayette County.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, what do you know about your mother's side of the family in terms of your ancestors?  How far back can you trace your ancestors on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Well, really just back to my grandparents.  And, of course, I have heard of my great-grandparents.  But my mother's father, Joe Stallings--I'm named after him--was a minister.  And he also was a farmer.  And he was one of the fortunate men in Fayette County that came into land.  And he owned about a 150, 200-acre farm, Fayette County.  And my grandmother, Emma Stallings; Grandmama Emma was very much a homebody and she really just stayed close to home.  And I remember when--because, yeah my grandfather was rather fortunate in that area, so he had the land and he had a new house, if you will, and eventually got electricity and so forth.  But my grandmother was afraid to death of irons and stuff, so she wouldn't touch one.  So but she was a good cook and just a good, faithful woman.  And so, Grandmama Emma died.  I guess she was about seventy years old, 'cause I was--I was probably about ten or twelve years old when she passed on.  Then my granddaddy, Joe Stallings, he lived to be up in ninety.  And he was quite a courageous man.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why do you say he was a courageous man?
Speaker 2: Well, again, he was not totally a learned man.  He was an itinerant preacher, but he was a smart, wise old man, and so he had the ability to acquire things.  And I guess--I think. Even though he was a preacher, he had a kind of a mean streak in him as well, because when Grandmama died, he had seven children; my mother and then she had one brother and five other sisters.  And so when Granddaddy decided now that Grandmama, his wife, is dead, "I'm going to sell the farm and I'm going to travel."  And he sold the farm.  Not actually.  It really was swindled out of him.  That's one of the things--projects that I got--I'm going to look into over the next several months, because I understand that he was given next to nothing for the farm.  But he decided he wanted to go and travel, and he put in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Did whites buy it?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: Did white people buy it?
Speaker 2: Yeah. White people bought it.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And instead of putting his money in the bank, he put it in a suitcase and he started traveling across the country.  And he was on the way to Hannibal, Missouri, that's where his son lived, and someone took his money away, frankly; and--but what was interesting about that transaction is that what he said to his daughter and his five--six daughters and the son, said, "I'm going to give you all y'all share because, you know, from working on the farm."  And then he gave each one of them twenty-five dollars.  That was their share.  And he thought that was generous, I think (laughs).  But anyway.  And I go back--I was down on the farm--we had our family reunion here in Georgia last year, and we took family back down to the farm, down to the cemetery where my mother's people are buried, and where my mother--grandmother, granddad is buried.  Now my mother and one of my brothers.  And my spot is there as well.
Story_ID: 122166
Speaker 1: Now, you said that you knew--you heard of your great-grandparents.  What do you know about them?  Did--were there any stories about them or about, you know?  I suppose they came out of slavery, right?  In Georgia.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes.  And it's sketchy, quite frankly.  We were--the families that--it was not really--you know, I know they came from down toward LaGrange, Georgia, area.  But as far as actually having anecdotal stories about them, I'm just not that (unclear) familiar with their life other than the fact that they were, you know, hardworking, honest people that, I guess, had the tenacity to survive; and they were people that--with good reputations, for courage and for--and wanted to do the right thing and having a sense that they wanted a better life for their children and for their grandchildren.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So but you--there're no stories about where they were--I mean, they're from LaGrange or you thing?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: From LaGrange, but there're no stories about what those conditions were when they were in slavery or about when the Civil War came or any of that?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, there were hard times, obviously.  But as far as me, and my mother [Alice Stallings Beasley] was a historian, and somehow we let her slip away.  And she was a virtual walking dictionary on our history.  And we didn't capture it the way that we should have captured it.
Speaker 1: Well, okay.  Alright.  Now, did your mother talk about growing up?  Did she ever talk about how she grew up or having stories about growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, my mother was just like in the middle of the family, and it was the tradition--it was a tradition then that the older children went to school.  And we did have some private schools, high schools and colleges for black people, like Fort Valley State College [later Fort Valley State University, Fort Valley, Georgia].  And so my mother's two oldest sisters went to high school, public [sic, private] high school, because, of course, for that time, there was no public high school for African-Americans.  And so they went to the private public [sic] school, and then they went on to Fort Valley College, and they were teachers.  And it was--that was just the tradition in our family.  And they--the parents, my grandparents [Joe and Emma Stallings] made the decision.  And they readily discriminated.  Said, "Ya'll goin' to the school, y'all goin' to the field."  And so, the middle and the younger children didn't get the education.  Even though I must say that my mother, I guess, didn't finish.  I don't know how far she went, maybe fifth or sixth grade on and off, but an extremely well-read woman that just could converse on any subject and was extremely interested in the news.
Story_ID: 122167
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Rozie Beasley.  R-O-Z-I-E, B-E-A-S-L-E-Y.
Speaker 1: Now is there a story behind the name of Rozie?
Speaker 2: Is there a story?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Is it short for something or did--
Speaker 2: No.  That's a strange name, but that's it, Rozie Beasley.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you don't know where it comes from or anything?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I really don't know where it came from.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Daddy was born on June 5 in 1912.  And he grew up in--down in, really, Fayette County as well.  And his mother was (Charlotte?) Allen; last name Allen.  And Rozie Beasley--Henry Beasley was my grandfather.  And--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  And his mother's last name, was that Allen?
Speaker 2: Allen.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I had the occasion, I guess I was asked a couple of years ago to come back to my daddy's home church in Hartford [United Methodist Church, Fayetteville, Georgia], a United Methodist Church, and to be the Men's Day speaker.  As a matter of fact, I was invited to be the speaker this year.  So I did learn a little more history.  I still have an aunt that's, I think, ninety-seven years old, that live here; my dad's sister.  And she calls me almost every day now and just--but I asked her to give me some history about the family, and she wrote some things out for me.  One of the things I learned that I didn't know is that my granddad Henry Beasley helped to construct the first church, the Hartford Church.
Speaker 1: In Fayette County?
Speaker 2: In Fayette County.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so, in this instance, my granddaddy Henry Beasley died.  As a matter of fact, he died before I was born.  So I didn't know him.  But his wife, Charlotte Allen Beasley, lived to be up in ninety as well.  So I got to know her very well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she actually died in California probably about ten years ago.
Speaker 1: Now, did she tell you any stories about the family history at all?
Speaker 2: Well, she did.  She talked about the family and about some of the things that she enjoyed doing. She was really a godly woman.  She called herself an evangelist, and she was very much--and she got married again to a gentleman by the name of Elder Rivers.  And he was really a minister and she was an evangelist; quite conversant on the bible and had strict rules.  If you go to her house, you know, no smoking, no nothing, not to think about alcohol; anything of that sort.  But she would confide in my sisters and say, "Well, if you all have a wild streak in you, I'll let you know that you got it natural, 'cause I, as a young woman, I wanted to paint my lips as red as I could get them and get on a motorcycle and ride across the country."  (Laughs.)  But I guess she held all those views, but it was just an aside that she would talk about herself as being quasi (unclear) a godly woman that she had the instincts of more--really instincts that she didn't act on.
Story_ID: 122168
Speaker 1: Okay. Now, did your father [Rozie Beasley] talk about growing up?  What it was like for him growing up?
Speaker 2: My dad was quite a different kind of man, growing up in Fayette County in Georgia, where black people had no rights that had to be respected by white people.  But there were certain Negroes that you just didn't mess with, and my daddy was one of them.  And he didn't play by the white people's rules. (Pause)
Speaker 1: You were saying that your father, you know, sometimes--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was incarcerated and had to go to the chain gang.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  He had went to chain gang, because was selling liquor and moonshine, and--
Speaker 1: Now, was that unusual in Fayette County in those days to have to go to the chain gang?
Speaker 2: Well, somewhat unusual.  You know, there're people who were still killing one another occasional and so forth, but, of course, killing of--Negro killing another Negro wasn't no big deal.  But my dad, again, if you didn't pay the right people off, you know, you got caught.  And he went to prison a couple of times.  And the last time he went he escaped; he escaped prison (laughs), and instead of coming home and getting his wife and five children--I was the youngest of five-he went and picked up his girlfriend and went to California and had ten other kids (laughs).  So he was quite a rolling stone, but quite a different man.  Not only did he--he was not--he was someone that white people just absolutely didn't bother.  And when he settled in California, he was very much a man that didn't have any hardly formal education, but he could do anything.  And he took up, like, plumbing as a profession.  And he, not just a regular plumber, he would do a whole, like, a subdivision.  He'd go in and lay out--I mean, he had a mathematical mind.  And as I, later or years, I, you know, was the first one in my family to graduate from high school.  And Daddy would take us to work and he'd say, I'm gonna help him do some of the figuring, if you will.  And he'd give me--before I'd think of even start writing, he'd have it all figured out.  Right.  So he was quite a unique kind of a man in many ways.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you when he had to relocate?
Speaker 2: How old was when he--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How old were you when your father moved to California?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I was probably about eight years old.  And Daddy, like I said, he picked up and picked his lady friend up and went to California.  And he left Mother [Alice Stallings Beasley] there with the five of us.  And we had no--I think during the whole time he was gone (laughs), he sent twenty-five dollars home one Christmas.  So we were pretty much--and my granddad, quite frankly, Joe Stallings, while he had some means, he wasn't the kind of man that was a very generous soul, you know.  And then at one point, I think there was an old house on the property, and one of my uncles, who was going--was a carpenter, he was going to fix it up and let--for us to move in (laughs), but Granddad wasn't with that deal and stuff.  And so it was kind of an interest in dynamics with him.  He was a good man, great man; but, you know.  And so, some of my recollections in Fayette County [Georgia], I hated it, quite frankly.  I didn't like it down there, and--
Story_ID: 122169
Speaker 1: Now, let me--I'm going to get back to that in a second.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.
Speaker 1: I just want to ask you one more thing about your father [Rozie Beasley] now.  Is there a story about how your mother [Alice Stallings Beasley] and father met?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  There is.  The first Sunday in June used to be a day in Fayetteville, Georgia, right down the road here.  It was a day that, like a festival day.  And the black people from all the surrounding counties would come to Fayetteville and just walk the streets (laughs) all day.  And a lot of relationships developed out of those festival days.
Speaker 1: Was it like a Juneteenth Day or something similar in a way?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, you know, we didn't think of it in that term, but could very well have been.
Speaker 1: But it was the first of June?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Did it--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I really--that tradition of the--when the news hit Georgia that the slavery--the slaves were free--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Do you think it had anything to do with (unclear) being a slave--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I think it was related to that, but I had never really given that any great thought.  But that was our festival day, and we would--people would be selling ice cream and fish sandwiches, and we would just be walking all day.  And you'd dress up.  Put on the best clothes we had.  And I remember my daddy had an old black suit that he let me wear (laughs).  As we walked, it was about to falling off of me one time.  I thought I was pretty.  And we took pictures and things.  So that was a special festival day.  That's where my mother and dad had met.  And back in those days, it was not long courtships because, you know, transportation just wasn't there.  And if things kind of clicked and, you know, they clicked.  And so, that's how they met one another and they eventually got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I have in the nuclear family, I call the nuclear family, I have three sisters and one brother.  One of my sisters, my oldest sister Emma died a few years ago.  And my brother, who is next to me in age, died a couple of years ago.  So I have two sisters left; one here in Atlanta [Georgia], and one living in Detroit, Michigan.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're very close.  Always been very close over the years.  Then I suggested that we have--my father went and had ten other children, and so I have--and then I guess, I have to mention this too, but he also had one on the side here in Georgia was the same age as I am, Isaiah Beasley.  He live--he still live here in--he never left the farm.  And quite frankly he inherited many of my father's traits.  While he's not educated, tremendously gifted man that is extremely successful as a contractor and very wealthy himself, so; and then my sisters and brothers in Cincinnati [Ohio].  My dad died young and, as a matter of fact, as I say, when I finished--when I left Georgia, my dad, as we got older, my brother as a year-and-a-half older than--but so he came back to Georgia--he slipped down here, 'cause I told you he was an escaped convict-- so he slipped down here one year and picked my brother up.  He was big enough to go to work in Cincinnati.  So he came and got him.  And the next year, he came back and got me.  And I left my mother down there living on that road by herself, the only house on the whole road that's still down there.  But I--he wanted me to go to school.  So I didn't really go to work.  So I went to high school.  And I was kind of like a driven country boy that, you know, you all the ridicule that you experienced being a country bumpkin.  And so I'd set for myself some goals, and one of them was that I was going to be the president of the class.
Story_ID: 122170
Speaker 1: Of--
Speaker 2: Okay, now before we get you that far into it
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I want to go back to--
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Good.
Speaker 2: --some of the earlier years, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We always ask this question:  Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 1: Earliest childhood memory.  Well, of course, I remember when Pearl Harbor [Hawaii] was bombed.  And that was one of the things that I will always remember that was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You're about, is five, I guess--(unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Four or five or six?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  It was '41 [1941]. I was born in December of '37 [1937].
Speaker 2: Okay.  So you're about four, I guess.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  But I remember it quite well. And I could sense it was a, you know, world-transforming event.  I also remember when Franklin Roosevelt died.  He died here in Georgia in a little white house, was down in Warm Springs, Georgia.  And I remember great sadness that President Franklin Roosevelt had died [1945].  I also remember when Eugene Talmadge, who was the governor of Georgia died [1946].  And to me that was a good thing.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughs).
Speaker 1: Because he--I learned so much about politics and Democratic politics, if you will, all Democrats.  And Eugene Talmadge, the Governor, was saying that, you know, "I'm gonna keep niggers in their place forever."  And so when he died, my sense of it was that was a good thing.  But his son, who later became a U.S. senator, Herman Talmadge, he had the sense that he was living and, you know, his daddy's dead, so "I'm the governor."  And so during that period of time our crazy, curious Georgia history is, is that we had three governors at one time.  Old Herman said, "I'm taking over.  My daddy was the governor."  He went--this guy named L.S. Arnold was the Lieutenant Governor really should have been the next governor, but they were fighting over at the state capital like fools.
Story_ID: 122171
Speaker 1: You were talking about the--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Talmadge (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  [Eugene] Talmadge dying when you were a little kid.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  And so I remember, those were some real--my sense of it was kind of like life-changing events that--you know, and I became politically aware as a very young child.  Of course the rules in Fayette County [Georgia] was, is if you were big enough to walk, you were big enough to work.  So, you know, and so, I went to field and went to work and stuff.  But I guess one of the real events that kind of shaped my life, I heard about the Haitian Revolution.
Speaker 1: Now, how did you hear about that as a kid?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  As a kid out in the cotton--out in the field, about the Haitians defeating Napoleon [Bonaparte].
Speaker 1: Now who--how did you--when did you first hear about that?  I mean, or how did you hear about it?
Speaker 2: Well, again, my people, while they were not formally learned, there was something, I won't say it's instinctive, but there's something--I know there's something in the water (laughs).  There was something in the air.  And I still have a sense that events are, you know, God is generous and kind, and somehow maybe we get it through osmosis or something, but I became quite conscious of the fact that these slaves had rebelled, and Haiti had defeated Napoleon.  And I'd made a commitment way back then that I think that life can be different, and I'm gonna be a part of the difference, do what I can do to get in this struggle for justice and equity.  Because I just had the sense that--the knowledge that we were being treated subhuman and it wasn't right.  And it was also quite clear to me that we were just as smart as the white folks.
Speaker 1: Now, in those days--now, when you were young, did you have a sense that slavery was over or did you--did it seem to, from what people said, did it seem like it was still going on?
Speaker 2: Well, see, there was not much difference between--and I won't go into the academics of it--but it wasn't--much wasn't like it was when Daddy left, we was still working on Mr. Pharaoh, we called him, and I thought it was, like, "Go down, Moses, way down in Egypt land.  Tell old Pharaoh--"
Speaker 1: (Laughs).  P-H-A-R-O-A-H [sic], huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: But his name was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Ferriell.  F-E-R-R-I-E-L-L.  And, but, we called him Mr. Pharaoh.  And Mr. Pharaoh (laughs) had this--one of his daughters, who was crippled, and so she was not considered by the boys of her class.  And so Mr. Pharaoh went and got a real redneck cracker that had no--just a mean, old cracker is what he was, and he married this crippled daughter off.  And so Pharaoh put him over the, you know, the farms.  And he was, like, the straw boss.  And he would do the shopping for us, for groceries and things.  He would come and my mother would give the wish list on the Friday, you know what I mean, and she might say, "We want some bacon."  "Oh, bacon is too--cost too much for ya'll to eat.  Get some fatback."  (Laughs.)  And so it really was tantamount to slavery.  We didn't have any ready money.  And at the end of the year when settling up time come--came around, you always was in the hole.  Of course, you never got a chance to see the books.  And so when we made up our minds that we were leaving, and I said that one year, my dad came and got my brother.  He made arrangements for me to come.  I remember this old straw boss had came out, and me and my sister was leaving the field and we were leaving a little bit before the sun went down.  And he was raising big hell that, "You all," you know.   But we--in our back of our mind, we, "Yeah.  Tomorrow we gonna be gone, period."  You know.  So it's almost like we had to slip off and catch the bus and be gone--
Story_ID: 122172
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, too, though.  What were some of the--we'll get back to some of this political discussion, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Of growing up?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What did it look like?  What did it smell like?  What did it sound like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, dusty old roads; muddy old roads; you know, leaky houses.  Look up, you could see the stars; look down (laughs), you see--but I enjoyed, like, in the fall; you start burning, you know, the leaves and things.  So--but there was very few pleasant memories that I had of growing up.  To me it mostly was hell.  I wanted to get the hell out of there quite practically.
Speaker 1: It's a lot of work as soon as you can walk, you said.
Speaker 2: A lot of work, yeah.  A lot of work.  And but I--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: How old were you before you started working?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: How old were you before you started working in the fields?
Speaker 2: I'm saying, if you could walk, you could work.  You could do something out in the field.
Speaker 1: So you were out there from a toddler basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Yeah.  From a little kid.
Story_ID: 122173
Speaker 1: But I had a desire of education, I think, a little more than even my sisters and brothers.  So whenever I had an opportunity I went to school.  And, of course, one of the things that--that school is still there.  They rebuilt the school, but it was an old, rotten shack that we went to school in.
Speaker 2: What was the name of your grade school?
Speaker 1: It was New Hope.  It was a part of the church, New Hope.  It was an elementary school.
Speaker 2: New Hope Elementary School [Fayette County, Georgia]?
Speaker 1: New Hope, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we had one teacher.  And we had the seven grades.  And the teacher was really not a very learned person herself.  But you--we had the discipline.  You sat on your bench, and she went to the first grade, and second grade and you kept your mouth shut.  And so you had discipline.  But we had a desire, a sincere longing to learn.  And I happened to, you know, I wanted to make good grades.  I made good grades.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did you have a favorite subject or did it make any difference?
Speaker 1: Well, I liked history and I liked--you know, math, people were afraid of math, and (unclear) teachers didn't know it, so I didn't know anything about math.  So I guess it's just a social studies is what we were most engaged in.
Story_ID: 122174
Speaker 1: Was church a big part of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  My granddad [Joe Stallings], as I say, was a minister on my mother's [Alice Stallings Beasley] side.  And it was mandatory for us to go to church.  It wasn't an option.  We went to church, but back then church was only once a month; one Sunday a month.  And so we had these preachers that went around the different churches.
Speaker 1: Oh, the circuit rider.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And so our--we only had one Sunday a month, we'll be there.  And, of course, then we'd have a revival once a year for a week.
Speaker 1: In the summertime?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think it was in the summertime.  And what I recall about church in the early days is that the women and the children went to church, and the men like my daddy [Rozie Beasley], he would maybe drive us there in the wagon, but they'd be out in the woods shooting dice and drinking liquor while we were (laughs) in church, you know, so.  He'd be out raising hell, right.  Oh, but church was a very central part of our existence.  I think that really gave us the--this Go of you, know Him to be, that somehow He would see you, you know, through the difficult times and stuff, and that wouldn't put too much on--nothing on you you couldn't bear, so to speak.  But we never bought into the idea that, you know, the servant would be, you know, obedient to the master, but it's the Lord's will.  We didn't think--I didn't think it was the Lord's will that we be obedient to the master.  But, quite frankly, in Fayette County [Georgia], if you want to survive, and I think it's what one of the things that parents and mothers wanted you to survive the racism, which means there's a standard of conduct that you had to adhere to.
Story_ID: 122175
Speaker 1: Were you given instructions about how you had to behave?
Speaker 2: Oh sure, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Well, what did they [Beasley's parents, Alice Stallings Beasley and Rozie Beasley] tell you?  'Cause this is for history, you know, so.
Speaker 2: Well, obviously when you went to a white man's house, you went to the back door with your hat in your hand.  And, of course, it's always, you know, "Boss, yes, sir; yassa, no sir," whatever the case may be.  And you had to acquiesce.  You had to act subservient.  And, like, when we go in to the town, and Fayetteville [Georgia] is a little town, and the main part of town just like (unclear) when we were growing up.  And they had this one--had a theater and black people could go around to the back and go up the back stairs.  And then one of the cardinal rules is that, if you were on the sidewalk, if a white woman coming, you'd better get your black self off, out of the way.  You know, that was on pain of death.  And so it was the rules was clear.
Speaker 1: Now, did you ever see anybody break the rules or attempt to break the rules?
Speaker 2: Not really.  My--like, my daddy left early.  He left us early, but he didn't play (unclear), but I didn't, as far as me having him actually defying and stuff.
Speaker 1: Did anybody you know--now, I've heard people say that people in those situations, a lot of times, would try to avoid a situation where they'd have to obey those rules.  So they, maybe, if they saw somebody coming, they wouldn't--they'd go another way so they wouldn't have to be--wouldn't have to deal with it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.  Sure.  Sure.  Yeah.  The same thing with me, you know.  I mean, we would--just try to keep yourself out of harm's way.  And you're taught that.  And so this notion about what is manhood, it was a very perverted notion because you couldn't be a man in Fayette County [Georgia] unless you were a crazy Negro like my daddy (laughs).  But for the most part, people had to play their role, and they played them quite well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For survival.
Story_ID: 122176
Speaker 1: Okay.  Let's see.  So I was asking you during the break, before we took the first break, about how you got news and information.  And you said the Atlanta World was readily available.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  The Atlanta Daily World almost, it was readily available.  We, somehow, would get copies of papers.  And, of course, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution from time to time.  It could be daily papers, but we were quite interested in the news.  And as time went by, you know, our neighbors got a radio and they would let us come down and listen to the radio occasionally, especially if it was to be a fight with Joe Louis or somebody boxing.  We'd get a chance to go and sit around and listen to that.  And, of course, we'd listen to Amos and Andy, which was black folks making--cutting a fool.  Of course, we found out later on it was white people in blackface.
Speaker 1: So you didn't know it in those days?
Speaker 2: No.  We didn't know it in those days, but they really made us sound very ignorant.  And so that self-image, you know, was there and it's quite damaging, quite frankly to many people, you know, that image of self.  And, of course, it persists, you know, up until the present time.  I do--right now I do a class for the last almost twenty years in Clark Atlanta University [Atlanta, Georgia] on Thursdays.  And it's an unconventional class because it's a group of people that's sent to us from the courts.  It's an alternative to prosecution.  And the black kids still gravitate to the back of the room, almost like it's still there, you know, mean that we don't know how (unclear).  And the whites usually sit in the front.  And the blacks--slavery is over.  You can sit up front.  Come on up here (laughs).  So there's something very deep in this experience that this slavery and then the hundred years of Jim Crow and of the KKK [Ku Klux Klan] terrorism.  It's a deep scar.
Speaker 1: Now, did you hear any stories of terrorism down there where you were?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Occasionally there would be a Negro that would be dead on the side of the road or fish him out of the river.  And we had stories of, you know, misconduct (unclear) broke the rules; maybe they whistle at a white woman or something.
Story_ID: 122177
Speaker 1: Now, were you--well, when I was in, you know, Emmett Till was in Mississippi, but do you remember where you were when you found out about his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, see, that's when Emmett Till--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, you were pretty much--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Till--I was in Cincinnati [Ohio].  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --yeah.  You were pretty old by then.  Yeah.  In Cincinnati.
Speaker 2: I was in high school.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, how old were you when you moved to Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Oh, I started the seventh grade in Cincinnati.
Speaker 1: So you're about twelve I guess, eleven?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Somewhere around there.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And but I do have a cousin--I think he's still alive--that they accused him of whistling at a white woman.  And that, you know, the whole community went wild.  They chased him like a dog, and he--you know, I mean, he--it was--he had to run for his life.  And he eventually was able to get out of Georgia and to Cincinnati.  So it was real, you know.  It was quite real, the terror.  And so when I say to our white brothers and sisters, you know, you're talking about 9/11 and terrorism, talk to any Negro.  We've got past master in terrorism.  And so we don't scare no more.  So (laughs).  So, we don't scare no more, you know.  And God's been good enough to me that we're able now to go to Haiti and to experience the, you know.  They talk about Haiti being the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere.  There's nothing surprising about that, since the most powerful nation in the world had a blockade on it two hundred years [sic, the United States prevented Haitian merchants from entering U.S. ports from 1804 until 1862, but continued to trade with Haiti throughout this period] .  It's as if Thomas Jefferson had put the blockade on Cuba.  And that's all about race.  We never will forgive them slaves for setting this precedent.  And so the blockade is on.  And we've had as ambassadors to the Haiti people that hated Haitians.  And so, it's no mystery there.
Story_ID: 122178
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me ask you about Cincinnati [Ohio].  When you moved to Cincinnati, now, who was it that moved?  It was you and your brother and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Me and my brother moved to Cincinnati.  And, of course, at that time the family was still under formation; my other ten sisters and brothers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you moved to live with--your father [Rozie Beasley] was in Cincinnati then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, like I said, I guess when I moved there, maybe there were six kids, and they just--he had a lot of them; every two years or a year and a half there would be another brother just coming along.  But I think when we moved to Cincinnati, it was in a tenement, it was horrible; but I thought it was paradise.  We had two rooms, a kitchen and a bedroom.  And then we had a shared toilet with a family that lived across the hall.  And then the boys, we slept up in the attic.  It was the third floor of the--it was a three-story building.
Speaker 1: So this was about 1948 or so?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: No.  This was like '51 [1951].
Speaker 1: Fifty-one.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  1951.  Somewhere around there.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: And, but we slept up in the attic, and it was really a firetrap.  God was just good to us that we didn't--that we survived it.  But it was far--I loved it so much better than being down there in Fayette County [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Now, what part of town did you live in in Cincinnati?
Speaker 2: Well, I lived (unclear) the terminal station right downtown.  And, of course, Cincinnati is like Atlanta [Georgia] or Detroit [Michigan] or Cleveland [Ohio]; wherever the train stopped and the buses stopped, which was Central City, that's where we stopped 'cause we didn't have no food, couldn't go no further, had no money.  And then what we found out was, is that our white friends in the North had the same opinion about us as our white people in the South.  They said that if you all are coming, we're going.  And you can have the synagogue, you can have the churches, you can have everything; we're getting out of here.  And what happened, of course, the phenomena, I guess, and when so many white people ran from Central City, and then, you know, black rule came to towns like Atlanta.  And, you know, they would say, "Oops, too many of us left.  Now it's full of Negroes."  But, in a capitalistic system, whoever it is, is paying the fiddler, is calling the tune; so there's more decisions being made at Central Atlanta progress in Atlanta, like Coca-Cola, than it would ever be made in city hall.  That's why I had to spend all day yesterday down there raising hell at the counter because the Mayor had--the white people the business given Shirley Franklin an ordinance, and [philanthropist] Mr. [Bernard] Marcus, who put up two hundred million dollars to build this aquarium up down here.  He don't want poor Negroes and poor whites either anywhere near them fish.  So we put the welfare of fish and the tourists over the poor people.  And so Shirley Franklin tried to slip through an ordinance banning panhandling of any sort in a triangle here in Atlanta.  So, you know, I for one, others, I had to go and remind her.  "Shirley, I'm ashamed of you.  And you, (unclear), I'm ashamed of you."  'Cause I remember coming out of Fayette County when we could not go into the public park because of the same issue.  The issue was that Negroes are bad for commerce.  "Keep your black ass off of Peach Street.  You're bad for commerce."  And so, then God flipped the script, and now we put black people in charge, and I said, you mean, you're a disgrace to your ancestors if you would allow people's First Amendment rights, constitutional rights, to be violated.  And to beg, to ask you for some money, that's speech.  You don't have to give me money, but I should have the right to ask.  I rather actually have you to ask that, for me to knock you in the head and take it.  But I had to remind them, not only about the history of how we as a black people was treated here in Atlanta.  But I had to remind them that if they had any sense of history, there was a generation coming.  Here, right now, we're imploding the community.  You know, we're getting drunk, getting drugged up because the reality, it's too miserable, it's too hard to bear.  Why am I so hated in my own land, own country?  I've got to get something--some anesthesia to get me through the day; drunk or something, 'cause--and this baiting society.  You know, the hardest working people in Atlanta are the homeless.  They're damned.  If they go in the shelters, they got to be up by six.  And then you have to walk from, you know, and you're, you know, maligned.  And then even under [HM] Andrew Young.  Andrew Young, the white people made him.  (Unclear) but, (brought?) grant money in for housing for the poor.  And Andy had the audacity to take the poor people's money to refurbish Underground Atlanta, about seven million dollars.  He did.  Now, when they opened it up, we were down there raising so much hell until we--he wasn't able to finish his opening speech.  But it's that mentality that our political leaders have allowed themselves to be manipulated by the powers that be.
Story_ID: 122179
Speaker 1: And so, you know, but what I reminded the city [Atlanta, Georgia] of, I remember, 'cause I was in Vietnam when the saturating, when the B-52s came in.
Speaker 2: The saturation bombing?
Speaker 1: Saturation bombing.  And when they said, we're going to bomb these gooks to oblivion.  But the gooks had made up their mind.  They said that, "You know what you can do?  You can kill me, kill mama, kill granny; we ain't gonna take it no more."  And there's a generation of African-Americans coming that's saying, "We're not gonna take it no more.  We're not gonna, you know, go to just be put in jail."  You know, that's--my fear is, what we see unfolding in Baghdad [Iraq], and what we see unfolding in Gaza, it's coming.  People are not gonna to acquiesce forever.  And so, just as wrong to (unclear) from within, and George Bush, with his limited man; very limited ideologue, our President, need to go back to Crawford, Texas; somewhere.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But be that as it may, he's a limited man.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Let me--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --get you through high school here (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay (laughs).
Speaker 2: We got off of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yes.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --It was a good tangent, but it was a tangent.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But, now, you went to high school in Cincinnati [Ohio].  Right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now, where did you go?
Speaker 1: I went to Robert A. Taft High School [Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Taft High School.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, you know, that's one of the good Republican governors--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  Made a (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah. Robert A. Taft and--
Speaker 2: What was that like?  What was the population?  Was it all black or was it?
Speaker 1: No.  It was a mixed school.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: It was a mixed school, and it was a large school.  And as I suggested, I was coming like a driven kid.  And I said, I'm gonna be the president of the class, senior class.  I'm gonna be an editor for the school paper.  Those were the goals I'd set for myself.  And I had, not only was me and my brother, but Daddy [Rozie Beasley] had took everybody in.  We had cousins (laughs), so the whole bunch of the boys sleeping up there in the attic.  And they all had clothes, but they were working every day, and I'd have a choice of wardrobes.  (Laughs)  I'd put on whoever clothes.  I was well--attired, but I had--and they worked in Dayton [Ohio].  As a matter of fact, my dad worked in Dayton.  they would drive to Dayton, and occasionally it would rain.  Say, we're doing construction work, and I'd have all my brothers to loan my cousins suits (laughs).  And I get back home, and of course, they would be there.  And I'm walking in, but they really didn't mind.  But I applied myself, I think, pretty well.  I had all As and Bs.  I received one C that I raised so much hell.  I wouldn't accept it. I raised so much hell I made them change it.
Story_ID: 122180
Speaker 1: --(continuing) that was my--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, we have speed, but when we left, you were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --your ambition was to become president of the student body of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: And the editor of the school paper.
Speaker 2: --at [Robert A.] Taft High School [Cincinnati, Ohio].
Speaker 1: At Taft High School.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So what happened?
Speaker 1: Well, I became the assistant editor of the paper and I was real close to winning the senior class, but I didn't win.  But I was satisfied that I had made a good show of it.  And I was by that time a little bit vindictive.  The guy that beat me out to be president, I assured him that he would not get any publicity in my paper (laughs).  So--but anyway, that was--and I graduated.  Quite frankly, I was most likely to succeed.  And so I got a scholarship from Alpha [Phi?] Alpha Fraternity.  But it really illustrate--but I was planning on going to the University of Ohio [sic, Ohio University, Athens, Ohio, or Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio].  And the counselor was horrible because when I made application, he said, "What?  You don't qualify."  You know, I didn't have any language.  I didn't have any---math was very weak.  And so, they said no.
Speaker 2: So you didn't take the college prep course or?
Speaker 1: I don't think they had it back then, I guess, you know.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And so, I wind up--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So you didn't--
Speaker 1: --going to--I had, you know, got the scholarship and my family was all hyped up.  They said, finally one of the family's going to be going to college.  And so I went to the [Cincinnati College-]Conservatory of Music [later part of the University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio].  Quite frankly, what happened, I had--by that time, I picked up some of my daddy [Rozie Beasley]'s habits.  He was a gambler.  Then I got to gambling and lost my book money (laughs).  And so, I headed to the recruiter's office and joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 2: Now, did you consider--did anybody--now I know it's tough if you're in an integrated high school, it's probably tougher to get some direction about where a black student can go to college, especially in those days.  I know, even when I was coming along, it was the same thing.  Did anybody tell you about Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] or Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio], you know?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: And they were right just less than thirty-five miles away from you.
Speaker 1: Sure.  Sure.  And I probably could have went to one of those schools in hindsight.  But I didn't know.
Speaker 2: But nobody told you about it, didn't talk about it?
Speaker 1: No.  Nobody told me about it.  And so, the idea was that I still wanted to finish school.  I had the desire for that.  And so I said--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But one more thing.  What year did you graduate from Taft?
Speaker 1: 1956.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 1956.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So did you go in the Air Force the same year?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I went.  I joined--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So it didn't take long to get rid of that book money?
Speaker 1: No--
Story_ID: 122181
Speaker 1: And, you know, one thing about my dad [Rozie Beasley], while he was quite a worker and quite a knowledgeable man, he liked to drink liquor.  And he thought that to feed the boys liquor would be making a man out of them, right.  And so, you know, he'd feed us liquor and had to drink.  I didn't have no choice.  And he'd take us gambling with him.  He'd gamble and sometimes he'd gamble all night.  We had to sit there and watch him gamble.  And so we picked up from those habits and stuff.  So I lost my book money and I joined the [U.S.] Air Force.
Speaker 2: Now, why the Air Force?  Why did you join the Air Force?
Speaker 1: Well, I guess I was kind of a strange kid.  I didn't like the [U.S.] Army.  I didn't like the [U.S.] Marines.  And the Air Force seemed a little more exciting to me.
Speaker 2: Now, these are the days of the Strategic Air Command, the SAC bombers.
Speaker 1: Oh, absolutely.  Absolutely.
Speaker 2: They were--I mean, people were putting together model airplanes.  The Air Force is a big deal.
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: The astronauts were being chosen.
Speaker 1: And I spent twelve years in the strategic air command.  Most of my time was in SAC.
Speaker 2: And you're excited about that kind of publicity and that kind of knowledge about the Air Force?
Speaker 1: Well, I was drawn to it.  I was drawn to it, and--but when I took the test to--you know, I didn't qualify.  I didn't have any math and stuff.  So the only thing I qualified for was just in the general area.  So I could have been a cook, a cop, supply man or something like that.  So I wind up being a cop.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was a security police.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, how long did it take you to become a security (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, you know, once you finish your basic training, which everybody have to go through.  At that time, everybody went through Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, Texas.  And then you do your testing, and then they select where you go.  And it just so happened the police school was there at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio, so I went to school there.  And then I got--was assigned--my first assignment was in England.  So I left and went to England in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Now, that must have been exciting.
Speaker 1: --'57 ([1957].  Yeah.  Like going to heaven, dying and going to heaven (laughs) to go--to be in England and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That's more dramatic than I thought (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)  Well, you know, people didn't look at you funny.  Then when you got on the train, white people weren't afraid to sit beside you and stuff.  And, you know, the white women thought that black men was handsome and stuff.  And so it was quite a difference.  But there were still barriers in the society in England, of course.  Black people couldn't be anything like cops.  They couldn't bobbies and things.  So there was barriers, but it was so much better than anything I've ever known in the United States.  So I spent three years there in England.
Speaker 2: That's until 1960, I guess then?
Speaker 1: Yeah, 19--actually, I think I left the latter part of '59 [1959], but I spent six months in Casablanca [Morocco], which was another quite interesting experience, to go to Morocco as a young man.
Speaker 2: Okay. Now, you're in the fabled Casablanca in Morocco.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, what was--well, what were the racial attitudes in Casablanca?
Speaker 1: It was open, you know.  We hung out where GIs hang out at.  And I was not interested in Mecca.  None of that stuff was on my mind.  I was just a wild young man in the military, took my gambling with me that my dad taught me.  And I had this one--one of my best friends, who was a white guy from Tennessee.  We were was an odd couple.  We hung out together in Casablanca.  Both of us was crooks (laughs).  Anyway, we took to chance our gambling.  So we marked the cards and stuff (laughs).  We had all those things going, you know.  But we, you know--but I was a good soldier.  I was a good airman.  And when I really reached the point where I was going to make it a career, I put myself in the position where that I'd write my own performance reports.  That was another one of my goals.  I'm gonna write my own performance report--
Story_ID: 122182
Speaker 1: Now, how do you get in a position to write your own performance report?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, that's interesting.
Speaker 1: Did you see something in the system that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I was one of the people--one of the very few people that could type.  I was good at typing.  I didn't know the language that well, but still don't know it that well, but I could write better than most of the officers.  And being with some clerical skills, you know, I was--like a desk, work in the office.  And because the officers and the sergeants sure couldn't write, I could write.  I had to write their reports for them, and I'd write my own.  And you'd be the monkey of the last magnitude if you didn't give yourself the best ranking, you know, so.  And I made up my mind that, you know, I want to know my job, I'm gonna do my job.  I was there twenty-one years.  I was never late.  Not once.  Never sick, never, you know.  And I knew the job.  And so, but I had the idea that, you know, it was my [U.S.] Air Force, too.  And I'm gonna do my job.  I ain't gonna take nothing off of nobody, whether he was a colonel or whether he was a general; I'm going to--you treat me the way I, you know, and so.  It was a good contract.  And so I never was afraid of my rank, you know, even though I'm coming from out of the experience in Georgia in Fayette County.  And I was clear, you know.  If I had one day in rank higher than you, you sit down and you do what the hell I tell you to do.  I don't care whether you're black, brown, white, purple, polka-dot, you know.  So, you know, I was a good--and I retired, which was rather unusual--I retired as a master sergeant.  Especially in the military police, people didn't advance.  Many people just, you know, they didn't go any higher than a staff sergeant.  But I retired as a master sergeant, and I was a police superintendent, which means that I was the big boy in the (unclear), and I knew it, right (unclear).  Not arrogant.  It was just no nonsense.  You work for me, no nonsense, all right.  Everything by the book.
Story_ID: 122183
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when you--did you retire--were you--did you retire from Casablanca [Morocco] or did you come back here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I retired from Whiteman Air Force Base in Missouri.  But, I was very--I remember during the Cuban [Missile] Crisis, and I was, like, over the ramp, the B-52s.  And it's almost like the commies are coming any moment down here and I'm in charge.  And I was, you know, I'd come and drill the troops, right.  Man, you better know.  When I ask you, you better know the answer, right.  And I left my .45 laying on my seat.  Everybody knew it.  Of course, I'd be a .45, and "I'll blow your damn brains out.  You answer my question right."  And so I got along quite well in the service.  I loved it I was, you know, it was good.  The travel.  Three years in Spain.  Can't speak a lick of Spanish.  And I was almost like them back then.  You know, if you had any civilization, you could speak English.  That was our attitude.  "You're the monkey.  You're the one, you don't speak English?"  You know, but we were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you had a real American attitude about it all.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say, you know.  And for a while I was an ugly American.  So I was in Madrid [Spain] the day that Robert--I mean, President [John F.] Kennedy was killed [November 22, 1963].  I remember that very dramatically that funny-talking Texan was going to be the president, Lyndon Johnson.  And, you know what's gonna happen to black folks now.  But, of course, as it happened, he turned out to be the best president black people ever had, best friend we ever had.  And had Kennedy lived, he wouldn't never been able to do what Lyndon Johnson did.  I don't think he had the stomach for it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  A lot of people say that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But Lyndon was a driven man.  He and J. Edgar Hoover were, I guess, pretty much alike.  They had everybody's secrets, right.  And so he would twist the arms, and when he said--when he was being sworn in, "And we shall overcome."  Say, this guy gets it.  So as a result of his tenacity and [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] and God, you know.  And that's--so I think that things just don't happen.  But you have to be in place and ready, and if you're called upon, you'll be prepared.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you think of the Civil Rights Movement--the [1955-1956] Montgomery Bus Boycott was kicking off, I guess, as you were joining the [U.S.] Air Force, I guess, or around that time.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: And by time, you know, the time you were graduating from high school, '56 [1956], the bus boycott was going on.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Then the Civil Rights Movement was in the news pretty much all the time, you know, through the time that you were in the Air Force.
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Were you following it?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Story_ID: 122184
Speaker 1: --And we had our own civil rights movement.  And if you're looking through my bio where you'll notice that I organized a number of organizations.  And since I had made a commitment to be excellent, and I wasn't taking nothing off of nobody, and the stores where you--we call it the base exchange where you buy your products, and the only thing they had was Visine (laughs) for our kinky hair.  There was no black products.
Speaker 2: Oh, not about--you're talking about--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That little old stuff you put on your hair--(unclear).
Speaker 2: Brylcreem or something?
Speaker 1: Like--it was Visine back then.  It was a little ol'--you'd dump it all and it was liquid.
Speaker 2: I know what you're talking about.  Vitalis, you mean.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Maybe that was it.
Speaker 2: 'Cause Visine is eye drops (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  Vitalis.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Vitalis.  I had to think of it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah. Yeah.  And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It was V7 and it had V7 to make straight hair be combed into an Elvis Presley style, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So we demanded--that was one of the things we could do--we demanded; we wanted our products in the BX [base exchange], I remember (unclear).  So I was leading those movements.
Speaker 2: So what did y'all ask for in the BX?  What did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: We wanted things that was ethnic, something for black people.
Speaker 2: What in specific?  Since we mentioned Vitalis, what did you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, it was the, you know, it--I can't even think of--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I can name some.  Royal Crown.  Murrays.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Maybe not those.
Speaker 1: Murrays, yeah.
Speaker 2: Murrays?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Hair pomade.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Yeah.  Those kind of products.  And we got them in the stores.  And then we wanted soul--we had different ethnic meals.  We wanted soul food, and we demanded it.  Once a week a want soul food, and we want what we want.  We want chitterlings, we want ham hocks.  We--(unclear).  I said to them (unclear), like that.  Going up in Fayette County [Georgia], then they gave us what the white folk throw away.  They didn't want the guts, they didn't want the feet, they didn't want the ears.  Now who--(unclear), would you love a taste for them?  We want it, my God.  And so--and we got it.  And, of course, then we wanted a night at the club, our music.  We want black people.  One night for black people a week.  Initially, they was playing with us.  They said, "Well, we know exactly what you want."  And the first Negro they brought on to perform for us was [country singer] Charlie Pride.  Say, "You want somebody, black?  (laughs).  We got ol' Charlie (laughs).  But that didn't work for us long.  We let them know we were serious about it, and we wanted real black music and so forth.  And so we were able to--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: So who'd you get--I mean, who did they bring?--  (unclear),
Speaker 1: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You remember anybody that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Well, you know, I don't know the name, but what was that they (unclear)--and I was always kind of like a serious person, you know.  And I never learned how to dance.  They didn't teach me how to dance down there in Fayette County, (stepping?).  I never did learn how to dance.  None of that stuff.  I was pretty much demanding it, but once it got there, then, you know, as long as it was there, you know, but I didn't, you know, I never was often to--my mind was kind of like, let's get on with that fact that black people is a, you know, the last one promoted and the first one demoted; the first one to be put in the stockade.  We're bringing a stop to that, now so.  Now we had a real civil rights movement in the [U.S.] military.
Story_ID: 122185
Speaker 1: Were you able to change conditions for black airmen by being a police--a policeman?  A superintendent?
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't--I didn't start out as a superintendent, of course.  That came over time.  But we had, we put together what we call a Society for Black Unity.  There was two organizations I found.  One was the Society for Black Unity, and the other was Brothers United Together.
Speaker 1: Now, I have to ask this question 'cause it sounds a little strange for those days, but the organization is called the Society for Black Unity?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In 19--when you found that?
Speaker 2: Oh, my goodness.  I didn't--I founded that in, I think, at Pope Air Force Base [North Carolina] in, like, right after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed.  I went after Dr. King.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was '68 [1968].  That makes sense.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I was going to say if it was earlier, you know, everybody--it wasn't prior to--just a year prior to '68 [1968], everybody was a Negro.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Still.  You know, so.
Speaker 2: And we took on titles like the premier.  We weren't no president.  We were premier (laughs).  And it really was interesting, like, when we get to Thailand, I founded, I guess it was Brothers United Together; and one was Brothers United Together and one was Society of Black Unity.  And we bought these--this African garb.  We had on these long dashikis.  But by that time, they thought that, you know, that we were militant in the military.  And they said, "Aren't you afraid to do that?"  "Hell naw, I'm not afraid."  You know, we were here.  "I'm gonna do my job.  I'm gonna do whatever hell else I want to do."
Speaker 1: So this is in the late sixties (1960s), too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah.  Right.  And so--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: So you spent some time in Vietnam, you said?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was in Vietnam in 1967.  I went in March of 1967 and was there during the Tet Offensive, which was the real part of the war.  And I returned to Atlanta [Georgia] on August 4th, 1968, the day that Martin Luther King was killed.
Speaker 1: It's April 4th, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--which was a very traumatic time, you know, for us with Dr. King.
Speaker 1: And you came back to Washington, D.C.?
Speaker 2: No.  I was in Atlanta.
Speaker 1: Oh, Atlanta.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In Atlanta.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: So you came--okay.
Speaker 2: I was in Atlanta the day that he was killed.
Speaker 1: Did you go to the funeral here?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I went but the line was too long.  And so I wouldn't stand in the line.  I stood in there for a while, but I got tired and got out of the line.
Speaker 1: Can you remember where you were when you heard about it and what you were doing?
Speaker 2: I had just--again, my mother [Alice Stallings Beasley] lived--by the time, was living in Atlanta.  And I was a party person, you know what I mean.  I would go--get to the bright lights of Atlanta, there were clubs were open all night (laughs), so.  But to say exactly where I was at, I don't know exactly.  I think I was at my mother's house.  But we were, you know, first Dr. King was shot--had been shot, and then a little later on coming back, Dr. King had died.
Speaker 1: Now, can you describe for us how did you feel when you heard it?  When you heard the news?
Speaker 2: Well, a great sense of loss, you know.  A great man that was one of the greatest men in the history of the world; one of the greatest Americans, a champion of justice, someone that was not afraid; and that given the ability to articulate the (unclear) for someone that the whole world had recognized with the Nobel Peace Prize, that a great man had been taken from amongst us.  And so it was more encouraging to me than ever to get here and do my bit, if you will--
Story_ID: 122186
Speaker 1: And as I followed the Civil Rights Movement very close and upfront, and I was very drawn to [HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson.  And I didn't understand that [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] had really laid out his succession plan, which would suggest that Dr. [Ralph] Abernathy would be the successor.  And so to me it just made sense.  It should have been Jesse Jackson.  And I believe, quite frankly, that had Jesse Jackson--as much as I loved Dr. Abernathy, and I got to know him quite well; and I know his wife, sainted woman, very close to the Abernathy family, and to the King family; I think that Martin Luther King, III, to me is a great young man.  And I dismiss out of hand anybody who would say, "Well, why don't Coretta, Dr. King, why don't she"--and now "Why don't you do it?  Don't give Mrs. King and their orders.  Don't suggest that Martin, III, need to have the same vision as his daddy.  No.  Don't suggest that Dexter [Scott King] have to, you know--no, you do it."  And so I'm a defender of the leaders of the Civil Rights Movement.  And, you know, when Ralph Abernathy had some difficulties, we've always come to the defense.  And we don't care who didn't like it.  And I've been depicted in cartoons in the Atlanta [Journal] Constitution for being some kind of a nut when, you know, I think Ralph was caught with a small quantity of marijuana or something.  And we went to his defense.  And they had a cartoon of me in the paper, me and Tyrone Brooks that "They must be high on something," you know.  Had some other (laughs).  But I just say that we're defender of--and for--to have their father, Dr. King, taken as little kids, I'm just happy that they're as well off as they are.  And so, you know, and I, I don't know how much you know about--you know, there's been a whole hell raised about somehow Dexter King and Martin had taken all the money, right, and they mixed in funds of the for-profit and not-for-profit.  And, of course, I've been for the last year crusading against the Boy Scouts here in Atlanta, who have created all these ghost and phantom troops here in Atlanta.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  We'll get to that at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.
Speaker 2: But, I just want to know about how you felt about Dr. King [Jr.] at the time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --having been out of the country so long and coming back in and having not actually been around long when he was in his political heyday, I mean, of organizing.  And as soon as you get back he's killed.
Speaker 1: He's killed, yeah.
Speaker 2: And, I mean, but at that time, had you--did you consider yourself--when you came back, did you consider yourself like a follower of Dr. King?  'Cause some people, frankly, didn't consider themselves--they admired him, but they didn't consider themselves in the same--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: No.  No.  Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: No.  I absolutely subscribed to the nonviolent direct action approach that King had.  And that was, again, when I left and went from Atlanta [Georgia] to Pope Air Force Base in Fayetteville, North Carolina, that's when I organized, you know, the black organization there in the tradition of Dr. King to speak out and to change things.  And we did change some things in the military.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, did--what did you think--were there riots in Atlanta here after Dr. King was killed?
Speaker 1: No.  No.  We didn't have riots.  As a matter of fact, one of my nephews, Kenneth Beasley, was one of the leading athletes here, and he was graduating from high school, and he was very--someone that was called upon to talk to the young people about not to go to the streets and so forth.  So we didn't have riots in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 122187
Speaker 1: So there's no riots in Atlanta [Georgia] or any of that kind of thing after [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] was killed.  Right?
Speaker 2: There was no riots.  And Atlanta, quite frankly, had pretty good race relations here in Atlanta.  And people had worked at it from both sides; the whites and the blacks, had worked to integrate the schools, you know, so.  And so, there was a coming together for people to try to make sure that riots didn't break out, and they did not.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A lot of cities did.  The bigger cities of the North, Chicago [Illinois]; Washington, D.C.; other places had a lot of, you know, riots.  Even my hometown, Dayton [Ohio], had a little riot because of it.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Now did--do you went to Carol--you were still in the [U.S.] Air Force when Dr. King was killed.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: You'd just come back to this side--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Just, yes, come back, and I was reassigned to Pope Air Force Base in Fayetteville, North Carolina.  And I did, at that time, organize a black organization.  And I believe, you know, it was Brothers United Together.  I believe it was the name of the organization, Brothers United Together, and at Pope Air Force Base.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you think about the change in nomenclature from Negro to black in those days?  Do you have any thoughts about that?  'Cause that happened just about that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I thought that black was more appropriate, as far as I was concerned.  And then when we went from black to African American, I thought it was more descriptive.  And I've arrived now at the point that to fully understand that I'm an African and so we can drop the American.  As far as I'm concerned, I'm an African.  And as I've traveled across the world, we're trying to get people, you know, whether you're an African in Brazil or you're an African in Ecuador or if you're an African in Liberia, you're an African.  This thing about these artificial barriers been drawn as far as Uganda or Rwanda, you're an African.  That's the first thing.  You're an African.  And so it's a lot of people saying, "Well, you know, Africa has fifty-plus countries and they wanted their own identity."  That causes a lot of mischief.  I think we need to understand that the Lord has for whatever good reason He have, and He have a good reason, that we've been singled out for challenges for the last five hundred years.  And I'm glad about it.  I'm glad about it, and I believe that we're on the edge.  I'm a fool enough to believe in the Bible that says, "If you'll take one step, I'll take two."  And I believe that we're somewhere approaching critical mass.  And so when I see things that are going on in Africa that is damnable, I'm not discouraged, because I believe that we're on God's short list.  There's gonna be some tremendous things happening.  I think the 21st century is the century of Africa.  And so as we struggle for our unity, and there are a billion of us that's on the planet, and if we can understand that whether you're on English Avenue in Atlanta, Georgia, or if you're in Soweto in South Africa or if you're in a favalo [sic, favela] in Brazil, on the side of a hill, that you've been picked out to be picked on because you're an African.  You're descendants of slaves.  And while we're not in any way tired and discouraged by it, it's an organizing point, I believe, that, you know, that we're coming together.  And I'm just so happy to be an African living in America in the belly of a beast in 2005.  God has positioned us.  Strategically positioned to be here in this country.  And I believe that for us not to use everything we can to better the conditions of Africans across the globe, we'd miss a great opportunity.  At the same time, we don't want to put nobody down.  There's plenty of resources in the world for everybody.  And so I believe that the conditions that we've been able to--given us a kind of humanity that we don't want nobody down.  We want everybody up.  And so it's a great time to be alive.
Story_ID: 122188
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you would consider yourself a Pan-African at this point?
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  No question about it.
Speaker 1: In those days, there are people now that are-we have, like, people like, oh, [libertarian commentator] Larry Elder and other people that kind of--you know, they don't--they minimize the link to Africa.  And there's even one black Republican wrote a book about, you know, we haven't lost anything in Africa (unclear).  But in those days, in the days when [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] --when you came back to the U.S., Malcolm X had been assassinated, Dr. King had just been assassinated.  Did you know--were you aware of--were you as aware of Malcolm X in those days as you were of Dr. King?
Speaker 2: Well, not as aware, but was well aware and admired, you know, Malcolm X very much so.  And--but--and this is not a put-down of Malcolm at all, and I'm a very close adherent, and I worked close with [HM] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan.  As you can see in my office pictures of me and Minister Farrakhan.  And I--Minister Farrakhan was out at our convention in Chicago [Illinois] last week, and I participated in their Savior's Day.  So we're not gonna let nobody put a wedge between us, you know, because you don't necessarily love Jesus, I'm gonna fall out with you.  I ain't falling out with you, you know, we're black folks first.  And so, but I do say that it was one thing for Malcolm X to be talking the talk in New York [New York] and, but Martin was walking the walk in Salem [sic, Selma, Alabama] and stuff.  In Montgomery [Alabama], he was in the belly--he was really in the lion's den.  So I'm not denigrating at all what Malcolm was doing, but New York was different from the Deep South.  So I have great admiration for what Dr. King had the courage to do here in the Deep South.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I mentioned him because he was, I guess, the most articulate exponent of Pan-Africanism--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --I guess, during the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 122189
Speaker 1: How long were you in the [U.S.] Air Force?  You know, now we left you--you're in North Carolina now.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: You organized a black organization in the Air Force.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: How long did you stay in from that point?
Speaker 2: Well, I stayed in the Air Force twenty-one years.  I retired in 1978.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're in another ten years after Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  Indeed.  And--but I made the choice of the fact that I was gonna work for [HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson when I retired.  I'd already made that choice.  And so, and I encouraged people to set your goals and set them out a distance.  And so two years before I retired, we helped to organize a chapter of Operation PUSH in Kansas City [Missouri].  And it wasn't happenstance.  That was part of what I wanted to do.  And so when I retired on June 1 in 1978, I went to work the very next day as Executive Director for PUSH, for Kansas City.  So, you know.  And so, and it's not so much that I was pushing anything, but I believe that what Jesse doing--what Jackson was doing was right and was correct.  And I learned what PUSH was about.  We organized PUSH in Kansas City.  We have one of the strongest chapters in the nation there in Kansas City.
Speaker 1: Now, I know when after the death of Dr. King, there was some tension between Jesse Jackson and some of the older people in SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] in terms of leadership and so forth, and eventually leading to the formation of PUSH--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --which came out of, I think, Operation Breadbasket--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.
Speaker 1: --which is a program of SCLC.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Sure.  Absolutely.
Speaker 1: And when did you first become aware of Jesse Jackson?  I mean, really aware of what he was saying and doing?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I was aware of him ever since he first came on the scene.  And, you know, a lot of people were saying that when Dr. King was killed, that he went and put the blood on his shirt and didn't take it off for three or four days.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The blood on the dashiki, I think it was.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But be that as it may.  I think Jesse Jackson is the most articulate voice in the nation now, and I gladly follow, you know, Jesse Jackson.  Of course, whether he was fired from SCLC or whether he quit, I don't know.  I didn't ask him.  It was not important.  But I know that he organized operation PUSH in the basement of his church, [HM] Dr. Clay Evans' church in Chicago [Illinois].  And Jesse ain't no fool.  He didn't have to go out and write a whole lot of different bylaws.  I think he just took White-Out and (laughs) and (unclear) PUSH the SCLC Breadbasket manual, I think, became Operation PUSH.  Why should we write--rewrite a whole bunch of stuff.  Right?  And really we all want an organization anyhow, you know.  And I think that, you know, in these latter years, I think we're coming closer together as an organization, so.  But I admired Jesse's ability to tell the story, to articulate the story of the struggle of African-Americans and the African people (really?) across the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Since--I guess we can say that Jesse Jackson is probably--I mean that Operation PUSH and Rev. Jackson have been, like, the--been sort of at the forefront of agitation for social change and economic change for black folks since, I guess, the death of Dr. King,, had been--the organization has probably got the highest profile.
Speaker 2: Well, there's no question that Jesse Jackson and Operation PUSH has been on the cutting edge.  We have been really making history.  And when Reverend Jackson decided in 1984, and he really was not seeking--I've been close enough to know Jesse--Jesse Jackson was not seeking to be a candidate.  We asked people like Andy Young [HM Andrew Young], people like Maynard Jackson; in other words, we need somebody to offer themselves to be the president so we can begin to articulate the platform.  And so when no one else would run, he threw his hat in the ring.  And I admired him for that.
Speaker 1: This is--you're talking about his presidential run in '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, 1984.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: By that time, I was back home here in Atlanta [Georgia] and had established a chapter of Operation PUSH here in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 122190
Speaker 1: Now, before we get you here [Atlanta, Georgia], like, what kinds of things did you all do in Kansas City [Missouri] when you were director of Kansas City PUSH?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, we carried on the programs that the national office--we had by--at that time, we had, like, a labor--we had a grant from the Labor Department [U.S. Department of Labor].  I think we learned the lesson, because, you know, some of the, you know--but we had, like, (unclear) forced development and peace that gave us the capacity to have a big office there in Kansas City.  I was very concerned about the plight of black men being in trouble, in prison.  So we had put together a project to work with--to try and divert young men and women, you know, from the prisons there in--and, of course, we had, which was among the biggest programs was PUSH for Excellence, where we went into the schools and said to the young people, you know, to be excellent in their education; to sign a pledge that you would study, you know, two hours a night.  And we encouraged the parents to take your children to school and meet your--the parents, see your children's teachers and exchange phone numbers; then every nine weeks, to go back to school and pick up the report card.  And so we were very much involved in education.  And, of course, the biggest thing that I think that Operation PUSH was about in doing is the ongoing discrimination that still exists.  And so, you know, people would come to us with complaints of job discrimination, you know; unfair firings, and the lack of promotion opportunities.  So we took on the struggle for equity in Kansas City.  And so it was a very fascinating job.  And when I decided to come back home to Atlanta [Georgia], enough time had elapsed, because [HM] Jesse [L. Jackson] had meticulously decided that he would not put a chapter in Atlanta, the headquarters of--well, that's SCLC [Southern Christian Leadership Conference] National Office.  But by that time--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: To avoid conflict with SCLC?
Speaker 2: Conflict.  Right.  And, but it was clear there's enough work for everybody to do.  And so, I guess in 1981, we opened--organized a chapter of Rainbow--I mean of Operation PUSH here in Atlanta, Georgia.  And it was such a great pleasure to work with [HM] Dr. Joseph Lowery and Reverend Osborn, who is one of the leaders.  And at that time, people, like Abbott Love, who now is back working with SCLC again full time.  And I, you know, always sought to put SCLC involved in everything that we were doing.  And then freely acknowledging that you are the parent and we're the children, and we want to learn.  We want to work with you.  And as we take on these different  issues, we're not concerned about who gets the credit for it.  Let's knock down some of these barriers together.  And then, of course, we agree with the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  Yes, you're the oldest.  You're the biggest.  You're the baddest.  Having said that, let's work together.  Let's work together.  And whether Mr. [Kweisi] Mfume or whether Nelson Rivers, who's one of the leaders, if y'all gonna be the first to speak or the last how we gonna do it, let's do it together, 'cause I don't give a rip about who gets the credit, you know.  I, for one, am not looking for no accolades from nobody.  And if my name is never called, all the better.  But I'm gonna be behind the scene doing some work.  That's what I'm concerned about.
Story_ID: 122191
Speaker 1: Now, what is the difference--now, we've all been hearing, like, Rainbow Coalition, Operation PUSH.  What is the difference?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, again, in 1984, [HM] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson decided to take on the run for [U.S.] president.  And the various chapters of PUSH then, we had the option of either working--continuing to work with Operation PUSH or go with the campaign.  I chose to go with the campaign.
Speaker 1: Now, do you understand, I was asking about the Rainbow Coalition.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I'm getting to that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And so, out of Jesse Jackson's run for president, and, of course, we have maintained that he won, you know, because he excited the base.  The black people went out and registered to vote and they offered themselves up as city counsels, county commission, state representatives, state senators; and so there was a great infusion of black elective officials as a result of Jesse Jackson's run in 1984.  And out of the 1984 campaign came the formation of the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition because--I mean came the Rainbow Coalition.  And what had happened, PUSH had been perceived as a black organization.  And Jesse understood that it was not just blacks, but it was people of all races and people of goodwill.  And so the Rainbow Coalition was formed, and Jesse put a lot of his time as President of the Rainbow, and at the same time, to some degree, neglecting Operation PUSH in Chicago [Illinois].  And so, I guess, eight years or so ago, eight, nine years ago, he consolidated the organizations.  And so the Rainbow/PUSH Coalition became.  And then Jesse called me from a plane.  I guess it's eight, nine years ago.  I was, at the time, like, the Atlanta [Georgia] coordinator.  But he called me on the plane, said, "I want you to meet me over at the Omni Hotel and I want to talk to you."  And I went over to Omni, and he asked me if I would serve as the Southern Regional Director for the Rainbow Coalition.  And I said, "You know, I know you're not asking me.  Hell, I can't even talk.  Even you, talking to him and you stick a mic in Joe Beasley's face and go aba, babba, babba, babba.  You want me to be the Southern Regional Director?"  He said, "Yeah.  I want you to be the Southern Regional Director."  And so I accepted the challenge.  And so we put the structure of the regional piece together.  And I took it serious.  And I'm the only one left.  All the rest of them gone.  And I think sometimes Jesse wished I was gone (laughs), but, because, we still pushed the envelope.  And so I said, you know.
Speaker 1: Well, I think you're selling yourself short.  Number one, you know, you're obviously articulate and you have a lot of determination in what you're doing.  So I know why he picked you.  But, so what's the scope of your activities?  By the South, how many states do you have to coordinate?
Speaker 2: Well, when we put it together, we had really from Maryland all the way over to Texas.  And--but, quite frankly, most of my work is concentrated here in Georgia.  They added some hot spots in some of these other states.  And if I'm asked, I'll go in.  And so the structure has really evolved.  And, like, I said, I think, like, in the--like, Detroit [Michigan] area, the mayor of Detroit, now his mother was the Regional Director.  She's now a congresswoman.  She was the Regional Director for the area.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And then, you know, [HM] Jesse [Jackson], Jr. came on and he took over, like, as a national coordinator of the structure.  And Jesse was a stickler that--Jesse Jr. was a stickler that you want to make sure that we had a rainbow.  He wanted straight and gays and blacks and whites.  So he was a real stickler to make sure that we had a bonafide, legitimate rainbow; otherwise, he wouldn't give you a charter.  And I greatly admired, you know, Jesse Jackson, Jr., and to see his growth over the years.  And I think he's a very strong person.  And, quite frankly, he's gonna be the next mayor of your town, Chicago.  It's gonna happen.  Gonna make it happen.
Speaker 1: I've heard rumors.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 122192
Speaker 1: Now, what are the--some of the issues that you're tackling here in Atlanta and in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, we have the first Republican as the governor of this state, Sonny Perdue.
Speaker 1: He's of the chicken fortune.  Right?
Speaker 2: Hmm?
Speaker 1: He's of the Perdue Chicken fortune?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: He's not.
Speaker 2: No.  No.  No.
Speaker 1: He's not related to them?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he, you know, like most Southerners, he was a Democrat.  And quite frankly, I like Sonny Perdue.  And quite frankly, sometimes I (unclear) rub [HM] Jesse [L. Jackson] the wrong way, is that I've endorsed Republicans.  Before Perdue, I didn't endorse Perdue per se about he was a good man.  But I endorsed a Republican governor that almost won.  And it really made--people couldn't understand it.  When I had the call from Al Gore when he was Vice President, and he asked us to come to the White--I mean, up to his office on a day's notice, and got up there and they were talking about, let's get the black vote.  Let's get the vote out one more time, one more--I'm tired of it, you know.  Now, I've all ready endorsed a Republican to be governor of the state of Georgia.  You don't have to--get the hell out.  Don't come down here to Georgia talking about, you know, the yellow-dog Democrats.  And I think Reverend Jackson now is firmly understanding that it really is not about the party.  There are two parties with the same assumption about black people.  When it comes to cookie crumbles, they always, you know, come together on these black issues.  And we're tired of being taken for granted by these yellow-dog Democrats.
Speaker 1: Now, what do you mean by yellow-dog Democrats exactly?
Speaker 2: Well, it means that you're a Democrat on the state issues, but, you know, when it come to the President, you know, you close ranks and you support the Republican.  And so you're not really a real, you know, you're a Dixiecrat, quite frankly, is what you are.  And so, you know, so I kind of broke that tradition and, you know, publicly endorsed the person for--as a Republican for governor.  And so, we got--Perdue is the Governor of the state of Georgia.  I think he has done as much as any Republicans ever done, 'cause I go all the way back, you know.
Speaker 1: You mean as any Democrats ever done.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Democrats ever done.  I'll go all the way back to old Eugene Talmadge, as I said earlier.  And the only thing I could say about my people have taught me to say, don't say anything good--about the dead unless you say something good.  And when old Eugene Talmadge died, I said, "Old Eugene is dead.  Good."  He's dead and gone.  And so, you know, when we fought over this flag, it wasn't the Republicans that was--changed that confederate flag.  I was here, you know.  It was the Democrats that saying, "That we see this--the Civil Rights Movement coming, and how can we remind black folks," and they didn't say black, but the niggas, "that remind them, what's the best way of reminding them that they gonna be second-class citizens in this state forever.  Let's put the confederate battle flag out there."  And that became the permanent emblem of the Georgia flag which was changed in 1956.  So anybody that would suggest it wasn't changed because of race is either a fool or disingenuous.
Speaker 1: They may not know the history of it or may think that that flag with the little confederate flag on it was the original flag or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That's what I'm saying.  I'll give you two options.  Either you're a fool or you're disingenuous.  If you was ignorant, you know, I can forgive your ignorance.  But most of them were just being disingenuous.  They knew what it was about.  So we were able to finally change that flag.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Quite a battle, too--(unclear)--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, it was quite a battle.
Speaker 1: --read about [HM] Tyrone Brooks and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely.  No.  I was Tyrone's ally.  When Jesse Jackson decided to run for President, he said, "I want Tyrone, you be my state director."  And I said to Tyrone, "Well, I want to work you," so I was deputy director for the campaign.  And Tyrone and I have been extremely close, and I've followed, you know, his lead on this flag fight and 'til we finally got it changed.
Story_ID: 122193
Speaker 1: Okay.  I know you're--there a lot of other fights probably.  You are currently engaged in a couple.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Let me tell you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But, well, yeah.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: --about one of the fights that--we've had three fights with Coca-Cola here in Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Coke is based here in Atlanta.  Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Under--just a stone's throw from here.  I could walk up there.  And the first fight we had with Coca-Cola was in 1980, when we decided we wanted to buy a bottling company from Coke.  And Coke's response was, "What?  You crazy?  Ain't gonna sell no Negro no bottling company, you know.  You don't have enough money."  So [HM Reverend] Jesse [L.] Jackson and others said, "Well, you know, we do have some options.  We can change our mind about drinking Coca-Cola.  So the threat of a boycott had persuaded Coke to open up the bottling companies to black people.  Now, the second fight we had with Coke in the '90s [1990s] was over disinvestment in South Africa, to pull out of South Africa.  And, of course, Coke was saying, "If we pull out of South Africa, the peoples that's gonna be hurt the most are the black South Africans."  And our response was, "Let them die."  You know.  "Pull out of South Africa.  Let them die."  And so they were able to put together a plan in South Africa where they shared, you know, the ownership structure with the black South Africans.  So they put together a model plan for South Africa (unclear) multinational corporations could emulate.  And, of course, then the third fight that we had with Coke was three years ago, when we discovered that they had--were paying white people $26,000 more a year than they were paying blacks for the same job.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 122194
Speaker 1: So, yeah.  You were explaining the third component of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Coca-Cola.
Speaker 1: The third fight with Coke.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, the third fight with Coke, Coke was paying white people doing the same job as the black counterparts at the headquarters here on the average of $26,000 more a year.  And it just so happened that we had the goods on them.   We had the--I said we had the goods, we had the empirical records of--I had them in my office.
Speaker 1: Did they deny that they were doing this?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure they denied it.  But we had the records.  And it just when [HM] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson was traveling in Africa at the time with Coca-Cola, Carl Ware [president of Coca-Cola's Africa unit] at the time, and the 'New York,' I think it was a Washington 'Wall Street' journalist, somebody had stuck mic in his face and saying that I was making the statements about Coke.  And so I was told, you know, just be quiet until Rev. Jackson got back.  But when he got back here and he saw the records, you know, he took Mr. Daft to task.  And I went with him, you know.  And so it winded up, you know, we sued Coke, and we had the largest judgment ever been against a multinational corporation--$193 million settlement that Coke had to pay out.  And, of course, we put another group of watchdogs around them, around Coke.  And I think, what's her name?  She was the Secretary of Labor.
Speaker 1: [HM] Alexis Herman.
Speaker 2: Alexis, yeah.  Alexis was heading up the group that watch them.  And we have to watch them.  And so we put out three new demands for Coke for the twenty-first century.  Now, this is not--this is something that you'll see on my web page.  I put together an organization called African Ascension.  We have a global board.  There're people from all over the globe are on this board, African Ascension.  And so the three new demands for Coke that we've given them is that, number one, move the headquarters with Coke Africa out of London.  It smacks of imperial--you know, of days--of--
Speaker 1: Colonialism.
Speaker 2: --colonialism.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: We're not going to tolerate it more. We've been to London and met with the Coke officials and told them that, you know, we would not tolerate it.  And then, number two, we said to Coke that, you've announced, say you're outsourcing all of your information, technology, out of the United States, and you're sending it all into South Asia and to India.  What we're saying to Coke, we want a pro rata share based upon our patrons out there with your company.  There's a billion Africans, one billion Africans on the planet.  We want to, based on our--we want the jobs in Africa.  And we're not asking about it.  We're demanding it.  And then the third demand for Coke is that, all your bottling companies in Africa must be owned by black Africans.  We don't care how long the whites have lived down there.  All of them must be owned by black Africans in the twenty-first century.  And if they don't have the money, let's make a deal; make a sweetheart deal.  And so--and these demands, I think it's a just demands.  I was in Uganda two months ago, and I'd said to Coke, "I want to visit your plant, your big plant there while I'm in Uganda."  And, of course, I got an email en route saying that, "Well, we just couldn't arrange the meeting."  Of course, that don't mean a thing to me.  As soon as we got there, I headed straight for the plant.  Right?  And I had--I was invited by the Royal Family.  The King had invited me to his birthday party.
Speaker 1: Now, the King of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The King of Toro, the King of Toro in Uganda.  And so I'd been invited, and I had one of the princes of Toro with me and the princess of Toro.  And I said, "You know, I'm here.  I want to tour it, and I'm not taking no for an answer."  Well, they weren't stupid enough to keep me out.  And, but what I discovered, of course, is that it's owned by a white South African.  That's got to change.  And I told them to show me the records.  And the minimum wage in Uganda is a dollar a day.  And Coke was beating themselves on the chest saying, "Well, we're paying five dollars a day."  Five dollars a day is not enough.  And we're demanding that they immediately raise it to ten dollars a day, and then we're gonna start talking about what is really a wage that would lift the standard of living in Uganda.  And not only in Uganda, but through all of Africa.  That's the major piece that we're dealing with then.
Story_ID: 122195
Speaker 1: Okay. There's a--you have another major initiative going on now.  Right?  Besides Coke [Coca-Cola] here, you're working, you're dealing with a Boy Scouts issue here in the city of Atlanta [Georgia].  Right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Yeah.  Well, one of the things that we discovered about a year ago, some people brought a complaint that said that Boy Scouts in the Inner City, that the Boy Scouts was collecting money from the major corporations and also from the United Way.  And that really was just the phantom scouts, troops that was on paper only.  And, of course, we had pointed out to, because we have a lot of high-profile African Americans that's on the board of the Boy Scouts.  We pointed it out, and then, of course, every time I get into my office, a little birdie from the Boy Scouts had brought me some more papers.  So I had all--we had an airtight case, but we didn't have anybody with enough courage to stand up and say, "The Boy Scouts are a bunch of crooks." And we were finally able to get one of the investigator reporting stations to take it on as a challenge.  And, quite frankly, you know, we sent--I sent a certified letter to every board member making the demand that an audit be done.  And, of course, it was so compelling until the board hired one of the leading law firms here to do an audit.  And it was such a--you know, when they went in there, it was such a--it was so bad, they couldn't cover it up.  So they were publicly saying they had fifteen thousand Boy Scouts in Atlanta.  And, of course, we said there's less than five hundred.  And we stand by the fact that there's five hundred.  But when the auditors came back, they had said that, "Well, you know, we'll give the Boy Scouts the benefit of the doubt.  If a boy's attended one meeting a year, we'll count him as a Scout," which is ridiculous in my point of view, in our point of view.  So it's clear that the Boy Scouts, when the report came out, that the executive had to step aside.  And what we said to the Boy Scouts, and if you'll look at my web page, I got a web page, www.boyscoutsfortruth.com.  And I have a running chronology of all of the--my letter traffic and so forth, to the Boy Scouts.  And so what I want now, what we want now, what we demand now is, of course, that the chair of the board resign; step aside and his whole executive committee would step aside.  And we say that the fish start rotting at the head.  And so, therefore, the head is the chair of the board.  And what makes it so ugly, and we pointed out that Mr. Tom Gay, who is the chair of the board of the Boy Scouts, own Gay Construction Company, a for-profit company.  And he have used his influence to get all the contracts to build the Boy Scout Taj Mahal up there in Clayton County.  They built it away from the poor boys.  They built it up there where the poor boys can't even get up there on the bus.  And so Mr. Tom Gay, the chair of the board, has used his for-profit company, to use his influence for this not-for-profit, and he's built not only the multi-million-dollar headquarters, but built all the Boy Scouts camps.  So we're saying to Mr. Gay, "Step aside because we believe that you're just racketeering."  And we went to the FBI and we're making the demand that they would prosecute him under RICO.  And so that's one of the big things that we're--and what we're discovering, of course, is that it's a national problem, and that the Dallas office, with a wink and a nod, said, "Let's run the numbers up because our salary is based upon the numbers."  And what we discovered is that they've collected over $257 thousand they admit in dues, because off the top of the money, the ten dollars off the top go to Dallas, every boy they sign up.  And so they agreed to refund the $257 thousand.  But that's just a start.  You know, we want them in prison.  They're thieves and, you know, they say if you do the crime, do the time.  And so, we're going to do the time.  I'm gonna--we're not gonna give an inch.  And what we have learned, of course, is that the 'Washington Post' have assigned the bureau chief out of Miami to oversee this situation.  They got a battery of reporters out all over the country, and their reports gonna be coming out the July 1 sometime.  And what we're saying to, you know, the cover-up is gone.  Somebody's gonna have to go.  And so, you know, we're fighting that.  And it's kind of on and on.  We got a lot of different--
Story_ID: 122196
Speaker 1: It sounds like a tough fight.
Speaker 2: --(unclear)--that's going on.
Speaker 1: A lot of these people, I would guess, are well connected.
Speaker 2: Well, they're well connected.  And, of course, the way they do things, they put this little young black man and then a white judge to kind of head up the investigation.  And, of course, the black man is the spokesman.  And I've lost all respect for him.  And I understand that since he stood up against me and called me a liar at first, where he had to acquiesce and back out, but I think it's been good for his business.  And now they've put another--together another board with a black man, a young black man, Mr. Coleman and then another black man, Mr. Arnold, who is senior vice-president of one of the banks.  And I've been calling them.  I say, "I have no confidence in you all.  You know, you need to, you know, especially Mr. Coleman.  You're part of the problem.  You come in my office and tell me there's no problem."  And I mean, they--"You're getting paid to know that 'I didn't know' is no excuse."  And that, you know, (unclear) the board have some fiduciary responsibilities.  And I think maybe some of them need to go to jail.  So we're going to stay on that case.  And, of course, we're fighting the Democrats--I mean the Republicans, you know, have passed some very egregious laws here in the last General Assembly, where that we have seventeen different forms of I.D. that we could use to vote, and they reduced it down to five, and which means, for example, and two of them is a passport; you got to have a passport and a military I.D.  And only a few people like myself have--get those credentials, you know, military I.D.  So it's only three pieces of I.D. that you can really use.  And, for example, if you are student at Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] or Emory [University, Atlanta, Georgia] or Clark [Atlanta University , Atlanta, Georgia], your student I.D. is no good.  But if you're at the Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia] or Georgia Tech [Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia], because the State I.D.--so we're fighting tooth and nail.  And [HM] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson has called August 6 is the date that we're going to really close down Atlanta.  We're going to say that, you know, to fight to save the voting, you know, that we have to, you know, Section two and Section five is going to expire of the Voting Rights Act.  And [President] George [W.] Bush is such an idiot until he was approached by the Black Caucus, and [HM] Jesse Jackson, Jr. really had put the question to him.  "Well, Mr. President, what are you going to do about the Voting Rights Act, extend the Voting Rights Act?"  And he's such an idiot until he just said, "I don't even know anything about it."  And quite frankly he didn't know.  At least he was honest.  But he said, "When it gets to my desk, I'll look at it, and, you know, then I'll make a decision at that time."  But we're gonna educate him.  And Reverend Jackson and the Rainbow/PUSH, I think we're gonna have a great crowd here, August 6.  So that's one of our main focus, you know, for the next few months, to get 100,000 people maybe in the streets of Atlanta.
Story_ID: 122197
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a hard time--I know one of the functions of the Urban League is to point out discrepancies and, you know, different discriminatory practices.  They do a lot of statistical analyses and that sort of thing.  Do you have the benefit of, like, work done by the Urban League, say, to help you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We, you know, and we'll never criticize another civil rights organization.  And they have [HM] Marc [H.] Morial now as the young man that's over the Urban League, 'cause he was the Mayor of New Orleans [Louisiana] at one point.  And so [HM] Reverend [Jesse L.] Jackson worked closely with the Urban League.  We worked closely with the NAACP.  Mr. [Kweisi] Mfume's replacement have not been named yet.  But with [HM] Julian Bond and others.  And, of course, with Mr. [Charles] Steele, who has now assumed the leadership of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference [SCLC].  We're working very closely as a team together.  And, you know, we still have all these police killings.  Just recently heard that we've joined--and SCLC have taken a lead on the taser gun that is killing a lot of black men and black people all over the country.  And we're saying that we need to do away with the taser until more testing is done.  And so the SCLC have taken on the initiative in Gwinnett County and said that, because the D.A. [district attorney], when that black man was tasered five times over in forty-five seconds, they killed him.  And the D.A., when they convened the Grand Jury, he didn't show them that the tasered incident.  He said that they said they didn't want to see it.  But it was clear that they murdered the man.  And so we're joining forces with SCLC and to stand together in these kind of, you know, incidents and stuff, so.
Speaker 1: So, is there--in a city like Atlanta [Georgia] has had black police chiefs for, I guess, the last twenty years, I guess, or most part of twenty.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 1: But you still have a serious police brutality problem here?
Speaker 2: Well, I have great admiration for Chief Pendleton, who is our Chief of Police now.  And we got him here from New Orleans.  He did a great job in putting a handle on this police misconduct.  And so, we're pleased that--while we don't have a utopian situation here, that we have a tolerable situation.  And Chief Pendleton know that he is accountable to the people, and he is accountable to the people.  And he's responsive to the people.  And so, you know, but we still have the rogue cops here in Atlanta.  And when we find the rogues, we're gonna run them out of town.  And so, we have that commitment to have, because what we've seen historically is that, if anything that could set off a riot is this police misconduct.  You know, whether it's Rodney King in Los Angeles [California] or whatever.  So we will not tolerate police misconduct here in Atlanta.
Story_ID: 122198
Speaker 1: I know a lot of cities are concerned about, at least the black organizations of those cities are concerned about the number of youths that are being incarcerated for drug possession charges.  Is that an issue here in the criminal justice system in Atlanta [Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It is an absolute disaster horror.  And I'm serving on two so-called blue-ribbon panels.  One is looking at reforming criminal justice in Fulton County [Georgia].  I'm on that panel.  Then we had this killing of three--a judge and, you know, sheriff and then the clerk, and then he went and killed another federal officer; and the sheriff put together a commission to look at that, and I'm on that commission.  And so as a result of my work, I've been in that, full day--two days over in the Fulton County Jail.  It break your heart when you go over there with all those black men.  And, you know, probably 90 percent of the inmates are African-American men.  And if we look at our juvenile--people that's held in the Juvenile Detention Centers, probably 98 percent of them are African-Americans.  And so, you know, we've abandoned our kids.  And I get, you know, I get (unclear) Regional Director of the Rainbow Coalition, and I'm here at the Antioch Baptist Church, so I get invited to come in and talk to, you know, men--groups.  And I was recently invited to talk to this group of Presbyterian black people, men--black men.  And I, quite frankly, I went in and I felt like a youth there, all these old, retired black men.  And I talked to them, and then they had asked me a question about "Well, what are you all doing about these black boys walking around with their pants hanging off their ass?"  And I said to him, "You know what they're saying to you, sir?  What they're saying to you and America, what they're saying, they don't know it, but what they're saying is 'Kiss my black ass.  You don't respect me, and we don't--just kiss my ass.'  "And your grandkid--you just get off your old, tired ass and get out here and do something rather than criticizing."  And we're in the midst of a dilemma, but it's a good thing, and we don't see things as problems.  We see things as opportunities for us to come in and to change some things.  And so that we are very much engaged in--and we've cast our lot on the sea.  And my--[HM] Jesse [L.] Jackson, while have not--he's got an international office, and his international office and I talk all the time.  And, but my church, who is paying me, have said, "You're our ambassador to the world.  So you just get out here and make connections all over the world with black people."  And so we're bringing black people together from all over the world.  I recently had the only black senator [sic, first female senator] from Brazil, Benedita da Silva.  I'm sure you've heard of her.  Benedita was here and she spent a week in my--ten days at my house.  And I just turned my house over to her.  And so we have that kind of relationship.  And she's invited me to Brazil, and I'll be going to Brazil in April--I mean, in September.  And she said that President da Silva want to meet with me, because I promised Coca-Cola that I, you know, Coca-Cola--African-Brazilians are drinking 57 percent of the Coke in Brazil, but they can't get a job in--at Coca-Cola in Brazil.  And so what I've said to him, "I'm coming down and I'm going up to Brasilia to the Coca-Cola headquarters, and I'll chain myself to the fence and show you Negroes how to fight.  Based upon your patronage, you need a pro rata share of jobs."  And we put--Benedita and I is meeting with Walmart.  Walmart is the number one employer in the United States, and now they're vying to be the number one employer in Brazil.  We're gonna make dang gone sure that Africa-Brazilians are fully vested in Walmart, you know, from top to bottom.  That's what we are doing, you know, globally.  We're gonna fight this battle together.
Story_ID: 122199
Speaker 1: And, you know, as I looked across the world, I think some of the most audacious black people, and well-trained, are here in the United States, the result of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]'s movement.  And, like I said, I was--it's white privilege, something that we got to get over.  I was in Uganda and we had to get our visa at the airport in Kampala [Uganda].  So the line of black people in line to get their visa, and here come some white people (prancing?) up to the front of the line.  I said, "Where the hell are you going?  You know, you better sit yourself down.  You get in this line like"--and the purpose is, I'm in Uganda, but I said, since I don't know where I'm from, where you stole me from, but for the purpose of now, I'm a Ugandan.  You sit yourself down.  Right (laughs)?  And so, but the colonialism have sold, you know, corrupted the minds of--so they believe in white privilege.  We don't believe in it.  When I was with the Princess--they're in an all-black town, right?  And the merchant was in there.  The Princess of Uganda was there making a purchase.  And here this white European walked up to the front of the line, and the merchant stopped to take care of the white European.  And we're saying, what the hell is going on?  And the white man said, "Well, she can wait."  So we've got a lot of work to do, and saying to our African brothers, while we love our white brothers and our white sisters, but they ain't no damn better than we are.  And my first stop when I get into a country, my first stop is the U.S. Ambassador.  And I go to his office and say, "You know, when I went to Kampala"--and it wasn't that he didn't have a choice, I said, "I want to meet you as soon as I get there.  And if you don't know who I am," you know, "you can get on the Google or something and find out.  You better not turn me down, because I'm coming anyhow."  So we went and, of course, they received me.  But it was so interesting.  We drove up to the U.S. Embassy, and, of course, they have black guards everywhere, you know.  So the black guard said, you know, "Mr. Beasley, you got an appointment with you?"  And I did, of course.  And he said, "Well, you can park over here."  I said, "The hell you say?  Park on the street?  What the hell you say?  You open that gate up.  I'm driving in to the Embassy."  And, you know, and I said, "And if you don't have the authority, you get the ambassador on the phone.  Tell him to get his ass out here."  And, of course, you know, he opened the gate.  But that's how we are approaching.  And I'm trying to get the ambassador from--his name is [Jimmy J.] Kolker.  I'm trying to get him recalled.  And I told him when I got there, "You know, you work for these black folks in Uganda, and you work for Americans.  Your job is"--and they told me what a problem they have in getting visas to come to the United States.  They stand in long lines, have to pay a hundred dollars, and they don't give them an excuse of why they turn them or refuse the visa.  And so, we had a--we're asking that the ambassador from Uganda to recuse himself of his job, 'cause we don't think he represent very well.  He's over there representing the interest of white, a multinational corporation; not in the interest of the Ugandans and African people.  We're sick of that.  We're not tolerating it anymore.
Story_ID: 122200
Speaker 1: Now, with all your activities, you know, and we know, you know, civil rights leaders are often threatened.  Some of the threats are overt, some covert.  Have you ever been threatened or actions taken against you or your family?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, we always do--our phones are tapped.  We don't give a rip.  Our life is an open book.  And the--but this Boy Scout thing, I've been getting all kinds of little old ugly notes.  And usually I--because I do have compassion.  I have a temper.  And usually sometimes I get in a cussing match with them.  But I've got--I send them a nice note now when they send me a threat.  And I say, you know, and I wind up saying, "Well, you have a nice day, sir or ma'am," you know.  But I'm not afraid of nobody, you know.  So we ain't taking nothing back.  At my age, we'll add more to it.  Justice is what we demand, not only for Africans in the United States and Africans in the Americas, but Africans all over the globe.  We will be free in the 21st century (unclear) in the century of the Africans.  And I was--and I'll say this: I was in Durban [South Africa] for the Conference on Race, and they talking about the civil society and the rule of law, all that shit.  And I said, "What the hell do you mean?  How can the rule of law--and the law had been I'm a slave?"  Hell--to hell with that law.  And talking about civil society?  How can I talk to you civilly when you're a barbarian.  You act like a--you know.
Story_ID: 122201
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about--we were talking about--you mentioned Durban, going to Durban, South Africa, listening to, you know, some disingenuous remarks about free justice.  Did--how do you feel about the reparations movement?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the reparations, it's an internationally accepted principle.  And even George Bush, as limited as he is, understand reparations.  That's why they're spending three hundred billion dollars to rebuild Baghdad.  If you tore it up, fix it.  And the 250 years of slavery, when we worked for nothing and there were 100 years of Jim Crow, we're old big time.  And, you know, and people are saying, well, you African-Americans, you're no longer the number one minority, and the Hispanics are the number one minority.  And what I say to my Hispanic friends, "We're not gonna let you drive a wedge in there."  But when I say to my Hispanic friend or my Asian friends--I happen to be the Chair of the Asian-American Center here.  So we're reaching out with everybody.  We're saying that our Hispanic friends and whatever day it is, if your forbearers came over here and worked 250 years for nothing, then, you know, let's talk about it.  There's some things that have to be resolved between African slaves and these white folks.  Somebody's got my land and I want mine, you know.  I want--I'm as serious as a heart attack.  I want mine.  Somebody sitting on my property and I want it, and we're gonna get it.  So reparations is real, you know.  And when we say that our brothers and sisters that don't know anything about the stock  market--I love Jesse Jackson for teaching us financial literacy, when we were the first ones traded on the big boards, a boatload of us coming in (unclear) you know, offloading in the harbors of New York and Charleston and Savannah.  And they put the stuff that we worked and toiled for back on the boat.  We built Europe.  We built the cities of the Western world, North America, South America, and in Europe.  We built it.  And by God, our kids has got a right to not have to be locked up in the jail.  But the point is, for them to understand that our people already worked for it.  The legacy is there.  It's now ours for the taking.  And, quite frankly, a guilty conscious need no accusing.  And America is guilty.  They're guilty.  And, quite frankly, you know, white people, for the most part, is scared shitless of us.  I'm serious.  You'll put them to flight if you say "boo."  You'll put them to flight because they're guilty.  And you can't wash your hand off.  What you did to us didn't have nothing to do with that.  You know, we wasn't (unclear).  Now, if you come out of legacy, you're guilty.  And have a great fun with my white friends, especially the ones that's in high power.  And the former Attorney General, Michael Bowers, here in Georgia, we sued the State of Georgia about how we elect judges, select judges.  We sued them.  We finally won.  And Zig-Zag Zell Miller, who was the Governor, you know, forever, and the Senator; and Zig-Zag, you know, we've reconciled to some extent, because he would say that "When Joe Beasley come in the room, I'm leaving.  I ain't never be in the same room with the Negro."  And so, we finally settled this judge suit.  And me and Tyrone Brooks and some other--and they had the federal judge here--that when we sat every day to hammer out the details, and then we would go to lunch.  And then I would harass the Attorney General saying that "I want my damn property."  Talking about reparations, you know, he would get as mad as the hell he could get, you know.  I mean, he turned red as a beet, talking about--but it was just fun, and we developed a good friendship.  That's why to me, it doesn't matter about the Democratic or Republican or whatever the case may be.  And, you know, and I could admire the KKK.  I could go to lunch or breakfast, dinner with the Grand Dragon.  And, you know, he said, "I don't like black folks."  So, what else is new?  Let's talk about something else.  Let's talk about something else, whatever we can do together, you know.  But I will not stand and tolerate is these yellow bellied and streaked down the back of black people that say they're gonna represent black people, or white people that is two-faced.  Now, if you don't like me, fine.  Who gives a rip, you know.  But, you know, there's some things maybe we can do together to change the world for the better for everybody.  So, you know--but, so reparations--and when the United States said, number one, they weren't gonna send a delegation, then they decided to send a low-level delegation, and then they walked out.  But by that time, as old people say, the cat was out of the bag already.  Reparations is on the way.  There's no--you know, it's a natural, you know.  And so it's coming.
Story_ID: 122202
Speaker 1: Now, let me ask you about some of the activities of the Antioch Church [Atlanta, Georgia] here, and you have said that there's some development things you wanted to me about.
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  I've been here on the staff of the Antioch Church for well over twenty years, now.  And the pastor, Rev. Cameron Alexander, is a visionary.  And with the coming of HIV and AIDS, and with the coming of the substance abuse, and with the homelessness, the church have had to reinvent itself to be relevant in the world.  And so, we have been, you know, start building affordable, 'cause our government really has given up on poor people.  They're saying that public housing--I had to call them when you were with the Public Housing Director, but I'm on her.  But I call her the Gentrification Queen.  They say they want the choice tenants.  If you got bad credit, you know, you can't get in public housing.  So the church had to take up the cry for the homeless.  And so, you know, we just rented 256 units that we just opened up.  And there's 85 percent of ours are affordable housing.  We have another hundred million dollars' worth of projects on the drawing board.  We have, at the corner right down here of North Side Drive and Simpson, we're fixing to build--start a $53 million condo, hotel.  And right behind that, we're having, like, a $22 million senior citizen's complex, you know, for me to move--some of us to move in as we get older.  And we're building, on the other side of the church, we got thirty-two townhouses that will be coming up out the ground; it's gonna be for sale.  And we have developments in the low five points area.  So we're developing all over.  And the church have to do it, because, you know, when they're put out of public housing, where do they go?  Come to the church.  And our pastor have said don't let the sign be lying.  If it says, church, that mean we gonna help somebody.  Now, we can't help every--you know, and sometimes we can't help them in the way, what they really came for; maybe we can't help them, but we can help them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's why these people outside are waiting for their groceries.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  The room we're sitting in is a room where people are fed. Right?  On a daily basis.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They come and get their take-home groceries.
Speaker 1: And you said another interesting thing, too, it was at one time the chemical laboratory of Hosea Williams.  Right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Who was a chemist as well as a civil rights organizer.
Speaker 2: Yes.  This used to be.  Yeah.  Hosea Williams.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: A lot of people used to think of him as a fool, but he was a very brilliant man.  He was a chemist by training.  And this was his laboratory, his, you know, where he would mix his chemicals here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 122203
Speaker 1: Now, we always ask this question, and you've answered a lot of it already in some ways, but, what are some of your hopes and concerns for the African-American community today?
Speaker 2: Well, my hope and concern is that we would unify.  That we would, the ones that supposedly have made it, that think they've made it, they think that they are vested in this society, they're still the least preferred of all of the people coming into the country, the least preferred of the black people.  They need to get over it, you know.  We want--need to unify, you know.  Whether you live on the west side of town or whether you're homeless, under a bridge, we need to unify; not to impress anybody.  And so, not only here in the United States but across the globe, for us to unify for the survival of the unborn generations.  And that is my hope, is that we would, not out of animosity, not out of hurt, hate, not out--just unify, and then we can show the world a more excellent way.  Because we believe this dream of America must become the reality of the world.  And so, (unclear), the principles enshrined in our constitution was a pack of lies.  But we're going to make their dream of America become the reality of the world.  And so there's the quest that we're on.
Story_ID: 122204
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point in your life, is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: No.  I wouldn't take nothing for the journey now.  I'm so happy that I grew in Fayette County [Georgia], and that the white folks taught us well.  It was a--gave us a good work ethic.  And so people that say to me that black people are lazy, you're a liar.  We worked all our lives.  We built this country.  And then I'm glad that my discipline was undergirded with the military.  And so, the discipline, I'm at the point we take no--we will not take no for an answer.  If I ask you for something like that, you better be responsive, because if you--I called for the mayor, I've called for the governor on an important matter--"you better call me back quickly, 'cause I'm gonna be at your doorstep real soon."  They already know it.  So I get quick return calls.  So my desire is, you know, that we would unify, that we would be, you know, persistent, and that we, we're great people.
Story_ID: 122205
Speaker 1: Now, did--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And maybe I forgot the answer to your question.
Speaker 1: --well, when you--yeah, you answered it.  But, when you look back at your life to this point, what today would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, and I, you know, that I wanted to work to change things, and I don't--I'm not looking for legacy.  That's why I'm so mystified as to how you all got my name.  So I'm not looking for no legacy.  I want to work until the day is done.  And then whenever the day is done, I already told you that I had my plot already down there in the country.  And so I'll be satisfied to go down there and rest.
Story_ID: 122206
Speaker 1: Now, tell us about your family.  We haven't talked about your family.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, I'm extremely fortunate to have three children; I have identical twin sons and I have a daughter.  My daughter is the oldest--and I've been married twice--by my first wife, the daughter that live in Cincinnati [Ohio].  My second wife, my two identical twin boys, one is a medical doctor; he's a neurologist, and he's also an ordained minister in Memphis, Tennessee.  His brother worked as--he (unclear) worked (Forest Development?) for the State of Missouri for a number of years.  But that was a political job, and so when the governor lost, they all just tendered their resignation.  And so now he's the vice president of a college there in the boot hill of Missouri.  And we have nine grandchildren and two great-grandchildren now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there anything we have not asked you that you think we need to address before I ask my final question?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm just honored, you know, to have been asked to do the interview, so, no.  There was no expectations coming into it.  And so there's nothing that I want to squeeze in.
Story_ID: 122207
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, let me ask you this then: similar to legacy, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That as a Baptist, it's said that to walk circumspect in the world, I want to be diligent, you know, to make a noise; to be, you know, noticed.  And nobody don't need to call my name.  So we want to walk (unclear), but we want to be diligent.  That's why I work seven days a week, and that's why I'm up at five o'clock in the morning, every morning.  And that's why I'm up late at night, because there's much work to be done.  And I have no--well, we live in the age of information.  And information is power.  I'm not seeking academic information and stuff.  And I can't spout off times and dates and stuff.  But there's an urgency that I feel.  And so it's a pragmatic way of doing some things.  And so when we say to Coca-Cola, "You move that headquarters from London on to the company of Africa," we mean it.  We're serious as a heart attack.  It's gonna be moved.  And when I get the millions hits on my page, I'm giving Coke ninety days.  And if it's not moved, then by God, we're going to say to the people in the black world that maybe next week we don't need to drink Coca-Cola, just to show them that we got respect--and so when--for ourselves.  And when [HM] Jesse Jackson often say that African-Americans, in many instances, that we're suffering from a dignity deficit disorder.  We have enough dignity to say that "If you don't respect me, by God, I'm not gonna patronize you.  We're not gonna buy your product."  And so, if, you know, if I remember, (to me?) is that I wouldn't--I try to be, you know, diligent, hardworking just to--and I've been taught by my pastor, Cameron Alexander, over here, you know, when you sit yourself--you go to the back, 'cause it's better be asked up than to be asked down.  So I always try to forget the low seat.  And if somebody says, you know, "Joe Beasley, won't don't you come up?"  I come on up a little higher.  So, but I'm not looking.  And I also remember that people works speak for themselves.  And they were saying that, I guess it was Caesar, people was pondering around where they gonna seat him, you know.  And they're worrying themselves to death.  And Caesar said to them, "Wherever Caesar sits is the head of the table."  Wherever he sits.  And so I understand that I'm not looking (unclear).  But in my sphere of things, you know, wherever--you know, if it has some leadership there, then I don't need that.  I'll be in the back of the room.  But if somebody else know that I don't facing down whoever it is.  And I'll call, whether it's the mayor, Shirley Franklin, or whether it's the governor, I'll call them a liar to their face, you know, whether it's--well.  But I try not to--I want to be a unifier rather than a--but if I have to call you out, I will, by God.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, thank you, sir.  Thank you very much.
Story_ID: 122208
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Well, this picture really was at a art museum downtown in Atlanta [Georgia].  It's the chief from the Royal Family in Nigeria.  And I was speaking at the art gallery.  The gentleman in the back, yeah, that gentleman is a diplomat from Nigeria.  I don't know his name.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: About what year is this?
Speaker 1: This was 2003.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Then, Larry, if you can just (unclear) or ethnic group in Nigeria--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Hmm?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  --from any knowledge of which tract or any group--(unclear)--
Speaker 1: I really don't.  I know that (unclear) Royal Family.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  And this one?  Go ahead with your description when you're ready, sir.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a picture of the General Assembly of Georgia.  And Benedita da Silva, who is a Senator from Brazil, the only African-Brazilian to be in the Senate in Brazil.  She also was the Governor of the city of Rio de Janeiro.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  She's (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Yes.  But she grew up--and I predict that she's gonna be the first African president in the Americas.  She--Brazil is really predominantly African descendants, and the President of Brazil currently is--I believe he's gonna support her after his next term.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Can you go left to right on some of these?  I mean, well, let's start--maybe start here on this corner.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That gentleman I don't really know.  That's [HM] Tyrone Brooks.  He's over the Georgia Association of Black Elective Officials; a great friend.  That's me, of course.  That gentleman, I don't know.  Her name is April Mabel Thomas, who is a State Representative.
Speaker 2: April Mabel (laughs).
Speaker 1: April Mabel Thomas.  This is the Honorable Benedita da Silva from Brazil.  Let's see, the gentleman there I don't really know his name.  This our youngest State Representative from Clark County, and she just got married, and I can't even call her name.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Alisha Thomas.
Speaker 1: That's his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That's Alisha Thomas?
Speaker 1: Alisha, yes.  That's right.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Alisha Thomas.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And this is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: You can say it.  You got the mic on so (unclear) the people can hear.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Alisha Thomas.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now.
Speaker 1: This is Mr. Watson.  He is over the Black Caucus for the state of Georgia.  This is Ms. Stanley.  She's a State Representative.  This is a young lady--oh, my goodness.  I worked so closely with her, (Sister?) Jones.  She's a State Representative.
Speaker 2: And in the back?
Speaker 1: I can't hardly see who that is.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's fine.
Speaker 1: But Benedita addressed the General Assembly of Georgia on that occasion.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Just a little to your right.  Keep going.  Right there.  That's perfect.  Thank you.  Go ahead when you're ready, sir.
Speaker 2: This is me with the [HM] Honorable Andrew Young, who I think has done so much.  And he's really like--if I've ever been a (generic?) person, I think Andy is (generic?).  He's a global man.  And I think he's--will be a great, not only American-but a great Statesman of the world.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Hold on one second, please.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: That was probably in, like, 1990.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Hold on, please.  I'll let you know as soon as I'm ready.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Going through all the people in that last, the power cut out (unclear) camera--(unclear) --(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  --lost my settings.  Yeah, got to reset it.  photo (unclear).
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I see computers with--(unclear)-
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Next.  Thank you.
Speaker 2: (Unclear), just a vacation kind of thing, but I hope she learns a lot, so.  Her mother and I scraped together (unclear) enough (unclear).
Speaker 1: This picture was taken--we had a march from what Rev. Jackson termed, from Newt Gingrich's nightmare to Dr. King's Dream.  So we marched from Newt Gingrich's district in Kolb County; it's about probably 20 miles.  And what's interesting, at that census in Newt Gingrich's district, the median income is like $68,000.  When we got to the King Center, this median income in that census tract is like $8,000.  And so that's [HM] Reverend Jackson's--Jesse Jackson and [HM] Reverend Al Sharpton.
Speaker 2: And what year is this?
Speaker 1: That was probably, like, in 19--naw.  Like 1998, something like.  This picture is Nelson Mandela was just released from prison, and one of his first stops in the United States to try to raise money for his presidential campaign, was here in Atlanta.  And, of course, this is me; this is one of our deacons at our church; President--and Mandela; next to him are my pastor, Rev. Cameron Alexander; and this is Rev. Tim McDonald, who is really the major pastor here, and he's a national figure as well.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)  You have dates for this?
Speaker 1: Yeah, what date is this.
Speaker 2: This was, like, 1993.  The next year, President Mandela ran for President of South Africa, and I went down there to (unclear) opportunity to work with him with the ANC.  This picture is Rev. Hosea Williams, who happened--his office, his chemist shop used to be here in this very building.  And so, and the gentleman next to him I don't know the name.  This is the Honorable Lewis Farrakhan, and he was here to support Rev. Jesse Jackson in 1994.  And that is me, serving as one of his Deputy Directors for the campaign, Jesse Jackson's campaign in 1984.
Speaker 1: It's '84 [1984].
Speaker 2: 1984, yeah.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Y'all was Young Turks.  You know.  Y'all was Young Turks.
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  This is in 2003.  I've been going to Brazil twice a year and to help to establish--while Brazil is probably over 50 percent African descendants, yet only two percent of Brazilians, African-Brazilians are graduating from college.  We help found this university, Zumbi University in Sao Paulo.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Zumbi.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Their hero?)?
Speaker 2: Yes, indeed.
Speaker 1: (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: And, yes.  And we helped them raise money to start the school.  One of the requirements of Zumbi is that 50 percent of the student body have to declare themself as African descendants.  And as a result of our work, they were generous enough to name the library at the college in my honor.  They was opening it--that's the opening of the library there in Brazil.
Speaker 1: Oh, great.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  (Unclear.)  And you can go ahead.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Larry, could you point out to him the one we're doing?
Speaker 1: Oh.  This one?
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah.  Exactly.
Speaker 1: This was taken in 1994.  We went to South Africa and to work with the African National Congress to help get the vote out.  You know, while we have no (representation?) in South Africa, just the idea that African-Americans was going to be in the--get out the vote rallies was an additional drawing card.  So we were getting ready to go out to a rally in South Africa; Durban, South Africa.
Speaker 2: (Unclear.) this was the next one.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's also in Durban, South Africa, getting prepared to go to try to energize the turnout for the vote in South Africa for the election for President Mandela in 1994.  And, of course, I was there to see that South African flag come down, and the new flag of South Africa being raised in South Africa.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.
Speaker 1: (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  Well, you know, to see the people standing in line for so long, we just were sure that the mandate was there.  This is another picture of our getting ready for a rally.  These are African leaders getting ready to go out and to kind of pump up the crowd getting ready for that historic election for the transformation from white rule to black rule in South Africa.
Speaker 1: Now (unclear).
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Larry, would you point to the photos just described one more time?
Speaker 1: This one.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Okay.  Good.  Just want to make sure I had the right one.
Speaker 1: Is this (unclear) in Haiti?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, it's not?
Speaker 2: No.
