Story_ID: 481715
Speaker 1: I'm Shawn Wilson, with The HistoryMakers, I'll be the interviewer today.  This is Neculai Burghelea, he will be the videographer and I will have you state your full name including the middle name and spelling the full name out for us.
Speaker 2: Tonya Wilyce Bolden [HistoryMaker Tonya W. Bolden], T-O-N-Y-A, W-I-L-Y-C-E, B-O-L-D-E-N.
Speaker 1: Date of birth?
Speaker 2: Three, one, fifty-nine [March 1, 1959].
Speaker 1: Place of birth?
Speaker 2: New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Do you know which hospital?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the one Billie Holiday died in [Metropolitan Hospital Center; NYC Health + Hospitals/Metropolitan, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is it?
Speaker 2: It's in Manhattan [New York].
Speaker 1: In Manhattan, all right.
Speaker 2: On 96th Street, nin--
Speaker 1: Okay, I was just curious, is it--
Speaker 2: (Laughter) I don't know the name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is that you were born in New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So New York, today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 12, 2007.
Speaker 1: Happy belated birthday.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Writer.
Story_ID: 481716
Speaker 1: What is your favorite color?
Speaker 2: This year it's a burnt orange (laughter).
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Favorite food?
Speaker 2: One?  (Pause) Salad.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Fantasy or real?
Speaker 1: Either one.
Speaker 2: Jamaica.
Speaker 1: Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have a heart thing for it but I don't, I don't, I've been there but Australia is my fantasy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your favorite--
Speaker 2: And Ghana.
Speaker 1: And Ghana.  Have you been to Ghana?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: When I know who I am, then I'll be free, Ralph Ellison.
Story_ID: 481717
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start talking about your family's history.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: As much as you know about them.  We're gonna start with your mother's side of the family and then we'll talk about your father's side [Willie Bolden] of the family.  So if you can give me your mother's full name, her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Georgia Howland [Georgia Howland Bolden], she was born February 15, 1937, she died January 17, 1989.  She was born in Greenwood, South Carolina, to Eddie [Eddie Smith Freeland] and O'Dell Freeland, but she was, my mother was raised by her paternal grandmother, Mattie Howland [Mattie Freeland Howland], who was married to Sam Howland [Samuel Howland], so my mother and one sibling O'Dell [O'Dell Howland], were raised Howlands, my other, my si- my mother's other siblings were raised as Freelands.
Speaker 1: And how many other siblings were there?
Speaker 2: A sister who was mentally retarded, another baby who died, Willie William [ph.], and George [ph.].
Speaker 1: So did your mother ever talk about what life was like in South Carolina, growing up for her as a child?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, at one point she used to tell me it was wonderful and she had, you know, a lot of love and a lot of food and clothing and all of that.  And then, you know, in later years I remember her memory of being at home and Night Riders were about looking for a black man who allegedly did something, her grandfather who she thought of as a father, Sammy was out of the house and she, she, she said she knew he hadn't done anything but she feared that they would just grab him up, you know, 'cause it was looking for, you know, any black man would do.  One of the things that she had to deal with and I mean, it's not a big burden, was that she was high yellow and so later on she would express to me that she knows that for example, certain relatives liked her because of her skin color.  Oh, one, one memory I have is that her grandmother who was like her mother, the first time she met, my father went down there that, she apparently liked my father but just told my mother that all her good color was gonna go to waste (laughter).  So, there was all that color issue.
Speaker 1: Now was your fa- mother's, why was she light skinned?
Speaker 2: Because her father was light skinned, her mother, Eddie was, was that dark skin and that kind of coal black naturally straight hair but black, black.  So I, that may have been a reason that--
Speaker 1: Now were they Indian [Native American]?
Speaker 2: Well so--they well when growing up of course, you would hear stories that we have some Cherokee in us, that, you know, what I mean--
Speaker 1: Yeah, but I mean--
Speaker 2: Now, everybody has some everything in 'em.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: But when you, know when you look at certain people, and my, my grandmother, Eddie Freeland's side of the family, she was a Smith, they were all from Greenwood, you do see cheek, you, you can, it's safe to assume that, that there is some, whether or not it's Cherokee or not, I don't know (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 481718
Speaker 1: So, were there any, w-, was anyone's father white?
Speaker 2: Well, London Smith, Eddie's [Bolden's maternal grandmother, Eddie Smith Freeland] father, I'm not sure what he really was, he'd look like a white man and he supposedly, I think he had blue eyes and he had very straight hair and was very light.  So, I'm not sure whether he was technically a mulatto, an octoroon or was he white and kind of passing for black, so I don't know but I know he could have, he could have passed, he was either white or someone who could have passed for white (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And whose father was that?
Speaker 2: That was my Grandmother Eddie's father who hated her.
Speaker 1: He did (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think it, I think he hated her supposedly in part because of her color.
Speaker 1: Because she was dark?
Speaker 2: Yes, and she was given away.  The story is and I don't know if this is true that when she, some people came to visit and they said, "That's a nice little girl," and her father said, "You want to take her?"  And, there's supposed to be another story that she had another sister that who was light skinned who was--they were playing arou- around a wash pot and that the child's dress caught on fire and the child burned and died and that the father said to my grandmother, "I wished that had been you."  So there's lots of drama (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So, where did your grandmother grow up?
Speaker 2: Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] actually.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think she was before school age, she was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now let me just get this now so that this sticks.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: We're talking about Lonnie, no, your grandmother.
Speaker 2: No, my grandmother is Eddie.
Speaker 1: Eddie.
Speaker 2: Eddie.
Speaker 1: Right, Eddie.  So Eddie's father was Lon (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) London.
Speaker 1: London, London, so London wou- looked white?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was born as far as I know in Greenwood [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: In Greenwood.
Speaker 2: Smith.
Speaker 1: Smith.  But you don't know who his parents are?
Speaker 2: No, not yet.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I know that he was--see when my grandmother, Eddie's mother Gussie married London, Gussie was maybe (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay let's, keep it straight for me now. When--
Speaker 2: Oh.  Eddie is my grandmother.
Speaker 1: Eddie is your grandmother, when her--?
Speaker 2: Her mother's named Gussie [Smith Freeland's stepmother, Augusta Smith].
Speaker 1: Gussie, okay.
Speaker 2: Before she was born, when her mother married London, Gussie was eighteen and London was maybe forty or fifty he, some of his children were almost the same age.  I don't know what happened to his first wife [Margaret Smith], so there were two sets of kids in that family from his first wife and then when he married Gussie he had my grandmother Eddie, Bessie [Bessie Smith], Mozel [Mozel Smith] and Pearl [Peal Smith], maybe seven or eight other, other kids.  And growing up, I wasn't aware of all this, so now that I realize someone who was Aunt Ella [Luella Smith], was from the first set of children because growing up you just know that this is Aunt Ella, this is cousin so and so and you, you're really not aware of--and you know, I didn't call my grandmother Eddie, we called her Eddie, we didn't call her grandma and she was okay with that.
Speaker 1: But she was young?
Speaker 2: She was fifteen when she had my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden].
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Eddie was fifteen.
Story_ID: 481719
Speaker 1: Okay so, what other stories did your mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] say about, like what would, what were their daily lives?  Did they live on a farm?  Did they live in what was considered a, a city (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They lived like in a, sort of in town, town--
Speaker 1: In town, yeah.
Speaker 2: --in Marion and went back there a few years ago and I saw it.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the town, Mar- ?
Speaker 2: No.  No, no wait--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --Marion Street [sic. Marion Avenue] was where they lived, Greenwood [South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Greenwood, okay.
Speaker 2: So it was in the part of town and you know, there was a Piggly Wiggly and all of that, there was a Holloway store [Holloway's Grocery], they lived in a--wh- when I saw it a few years ago, there were these tiny little homes, a little, I don't know if it's clapboard, but these little, very modest little homes.  You know, I remember eating hash on the back porch, you know, it was huge to me, I thought when I was a kid and I went down there, I thought it was country but for her life growing up, I mean, I guess I realize now, she probably had an outhouse when she was a child probably, she was born in '37 [1937].  I don't know, I don't know, I think, I, I know one, one kind of way that she contributed to the household was what, a lot of family members worked for the Oregon Hotel [Greenwood, South Carolina].
Speaker 1: Is that a big hotel?
Speaker 2: It was a big hotel, because at one point, Greenwood, was a ra- for people traveling on business and cattle people traveling in the South so it was this major hotel.  So, my mother's, on her father's [O'Dell Freeland] side, the Freelands, they worked at the Oregon Hotel so her, my mother's maternal, paternal grandfather [sic. paternal great-grandfather], George Freeland was a cook at the Oregon and others were porters and laundresses and all that.  And my mother says that at one point when she was maybe three, four, five, they made extra money by having her sit in front of the hotel 'cause remember she's light skinned and she's got long hair and they would, they would, she was told to smile and greet the white people and the people would pat her on the head and say, "That's a pretty little pickaninny," and then give her like money.  And, I remember when she told me this, it, it wasn't with pride or anything, and it just was one of those, you don't know how to take it, you say okay they were doing what they, were they exploiting my mother or were they simply doing what they had to do to--?
Speaker 1: To make it.
Speaker 2: Get, get some coins so.  Now, she didn't finish, she only went to sixth grade, and I'm not sure really why because she was--they weren't so poor poor that she had to like go pick cotton in the field, she never had to do that, it just may have been that, no one thought it was important for her to continue with her education.
Story_ID: 481720
Speaker 1: And what about your father?  Did his (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He grew up in Charlotte, North Car- Carolina.
Speaker 1: Which was more of a city then?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  His father was a laborer who only went to third grade, I think there were, I think his (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now what's your father's full name?
Speaker 2: Willie.  And it's not William, its Willie James Bolden [Willie Bolden].  I think that his mother [Janie Bolden], I think his parents had fifteen births, ten children survived including two sets of twins.  I was, growing up I was always aware that my father grew up, I think much poorer than my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] did, in fact, I remember him telling me that when he was a child, that one of his dreams was to, you know, have any part of the chicken that he wanted.  But he also talks about one of the homes his father built and his father had to build a bathtub which was really scratchy, out of concrete, but--
Speaker 1: But did he talk about the parts of the chicken that they had to eat when he was growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess as I recall it, you know, he I guess at some age it, when he was among the younger ones, I guess he got the chicken feed or the--he talked about remembering about cupboards being bare on a Friday until his father got home, 'cause his father had to get his paycheck and then go to the grocery store and come home with the sacks of cornmeal and the sacks of that.  So he remembers eating, you know, like, I guess the Thursday night, maybe dinner was cornbread and buttermilk, or fatback and, and I know he always used to talk about creasy greens and later I wondered if that's watercress, 'cause I think people in the South did a different thing with watercress than we do with it in the North.  But it was, recently I was talking to him, he told that at one point he worked in a Greek restaurant in Charlotte and his thoughts then were that the Greeks were a little bit nicer than the other white folks, like he had, he was clear about the Greeks and the Jews didn't treat you so bad.  He only went to ninth grade, he told me the reason he dropped out of school was because he was ashamed of his clothing, wore dungarees, I mean, it's just such a different time that, you know, the fact that all he had was dungarees and he thought he could work and he was saying, help mama out, you know, his parents out and all of that.  But again, I have to say, on the other hand, one of his--my father's father came from Albany, Georgia, if you look at one of my great uncle's line, there was all this college going so, same Boldens but, you know, sort of different energies at one point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But that was his brother?
Speaker 2: My grandfather's brother's children.
Speaker 1: Right, they went to college (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A lot of them, all, almost all of them.  One, one, one of them, I think my, my grandfather Sam [Samuel Bolden, Sr.], had about ten brothers and sisters, so my Great Uncle John [ph.] who is still alive, I went to his one hundredth birthday party in October in Albany.  I think everyone of his, Uncle John, Great Uncle John's children went to college.
Story_ID: 481721
Speaker 1: So did your parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] talk about how they met and how they ended up in New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: They, I think they did meet in New York City, they were both involved in a church, the House of Prayer [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York], known as Daddy Grace's [Marcelino Manuel da Graca] church.  So, I think they met--
Speaker 1: Separately?  And, I mean, because he was in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I think they were members sep- right, separately.
Speaker 1: Because he was in Charlotte [North Carolina]--
Speaker 2: Charlotte and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And she was in Greenwood [South Carolina]--
Speaker 2: --and she was in Greenwood.
Speaker 1: But they were--
Speaker 2: And I do believe they were met up here because the church has churches all over.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: So, I think they met in New York though and I don't know how exactly when they met.
Speaker 1: And did they ever talk about their courtship or their early days before they started, before you came along in New York?  Where did they live?
Speaker 2: At one point they lived in Harlem [New York, New York], I wanna say on 10th Street, 116th Street.
Speaker 1: And this is about what year we're talking about?
Speaker 2: Fifties [1950s].
Speaker 1: In the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 2: Right, because I remember asking my father when Emmett Till--
Speaker 1: Which was '55 [1955] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) was killed, where were you?  And he said, "I was already up here and I said to myself, I'm not going home anytime soon."  So, '55 [1955], at least my father was here 'cause, I think his older brothers came, Sam [Samuel Bolden, Jr.] and Tom [Tom Bolden], the twins, and then he came.  I don't know what year my mother came up here, probably toward the '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what year did they marry?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957]?
Speaker 1: Fifty-seven [1957], and--
Speaker 2: Fifty-seven [1957], '58 [1958].
Speaker 1: And that's when you were born?
Speaker 2: I was born in '59 [1959].
Speaker 1: Fifty-nine [1959], but they already had Nelta [Nelta Brunson Gallemore]?
Speaker 2: My mother had already had Nelta--
Speaker 1: Nelta and she had--
Speaker 2: --in 1955--
Speaker 1: --and she, was Nelta born down south or up here?
Speaker 2: I think she was born in Greenwood.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 'Cause actually she stayed in Greenwood for a while when my mother came north to work.
Story_ID: 481722
Speaker 1: Now why did your mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] come to New York [New York]?  If she didn't know your father [Willie Bolden]--
Speaker 2: Unh-uh.
Speaker 1: -- she wasn't coming to be with him.
Speaker 2: Unh-uh, probably for work.
Speaker 1: But why would she choose New York?  I mean, most African Americans from the South were going to Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, I think that's different if you look at the lines?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You'll find the Mississippi people end up in Chicago (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Chicago.
Speaker 2: And the Carolina people end up in New York (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) End up in New York, okay.
Speaker 2: So I think probably--
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: --It's like families fo- found.  She probably figured even if she was doing domestic, she could get good pay, well 'cause it's good pay up here (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.  But did she know anyone?
Speaker 2: Oh, I'm sure she--well yeah, because she stayed with Aunt Bert [Roberta Howland] and Uncle Johnny [ph.], Uncle Johnny--
Speaker 1: Now how, now how are they related to you?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Remember I told you my mother was actually raised by her grandparents, Mattie [Mattie Freeland Howland] and Sam Howland [Samuel Howland]. Sammy Howland had a bunch of brothers, one of his brothers was named Johnny.
Speaker 1: Johnny worked in the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Sam worked for the railroad, Johnny may have worked for the railroad too.  So Johnny was married to a woman named Roberta, so growing up I always thought Aunt Berta was blood, but actually--
Speaker 1: It was--
Speaker 2: --actually Uncle Johnny was not blood either, because Uncle Johnny's brother Sammy married Mattie after she had O'Dell Freeland, who is my mother's father.  So actually none of the Howlands are related to me by blood, but growing up--
Speaker 1: They were (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, right, they were family, it was, it was all, it was never this thing about only by blood, that's what makes family.
Speaker 1: So she came up and lived with them (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Lived, yeah, I think she lived with Aunt Bert and Uncle Johnny.
Speaker 1: And where did they live?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: They lived in Harlem, 'cause I remember when they still lived there later they, they moved to Long Island [New York].  One of those brownstones on like 131st [Street] between Lenox [Lenox Avenue; Malcolm X Boulevard] and something, 127th [Street] in Central Harlem [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 481723
Speaker 1: Now what did your mother do for a living when she arrived, because she's this beautiful light skinned woman--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with good hair.
Speaker 2: Good hair, yep, yep.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Domestic work.
Speaker 1: Domestic.
Speaker 2: So she worked in people's homes.  I know she worked for a doctor and his wife once (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Which you have to.  I mean I've seen some of the ads that say, looking for light skinned negro--
Speaker 2: Oh?
Speaker 1: --to work in your home, like you had to be light skinned (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So I guess, yeah she had, she, you know, she was very, she was pretty and non-threatening and--
Speaker 1: So she worked for a doctor's family?
Speaker 2: I know at one point she worked for a doctor 'cause I know she told the story about, I don't know, she had her food in the refrigerator and the doctor was later tal- extoling about how that's a wonderful salad she had and it was cold collard greens, you know.  (Laughter) So I don't know, she worked for people on Long Island [New York], I recently been going through photographs, came across one from a little girl, Mimi [ph.], it's like to Georgie--that's the other thing, I think people called my mother Georgie, I-E [Georgia Howland Bolden].
Speaker 1: So your mother then, at what point did she send back for Nelta [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] to come and live with you?  Was that after you were born (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I think that's after--no, I think that's after my parents married, but then, I think after they married, it may have been after I was born because then I was down south for nine months, I'm born March, '59 [1959], so maybe after, right 'cause I think Mattie [Bolden's maternal, great-grandmother, Mattie Freeland Howland] trained me and then they, they believed in training you early so--
Speaker 1: Potty trained?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think Mattie trained me, I don't think I was trained in Greenwood [South Carolina].  But in my memory I was down in Greenwood for four years, that's how, how (unclear) 'cause I think I've merged all of the, the visits later.
Speaker 1: Into one life (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, into one life--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --of two or three years--
Speaker 1: Yeah--
Speaker 2: --down in Greenwood.
Speaker 1: --Yeah.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 481724
Speaker 1: What are your earliest recollections of living as a family in New York City [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Getting, living in Brooklyn [New York].  I think we lived at 241 Clifton Place, or someplace Clifton Place, and my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] was going somewhere that I couldn't go and I just remember it was in a brownstone building I think or I, I was at the babysi- anyway, looking longingly out the window as my big sister was going, being taken somewhere that I was too young to go.
Speaker 1: But she was only two years older than you?
Speaker 2: She's four years older than me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Four years older.  Okay.  So what are some of your other memories?  Who like, who are the neighbors when?
Speaker 2: Miss Ellis [ph.] took care of us.
Speaker 1: And who is she?
Speaker 2: A West Indian woman who took care of kids and I remember watching, what's that?  'Diver Dan' or Sonny Becker [sic. Sandy Becker] or I remember TV and I often think, you know, when people, you know, you meet some new people, you know, like people get really serious about early childhood schooling and all that and I think, it was a bunch of kids in Miss Ellis' house, you know?  And we turned out okay, we didn't have any playschool toys, or--
Speaker 1: How many children did she babysit?
Speaker 2: To my mind the house was, the apartment, whatever it was, was always crowded so in my head, I imagine dozens, of little kids (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But not dozens (laughter).
Speaker 2: And I think too she had grandkids and--
Speaker 1: And what did she--so she was Jamaican you said?
Speaker 2: West Indian.
Speaker 1: West Indian.
Speaker 2: I mean, it did--at that point--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I was coming up, I didn't know difference between, I thought West Indian, there was only one West Indian, I don't even know if I knew what that meant.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.
Speaker 2: That's why I did a book, 'Rites of Passage' ['Rites of Passage: Stories about Growing Up by Black Writers from Around the World,' ed. Tonya Bolden] later on, and all that but.
Speaker 1: So she took care of you when you were young.  Who were your friends at the time?
Speaker 2: I didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because this is all before you started--
Speaker 2: School.
Speaker 1: School.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't have, we lived in Brooklyn and we moved, when I was four we moved to 108th Street.  I don't have memories of Brooklyn, I mean, there's, there's a story of a roof fell on, you know the ceiling collapsed on me and my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] when I was an infant and my sister was there and supposedly said to me, my mother's dazed, "Tonya [HistoryMaker Tonya W. Bolden], I think your mother dead."  I don't have memories of Brooklyn.
Story_ID: 481725
Speaker 1: What memories are vivid for you about your childhood?  Early childhood, even, you know, just before school started, are they of Harlem [New York, New York]?  Did you attend--
Speaker 2: My fir- my first public event memory is JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] being shot, I think I had not started school, so that's November, '63 [1963]?  I was home with my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden], I remember we had one of those two seater pullout things and I remember ducking b- behind there and crying hysterically and even, you know, later on in life, (unclear), who's the man in Egypt?  Sadat [Anwar Sadat], anytime I hear of anyone getting assassinated, I notice I get nervous and I've since analyzed and I've realized what probably happened was, my mother probably got hysterical.  I remember a bulletin, you see those bullet- we interrupt this--so I don't know if I remember the first hearing of the shooting, or I remember hearing he's dead.  But probably my mother got very upset and that's why I was upset, that's what I was reacting to.  My sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] remembers my uncle O'Dell, Jr. [O'Dell Howland] who we call Jake, coming over with copies of the newspapers and saying, "This is history, this is history," and now I'm like, where are those newspapers (laughter)?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: That's my first public, but--
Story_ID: 481726
Speaker 1: But what about going to church?  Did, did, did you--your, you said the House of Prayer [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York] it was called?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, do you attend House of Prayer as a child (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah Sunday.
Speaker 1: Where was it located?
Speaker 2: 125th, 125th [Street].
Speaker 1: And what was that like, the church itself, and that Sunday service (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Pentecostal church.
Speaker 1: It was Pentecostal?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So take be behind the scenes of Pentecostal, does that, I mean it's--?
Speaker 2: Well it's very spirited.
Speaker 1: Shouting?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Shouting, band with good music, you know because the music a lot of gospel music has that north--I did a project once with [HistoryMaker] Bernice Johnson Reagon, which is how I found my Albany [New York] Bolden family, but that's another story.  And she once said that that House of Prayer music is the only one that carried that New Orleans [Louisiana] tradition of having all those trombones.  So, you know, brass, and it was--
Speaker 1: Did you ever feel that spirit as a child?
Speaker 2: Well I think, yeah, I think you felt, you, you, you ought to feel it, otherwise it was something wrong with you (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: But it's, it's really not something that I, I've totally processed, I don't think?  I mean it wa- I mean it was just church, you just went to church and most people I knew went to church, some people went to a different church than I did.  But, it, it was, church was getting dressed up and getting yo- your legs and all your limbs vaselined and you know having on your best outfit and sitting straight and getting a peppermint ball and, and listening to the music and fearing God.  And then having, you know, going out to, then either aunts and uncles come over to our apartment for dinner or we going to their apartment or really the best was when after church, when my parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] took us to La Famiglia [New York, New York], which was on 125th Street that restaurant.  And it was like, I think that's where I, they allowed me to have, you know, I don't, probably some ginger ale with some food coloring in a martini glass.  That's what I remember about Sundays is that it was, it was like family day and, dress up day.
Speaker 1: Did, did the spirit of Sunday carry through for you every day?  Did you feel a sense of, of, a sense of God's presence in your life (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, I think I think, you know, gee this is a good question.  I think it was almost like this was the--I remember pra- saying my prayers, and I remember us saying grace, but we didn't have fa- I don't remember family devotional time, through the rest of the week.  Matter of fact, I remember Sunday morning, we would be, I, I think I remember hearing, having gospel records being played and I'm watching Bullwinkle ['The Rocky and Bullwinkle Show'] or, or whatever.
Story_ID: 481727
Speaker 1: What about Christmases?  Did you celebrate Christmas (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah, Christmas was, was wonderful, I mean, I remember one year I wanted a doll called Bipsy.  Bipsy can gurgle, Bipsy can do so many things--
Speaker 1: Was she black or white?
Speaker 2: She was white, I didn't even know of anything with a black doll, and apparently the story is that I had wanted this doll all year, all year, and it was one of those typical things, I got the doll and when I saw it, I was like whatever and my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] and I, we played with boxes or something.  But we did because in, in the, where we lived, at this point in Manhattan [New York], the Mitchell-Lama development, 108th Street, the Franklin Plaza [Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York], we lived at 324 and the next building which I think is 334, one of my father's [Willie Bolden] brothers and his wife and daughter lived in that building.  So, our families were always having dinner together, so it would be Christmas in our apartment, Christmas in their apartment, so there were always lots of presents, there were trees, it was decorated, you know, and there were shinny packages and paper and wrappings and, you know, as a child, I never knew any deprivation.  There's a story that my Uncle Jake [O'Dell Howland], the one who loved history he, he was adventurous and he had some friends from Sweden or Stockholm, or Finland, or somewhere, and the story was that he brought them to our apartment and then I, I overheard that they had come there and I don't know if they meant our apartment or to Harlem [New York, New York], but they wanted to see where poor people lived.  And I, I supposedly said, why did he bring them here?  So, 'cause, 'cause I didn't grow up feeling, I didn't have a, down these mean streets, kind of experience, like Perry Thomas [ph.]?  Although, I'm 108th between 1st [Avenue] and 2nd [Avenue], and I think his mean street were a few blocks over.  But, what I remember about Franklin Plaza was the playground, I mean, outside was my life, outside, I mean, you know, finish my homework, still light out, I had to be always outside playing, Ringolevio, handball, skullies, bike riding, roller skating, I just loved to always be outside as much as I could.  So, I remember the playground, you know, jump rope, double dutch, double orange--
Speaker 1: Did you ever go to the Apollo Theater [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Were you--?
Speaker 2: --Apollo is across the street from the House of Prayer [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York].  No, probably wasn't allowed.  Yeah, I think probably that was, it was right across the street, but it was, so what, it's the Apollo across the street from the, from church.
Story_ID: 481728
Speaker 1: All right so continuing on tape two.
Speaker 2: Okay, childhood memories.
Speaker 1: Childhood memories.
Speaker 2: Yeah, play, I remember, what I loved was July there was an Italian festival that came around they would have, they would build this giant statue and they would go (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uptown [Upper Manhattan, New York] also?
Speaker 2: --on it, yeah, but see that's, you know, a friend of mine, Elza Boyd [Elza Dinwiddie-Boyd] said, a lot of people forget when, that, like I tell people, I grew up multicultural but it wasn't an issue, it wasn't forced, it wasn't an agenda, it just was.  Where I lived I would say, sizeable population black, sizeable Puerto Rican, sizeable Italian, so I literally could be outside and hear, Tito Puente kind of music out of one window, 'O Sole Mio' out of another window and Motown [Motown Records] out of another one, and it was yes, it was a strong Ital- that was, I think that section at one point was Little Italy [New York, New York], then it became Spanish Harlem [East Harlem, New York, New York] and, and all this.  But and I remember social club--
Speaker 1: Festival, you were gonna--
Speaker 2: Oh the festival, right and they built this giant, giant saints statue and it would march at the culmination of the week of celebration so there was a, like a bl- I guess it was a block fan that had those rickety rides that come around, The Whip and of course my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] would always say, y'all can't go on those rides, they're too rickety and we didn't pay no mind and went on The Whip and you know, pitched a nickel and win the, the thing and cotton candy and Icees and sausage and--
Story_ID: 481729
Speaker 1: Now was it only the two girls that were in the house with you?  You and Nelta [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Me and my sister.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right, we grew up together.
Speaker 1: Right and then so then the other siblings were not in the house?
Speaker 2: No.  My brother Jimmy [ph.] sometimes came in the summer (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was your mom [Georgia Howland Bolden] strict?  Because you said, the Apollo [Apollo Theater, New York, New York] was right across the street from the church--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you didn't, you couldn't go?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, 'cause that's kind of worldly I guess.
Speaker 1: Worldly, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Yeah, you know, it was--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: --I remember seeing Al Green get chased down the street, though one time I was at the House of Prayer [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York] and I'm looking out the window and apparently he didn't do his moves right to get in the building and a crowd was chasing him down the street (laughter).  My mother was strict, well, no, if anyone was strict if was my father [Willie Bolden], I mean my father could tell me he was disappointed in me and I would, I'm on the floor.
Speaker 1: Now did they, could you only wear dresses?  Could you wear pants?
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no it wasn't that strict.  Well, remember too when I was coming up, I went to live on 108th [Street] near 1st [Avenue] and 2nd [Avenue], I went to M.E.S 146 [New York, New York], which is a 106th Street and 1st Avenue, when I was in elementary school, girls couldn't wear pants to school, only when it was snowy and then you wear your pants under your dress and when you got to school you took off your, your pants.  But wh- but when, I could play, I co- when I played outside my pa- I had play clothes, I had pants and shorts and all of that, on Sunday I couldn't go outside and play and I, I guess I couldn't wear pants, I don't know.  On Sunday, I couldn't go out and side and play, I couldn't Sunday was--
Speaker 1: Period?
Speaker 2: Right.  Sunday, I think was church and the only, but the social life was, we, we went and ate with family so.  But, yeah, when I was in, yeah in elementary school, I couldn't wear pants to school.
Speaker 1: So did you--coming to your elementary school years, you first went to P.S. 146?
Speaker 2: Actually it's, it was called M.E.S. 146, More Effective Schools, it's a program that they had in the '60s [1960s], my school was new, we had small classes, I think we were also changing classes when other kids weren't.  I remember taking a lot of tests, seemed like I was always taking some little test, so it was some kind of I think experiment with ed- progressive education.
Story_ID: 481730
Speaker 1: I just wanna go back for a second, something I usually ask people but--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --it may not apply in this case because you grew up in a multicultural environment, you never had to be told that you were black in the sense that people were going to discriminate against you because you're black?  Like you were never called nigger or never (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't remember--
Speaker 1: --like you never had that awareness?
Speaker 2: I didn't have that, I, I could also be blocking things out, but, but of, because of where I lived my, my psyche was not assaulted every day of the week.  Now there were some white people who lived in the development [Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York], but like I said, it was black, Puerto Rican, and Italian, and even in my mind, Italian, the Italians that lived in my neighborhood weren't the same kind of white people that I heard about my, my father [Willie Bolden] knowing when he was a child.
Speaker 1: Did?--
Speaker 2: They were Italians, just like, even to me, Jews were Jews, I never thought they were white people.  So yeah, I guess where I grew up, I don't remember experiencing a lot of racism, I remember, yeah, in, in M.E.S. 146 [New York, New York], most of my teachers were white.
Speaker 1: I was going to ask if you had any black teachers.
Speaker 2: One, Miss Jackson [ph.], and I don't even think she was my teacher.
Story_ID: 481731
Speaker 1: So in this program, M.E.S. 14 [sic. M.E.S. 146, New York, New York] at the school--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: There were very few black teachers?
Speaker 2: There were very ch- I only knew of m--I rem- no, no, no my band teacher was black and Miss Jackson [ph.] was black, but I'm not sure if she was ever my class teacher 'cause at one point I got skipped, so I think that's how I missed having Mrs. Jackson.
Speaker 1: So during those, I mean--?
Speaker 2: So the school was mixed, the population of school as I recall reflected the neighborhood, right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The community, the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: So probably mostly black.
Speaker 1: But the teachers didn't reflect the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, there was Mrs. Grottenburg [ph.], Mrs. Zimmerman [ph.], Mr. Schwartz [Matthew Schwartz] was the principal, Mr. Fleegle [ph.], who's very involved in education in New York today still, was the vice principal.
Speaker 1: How would you describe their attitudes towards you as a student, and what they were teaching you?
Speaker 2: Well, I recall that it was wonderful.
Speaker 1: Well that's all--
Speaker 2: Again, my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] was very involved, so my mother was a kind of parent (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) In school?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, who would maybe do a chaperone for a trip, or would, when it was Halloween time and we were gonna make the pumpkin seeds, she would bring the frying pan, and my mother made sure I was clean and neat and everything and I was a girl and I was bright.  So a lot of attention was paid to me, you know, I, I--
Speaker 1: Because your mother was involved?
Speaker 2: I think so and also because I was polite and well dressed and neat and clean, I, I have this mem- as I said, I was skipped at one point.
Speaker 1: Right and that was all the involvement of your mother though that you were polite and clean, you know (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, um-hm, um-hm, and I--
Speaker 1: They saw a kid who was cared for.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And I, 'cause I distinctly remember thinking that there was someone in my class, I think in fifth grade, I don't know which grade George [ph.], who I always thought was smarter than I was and I don't think George got the attention, I think his clothes were a little pilly and I always remember thinking, George is smarter than me and, and I'm getting more attention.
Story_ID: 481732
Speaker 1: How did you deal with boys and having grown up in a, in an environment where your father [Willie Bolden] was strict?  Did he let you, I mean did you have, I mean like crushes on boys?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I remember Pete [ph.], and I think when we went out that meant that we went and had a soda and that was going out, I mean, when I, when I was growing up, you just weren't aware--having a boyfriend meant that you liked somebody and that was all you did was like each other.  Probably now I, I think my--you know what else I think?  Back then, parents put up boundaries, when you have to be in bed at nine o'clock, when you ha- you have--when you have to be upstairs during the school year especially, at, when, when sun, when, if the sun's not out, you're not out.  When you have to go to bed at eight or nine or so, when you, when you can't watch 'Peyton Place,' ther- there's, there's a whole world of experience and you're not even aware of to be curious about because my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] was a homemaker too.  My father worked.  That was the deal they made, at one point he worked three jobs so she could be with us, I couldn't do too much after school, you know, I had to come, my mother would know where I was, she purposely, I remember saying she picked our apartment [in the Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York] because it had the most windows overlooking the play park area 'cause she knew that's where we'd be--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, she could keep a lookout.  So I guess it was strict but I never felt (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What--
Speaker 2: --confined.
Speaker 1: --confined.
Story_ID: 481733
Speaker 1: What classes up to this point, like we're talking about 1970, '71 [1971],  '72 [1972], what classes were, were you excelling in?  Where did they, where did (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't know--
Speaker 1: --people see the most potential in you?
Speaker 2: No, in elementary school [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York], I was just considered bright, I, I remember having social studies and hating it--
Speaker 1: Were there teachers that you looked up too?
Speaker 2: I looked up to Mrs. Grottenburg [ph.], but my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] told me later in life, she was the one when in the middle of third, they put me in fourth and I adored that teacher, my mother told me later in life that she remembers Mrs. Grottenburg, telling her, telling my mother, "I don't see what's so special about Tonya [HistoryMaker Tonya W. Bolden]."  So, but my mother would never tell me that while I was adoring this teacher, so I don't know you, we did, I don't remember anything specific about class, I remember I played the clarinet in band, I remember at one point (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well what grade did you start playing the clarinet?
Speaker 2: Maybe fourth or fifth and then, and there are no pictures of me with the clarinet so that leads me to think I must have been awful.
Speaker 1: There are no pictures of you with?
Speaker 2: No I, which I think is kind of odd.
Story_ID: 481734
Speaker 1: Who are the role models in the community of Harlem [New York, New York] at the time you were, during this time in the '70s [1970s], when you were growing up? Were you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] my uncles--
Speaker 1: Your uncles, your parents, the church [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: They had people in the church that, the, the elders, you know, all the big people.  I don't have any, well I mean, as a kid I admired whoever had an Afro.  You know, at one point all of the older kids, who had the dashikis and the Afros, you know, I, I thought they were like so exciting and--my mother wouldn't let us have Afros.
Speaker 1: You had to have straight hair?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we had to have straight hair.  So I remember looking up to those, who I guess were militants, I don't even know if they were militants, they simply did the red, black and green thing and you know?  And they were exciting (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you have any--did you identify with Africa at all during that time?  Like you know the whole push the--
Speaker 2: No.  I, I didn't know anything about black history, I, I think I knew there was a man who at night in this, in the, I remember summer nights hearing steel drumming after I'm in bed, I'm in in bed, I have to be in bed and hearing steel drumming.  I, I honestly don't know if at that time I just thought that's a West Indian man or if I knew that was a Trinidadian man, I really don't know what I knew.  But I didn't have a sense of Africa, I didn't have a sense of the diaspora and I don't remember whatever I was told about slavery, I remember going south, you know, either to Greenwood [South Carolina] or Charlotte [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Was that vastly different from being in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: No, but I think I know why.  I was asking my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] recently, when I was doing the book ['Rock of Ages: A Tribute to the Black Church,' Tonya Bolden] on King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] and I realized well were going down south, Jim Crow, and I don't remember any of that, but she said, "Don't you remember Tonya [HistoryMaker Tonya W. Bolden], we never went outside the black community."  I remember we stopped at Marilyn House [ph.].
Speaker 1: Which was?
Speaker 2: Which is a, like a restaurant, res- you know, nice food and a big place, and she said and we took food, and she said we would usually go stay in two cars 'cause, you know, my father and his--and I don't think we ever stopped again and then one, she said, don't you remember when Charlotte we went to a restaurant and we went any, we stayed in that black community.  So, my mother and my father never let us be put in the situation, they shielded us from being, going to downtown and imagine a New York kid and saying, "Mommy I wanna go do this," so, they, they, they, they protected us.  And now I understand it because I remember talking to, you know, people like my other mother Johnnetta Cole [Johnnetta B. Cole], talking about being protected from the race monster, in her case, she said that's why her--she and her sister [HistoryMaker MaVynne "Beach Lady" Betsch] were driven everywhere in Jacksonville, Florida, so they didn't have to face the bus or I want that, I, oh no, no, I can get you some better ice cream at home and, you know.  So, I think my parents did very much the same thing, they kind of protected me.
Story_ID: 481735
Speaker 1: What led to the transition of you going from the M.E.S. school [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York] to the Chaplin--to the private School (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York].  Well my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden]--
Speaker 1: Chapin, yeah.
Speaker 2: --my mother did whatever you had to do to find out about better schools and made sure she and my father [Willie Bolden] filled out whatever paperwork they had to do for the better schools.  So before I leave M.E.S. 146, my sister's [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] already, is at, is at Hunter, Hunter High School [Hunter College High School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Hunter High School.
Speaker 2: So my mother had, so she was determined that we were gonna get the best education possible, so like I said, I don't know, I was always taking tests and I believe I was considering how I could consider Hunter High, like my sister, Columbia Prep [Columbia Grammar and Preparatory School, New York, New York] and Chapin which is on 84th [Street] and East End [Avenue], down the street from the mayor's Gracie Mansion [Archibald Gracie Mansion, New York, New York].  And I went to visit Chapin and I looked in the gym and I saw Joann [ph.], a girl from my block who had gone to my elementary school and she was playing in the gym and I remember telling my mother I wanna go to this school.  Now, whether or not that really was my decision I don't know, but it was all about, you know, my parents not having connections, not having money, all they could give us was education, I mean I think they were people who truly believed if they can get an education, they can take it from there and they would, that was the only thing that they were always insisting.  I mean, school, but it, but it wasn't a pressure thing, I don't, I don't ever recall being f- fearful, it, it was just that you were expected to do well.  I, I think sometimes and I can say, you know, maybe if I got a B plus, it, it would be like, well that's good, but, you know, it wasn't like why didn't you get an A, but I was expected to do well.  I mean as a kid, I loved reading, I loved books, I loved writing so, I was all over school.
Story_ID: 481736
Speaker 1: Well who introduced you to those things, reading, writing, books?
Speaker 2: Oh my parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden], my parents.
Speaker 1: What types of books were you reading and that and what things were you interested in (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember Dr. Seuss--
Speaker 1: Doctor Seuss?
Speaker 2: I remember 'Curious George' [H. A. Rey and Margret Rey], I remember that little girl that looks like a nun, 'Madeline' [Ludwig Bemelmans] or somebody?  I remember reading 'The Borrowers' [Mary Norton], I remember coming home from school, I think it was the hour book club with the fill out how many books you want and I would have twenty, thirty books (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And that's in, yeah--
Speaker 2: It was five cent, ten cent, and I don't ever remember them saying no or this is too much, or we don't have the money or you can't have this book.  I don't, I don't, I mean one of the earliest photos of our apartment in Franklin Plaza [Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York], you see there's no carpeting and there's like old furniture and you see like this book case, its kind of--.  And my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] wa- my father was reader, my mother was a reader, I'm told there's a picture, a lost picture of me with, sitting up in my parents' bed with a, a book like upside down, was imitating my mother.  I mean she was the, you know, and, and that's the difference is that I find that back in the day, back in my parents' generation, being unschooled, it wasn't, was not synonymous with being ignorant, I mean, you know, sometimes we would laugh at my mother when she had to make those calls downtown to get and, we'd say, "Oh mommy, putting on her white voice now."  I mean that's what she would do what, to get us into school, to find out about this, to order something wholesale, it was this, those people had a kind of a genius, you know?  They had a, they had an intelligence that I know I don't have for all my schooling.  And so, I've, I just remember that, I do remember my mother telling me the story that her [paternal] grandmother [Mattie Freeland Howland] told her about the, I don't know, it's probably (unclear) about the enslaved man who was once given a note to take either to the owner or the overseer, or vice versa and when he got there he got beaten and supposedly the note said beat this behind, in other words and so the moral of the story was, if he had known how to read, he never would have delivered the note.  So, I grew up thinking that, oh my god, you gotta be smart and learn to read and write and know these things so you don't get beaten, you know, or abused or something so that was the sense, it was that, you know, reading and books and everything, it was like it was holy, it, you know it was, it's, it's, I can't describe it, it was like the, I guess like the fish hardly notices the water?  But it was just, of course you have a books and of course you read.  And, and people in the community then, being smart was, was celebrated, I mean people would talk about my vocabulary and be proud of it and say, "Do you know what word she knows," and you know, there was all that kind of support.  Although when, when I went to Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York], somebody, some--some woman did tell my mother I, that it was probably gonna make me crazy but, you know.
Speaker 1: Chapin was going to?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah (laughter), they probably thought--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Story_ID: 481737
Speaker 1: So, you went to Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Were there te- did you see you see, did the teachers at Chapin reflect more of your community as far as the mixture of teachers?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So there were, there were all white teachers at Chapin?
Speaker 2: All, I would say, I remember, I, I went there seventh, I graduated twelfth grade, somewhere eighth, ninth, tenth grade, somewhere around there we had a gym teacher, Miss Hampton [ph.], I think.  I've been back to Chapin, I, I've met a math teacher, I don't know if she's still there but that time I don't remember any black teachers, any black office workers, any black custodial workers, any black security people, any black people in the lunchroom, and the year that I entered in seventh grade, another black girl, Cheryl George [ph.], also entered and we were the first in that class of maybe forty-five girls.  And one, one of my friends from Chapin has told me that the summer before we came, their parents, or they were called and they were told that--I, I felt I have to get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That black students were coming?
Speaker 2: Yeah and I have to get from her were they told, "Here's a wonderful opportunity for your daughters," or were they told, "Don't spit on them," or, I don't know what they were told, but they were told--
Speaker 1: They were warned--
Speaker 2: They were prepared, right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: They were being warned that two blacks were entering their, their class and Chapin--
Speaker 1: Well who introduced you to theater during the time you were at Chapin?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I took drama, I don't know why and I didn't do, I don't remember doing drama in elementary school [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York], I remember val- being valedictorian or whatever you call that in elementary school and getting up there before my speech and crying for the first three minutes (laughter) and everybody had to applaud for me to--I wish I had that speech, I don't know what I said.  But, I don't know, and I, maybe it was that idea that you join stuff and I didn't do dance and I didn't do visual art.
Speaker 1: But you did music and you thought you'd do theater?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did, I did the drama club, I, it was probably just picking something to do.
Speaker 1: Now who, did you, is it true that you joined the Westside Repertory Theatre company [Westside Theatre, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did, is that something you auditioned for?
Speaker 2: No really, I was, my friend Bemshi [ph.], who I grew up with, my best friend on 108th street, we had gotten not estranged, whatever you call it, I moved to the Bronx [New York], she moved whatever, we, we caught up with each and she was taking acting classes at this, this off of Broadway company and we had dinner and then I went and then I started taking classes--
Speaker 1: And--
Speaker 2: --and then I got to be in the company.
Speaker 1: --is this the one that's over on the West Side Highway?
Speaker 2: It's like eighty, f- seventy, 81st [Street]?  I don't know if it still exist but it was a little around the corner from like Zabar's [New York, New York] area, it's a little down the steps, little place.
Speaker 1: What did that do for you, that exposure?
Speaker 2: Well this is later after I'm out of college [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I th--
Speaker 1: Oh that was after--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when I'm (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 2: --when I'm in college and out of college.
Story_ID: 481738
Speaker 1: So then, let's go back to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) To Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: --to Chapin.  Being in that world--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did that, you know, with these teachers and these students in this private school environment, was it different from the M.E.S. school [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, it was probably very traumatic, but I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because?
Speaker 2: --think I realized, now that I put it together, I think wow, you're probably traumatized, what, what I remember in terms of emotional memory, I remember the faces on some of the parents and some of the teachers.  Looks that said, what are you doing here, or looks that said, I don't know what quite to do with you.  So I knew that some people didn't want me, any black person in that school, I knew some people just didn't know what we were.  I have sometimes wondered if some of my friends who took me home to their Park Avenue or 5th Avenue apartments were trying to be radical and shocked their, you know, wh- did they really like me or was it, you know, this is in the '70s [1970s], so is it, it's a cool thing to be, to have a black friend, I don't know.  What I remember, what I value about Chapin is the education--
Speaker 1: Which is?
Speaker 2: Well two things.  One of the things--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was fabulous, I mean I remember a Miss Phelps [ph.], I think it was in tenth grade having us do, ten page papers, I wanna think it was every week, maybe it was once a month, whatever it was, it was too often and we hated that woman and we thought this is cruel, I get to college [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] and I think, thank Miss Phelps.  I was reading Faulkner [William Faulkner], I probably would need to re-read him, Dreiser [Theodore Dreiser], I had friends who were reading 'Love Story' [Erich Segal] when I was reading Faulkner and, and I've told pe- people who've sa- I said, yeah I have pretty Eurocentric education.  The only book by a black author I remember reading at Chapin is 'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison], I remember our reading 'Huck Finn' ['The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,' Mark Twain] and feeling terrible when we were reading out loud and we got to the parts about Nigger Jim and nigger this and I just kind of glazing over.
Speaker 1: How did you feel?  What affected reading Ralph's [Ralph Ellison] book have, 'Invisible Man' have on you?
Speaker 2: I have no memory of that.  (Laughter) I think I was probably happy that it was by a black person.
Speaker 1: Right.  But you grew up, yeah but by that time, Baldwin [James Baldwin] and all those people had long left Harlem [New York, New York], he was living in Paris [France], there was no renaissance taking place in Harlem anymore (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Unh-uh. Unh-uh.  I didn't even know about Harlem Renaissance, I remember in Harlem my Uncle Jake [O'Dell Howland], the history lover taking me by and saying this is Langston Hughes, it's the brownstone, 'cause he was still alive apparently when I was a kid and I remember, I couldn't care less, I remember this uncle telling me about Phillis Wheatley, and Paul [Paul Laurence Dunbar]--and I could care less, I mean I just didn't wanna know about anything history, I remember I had social studies, I remember I actually hated, I despised that class so.  But I, I don't, I remember reading, you know it was hard, you know, it was a hard book (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, except for Black History Month then, what did they do at Chapin?
Speaker 2: Nothing.  I don't think I knew of, so Black History Month started in '76 [1976], I don't remember Negro History Week, I don't remember in New York [New York], ever hearing about Negro History Week, '76 [1976], I'm graduating from Chapin, so that's when black history comes.  You know there was no, there was no, maybe?  Did we have a black studies club?  I think one time at Chapin we tried to have something, but there was no, there was, there was no interest in, in a multicultural education, that's not what Chapin offered at the time, you know, that was a school founded in whenever, 1900.
Speaker 1: Well, what did your parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] think you were going to get out of that type of education (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) A first rate education.
Speaker 1: First rate education.
Speaker 2: And so I--
Speaker 1: And it continued?
Speaker 2: --I had five years of Latin--
Speaker 1: All right, okay.
Speaker 2: --and I will tell people nothing sharpens the mind like five years of Latin.  They thought I would get a key, education would be the key, well you know, well the opening or whatever, they might as well say something like the world was my oyster.  So, I guess they figured, like I said, they didn't have money, they didn't have connection, if I was gonna open that oyster it was gonna be with education.
Story_ID: 481739
Speaker 1: And then who was it that introduced the idea of you going to Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] to you?
Speaker 2: I was on a volleyball team at Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York] and we went to see a volleyball game at Princeton and I said, this is a pretty place.  And my, my back up schools were gonna be Fordham [Fordham University, New York, New York] and Barnard [Barnard College, New York, New York], 'cause I, first I didn't wanna leave New York [New York], I didn't wanna leave home and then I went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And you'd never considered a historically black school [HBCU]?  It just--
Speaker 2: I don't think I knew they existed.
Speaker 1: You just didn't think about Howard [Howard University, Washington, D.C.] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I didn't--I don't think--I didn't know, I don't think I knew what they were and I think I'm slightly before ABC program, A Better Chance?  I'm, I think I'm maybe a year, I was never in one of those programs, but when I think about it now, I think maybe I'm of that group that was in a sense, tracked in a way for, to go to predominately white schools.  I mean, I think somebody had an agenda of, you know, opening doors and seizing--
Speaker 1: Well how do, how did, tell me the process of you getting into Princeton?  Because it's today, an extremely tough school to get into.
Speaker 2: Well, I applied, you know you took those tests, you take all those tests, you write essays, and you, when I got in, you know, like I said, Fordham and Barnard.  And only after I saw Princeton campus, then it was, it was Princeton and there's a story, Jake [O'Dell Howland], my [maternal] uncle wanted me to apply to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and I remember saying, I don't wanna go to Harvard, I don't wanna go to Boston [Massachusetts], and those, those, my decisions were based on location, it was like I don't wanna be too far from home, Princeton is close to home and he kept saying, "It doesn't matter, you'll probably get accepted and then you'll have an acceptance letter."  And I thought, I'm not doing that, that's crazy, you know?  So, and then I found out for example, the benefit of pr- of Chapin, is that when I go to Princeton, I placed out of language requirement, I don't know if I placed out of the writing requirement, but I think I, in other words, I, turns out I had done AP [Advanced Placement] work at, at Chapin and I wasn't aware of it.  Like I said, when I went, when I got to Princeton, research papers were no problem, reading big thick books in a short, you know, hundreds of, was no problem.  And also, I think the other thing I got out of Chapin was that the quote unquote the white people were just people, I mean, you know, I had classmates who had troubled families, you know, they may have a eighteen room apartments, but there was nothing, th- they weren't all bright, they weren't all together, they weren't all--I would th- I would say, what I became aware of--see remember, before Chapin my experience with white people, is like my friend Bemshi's [ph.], mother who lived in our building [Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York] and who had a lot of black friends, was experienced with or m- my father [Willie Bolden] worked in the garment center.  So I was used to white people who were used to black people, who worked and lived, you know.  I remember Bell [ph.], sending my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] chopped liver, so I grew up learning about Gefilte fish and Hanukkah gelt and all that kind of stuff.  So I was used to--Chapin was predominately WASP [White Anglo-Saxon Protestant], predominately wealthy, like old money, wealthy.  So I was dealing with a whole class thing too, which means that when I go to a place like Princeton, I'm going to school with the sisters and brothers of the people like I've gone to Chapin with, you know, people have wings of museums named after them and everything.  So, I think what, what I got out of Chapin is I realized that white people were not better than me, that some may have more money, you know those, those kinds of things or bigger apartments, or things like that but they weren't inherently any brighter or any, had any more common sense or any more talent or, you know were stronger or, or anything, it was--and I think that's a good thing.
Story_ID: 481740
Speaker 1: We were just talking about sororities.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I said you didn't ever sense that you were going to miss out on that (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I never, I never heard of them.  I mean I think as a--when you, you know, Judy Simmons [Judy Dothard Simmons] said something once, she said, "Harlem leaves a certain stamp on her children," and I think this is from my perspective.  You grow up in Harlem [New York, New York] with, around all these black people aware that some are doctors, some are domestics, some work for the railroad, some are teachers, some are whatever and, you know, you walk down 125th Street and it's just an experience and you grow up with that, you don't need to go someplace else for black identity, I don't think.  May be also at the time that I was in New York [New York], you know, living in a place like New York where you can experience anything, I remember there was a woman one of, someone from, my father [Willie Bolden] knew from work, he worked in a garment center and so, probably somebody who had a store, one of his customers, 'cause he mostly did shipping managing but he also did some sales, used to send or maybe it was one of the bosses, tickets to what was then called the Philharmonic [New York Philharmonic]?  The Philharmonic, right, and there we was, my mo- I know my father didn't wanna go but there was my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] said, "We're gonna go to the Philharmonic and we're gonna sit and we're gonna sit and we're gonna listen to this classical music," because she always said, "We never know, we might be invited to the White House [Washington, D.C.]."  And that's when my mother was just always trying to prepare us for, not saying covet being in the White House, all that, but she just wanted us to be prepared.  Now I don't know, I guess looking back at it, you could say that maybe she thought the, the wave for that preparation was to go to an overwhelmingly white private school, they knew I was gonna go to college, I don't, I don't know if they never suggested a HBCU [historically black colleges and universities], because they wanted me to go to a predominately white school or because they didn't want me to go to the South.  I di- my parents I, I'm thinking, that's a good question, they probably didn't want me to go to the South 'cause it's the place they fled, even though you know it would have changed by then--
Speaker 1: Well who--
Speaker 2: --I don't know what they, they had never gone to college--
Speaker 1: Well, go ahead.
Speaker 2: --and they, they were probably following the advice of other people who when they said good school, that meant an Ivy League school.
Speaker 1: Well you graduate Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: In 19--
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Bicentennial.
Speaker 1: Bicentennial.
Speaker 2: We went to see the ships, the tall ships, my mother had to go see the tall ships.
Story_ID: 481741
Speaker 1: You get into Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --as a freshman at Princeton?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: So now you're living away from home for the first time?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are you, are your roommates white?
Speaker 2: No, because I was in part of the summer program when you go for a few weeks and get, you know adjusted and I met Karen [ph.], Sandy [ph.] and a couple people then and I think we all decided we would room together, like seven of us room together.
Speaker 1: All black?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so, your life on campus then was segregated?  You hung out with these sisters and--
Speaker 2: I hung out with the people I liked and the people I liked were black.  It, I mean, see remember it wasn't as though I was leaving, jumping from world to world, when I was going to Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York], that was my, that was like my day job, that was my eight to three [o'clock] job, I came home to Harlem [New York, New York] or to the Bronx [New York] and I've noticed something, I think at least for me, I don't think the elementary [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York] and secondary school loomed as large in my life.  If I look at my concentric circles, I would say at the heart was family, then was church [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York], then was block, then was school.
Speaker 1: Although school was seen as the one that was going to do the most for you?
Speaker 2: Right.  But home?  Home and heart was family, church, block, school was the thing I had to do and I had to do well in to go out in the world so, when I went to Princeton, I wasn't, there wasn't anything about like, oh do I go hang out with white people, hang with black people?  It was like, I naturally gravitated towards the people who looked like me because they, that had been my world, my real world all my life.
Speaker 1: What were you considering becoming freshman year at Princeton?
Speaker 2: No idea.  All I knew when I went to Princeton is that I liked languages and I was gonna major in French and then somewhere along the way, someone, I think I actually, before I came to Princeton said, you know, you should consider a harder language, thinking maybe Chinese or Russian and I had no interest in.  And I don't know why I said maybe Russian and someone has asked me is it because of the Cold War and all that, I don't remember being aware of it, but I think other people may have been.  And I do remember people telling me that Russian speakers will be in demand and I think on a lark, freshman year I took introductory, whatever they call it, Russian and I went after, I don't know how many weeks or days, called my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] and said, "This alphabet is too hard, I can't do this, I'm gonna major in Italian," 'cause I figured Latin, five years, you could do Italian.  And then my mother said, "Stick with it baby," and I stuck with it and the department was small and it was fun.
Speaker 1: And do you speak the language fluently?
Speaker 2: No.  No, 'cause after I got master's [degree] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Did you read the language then?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well I could read it, well I remember, no if I'd read something like 'Dead Souls' [Nikolai Gogol], I probably had to have the English translation with me.  I think the only time I ever spoke Russian without thinking was in, in the '80s [1980s], when I was in the Soviet Union [Russia], I was in Soviet Georgia [Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic; Georgia], it was at a banquet and they had this wonderful white wine and I remember saying something to the person next to me without thinking, I just spoke in Russian, it was easy for me to, to speak to non-Russian people in Soviet Union then the Russians, you know like Georgia and so I could understand people with, whose Russian wasn't their first language than I could Russians I found, 'cause they had learned the languages as I had learned the language so.
Story_ID: 481742
Speaker 1: So back to your early days at--
Speaker 2: Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) Princeton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What did you do for extracurricular activities outside of school?  Did you work after--?-
Speaker 2: Yeah I had a job in security, I had a little part time job which was just needed for hoagie money and pocket money.  I had some scholarship and then I had loan and my parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] paid some so I didn't have to work through school, so, my, my, my working was just for pocket money.
Speaker 1: And what do you think, what did you learn from your years at Princeton about yourself, about what you wanted to do?
Speaker 2: I learned that I may have gone to the wrong school (laughter), because I knew I want, I loved the arts, it was clear about that, and--
Speaker 1: And that came from?
Speaker 2: --I guess from Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York], doing drama, from liking languages, from--and at one point maybe it's my summer, summer after freshman year may have been when I'd gotten involved in the off, off Broadway theater.
Speaker 1: The Westside Theatre [New York, New York]?
Speaker 2: Right and I would do that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So you would do that off and on--
Speaker 2: Then summers off and then when I took my year off, I did an internship there.  I always, I loved, I loved the arts, I did, took drama classes at Princeton, I think I felt odd because many of the people, my peers at Princeton, they were very focused like they knew they wanted to be doctors and lawyers and you know, they kind of had that.  And I, I never wanted a career for a career, I never wanted money or I never wanted status, so I always felt odd at Princeton, because I really, you know, I didn't really have any goals, I, I knew what I liked, you know, which is anything that's dealing with the arts.
Speaker 1: Well, what did you think you'd become during the time you were at Princeton?
Speaker 2: I wasn't sure (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You thought, okay, I'm gonna go teach or?
Speaker 2: I kind, I don't, you know, I don't know, when I was a kid, was a little girl and people say, "What do you wanna be?"  I'd say teacher or, or, or housewife like my mommy.  But then, I think I'm coming in an age with whatever, how many waves of feminism, where you kind of got the signal that you shouldn't wanna be a teacher or housewife, that's the feeling I got.
Speaker 1: Was [HistoryMaker] Angela Davis on your radar?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Not that I remember, no.  But, I kind of had that feeling like, hm, you, you shouldn't wanna be a housewife and a teacher.
Story_ID: 481743
Speaker 1: How were you wearing your hair at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Straightened.
Speaker 1: Straightened?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What about the other six girls that you hung out with--
Speaker 2: Stra--
Speaker 1: --over the summer?
Speaker 2: At one, but sometimes I don't know, we would have these, these moments when, 'cause I do have some photos of us when we have more natural hair styles.  But for the most part, in the '70s [1970s], no I think you def- you would find some then, 'cause I would cut my hair off and do different things with it or braids or sometimes do braids, cornrows, some people would do Afros, there was Third World Center [Carl A. Fields Center for Equality and Cultural Understanding, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] existed then and we would go and do things at the Third World Center.  I remember at one point protesting for Princeton to divest from South Africa, I remember some marches, I remember (unclear), I remember the rad- really radical ones.
Speaker 1: When did that come into play for you?  When did you, I mean?
Speaker 2: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 1: Seventy-six [1976].
Speaker 2: Seventy-seven [1977], '78 [1978] maybe where there was politics going on, on campus.
Speaker 1: Were there ever any sit-ins at Princeton? Were you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There were some, but they was nothing like that, no one was gonna get dogs set on 'em, oh, no, no.
Speaker 1: Right, right but you didn't?  No, no, or but you didn't take over any buildings or anything?
Speaker 2: No, I think somebody, I don't, I don't remember that, I think there was a threat too, but yeah, it wasn't that kind of 1960s, thing going on, I don't remember any of that at Princeton.
Speaker 1: So sort of, it, just sounds like race took definitely a backseat, racial politics or racial issues during your time at Princeton you didn't quote unquote identify with black politics or?
Speaker 2: But you just were black, I mean, that was the thing, it was like when I was coming up, you, you didn't have to do things to be black, you just were black.
Speaker 1: But you feel you have to now?
Speaker 2: No, no, no I mean, I didn't, I, I never had an issue with am I black or am I not black or you know, you knew I knew people who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well let me ask you this?
Speaker 2: --people say, like you know, it was like a foot in two worlds, I, I never felt like--
Speaker 1: But you had a foot in two worlds.
Speaker 2: --but I never felt in my soul, in my mind, I was never conflicted.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I never felt I had to choose.
Speaker 1: Well when--
Story_ID: 481744
Speaker 1: --When did you, you're, because your education was, was very Eurocentric--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Well when were you exposed to black writers, when did you read James Baldwin or--?
Speaker 2: In my twenties.
Speaker 1: In your twenties.  And you--
Speaker 2: Probably after graduate school [Columbia University, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: On your own?  Who or who, who opened that door for you?
Speaker 2: I don't know, I'm, I'm probably forgetting someone, I remember--
Speaker 1: A boyfriend?
Speaker 2: No, it--at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] I took some courses in the Afro-Am department, I took which, Scobie [James R. Scobie] who was from Dominica [sic. Chile], I think.  I remember taking, I know what jazzed me, a course in either black women playwrights or black playwriting, with, god I forgot her name, I think it's like Adrienne [Adrienne Kennedy], Adrienne, I forgot her name.  I also think I remember, but don't quote me on this, I think I remember Baraka [Amiri Baraka] coming to camp- 'cause I remember at one point writing poetry like Barak- I thought it was Baraka, 'cause I was cussing and you know all this wild stuff, but I remember Baraka having some, some influence.  Now whether I saw something on a video or he actually came to campus, but the part of the black playwriting course, it was like black women something, but that was just opening me up to what was out there, it wasn't telling, it wasn't making me fe- in other words, I think I grew up with, even without saying it, but feeling black and proud, I think I felt that.  But I wasn't aware of the culture I mean I was aware of the folk culture (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: What I got from my parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden].
Speaker 1: Right the folk culture--
Speaker 2: The songs, you grow up in a black church you know the music, you know, but I think at Princeton somewhere, so I take some classes, I started to learn about being more interested in black culture.  Now remember my uncle [Bolden's maternal uncle, O'Dell Howland] was trying when I was a kid, he tried to take me and get me excited (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So tell--
Story_ID: 481745
Speaker 1: So tell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Excited about--
Speaker 1: --me about, more about him, because you've mentioned him a few times--
Speaker 2: Yeah he got--started my coin collection--
Speaker 1: He's Uncle Joe?
Speaker 2: He start--Jake.
Speaker 1: Jake.
Speaker 2: His real name is O'Dell [O'Dell Howland] but th- the woman who raised him and my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden], Mattie [Bolden's maternal great-grandmother, Mattie Freeland Howland], she decided to call him Jake.  Jake started me with my coin collection, my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] with her stamp collection, Jake was the historian of the family and the, the person, "Apply to Harvard [Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] because you'll have an acceptance letter."  He is the person I, I recently was going through some things and, and came across, he, he also, he would like, the type of person who would go to night school to get the bachelor's degree and all of that and did different kind of jobs, working like maybe insurance companies.  At one time, he did, on the side, did, you know, waiting, waiting at parties and clubs and stuff like that, so, because of that, he got me people's autographs and he would bring me these little pieces of paper and I would think I, I don't care, I don't care, thank goodness my mother held onto some of them.  I think one I, I cherished the most is Pearl Bailey saying, "Tonya [HistoryMaker Tonya W. Bolden], you know, love is all," signed in you know, the '60s [1960s], or the '70s [1970s], or something.  But he was that kind of, he b- he did, he did a party for Satchmo [Louis Armstrong] once, I remember him bringing me back a mask that was one of the favors at this banquet or something, I don't, I don't know where it is now but, he was, he was just--I do have some old issues of Life magazine with the Kennedys on it, not, not of the assassination, he, he was just so crazy about history and at the time I could care less, I hated it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So did you know--
Story_ID: 481746
Speaker 1: I hated it (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So did you know anything about, you know, communism or you know, blacks in communism--
Speaker 1: No, not at the time--
Speaker 2: --Communist or--
Speaker 1: --I think at--
Speaker 2: --having read the--
Speaker 1: --at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]--
Speaker 2: --'Invisible Man' [Ralph Ellison] did that and, you know, Russians and Soviet Union [Russia], did any of that come together for you?
Speaker 1: In my decision to major, I only started to learn of that when I decided to major in, in Russian and I started taking, of course you have to take, you know, the language courses and the English courses and the history courses.  I really got kind of caught up in old Russian literature, I mean I started to find that when you go back to people and you look at peasant, were kind of all the same, I found so many things that were similar between, you know, Russian peasant culture and, and southern American peasant culture, you know, ways and sayings and things you eat and start to realize that when you go back we're kind of all the same.  I think I did have a romance with, I would say socialism, I think, I remember taking a subscription while at Princeton to like a Socialist newspaper and some really red faced guy like following me on campus trying to get me to go to meetings and I was like I don't know.  And I kind of had a romance with the whole Communist socialism thing until I think I realized that there was no place for God and even though at that point I wasn't going to church I never stopped believing in God and so I think that was my problem, it's like well I can't go for this.  But I, I think considered myself a leftist for about six months, yeah, 'cause I remember coming home from college and I had a copy of the board game Class Struggle and I was gonna make my parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] play this and they thought I was out of my mind, I was telling 'em take their money out of Chemical Bank 'cause they invested in South Africa, yes, I was a radical for, yeah a couple of months.
Speaker 2: What were you reading at the time?
Speaker 1: Princeton?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  What books were you reading?
Speaker 1: Dostoevsky [Fyodor Dostoyevsky]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: 'Dead Souls', Gogol [Nikolai Gogol], 'cause I would, so I would have read old Russian, Russian literature, I would have read medieval things and I would have read probably Soviet writers like--
Speaker 2: Do you call on that stuff today at all in your writing?
Speaker 1: I think a writer calls on everything that they've been through, I mean, I think that if you read some of my works and you see different rhythms and different ways of thinking and posing, I think the experience of a Spanish Harlem [East Harlem, New York, New York] are in me, the southern is in me, I think some of the Russian, well you know Russian and the whole thing with soul, you know, the whole soul, dusha.  So I think it's somewhere, w- well I, I would probably say that, you know, I guess I kind of come with the critique of capitalism in a certain extent, even though I never fully understood the economic, I don't really understand economics at all, I think that because I did study about it, and I'm idealist.  So, you know, I would love to see an egalitarian society, I think.
Story_ID: 481747
Speaker 1: What year did you graduate Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey]?
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981], 'cause I took a year off.
Speaker 1: Now were there professors at Princeton that you looked up too, that's, that became important to you for any reason?
Speaker 2: Well Ellen Chances, in, in the Russian--
Speaker 1: Who is she?
Speaker 2: Ellen Chances, she was one of the professors in the department of Slavic languages and literature and she was cool, you know, I mean, so a lot of students liked her because she was younger and she would go out and maybe and have pizza with us so, you know, she was fun.
Speaker 1: Were you the only African American student?
Speaker 2: At the time, yeah, I guess I keep ending up in these only or one of the only situations, again I just never felt--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --that I had to choose.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did they ever ask and did any other, other students ask about your interest in Russia or--
Speaker 2: You mean, I got ragged about it?
Speaker 1: Well, kind of.
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember that, but you know--
Speaker 1: Or even ask well, what are you gonna do, yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Do with that?  Well everybody, everybody asked me that and I may have at some point told people diplomatic or just to get people to stop asking me that.
Speaker 1: What did you think you were going to do with it?
Speaker 2: I don't think I had an idea, I think a one point I did think, maybe I will work at the UN [United Nations] and maybe I went someplace (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah which seems the likely thing--
Speaker 2: Right, I may have gone someplace and got a brochure, I did find some letter I wrote to someone while I was in college saying I was gonna be in communications, I have no idea what I was talking about.  And then, well later when I got the master's [degree] at Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], I also did take some courses at Teachers College [Columbia University, New York, New York], 'cause I kept thinking, well I'm gonna go into education.  But, I d- I was never that driven towards anything.
Story_ID: 481748
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, some friends remember that I wanted to be a writer since Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: You have been.  Did you write (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some pe- some people have said, you always wanted to be a writer.
Speaker 2: What are the earliest things you wrote?
Speaker 1: Oh, when I was in elementary [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York], when I was in Franklin Plaza [Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York], when I was however old you could write (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) You wrote poetry?
Speaker 1: I wrote poetry--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I wrote little short stories, I wrote--
Speaker 2: What were you writing about like--?
Speaker 1: I think what me and my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] today, I might have, my, my sisters and cousin used to play a game called wilderness, so maybe I wrote stories about wilderness, and we would take the dining room table, or the kitchenette table--
Speaker 2: Were you very imaginative or very literal (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah well we--I think I had to be imaginative on my (unclear), but I was the baby, my sister's four years older, my other cousin, who's like a sister, who grows up in the next building is like, a year older than her, their friends.  So one time, ever with family, I mean I did have some younger cousins or went down south, those cousins were older so I'm always the one who's gotta keep up or get kicked to the curb, 'cause I'm the baby.  So I think I was kind of forced to be quick and keep up and, and learn and, and be curious 'cause everyone was older than me.  But yeah, I, I wrote stories and, I remember my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] telling me Brer Rabbit stories.
Speaker 2: Which ones?
Speaker 1: Brer Rabbit stories?  I still have her books, those Uncle Remus tales.
Story_ID: 481749
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 19--?
Speaker 2: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 1: Eighty-one [1981].
Speaker 2: From Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey].
Speaker 1: Princeton.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And then--
Speaker 2: Though when I took a year I did, that's when I did an internship at the theater [Westside Theatre, New York, New York] and--
Speaker 1: Now what were you thinking you'd do that?  Oh you thought, okay I'm gonna be an actress?
Speaker 2: No, because I remember my acting teacher at Princeton told me that I could be good, I was good and I could be possibly great if I would open up and I remember thinking, I'm not gonna do that.  So I always remember that to me, I would never do theater full time because you really have to get naked, it's, it's just brutal, you and the rejection is to your face--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --you know, next!
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: You know, if someone doesn't like your article or your book you get a letter or you get a bad review, but it's not public.  So, I, I never thought I was, I had a thick enough skin to do theater, you know?  I mean, I had friends who with the head shots and being waitressing and it, it's just dogged.  But I, it's just something I liked to do, I mean I have to say, I was blessed to have parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] who allowed me freedom to just enjoy somethings and not be on a plan.  The only thing my father always insisted was that just be able to stand on your own two feet, he, his whole thing was just don't be a moocher in life, do whatever you wanna do, but be able to take care of yourself.  So, I just figured as long as I can take care of myself, I'd be okay.
Speaker 1: So you graduated in 19--
Speaker 2: Oh and a--the Africa thing, you want Africa, okay.  When I took a year off, one of the things I did was fell in love with, an, an African dancer and drummer from Congolese who didn't speak English, only French, so it was so romantic, 'cause I knew a little bit of French and I did sta- it was a dance and drum, they had, they did classes and they had little productions and I did set designing and I think that's when I started to fall in love with Africa, so that was my whole Africa moment.
Speaker 1: And that?
Speaker 2: And I think he became a baker in Detroit [Michigan] or something like that.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) But it was in African dancing and drumming and you know, authentic fufu, and you know all of that, it was--
Story_ID: 481750
Speaker 1: So in 1981, you graduate--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --from Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], had you voted at this time, I mean had you--
Speaker 2: I'm confused, 'cause I remember wanting to vote for Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.], but I think I couldn't, so that was '70 [1970]--
Speaker 1: Six [1976].
Speaker 2: Six [1976]?
Speaker 1: But didn't he and then it was again in '80 [1980] when (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Who ran?
Speaker 1: --he was running against Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan], right.
Speaker 2: He ran against--?
Speaker 1: Wasn't it Reagan and Carter in 1980?
Speaker 2: Then I probably voted for Cart- Carter, because I remember the first time being disappointed I just missed the voting thing.
Speaker 1: So was voting something that was talked about at home?  Did, wa- was there a, you know--
Speaker 2: I think I got the people died for this right--
Speaker 1: Right so you got that whole story--
Speaker 2: And we have to--I rem- I remember my father [Willie Bolden] they would always be like, "Well I'm going in to work early or late or I'm coming home late or, or early because I have to vote," I always remember my parents voted, it was, you know, and that's something you do because people died for that right.
Story_ID: 481751
Speaker 1: So when you graduated Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] did you have any idea what you were going to do when you left?
Speaker 2: No.  And I think that's when I went to work in, 'cause I think when I took my year off, I also worked in a garment center in the firm like who my father [Willie Bolden] worked for.  So, I think when I graduated, did I go back to Charles Alan [Charles Alan, Inc.]?  Or I went to work for James Goldman, my sister [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] worked for him, he and his wife [Barbara Goldman] they had a company, Raoulfilm [Raoulfilm, Inc.], James Goldman did 'The Lion in Winter,' his brother [William Goldman]--
Speaker 1: Well I have that you, you went to work for Charles Alan.
Speaker 2: Okay, then that's the next one--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yep, that's the next one.  So that's the garment center that's where--
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: --I worked when I took my year off.  So I was doing everything from answering the phones to entering orders to selling, I didn't like selling--
Speaker 1: This is just making money though? You're just making money (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, I was--just a job.  Right.
Speaker 1: And, and so you do that until you decide to go back to Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah because a friend of mine, Connie Green who was a few years ahead of me in college said everybody should have a master's degree.  So I thought okay, so I'll get a master's degree and I said, okay let me go back in the Slavic language and since I just enjoy that, that way if I get a master's and I still don't know what I wanna be, at least I will have done something I enjoyed.  So, I thought I was, no, I was gonna get a Ph.D., because I think I at one point, I did think academia and then after about a year or so, I thought, you know what?  I could end up being like a professor of Russian in some school in Iowa and I just decided I don't wanna be a freak, I just realized, whoa, this could end up being, I don't wanna be some odd freak black Russian teaching person, and I was like, I'm not gonna do this.  But you know, I thought you don't just stop, so I said let me just get the mas- let me just do the master's, but yeah at one point I think I was gonna go the whole Ph.D. professor thing.
Speaker 1: Now was Columbia a lot different than Princeton?
Speaker 2: No, I thought, I had, I thought Columbia was gonna be this kind of hot bed of radicalism and, and everything and it was just like Princeton, you know, I, when I went I had to go to some of my classes, I remember I had to go through the law school and I would see a lot of people from Princeton.
Story_ID: 481752
Speaker 1: Then too, I'm living at home so I didn't experience (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right but then also this is like '85 [1985]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is, yeah, but I, I still thought Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York] had a, you know.
Speaker 2: Right but then you, you had the big crack [crack cocaine] epidemic in Harlem [New York, New York] or in the country right, in the '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 1: I don't remember that.  But I didn't know any crack heads (laughter)--
Speaker 2: But I mean it was like, no but it would--
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: It seems like we saw it on the street and you saw it in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I remember--
Speaker 2: --movies and--
Speaker 1: --the homelessness--
Speaker 2: --you saw it at--
Speaker 1: --I don't remember--
Speaker 2: --home and you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: --I, I remember the homelessness much more than I remember--
Speaker 2: Drugs.
Speaker 1: --crack heads.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: The homelessness, I remember that but I was living at home so I didn't really participate in Columbia, I was just there to get a degree.  It was a (unclear) scholarship.
Speaker 2: Right, now were you, during that time living at home, were you still involved in the church [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York] as much as you had been (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) No I think once I went to college I stopped going to church.
Speaker 2: Right and that was okay because you were an adult now?
Speaker 1: It was okay with me or my parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden]?
Speaker 2: Your parents.
Speaker 1: Well yeah, I guess they figured we can't make you, but they weren't gonna kick me out, it wasn't if you wanna live here, you gotta go to church, they weren't like that, they were probably disappointed but, I was their child--
Story_ID: 481753
Speaker 1: How did you end up in the film business?
Speaker 2: Oh with the Raoulfilm [Raoulfilm, Inc.]?  Because Bobbie--Jim Goldman's [James Goldman] wife Barbara Goldman had like a production company thing, it was just a small thing.  I think most of the things were around some of his projects and I started off, you know, I guess making sure he had typewriter ribbon, and taking phone calls or messages and then, you know, we advanced to, I got to read a script and could give my feedback and so it was just administrative assistant.  But he's the reason I think for years I never thought of writing a screenplay because I would read Jimmy's scripts and it was like, work of art and then I'd see other peoples where they just have a cut to exterior and, you know, he, he, he dreamed the whole world and drew a whole world and he was, I used to tease him and say that I would keep working for him because he was supposed to do a book or screenplay on Trotsky [Leon Trotsky] and I always have this thing for Trotsky, and I always think if Trotsky had triumphed over Stalin [Joseph Stalin], you know, the Soviet Union [Russia] would have been a glorious success, I have no idea what I'm talking about (laughter), but I've always had a thing about Trotsky.
Speaker 1: So from that, so, so you were just at this point doing bit jobs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just jobs, just make, 'cause again my father's [Willie Bolden] not gonna let me live home and not work, you know, so I got the fellowship so I, I think I worked part time with the Goldmans when I was in graduate school, and then I was still in graduate school when Connie Green, the friend from Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] who told me everyone should have a master's [degree] at least, asked me would I like to do some book reviewing for her?  She was working at Black Enterprise magazine, for a while I get like two hundred bucks [dollars] for reading a book and I get to keep the book and started doing the book reviewing and then after Columbia [Columbia University, New York, New York], I went back to work for the Goldmans and I was doing some book reviewing and then one day I said, I'm gonna quit my job and try to make a life as a writer.
Speaker 1: But before then, I have that you taught at Kings--at Malcolm King College [Malcolm-King: Harvard College Extension, New York, New York], is that correct?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what was that?  Oh, right but I think I may have been doing, I may have been doing that when I was freelancing.
Speaker 1: Okay and then at New Rochelle's [College of New Rochelle, School of New Resources in Co-op City, Bronx, New York]?
Speaker 2: That's much, yeah that's much later.  But '80 [1980], '80 [1980], '83 [1983], is my first piece in Black Enterprise, I think, let me see, '80 [1980], I wanna say two years later maybe, is when I stopped full time work and then went to writing work, which may have been teaching here on the side, here and there.
Story_ID: 481754
Speaker 1: Okay we're talking about turning points (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Turning points.
Speaker 1: --and the revelation of South Africa.
Speaker 2: Right, I think when, when the, the really, the, the students at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], I looked up to the one like I said, a (unclear), who wore, you know, khaki and fatigue, you know, and I guess whoever had a poster of Che Guevara, you know, those really political students who knew a lot and, you know, who spoke at rallies I think made us all aware of what was going in South Africa, I think that was the, kind of an awaking for me.
Speaker 1: What did it awaken in you?
Speaker 2: Well I think the idea that, to be rebellious, like I said, it's probably around the time that I was a Socialist technically for six months or had a subscription to a newspaper, I think the idea that you, you can change the world, that the status quo was not okay and, but I still never knew what specifically how was I gonna contribute.
Story_ID: 481755
Speaker 1: What do you consider to be your first turning point writing experience?  To where as you say, "I can do this for a living"?  Was it reviewing for black (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I remember thinking, well if this, I'll quit my job, I felt the only way to give it a shot was to quit my job.  And that would f- that would mean I would have to take any kind of work I could get because I--
Speaker 1: As a writer?
Speaker 2: Right, book reviews, if it was directions for soup cans, I would do it, if it was covering, you know, (unclear) Wood for Amsterdam News [New York Amsterdam News], whatever and I always thought if it doesn't work I guess I can get day work, you know, 'cause--
Speaker 1: But you--
Speaker 2: --you just panic.
Speaker 1: So you did freelance for the Amsterdam News?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  The Amsterdam then The New York Times, anybody, any work that I can get, Essence, when Paula Giddings was on break from doing book reviews, I filled in for a couple of months.  A woman that was my agent for a while and who really started me, in terms of books, [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown, thought I had talent and took me under her wing--
Speaker 1: She's still around (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And started getting me work with Johnnetta [Johnnetta B. Cole]--
Speaker 1: I met Marie Brown because we met her at [HistoryMaker] Evelyn Cunningham's house.
Speaker 2: Oh, Evelyn Cunningham um-hm, Marie Brown, you know everybody, the other mother in literature who, and she would help me get work, small work, book work, things like that.  I, I don't 'til this day ever say, ooh, I can do this, I mean every time a book comes out, I think god, I've just been lucky and people are gonna say you're a fraud, 'cause you don't, you know, we don't see where you went to writing school, you haven't been to Yaddo [Saratoga Springs, New York] or where ever these writers go.  So it can, you never feel--I would say this, maybe five years ago, six years ago, I started thinking it was okay to call myself a writer, before that I would say I write, because I thought, Baldwin's [James Baldwin] a writer, to be a writer you, you craft and you create and you don't just put words on paper, you, you know, you weave things.
Story_ID: 481756
Speaker 1: We're gonna go to 1990, you write 'The Family Heirloom Cookbook' [Tonya Bolden Davis].
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was like, how to write a cookbook, again that was like hey, do you think you can do this?
Speaker 1: And how did that come to you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Marie [HistoryMaker Marie Brown].
Speaker 1: Marie?
Speaker 2: Marie must have recommended me to the editor interested in someone who could put a book together to tell people how to put your own cookbook together, you know, how to gather your recipes and things like that.  The same way the books of, you know, 'Mail Order and Direct Response' [Tonya Bolden] or 'How to Start a Business From Your Home' [sic. 'Starting a Business in Your Home,' Tonya Bolden], Marie knew an editor who wanted these, you know, work for hire product and I figured, I can do research, so I can research this stuff and write.  So at that point, if it was decent, you know, and if it wasn't about sciences, I was open to any kind of assignment.
Speaker 1: What opened the door to the children's book world?
Speaker 2: Vy, working with [HistoryMaker] Vy Higginsen on taking her musical, 'Mama, I Want To Sing,' and turning it into a YA, young adult novel ['Mama, I Want to Sing,' Tonya W. Bolden and Vy Higginsen].  Marie again, Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] was interested in it being done, Marie recommended me to Vy and her husband Ken [Ken Wydro], to be the writer and at that point I had not seen 'Mama, I Want To Sing,' I knew it, and I went to see and I'd done theater and I thought, I can do this.  And I worked with her and then the, that editor, Ann Wright, said, "I'd like to do another book with you," and--
Speaker 1: And the next book was?
Speaker 2: Well actually, the next book was just 'Family' ['Finding Family,' Tonya Bolden] which is the autobiographical novel, which actually didn't work for Scholastic but Dutton Cobblehill [E.P. Dutton, Cobblehill Books; Cobblehill Books/Dutton], but the book that Ann and I ended up doing together after another dinner was 'And Not Afraid to Dare: The Stories of Ten African American Women' [Tonya Bolden], and basically she said, you know, je- Jim Haskins [James Haskins] book, I think, 'One More River to Cross' ['One More River to Cross: The Stories of Twelve Black Americans'], bios of maybe twenty blacks, men and women, had done well and she said, "What about a book of bios about black women," and I thought well, don't you want Jim Haskins to do this?  And she said, "But you're a woman." So (laughter).
Story_ID: 481757
Speaker 1: So, I'm gonna ask you kind of a, well, well, I'll just ask.  What made you think you could do, take on these black subjects when you'd never, when you, when, when being black was just who you were, it never, you know, you were bla- you, di- does that make any sense? You know the black culture didn't (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah it does I mean--I think--what.  No, what happened is, you know, how this phrase, you know, going from strength to strength?  I think I've been going from curiosity to curiosity, is that once I'm taking, I'm trying to stay alive as a writer an editor says, here's a book I want you to do, you say, okay.  I say okay, what women?  Hm, some of them I've known about from writing small pieces or, remember I started as a book reviewer for Black Enterprise and Essence, so there was my education in black history, all those books for all those years, I'm learning about Adam Clayton Powell [Adam Clayton Powell, Jr.] and Marcus Garvey and, and, Martin Delany and I'm learning all of this because I'm reviewing for black owned publications.  So yeah, I start to know some things, so you, you start to, you know, say okay I'm gonna do Leontyne Price and I'm gonna do Mother Hale [Clara Hale], you know, I'm gonna do these people and you start to do these lives and you start to see how fascinating that is and then you just, at one point, I thought, well, I mean, I've done black women, what about black men?  Who do we really know, what do we really know?  And then, other 'Strong Men Keep Coming' ['Strong Men Keep Coming: The Book of African American Men,' Tonya Bolden] and then I think what about black children, what if, what, what would my life?  So it's been, my writing has been very much in part, teaching but also I think a personal quest to learn all the stories that I didn't learn when I was six or seven and eight.  Now thankfully, if it's true that Harlem [New York, New York] needs a stamp on our children, my psyche was held together enough that at least I didn't have a lot of self-hatred and all that.  But I didn't know what I was supposed to be proud of, I knew to be proud, but I wasn't I didn't know the details and I guess a lot of what I do is about fleshing out, getting the details and, and also giving the details to other people so that they don't just go around with some vague sense of, of greatness or, or just, you know, if you come from great people, that they're many black people, you know?  But so that you can, you can, you can name more than twenty people, I think any young person or anyone who reads any of my books, if they read my entire body of work and if I keep on writing another few years, I think, you know, they will, they will have some confidence when they go to talk about black history, they will have some details, they will have variety, and some texture to these stories I hope.
Speaker 1: What stories and we're gonna talk about some of these individually, and we co- we'll start with talking about the women, when you did the st- start, when you did the book?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, 'Not Afraid to Dare: The Stories of Ten African American Women' ['And Not Afraid to Dare: The Stories of Ten African American Women,' Tonya Bolden] which is a YA [young adult] book and I also did an adult book, 'The Book of African American Women' ['The Book of African American Women: 150 Crusaders, Creators, and Uplifters,' Tonya Bolden], and that's a 150 profiles.
Speaker 1: And you selected those people based on?
Speaker 2: I think my interest in them, people not well-known, also what I was trying to do and the same thing with 'Strong Men Keep Coming' is kind of tell black history in America, so, you know, I wanna say, oh I gotta get, you know, I made, making it up, and again we had businesspeople so I don't wanna wait to have a business person in the 1920s 'cause that says we didn't do business.  So, or we weren't involved in unions.  So, I think it (unclear), I wanted to do Isaac Myers  out of Baltimore [Maryland], you know, for his story we don't have a lot of information, but the point is, people have to know, 19th century, blacks were in labor unions--having labor unions, or in 'The Book of African American Women,' I forgot her name now, Elizabeth [ph.], anyway one of the first bla- sisters to become a physician, gonna have her in the book along with the dancers and the astronauts and the, and the, you know, the pioneers and the educators, always the educators, you know, and the Bethunes [Mary McLeod Bethune] and the--I, I consciously picked people who, whose stories will help me tell a bigger story, you know?
Story_ID: 481758
Speaker 1: So you also worked-- what exactly did you do with the music for little people?
Speaker 2: Oh right, I was gonna work with Sweet Honey in the Rock, it was an activity guide on 'I Got Shoes,' they're, they're, video--I guess it was a audio, I guess it was a CD, and I wrote, work, worked with Bernice [HistoryMaker Bernice Johnson Reagon] on the activity guide around those songs on that tape.
Speaker 1: Now did Marie [HistoryMaker Marie Brown] get you that job as well?
Speaker 2: Probably.  I think what--
Speaker 1: Have you had any other agents outside of Marie?
Speaker 2: Not, w- we--well, our--that relationship ended maybe a couple years ago, in maybe 2000, I can't remember if it was before or after 9/11 [September 11, 2001], I think it was before 9/11, so 2000, 2001.  She probably, somebody, in other words a lot of the work that she didn't get me directly, came about because somebody she recommended would be somebody who then recommended me to somebody.  So, I would say, all roads would lead back to Marie, you know, even if she didn't directly make the phone call, someone heard about me because of, you know.
Story_ID: 481759
Speaker 1: So when you think about your, some of your stuff like '33 Things Every Girl Should Know' [Tonya Bolden]--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and 'Strong Men Keep Coming' ['Strong Men Keep Coming: The Book of African American Men,' Tonya Bolden], all of these books on some level are self-help black books.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: I mean they self-help our psyche, they self-help us, you know, figure out who, where we're going because this is where we've been.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Do you see them?  How do you see them?
Speaker 2: That's a good question.  I see them as, I--what I see myself trying to do, because a lot of the book, 'Maritcha' ['Maritcha: A Nineteenth Century American Girl,' Tonya Bolden] is a case where that was basically a pretty--
Speaker 1: Say that again?
Speaker 2: 'Maritcha,' that's a book, that was, that was not well known, I mean that, her story was known by scholars but, you know, it's the first book on her.  But I think for the most part, if you look at my work, I'm not writing about people that no one has ever heard about, I may sometimes write about people we don't talk about a lot like Charlie Hamilton Houston [Charles Hamilton Houston].  But again, I think my role, my calling is to give texture to the story, in other words, I made a choice in 'Strong Men Keep Coming' not to do Thurgood Marshall, but to do Charles Hamilton Houston, because even Thurgood said, he's the engineer of it all because you want people to know that everyone had a mentor and to--without, without a Charlie, there would have been no Thurgood and all of that.  Similarly, I did Paul Robeson's father [William Drew Robeson, I], not Paul Robeson, 'cause even Paul Robeson would say his father was a better orator and had a better voice than he did, again, to show this guts and this nerve it gave.  So, I think that's what I wanna do is kind of humanize our story, because sometimes all we, we get in black history, what we get often are these big huge heroes and he was great and he overcame and he did this and you, you never kno- you never have a feeling that these were real human beings.  For example, I remember in 'Strong Men Keep Coming,' my piece on Frederick Douglass, first I was like, okay I think he's gotta be in this book but what can I say?  And I was doing the research and when I found out that he, he played the violin?  Wow, you come back from a crusade or something and you play the violin with a ha- and I don't know, I just said he's a human being, so I think one of the things I wanna do is add depth and dimensions, let people, especially young people know that you look at these great people and they didn't get where they, where they got by themselves, they, it was a strong father or mother or both, it was the law professor or teacher, it was always, or a whole community.
Speaker 1: Why do you feel you chose nonfiction?
Speaker 2: Well because once I got the history bug, I found out that there's, there's so much that's not widely known in history and that there's so much more to explore, you know?  I mean, there's so much we don't know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What is that? Yeah, now what has it done for you (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well like I said, you asked me my favorite quote, Ralph Ellison said, when I know who I am, then I'll be free.  So with every book that I do, every black story that I tell, that I research and remember, what you see in one of my books maybe a third of the information that I got along the way, so there's all this, this, fleshing out, depths of story that I'm getting.  So I think along the way, I'm also getting free, I'm also, I think getting very, very clear.  I mean for example, I heard someone say when James Brown passed, called up on the radio, you know, admiring kind of saying, in essence that he started the black consciousness movement, and I remember thinking, oh man, somebody gotta call up and correct that, of course I don't call radio shows, and I didn't.  But, you know, I realize okay, maybe I'll do a book on my conscious so we can put, yeah, James Brown, had a role, but let's put him in context, you know, or you before, I remember when I was gonna come in up the--we come from kings and queens, you know, okay yeah when, where, how?  And, you know, and some of that's true, but I also wanna be able to say, and we come from shepherds and craftspeople and blacksmiths and, you know?  And all of it is just--did I answer your question?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 481760
Speaker 1: What has been the most enlightening for you of the books you've done?  Which one have you walked away with and felt, I'm better now than I was when I started that book?
Speaker 2: The last book.  I think 'Tell All the Children Our Story' ['Tell All the Children Our Story: Memories and Mementos of Being Young and Black in America,' Tonya Bolden], was a turning point for me.
Speaker 1: Because of 9/11 [September 11, 2001]?  Because of the event that led to it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: And there was a huge block in the create- creative process?
Speaker 2: No, 'Tell All the Children,' I got my first finished book actually about a week after 9/11, at that point I was feeling useless, like how come I'm not a rescue worker or psychologist or, I don't have words to offer people.  But I do remember an email going around to writers saying, when you think about what you will write based on what you have, do you think, you know, what of change do you think you'll do more serious work?  And I remember thinking, even though at that point, you know, we didn't know what anyone was gonna do, I remember thinking, you know what?  Thank god I do what I do.  Because I, I'm proud of what I do, and I'm not doing something trivial, and I thought, you know what?  Yeah, I'm not, you know, doing something silly and so it felt good to say, you know, maybe I feel like my work can't help anybody right now, you know, in this trauma, but I'm, I, I'm glad I'm doing something, that feeds my spirit because in the end, that's all there is as we just saw on that day, and you know, I was here in New York [New York], I was in the Bronx [New York].  It, it's just to do something, to me, especially after 9/11, it does not feed my mind and my spirit and my heart and that I think also doesn't help one, to not, to not do that, to do something else, something that, for just for money is a kind of spiritual suicide, I mean, you know, I think we're in the last days (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: We may be in the end times, so why not do what you love?
Story_ID: 481761
Speaker 1: And you kind of answered this before by saying, wi- with the reviews that it opened your eyes to black history.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: But, did that also open your eyes to other great black writers whom you'd not known about prior, like who do you (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right yeah, because--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --I probably, at one point, see I'm reviewing when Zora [Zora Neale Hurston] is being resurrected--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and so, you know people putting out, the collected works of Zora Neale Hurston, so I'm covering that or Library of America [New York, New York] is putting out the collection on, on Richard Wright, or Baldwin [James Baldwin].  So yeah, I, I was able to, the reviewing I did forced me to go learn about--I th- I don't what made me pick up 'Their Eyes Were Watching God' [Zora Neale Hurston], I know that was a turning point read and I may have read that before 'The Bluest Eye' [Toni Morrison].  But I was up in my twenties.  I know what happened, one of my assignments had to be a chapter in the Scholastic [Scholastic Corporation] textbook, on the emergence of black women writers in the 1970s, so that's why I think part of my work was to go back and read a lot of black women writers.  So, yeah that's the wonder thing about being a writer, is that, it's, you go to school, you just, you just keep learning and what you learn, you use in a book or it gives you an idea for a book, so it's been all of kind of a peace.
Speaker 1: Did you discover?  Who, who do you look up to as black women writers past and present?
Speaker 2: See, I don't separate them as--okay--
Speaker 1: But I'm asking--
Speaker 2: Oh, just as--
Speaker 1: --you this--
Speaker 2: --black woman--
Speaker 1: --yeah--
Speaker 2: --and then--
Speaker 1: --yeah--
Speaker 2: --you asked me--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --black men?  Okay.  Well Toni Morrison, especially for 'Sula,' and there's something she wrote, paraphrasing, all we have is the language, the language must not sweat it must be careful.  And that idea, you know, that idea of making art and not just doing sociology with fiction, yo- you, know, I went through a Zora phase, Toni Cade Bambara, I think is my role model in a way, just from what--I never knew her, but it was so funny, everyone knew how much I liked her, and they knew I didn't know her but when she passed, people called me, and said, "I know how much you liked Toni Cade Bambara, I wanted you to know she pass--," 'cause I remember, you know people, or she was defining herself, as what was it a cultural warrior?  You know, and she was a writer, you know, a lot of stories about New York [New York], and of course I can relate to that.  But you know, I think she went into prisons and she worked with, you know?  So she saw, the cult- the arts and the educa- in other words, I guess, I think on that argument of arts for art's sake?  I think I don't believe in that, because I think I tend to gravitate towards the writers or whatever kind of artist who also believed in art, you know, as part protest, as part education, it's about art, but also about other things, because I think if it was just, you know, that would mean that if I just were interested in butterflies--and maybe I will write a book about butterflies but I'd wanna think, okay, how does this contribute.
Story_ID: 481762
Speaker 1: So do you feel that, and I'm just asking you all these questions--
Speaker 2: It's okay--
Speaker 1: --you know, because I'm searching your soul as a writer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you feel that, like the 'The Bluest Eye,' you know that's Toni Morrison's, but, I mean do you--?
Speaker 2: See I read this stuff late.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See I'm reading this stuff, older when I'm having to play catch up.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I remember being disappointed in 'Native Son' [Richard Wright].
Speaker 1: Being disappointed?
Speaker 2: And thinking that Ann Petry's 'The Street,' was the book, for that kind of thing, race, the thing that race can do to do you, you know, jam you up and make you crazy and all that stuff.  I remember being blown away by 'The Street.'
Speaker 1: Okay, so what--that's perfect, because have you ever read a white writer who's done that same thing for you emotionally or for your soul, that's blown you away with their ability to craft a story (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I remember--I think Chekhov [Anton Chekhov], 'cause I remember, I think I must have read Chekhov probably in Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York] and I remember at one point saying I wanted to be a short story writer like Chekhov.  And I think what I liked about Chekhov is that he was a doctor, he was a physician, and a writer and I liked that idea that you could have a job and be a normal person and write and be creative.  I never liked that, that out there artist, strung out, half-crazy all the times starving (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But I'm talking about the work itself--
Speaker 2: The work--
Speaker 1: --that you--
Speaker 2: --itself, I would--
Speaker 1: --could (unclear).
Speaker 2: --probably Chekhov's short stories.
Speaker 1: Chekhov?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Probably Ari Goncharov's [sic. Ivan Goncharov] 'Oblomov,' I don't remember details, but I remember a lot of the Russian writers, 'cause I said, the Russian, the soul, it's so important.  I'm trying to think, 'Brothers Karamazov' ['The Brothers Karamazov,' Fyodor Dostoyevsky], I can't remember, I remember Chekhov, I remember Gogol [Nikolai Gogol], loving Gogol.  But I'll tell you a southern white writer I always loved was Flannery O'Connor, Flannery O'Connor is always the--I, at one point I went through a phase where I liked Hemingway [Ernest Hemingway] and, and all those kind of people but, is that your question of non-black--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --writer who did--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --Flannery O'Connor.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, now what about men, black men who's writing you?
Speaker 2: Baldwin [James Baldwin].
Speaker 1: Baldwin.
Speaker 2: I, I, I would be--one of my goals if I could write a great essay, if I can be an essayist, worth of Baldwin's eyes, that, that would be, if I could write an essay that--
Speaker 1: Well that's a great title.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, Baldwin.  I mean, and again, I guess with him and Morrison, a lot of writers I like is because they're not only doing information and thought, they're doing these incredible things with language, Charles Johnson [Charles R. Johnson], definitely for his ability to, to work with different forms.
Speaker 1: So what about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Langston Hughes, I mean, I grew up with the--you know, it's nice but, but--
Speaker 1: But, but--
Speaker 2: --yeah, Baldwin (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 481763
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about it because you said you read a lot of screenplays also?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You were--
Speaker 2: Working for Jimmy Goldman [James Goldman].
Speaker 1: Yeah, have you, what do you think about African American screenplay writers today, have you?
Speaker 2: I don't think anything 'cause I really don't, I, you know, the whole theater thing totally went off my ra- I went off it's radar.
Speaker 1: So you're not there anymore?
Speaker 2: I'm not there anymore.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one thing I do wanna do is, I wanna do a screenplay as soon as I stop thinking that, you know, that I, maybe I can do it some--and the last few years, I started thinking maybe I could do a screenplay and that's like on my wish list.  But no, I totally left the whole, I don't see theater anymore, there was a time I used to go see a lot of theater.  But you know things still have a way of cycles.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But yeah, maybe one day I'll get into theater.
Speaker 1: And what do you think it was that put, pushed you in the arena of like the teen books and the children's books?
Speaker 2: Realizing that I was, if I do that then I'm, I don't know if this is, I don't know if this is conscious or not, but I think what has happened is that I've been able to be the teacher I always wanted to be, but was kind of too ashamed to be during the second wave of feminism (laughter) or whatever was going on.
Speaker 1: Was there anything motherly about what you're doing?
Speaker 2: Maybe, I guess so I, because it fe- I guess because I have hope, because basically I'm not sure that I can change any adults' minds, I mean I'm a terrible idealist, but I think somewhere a kid's gonna read one of my books and get turned on to history or get turned on to this and decide to be the writer they want to be or to be an activist or to be a good thinking person or som- I think I'm gonna have, I think, chances are I can have a more positive pact- impact on a young person than I can have on adults.
Story_ID: 481764
Speaker 1: So let's talk about your King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], 'Rock of Ages' ['Rock of Ages: A Tribute to the Black Church,' Tonya Bolden], how did that book come about?
Speaker 2: I was talking with Elza Dinwiddie-Boyd and saying, we were talking about, something about the black, I was like this, it's really true that it's so central in our experience and she made a comment, you know, right.  If you don't know about the black ex- if you don't know about the black church, you don't know about the black experience.  So then I wanted to do a book and it's poem, kind of, oh, that's the other thing, if I were to win millions of dollars, I would stop and be a poet, I mean I think that's what I really wanna be is a poet, but I'm also, remember my father [Willie Bolden] always said, I have to take care of myself, I couldn't be a moocher.  So, I think, but too if I had all of a sudden, tons and tons of money, I think I would just stop and just write poetry and sometimes poems come to me and 'Rock of Ages' is a poem that came to me, it was published in an anthology, and then the one day, I said, I wonder if this could be a book?  And, someone at Random House [Random House Inc.; Penguin Random House], thought it could be, and the subtitle's, 'A Tribute to the Black Church.'
Speaker 1: So you said you had only one thought when King was assassinated?
Speaker 2: Right.  It was, what I, all I remember, I don't remember being aware of him before he was assassinated in '68 [1968], so I'm like, I'm nine.  I remember Miss Jackson [ph.] who I remember is the only black teacher in my elementary school [M.E.S. 146, New York, New York] with tears on her eyes at the mention of his name.  So that's a Thursday, I don't know if we're in school the next day, but I remember, and I don't remember what my parents said or anything, but I remember think--'cause Miss Jackson to me was big as in stout and strong and I remember thinking, if Miss Jackson is crying and rattled then this must be a terrible thing.  And that's what I remember that it, this just must be a profound something 'cause Miss Jackson does not cry and does not get rattled.
Speaker 1: Did you think about that when you wrote 'Rock of Ages'?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: I think I thought about the black church--
Speaker 1: The black church.
Speaker 2: Growing up in a black church and what I knew--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: 'Cause by the time I do 'Rock of Ages,' I've somewhere, in a book or study guide written about Thomas Dorsey [Thomas A. Dorsey] and gospel singers and I've written about Richard Allen and you know, I wouldn't--I've covered, I, I've known that Frederick Douglass was a Baptist minister and Harriet Tubman and most of the other activists in our history came out of the church were either A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or Baptist ministers or--
Story_ID: 481765
Speaker 1: What have you not written about (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Science--
Speaker 1: --in our experience that you would like?
Speaker 2: What I would like to?
Speaker 1: In our, in the black --
Speaker 2: Experience?
Speaker 1: --experience, yeah.
Speaker 2: Probably that, what is it they called it, the nadir? 'Cause I've done, you know, Reconstruction in 1877, what happened between 1877 and 1920?  'Til we get the Roaring '20s [1920s], you know, no one talks about the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century.  So that kind of period that really doesn't quite have a name other than the nadir, I think they call it?  You know, was at really, 'cause then Jim Crow's, you know, so that kind of period, that doesn't have a name, I think I'd like to do something there and then probably other personalities, I think I'd go through changes, but sometimes I wanna do overviews of periods and sometimes I wanna do multiple, you know, what do they call it?  Multiple biographies and sometimes I wanna do one book like now, I'm working on Du Bois [W.E.B. Du Bois] 'cause I wanna just do one person, I think I'm in my one person.
Speaker 1: And what do you wanna tell us about him that we don't know?
Speaker 2: Well remember, I'm writing for young people--
Speaker 1: Right, okay.
Speaker 2: --so a lot of young people--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a book for teens, so a lot of them aren't gonna know, might not have a lot--all I wanna do is show how, how fan- how fantastic living a life of the mind can be, you know?  To have a black man who's not an action fig- figure, I, I wanna put that out there.  I probably too wanna work out some of my issues with Du Bois, you know?
Speaker 1: Which are?
Speaker 2: And, and see, well you know, it's, at one point you grow up and I guess depending on where you grow up, it's like, he's the great hero and Booker T. [Booker T. Washington] was a sell out and, you know, Marcus Garvey was crazy and all of this.  And I think in this book, even though it's about Du Bois, what it means is that I'm gonna be able to bring them all in there and I'm gonna, I think, I guess say, it's like I wrote a piece, 'Malcolm and Martin' [ph.], where I say, either or, that way lies madness, we needed them both and I think doing a book on Du Bois, will allow me to kind of put, bring all these other ways in and show, well on the one hand, Du Bois, was right about this, on the other hand, Booker T. built an institution (laughter), and Booker T. was the one living in the South and having to survive in the South and Marcus Garvey had these good points.  And, and all that, I mean, as I think as I move forward in work, one of the things I'm trying to do is present black lives, black people as human, as not great marble people who had no flaws.
Story_ID: 481766
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But we were talking also just about screenplays and experiences.
Speaker 2: Oh that I would like to write about?
Speaker 1: Yeah, but what I wanna know, are there things that you--like are there areas of the experience that are too painful to, for you to tackle at the moment?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I don't think there's anything too painful not after you've done a book on Reconstruction, I think if you've done a book on Reconstruction, and, and gone journeyed with your forebears through that violence, I think you can take, you could do anything.  There may be some things that I don't, I'm not personally interested in or that I don't think helped anyone?  Like, I wouldn't write a book probably on the war supposed war between black men and black women or ten, you know, I, I wouldn't write a book like that because I don't think that heals or that helps or anything like that.  So anything I don't do, means that either I just personally have no interest or I see, I don't see how it contributes.
Story_ID: 481767
Speaker 1: Can you connect the dots in your own personal life of your early experiences and how they formed you as a writer today?  I mean, Chapin [Chapin School, New York, New York], you know, Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey], wha- how did those things develop you as a black writer--to, to come out the end that you've come out?  How do you think those things?
Speaker 2: I think they didn't, I think it goes back to the root.  But I was raised by parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] who didn't have the education, who didn't know the black history, but who knew that black folks were worth something and who valued some of whatever their family history they had.  I remember, I remember thinking that my grandfather was the wisest man in the wo- my father's father from Charlotte [North Carolina], Sam Bolden [Samuel Bolden, Sr.], I remember thinking that was the wisest, most holiest man in the world 'cause he did speak wisdom words or you ask him something about the Bible and he knew it, it didn't matter that he only went to third grade.  So, how you value, the way I was raised to value things is really not by the world's standards (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) So that--?
Speaker 2: So if anything, I've come full circle.
Speaker 1: You've come (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In a sense--
Speaker 1: --full circle?
Speaker 2: In a way, I mean the, my, my base is my family and that early love and encouragement and the world is your oyster, Chapin, Princeton, all of that were stops along the way but they didn't form, they didn't shape me, they opened my eyes, they gave me opportunities, I met some fabulous people through those places, but life for me is li- is with my family, on handball, playing handball, running through the sprinklers in Harlem [New York, New York]. You know, playing in a little tambourine band in the church [United House of Prayer for All People, New York, New York], you know.  But it's those early, that early--but then maybe it's because our childhoods are what's dearest to us, maybe that's it, 'cause when you start going to Chapin and Princeton, I'm also through adolescence and oh god, who wants to be an adolescent again?  So--
Speaker 1: But you did marry?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  That didn't work out.
Speaker 1: Was he African American?
Speaker 2: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you moved on from that.
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Right, that didn't work out, that didn't last--
Speaker 1: (Laughter) That didn't last (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Three or four years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was three, you know, three or four years.
Story_ID: 481768
Speaker 1: What are you most proud of yourself of what you've written or what you've done or what you've become?
Speaker 2: (Pause) I'm glad that I'm doing something, how do you not toot your horn, own horn, that I'm in the education field.
Speaker 1: But tell me more than that (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I'm glad that I'm, I'm doing, I'm proud as--I'll tell you what, my father's [Willie Bolden] proud and stuff.  A few years ago I said to him when I was not having a good year, this was maybe, I don't know how long ago, and I said, "Daddy are you proud of me?  Do you sometimes, wish that you could say my daughter the doctor, or my daughter the lawyer or the judge or you know, astronaut or whatever."  He wrinkled his face, you know, there's a mean streak in the Boldens and I'm thinking, oh my god what did I do?  And he said, "Why wouldn't I be proud of you?"  He said, "I see how hard you work." He said, "You're doing something you love to do."  Then it was only after that, that I found out that when he was a boy he daydreamed of being a writer.  So, I think the fact that I'm doing something that I love to do, I'm making a living, knock on wood, doing something I love to do and that, I think I'm making a contribution, a positive contribution to society, to the wo- I grew up with, "Ask not what your country can do for you," I grew up with ecology club, I grew up with, well when I was a kid, maybe I was gonna join the Peace Corps when I got older, you know, I grew up in a time of hope and optimism and, and make the world a better place, all those folk songs, there was--
Speaker 1: Do you think--
Speaker 2: --also the love songs and the Motown [Motown Records], but we grew up with all of those about change and better-ness and love and peace and--
Speaker 1: Do you think that's different today?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I think now we live in a world where the message is get all you can and step on the other person, I mean, I don't think we live in a time where, when you look at what we value.
Speaker 1: What saddens you about where we are?
Speaker 2: The waste, the ab- the, the, the greed, the materialism, the consumerism, the lack of huge concern about the environment, I mean, just the whole rapacious spirit that seems to have taken over people, the vulgarity, I mean--
Speaker 1: What are your hopes?
Speaker 2: That the next generation will have it together enough that they can ma-may be salvage some of this.  But who knows, it may all end up, you know, ashes.  So, if there's something left, then maybe a few of my books will be around to kind of point the way towards brotherhood or something (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Do you think a writer, write about what he needs to know, what he needs to learn himself.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: Do you think a writer writes what he himself (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, oh that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I think part too, because you have to be curious, it's hard to write about something you're not interested in, so I think that's part of it.  You know, the other piece of my life that you, that I will mention it is a factor, which is why I don't take myself so seriously.  You know, my mother [Georgia Howland Bolden] was bedridden for, well she had a back problem when I was young, anyway, she battled for years with multiple forms of arthritis, we went through the, in and out the hospital and that, but she lived the last few years of her life not being able to walk and so, and my father stayed with her.  So, when you, when you grow up with an ill parent at a certain point in your life, and you just grow up with, with that and with suffering and things like that, you--that's the kind of thing in a family that stays together through that, that's the kind of thing that makes you who you are.  And that, I think that's the kind of thing that also makes you want to earn a living doing something that contributes.  So, you know, one day I'm sure I'm gonna wanna do a book on people who can't walk, handicapped people or--I have a friend who has an autistic son, I know I wanna do something with autism so.
Story_ID: 481769
Speaker 1: So do you think that your evolution will also include doing books that are not about the black experience?
Speaker 2: Probably, like I've been wanting to do a book on Pushkin [Alexander Pushkin] but one, one editor told me--
Speaker 1: On what?
Speaker 2: Pushkin, you know?  But one editor told me Americans are too provincial and why would that--?  I was like he was like the father of Russian literature,  he was dramatic, you know, he had this dynamic life and one editor told me Americans are too provincial and why would they care about--and I'm thinking I would bring in the African connection too, but I don't see, I don't see Pushkin as oh, he was a black man, because the, being there and especially meeting Yelena Khanga, I have to realize I see Pushkin, I've read John Killen's [John Oliver Killen] work on him.
Speaker 1: Tell me about meeting her also--
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: --after you tell me this.
Speaker 2: I think Pushkin was a Russian.  He was culturally--I mean he had the African ancestry, but he was culturally, culturally Russian.  So I, I wouldn't--sometimes people say, "Well you should do and talk about black genius," and I say, "Well if I wanna talk about black genius, I can do Alexander Crummell, I don't need to go to Russia," you know?  But, just because I just think Pushkin was, he was a wild man, it's like Byron [Lord Byron], you know, it's kind of a drag.  So I wanted to do a book on, on him but I couldn't get anyone interested.  Yeah, I mean maybe I, I don't know if I, I don't know if I'll ever run out of black subjects, I think I may wanna switch up sometimes, you know, and, and do a book on a bunny or maybe that book on, what did I say before, daffodils or caterpillars or something?
Speaker 1: So talk to me about when you were in Russia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh and I met Yelena Khanga, right.  I think it may have been, she had may have been here, and we, we met, I told her I was coming and she was working, I guess with Moscow News at that point and she met me at my hotel and we chatted a little bit but we never really bonded.
Speaker 1: Because?
Speaker 2: And then when she came back here, I think she kind of had some gatekeepers, I remember trying to call her and then someone calling me and saying, "How did you get this number?"  And it was all this kind of drama, I di- I don't know, I think it, I got the feeling that she wasn't interested, you know?  And I don't know if she's still here or back, but, you know, we, we met, we, we, we had, we broke bread together, something we have a photograph together, it was, it was a nice experience.  But I realize too, in meeting her it was like, can't just assume she's my sister because she's of African descent.
Story_ID: 481770
Speaker 1: What awards have you been--well you've received several, but which ones are you really proud of?
Speaker 2: Well, I think the nat- the National Council of Negro Women, North Bronx [Bronx, New York] section, gave me an award in descend- a legend, a ball or something, and a friend said, "I guess now you know you're middle age when they don't say, oh she's too young for that."  But I think it's because of my fr- I wish you had asked me to prepare for this, the quote had something to do with, in a letter saying that, in other words, I was operating kind of in the spirit and tradition of Mary McLeod Bethune, and like I said, that just gives me shivers, and that gives me something to live up too.  So that's, that's meaningful, the, the Coretta Scott King honor [Coretta Scott King Award] for 'Maritcha' ['Maritcha: A Nineteenth Century American Girl,' Tonya Bolden], and then a few months after that, Lynne Cheney gave me the James Madison Award for 'Maritcha', for excellence in American history.  But, I remember when the New York Public Library [New York, New York] named one of my early books a, a best book for the teen age and it, it's all meaningful, I think when I look at my career, the, the thing, I'm happiest about are the people who believed in me when I had like a book and a half, you know?
Speaker 1: Now, how many books do you have now, like twenty?
Speaker 2: Maybe about thirty--
Speaker 1: Thirty?
Speaker 2: --twenty, or thirty.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I don't count, 'cause you know, then they--
Speaker 1: It's too--
Speaker 2: --go out of print--
Speaker 1: --many to count.
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: And it's always the next one and what, what difference does it make if you don't, if the next ones a--
Speaker 1: If the--
Speaker 2: --disaster.  So it's always, it's, it's everything, you--I especially, I sent an email to friends who said, "To those of you who came to a books signing, when you were half the audience, thank you."  I can recall librarians who embraced me and thought I had potential, invited me to do programs.  So, it's, it's, it all matters, you know?
Speaker 1: So I can see you, and it just came to me in a vision--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And I'm gonna say it--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --so if it comes true, you'll say Shawn [Shawn Wilson]--
Speaker 2: Ooh.
Speaker 1: --told you that.  But I can see you doing something in Africa with Oprah [Oprah Winfrey] and all these women.
Speaker 2: Well, from your lips to God's ears.  Well, well maybe, like I said, I'm, I'm one of the things, I, I wanna do is go to Africa, you know, West Africa (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But just when I, I mean just thinking about, you know, you and your, your work and a big body of your work is for young girls and teens and, you know?
Speaker 2: Maybe that will happen.
Speaker 1: And, and you're speaking to wen- girls I see when someone needed to speak to you most, you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, good point.  Well, you know, the thing about me is I'm not a good planner, I mean, if things that happened in my life, people would say, you should do this and you--and it's almost like, I always believed that whatever is for me, will be there for me when it's right time for me.  And so, if that's to happen, it, it'll happen and that'll be good, but--
Story_ID: 481771
Speaker 1: What is it, I mean, because you're too young now to even think about a legacy, but you can think about what it is you would like to be remembered for?  Because you can always think about what it is you want people to remember you for today.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I would like to be remembered as a chronicler of black magnificence in a magnificent way.  I mean, you know--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I would like, you know, I just would like to, to, to be known as someone who knew how to tell stories (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And by magnificence you don't, I mean, and I know what you mean--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But you're not necessarily meaning that magnificent grandiose people?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They could be the domestic. They can be the--
Speaker 2: Right, right.  Just like in 'Strong Men Keep Coming' ['Strong Men Keep Coming: The Book of African American Men,' Tonya Bolden]--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --the man on the cover is Elza Dinwiddie [Elza Dinwiddie-Boyd], my friend the writer, [HistoryMaker] Herb Boyd's writer wife, it's her father on the cover and I wanted to do an entry on her father Dave Dinwiddie, in, in Oklahoma, in one of those all black--Oklahoma area, one of those all black towns who had a grocery store and who was a pillar in the community and helped black people and got the, the road paved, he's right there with Douglass [Frederick Douglass] in my mind, right.  So I mean in terms of doing good things and just surviving, you know, clothed in your right mind, you know, needs to be chronicled, it needs to be applauded and, and, and acknowledged.  So that it, that, that is the, you know, there's a glory to all people, I just happen to be focused on the glory of my people because that seems the most logical thing to do.  And when I run out of chronicling glorious things and glorious ideas and glorious doings and, you know, then I will (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) And then you'll go dig up the Indian [Native American] in you.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I'll go find some other, the Irish, someone said Bolden is Irish, so you know, I don't know.  But I think, for doing work, me, I wanna be remembered for doing work that needed to be done.
Speaker 1: Well that's great to wanna be remembered for.
Story_ID: 481772
Speaker 1: And one thing I wanna talk about, I mean, sort of that's the end of the interview, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --it, just create the community for me--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --that exists with black writers, is there one?  Are there other writers like yourself who are working in the same genre that you can speak to about what it is you're writing about?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, I mean but it's loose, and I think the--
Speaker 1: It's loose?
Speaker 2: --Internet that helps, it's, it's kind of loose, I mean, I'm not a joiner so I don't know, there may be some community (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: I, I'm not a joiner, but there're people, like years ago when I wanted to do a book on Reconstruction, I met Joyce Hansen at some event, and she was saying, "Oh, I'm working on--I have a book on Reconstruction about to come out," and I said, "Oh, I won't do mine," she said, "Go ahead and do yours, we could use more than one."  So, all these many years later my book comes out, or Charles Johnson [Charles R. Johnson], if I have a question or something serious or when I tell him I thought I was gonna quit last year and go write chick lit or something 'cause nobody cares about history and after Hurricane Katrina, I can't take this and I'm moving to Canada and you know all of this.  And he was like, you know, keep doing what you're doing, so yeah I have friends and people that, that I can reach out to at any time [HistoryMaker] Herb Boyd, Elza Boyd [Elza Dinwiddie-Boyd], Charles Johnson, Joyce Hansen, Walter D. Myers [HistoryMaker Walter Dean Myers], we had a nice chat at an affair.  But I don't need that kind of constant touchy, let's meet for coffee, ha- I don't, you know, I have an angst, you know, if I have an angst over a book, I go clean the bathroom or go shopping.  So, I, you know, I, I just don't happen to need that kind of thing.  But there're people, you know?
Speaker 1: Is there joy in working with celebrities like Chaka Khan and--
Speaker 2: No.  No, there's, there's, there's, a lot of times what's great is that I find out, well when two, three cases, Mother Love, Chaka Khan and [HistoryMaker] Eartha Kitt, I'm like wow!  These are not only talented women, these are women with minds and that's been the most thrilling thing for me is to find out that they're intelligent and they have, they've done other things and have other thoughts, it's kind of--and then I see there's history too.  So, when I'm working with them in their stories, I'm always trying to get out the history in it too because, you know, they're a part of the history, they're a part of, you know, Chaka was in--knew Fred Hampton.
Story_ID: 481773
Speaker 1: So, very last question.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What did your parents [Georgia Howland Bolden and Willie Bolden] think?  Well, you told me about your fa- your mother--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --I mean your father.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's the sad thing that my mother never, she saw me write short pieces but she died before my first book came out.  That hurts.
Speaker 1: What about your sister?
Speaker 2: She usually is the first person that reads all of my work before it, my editor does and she always says, "You were always with the books, you were always writing," also as a kid, I got in trouble a lot, because of--
Speaker 1: Talking.
Speaker 2: --with the mouth.  Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: So Nelta [Nelta Brunson Gallemore] says, you're, she?
Speaker 2: She says I ta- make total sense.
Speaker 1: She's not surprised?
Speaker 2: No.  And she just laughs to--if Jake [Bolden's maternal uncle, O'Dell Howland] were alive to see me so crazy about history (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Uncle Jake?
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.  She just says she just wish he had lived to see that.
Speaker 1: Yeah you know?  But he is probably--
Speaker 2: He probably--
Speaker 1: --is like thank--
Speaker 2: Right (laughter).
Speaker 1: --you know I did it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter) She said--
Speaker 1: I did it.
Speaker 2: --you've become Jake.
Speaker 1: Yeah (laughter).
Speaker 2: You know?  I collect things now, I don't have a coin collection but I collect photographs, and black Americana and, and, you know, and that's what I'm thinking, where are those newspapers on the Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] assassination?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I collect newspapers, so.
Speaker 1: Well thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Well thank you Shawn [Shawn Wilson].
Speaker 1: It's been awesome talking to you.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Speaker 1: And did I, did I, not cover something that we should include?  Because people are gonna be looking at this fifty years from now?
Speaker 2: Oh god, I don't know, it's so much.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: This is so tremendous.
Speaker 1: It is tremendous.
Speaker 2: So emotion- it's just like, I've gotta go down, I've, you know, after w- even aft- like around this time, after Easter, ask me so I had to call an uncle and say when did Eddie [Bolden's maternal grandmother, Eddie Smith Freeland] die and all this stuff, I'm like, this is a shame that I don't have my own families history.  So I have ancestry.com and I've started to do some of it and I interviewed my father when he was here in November, but I have to do better about, about the family. The history (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is your father still alive?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He's in L.A. [Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: All right, I thought that maybe it was your grandparents that I thought.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they're all dead.
Speaker 1: Dead, okay.
Speaker 2: I have no, all I have is a father, that's the next generation--
Speaker 1: Okay so--
Speaker 2: --and a great uncle.
Speaker 1: --Your father's still alive?
Speaker 2: My father's still alive.
Speaker 1: Awesome!  Yeah, so he can see?
Speaker 2: He came, he came in December for the NCNW [National Council of Negro Women] Legends Ball, he was like, I'm coming and he came out here from L.A.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Speaker 2: 'Cause he wanted to be there.  And he tells his, my stepmother how I, with my thank you, I thanked him and mentioned him and had him stand up and tell everybody he flew all the way over from L.A. to see me (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: So, okay?
Speaker 1: Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you.
Story_ID: 481774
Speaker 1: Looking at a photograph of a school photograph, fifth, sixth grade, I think that's sixth grade, made in sixth grade.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Of?
Speaker 1: Of me.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Yeah, but just, say your name so--
Speaker 1: Oh, this is Tonya Bolden [HistoryMaker Tonya W. Bolden], with one of her favorite outfits, I think my mother may have made that.  My mother also made silk flowers and catered and sewed and, so I either wore hand me downs or clothes that she made.  Now, like I think that's kindergarten or first grade.
Speaker 2: What was the age?
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Were you five years old?
Speaker 2: I don't know, was sixth grade, I don't know.
Speaker 1: That's Tonya Bolden--
Speaker 2: Hold you have to wait for him to tape you.
Speaker 1: Tonya Bolden in first grade, I think, with my favorite outfit.
Speaker 2: Where'd you go to first grade?
Speaker 1: Oh ne- M.E.S. 146 [New York, New York], right, one grade, one through six.
Speaker 2: Because what they'll do is put a caption under all this.
Speaker 1: Oh, Tonya Bolden, photograph probably taken by Uncle Jake [O'Dell Howland], 'cause he, he loved to take photographs and that may be in our apartment in Brooklyn [New York] or in a neighbor's apartment.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hold it, hold it.
Speaker 1: Tonya Bolden and her sister, her older sister Nelta [Nelta Brunson Gallemore].  I believe we are, we're in Brooklyn but I think we're in the apartment of my, of my parents' friend.
Speaker 2: Princetonian (laughter) Tonya Bolden, a Princetonian, maybe, I remember I went to a beach or some kind of beach place with two friends for the weekend, it was like so I'm a student at Princeton [Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey] but it's not during the school year and yeah I look--is that Izod?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Say that again?
Speaker 2: The necklace was given to me by Alison [ph.] who I think was the only and one of the few white friends I made a Princeton.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Next please?
Speaker 2: This is Tonya Bolden in the Soviet Union [Russia], specifically we must be in Moscow [Russia], I'm with Yelena Khanga and I think we're holding up the newspaper for which she worked.
Speaker 1: Can you just briefly tell people who she is?
Speaker 2: Yelena Khanga is a woman of African descent who was born and raised in the, in the Soviet Union in Russia, her grandparents, I believe had come to the Soviet Union with great hopes and expectations, I believe she's like a, you know, her father was, her grandfather was African and maybe her grandmother was Jewish or opposite or something like that.  And then I think her mother was born in Russia and then I think maybe her fa- mother married an African who was going to school in the Soviet Union and that was in, oh the dates there, is this the date?  It's Moscow News.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  What year was that?
Speaker 2: And it was 1980s, it was ar- I was in the Soviet Union right before the, the Gorbachev, Reagan summit [Mikhail Gorbachev and President Ronald Wilson Reagan at the Reykjavik Summit].
Speaker 1: Tonya Bolden in the Soviet Union when I went with an organization out of the Friends organization [Friends International] to have potential American leaders meet potential leaders in the Soviet Union and these were two women who went on that trip with me.
Speaker 2: Were you the only African American on that trip?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I loved my straightened hair.  I mean I--
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  (Unclear).
Speaker 1: What year was the, was the summit, '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: What year was the Gorbachev--
Speaker 1: And Reagan.
Speaker 2: Reagan?
Speaker 1: In '88 [1988]?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) was started tearing down the--
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  No, must have been in the '87 [1987], probably '88 [1988], but certainly within that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Which was after his second re-election.
Speaker 2: Tonya Bolden, her name is Vaughnie [ph.], in the Soviet Union on our trip, I--
Speaker 1: And who's the man?
Speaker 2: I don't know, he's probably our minder.
Speaker 1: And where were you?
Speaker 2: I'm really not sure if that, what republic that is, I don't, I don't remember if that's Georgia [Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic; Georgia], Latvia [Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic; Latvia], or Russia.
Speaker 1: Tonya Bolden in the Soviet Union with one of our main guides with the thing around his neck, and they took us to, you know, an outdoor place of artist and, I think they compelled the artist to, to do charcoal sketches of us and there's the artist who did my sketch which is now framed and up on the wall in my home.  I don't know, if this--it could have been in Leningrad [Saint Petersburg, Russia], I don't know if this is in Leningrad, I don't think it was--
Speaker 2: Now, I think that's Brooklyn.  Okay, Tonya Bolden with her parents, it might have been Easter, it's probably, if not, if it's not Easter it's probably a Sunday.
Speaker 1: Can you just give the parents' name in case a different person logs this tape (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.  So Tonya Bolden, I'm the baby, my mommy's holding me, Georgia Howland Bolen, Bolden, my father, Willie, not William, Willie James Bolden [Willie Bolden], and my oldest sister by four years, Nelta, N-E-L-T-A.
Speaker 1: Tonya Bolden, reading from '33 Things Every Girl Should Know' [ed. Tonya Bolden], my anthology, I was in a school in Brooklyn, one of my favorite schools, I.S. 71 [Juan Morel Campos Secondary School, Brooklyn, New York], the librarian who had me come, Susan Hess, su- since has become a great friend and if I were--a few years I was thinking about going to library school and becoming a librarian and she was gonna be my role model and I've done, I was doing--I later did a writer and residency program at her school.
Speaker 2: Tonya Bolden at the Harlem Book Fair, in the 1990s, photos taken, no it was in 2000, maybe 2001, 2002, photograph taken by [HistoryMaker] Marie Brown, at the time my former literary agent, but we saw each other at the fair and we still remained friends.
Speaker 1: Tonya Bolden, this is one of the earliest photographs of me and it shows that I was, or my mother had me into rabbits, so I never had bears, I always had bunny rabbits and as you can see, it's, I guess it's my mother or my Uncle Jake, that looks like Jake's handwriting, it was a photograph of Tonya Bolden on a Easter Sunday, 1960, so I'm about a year old and it was for Mama Mattie [Mattie Freeland Howland], which is actually my great-grandmother, the woman who raised my mother and her brother Jake.  That's Jake's handwriting so he sent Mattie that photograph of me.
Speaker 2: And you gotta name all--everybody.
Speaker 1: That photo is taken of my family in our apartment at 324 East 108th Street, Apartment 8F [Franklin Plaza Apartments, New York, New York], that's me all squiggled, I apparently wiggled a lot as a kid--
Speaker 2: Here?
Speaker 1: That's me in my mama's arms, my mother Georgia, next to her my daddy Willie, next to her my sister Nelta, the man with his arm around Nelta is my mother's brother George [ph.], she's older than George, behind her, behind George is Jake, Uncle Jake, the other brother William [ph.] is not in the photo, but he was probably, he may be taking the photo.  And next to them is Eddie, my mother--Eddie Freeland, Eddie Smith Freeland, my mother's mother.  And we were there, you know, a family gathering, 'cause Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]--there was a lot of back and forth, Philly, New York.  And that's probably taken in, I don't know, '60 [1960], what do I look, about ten there?
Speaker 2: No, you look young.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but that kind of sums up how I, my, my childhood, I was kind of carefree.
