Story_ID: 203216
Speaker 1: Good afternoon.  My name is Regennia Williams, and I'm with The HistoryMakers program.  Our videographer today is Matthew Hickey.  And we're pleased to be in Cleveland, Ohio to share information with you about The HistoryMakers, an African American videotape oral history archive that will be housed in Chicago [Illinois], and will be accessible by way of the Internet.  So, the history that you share with us today will eventually be shared, we believe, with millions of people across the globe.  I would just like to get started here by doing some slating.  First, I'd like for you to please state your name--first, middle, maiden, and last, and to spell each for us, please.
Speaker 2: Lillian--you want me to spell it?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Lillian Walker Burke, L-I-L-L-I-A-N, Walker, W-A-L-K-E-R, Burke, B-U-R-K-E.
Speaker 1: And your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: 8/2/17 [August 2, 1917], in Upson County, Georgia.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is the 17th of June, 2004.
Speaker 1: And the location of this interview, with the address.
Speaker 2: 1357 East Boulevard, my home, Cleveland, Ohio 44106.
Speaker 1: And would you please state your occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a retired judge.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you very much.
Story_ID: 203217
Speaker 1: Now, the next series of questions are very serious.  We describe these as People magazine-ish type questions.  And the first one asks, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Food?
Speaker 1: Yes, your favorite food.
Speaker 2: Frankly, I'm not the greatest eater.  I think if I had to choose, I would say chicken salad.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: The favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh, not really, I've been everywhere.  I've been all over the world, I guess I can say.  I've just traveled everywhere.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love it.
Speaker 1: All right, well, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite what?
Speaker 1: Phrase.
Speaker 2: Play?
Speaker 1: Phrase, or a motto or a saying?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, I see.  Oh, yes, I believe that, I think that on my retirement book it says--I was referring to Micah [6:8], and this is my special--"And what does the Lord require of thee?  To love mercy, to do justice, to love mercy and to walk humbly before God."  That is my motto.
Speaker 1: Okay, thank you.
Story_ID: 203218
Speaker 1: Now the next section, as I said before, will focus on your family background.  And I would like to start by asking about your mother.  What was her name?
Speaker 2: My mother was named Ozella Daviston Walker.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where was she born?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Georgia.
Speaker 1: Do you know what city?
Speaker 2: No, I think they had counties then.
Speaker 1: Oh.
Speaker 2: I think it was Upson County [Georgia], and that's down below Atlanta [Georgia].
Speaker 1: And did she also grow up in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did she share any special stories with you about her childhood in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well, I just, I don't remember a lot about--I've been going back to Georgia in the last twenty years, and I've met a lot of relatives since I've been going back that I did not know.  And my father went to Georgia more than my mother.  My mother didn't go back that much.  But my father went and my brother went, but not my mother.  My mother didn't go very much.
Speaker 1: And she didn't talk much about it?
Speaker 2: No, she didn't talk very much.  But my father, they all talked about it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your father's name?
Speaker 2: His name was George Walker.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you say he was also from Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes, my family, all of my people are from Georgia.
Speaker 1: Do you know what county he was born in?
Speaker 2: Upson County.  Now, there might be another county that I'm not familiar with.  My brother would know more about that, but all I just know is Upson County.
Speaker 1: And you said that's near Atlanta?
Speaker 2: Yeah, near Atlanta, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I'll tell you some other cities that are close by, because those are the cities I've been visiting.  That's Griffin [Georgia] and Macon [Georgia].  Those are--they have families in those small cities too, and I know about those.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 203219
Speaker 1: Now, you said your father [George Walker] talked more about his childhood in [Upson County] Georgia than your mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] did?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay. What were some of the things that he told you about life in Georgia?
Speaker 2: Well, he talked about his father [Pete Walker (ph.)], whom I did not know.  His father was a slave, and he talked about some of the things that happened during slavery.  They're not, they're vague to me now, because it's been a long time.  But my father was very upbeat.  He always taught us that if we want to go places, we've got to get with folks who are going.  So that, I remember more than anything else.  I know that if I want to move, I've got to get with movers.
Speaker 1: Okay, now you said your father was upbeat.  How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: She was a homemaker.  She was, let me say this.  One thing that I--and I said to my brother when he was here a couple of weeks ago.  One thing my mother did, I remember more than anything, she prayed for her children.   Every day when we--she prayed, and she prayed for her children.  I wish I could copy her and stay in prayer like she did.  She really prayed for her children more than anything I know.
Speaker 1: Okay how many children were in the family?
Speaker 2: There were six of us.
Speaker 1: Can you--
Speaker 2: I have four brothers and one sister.  They're all deceased now except one, and that's my brother, Roy.  He and I are the two living persons.
Speaker 1: Would you state the names of all of the children in the family?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: Would you state the names of all of the children?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I have my, I have a brother who's deceased by the name of Quinny Walker [ph.].  And then Roy Walker [ph.], and Sandra Walker [ph.], Charles Walker [ph.], and Marvin Walker [ph.].
Speaker 1: Six children, and of course, [HistoryMaker] Lillian [Burke].
Speaker 2: And Lillian.  I forgot myself, Lillian Walker.
Speaker 1: Okay now, you said your mother was a homemaker?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was a very good cook.  And she, in fact, I think that's where I got my, I do a lot of cooking.  Even when I cook for myself, I have just gobs of food, and that's what she did.  Everybody came to the house to enjoy her cooking.  She was always cooking for us, lots of good food.
Speaker 1: All right, and what was your father's occupation?
Speaker 2: My father worked in the steel mills in the Duquesne [Pennsylvania].  We were brought up, and my--I don't remember too much about life in Georgia.  I know that we all came to, they brought us to a city called Duquesne, Pennsylvania, and that was where the steel mills were.  And I must say that it was a small town about twelve miles from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And I can remember that were waiting for the men to graduate from high school so they could get jobs in the mill.  There were no jobs for women at that time.  That was in the '20s [1920s], and I guess the women were waiting around to get grown so they could find a good guy to marry, I guess (laughter).
Story_ID: 203220
Speaker 1: So, the entire family migrates from Georgia?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: To Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: And even I had a grandfather who came later.  And one thing that was a great--my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] had sisters there, and she had one brother who lived be over a hundred, who died about two years ago.  He was the last living relative of the immediate family.  And they, everybody, all the men worked in the steel mills.  And the women didn't have any jobs.  They just sort of made, they were housewives.
Speaker 1: And the grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And all I remember was the good cooking that they were doing.  And my mother did a lot of, they did a lot of quilting, too.
Speaker 1: So you say your grandfather also came to live with the family?
Speaker 2: Yes, he came.  My grandfather on my mother's side, that's my maternal, I guess they would say, grandfather came.  And they had a family store.  And he was the, well, he ran the store.  And my brothers used to work, but they didn't let the girls work.  We didn't, we weren't allowed to work in the store.  The girls sort of lived a restricted life.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His name was Nelson Daviston.
Speaker 1: And that's your maternal grandfather (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, and he died.  I remember when he died, my son [R. Bruce Burke] went--so my son remembers him.  And my son went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], and he brought back a little watch, an Illinois watch that--when I was a youngster I used to see that watch.  And I loved it so, because it was beautiful to me.  And he wanted me to have that watch.  And so, I have that watch, I have it now.  It's an Illinois little watch, and it's gold, it's very lovely.
Speaker 1: Do you remember your grandmother's name?
Speaker 2: I--
Speaker 1: Your maternal grandmother?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her name was Jennie [Daviston (ph.)], but I don't remember her, she died early.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how about your paternal grandparents?  Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: My paternal?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't remember--I just remember them by my father [George Walker] talking about his father [Pete Walker (ph.)].  I thought he was, I think that my grandfather was pretty successful.  He had a lot of land down there, and I think that was very important to people in those days.  Because I've heard about the land since I've grown up, and there was a lot of trouble about this and that.  So, he had a lot of land.
Speaker 1: Is that land still in the family?
Speaker 2: I don't--I think there was a lot of turmoil.  I don't know, I didn't follow--I didn't get in it.
Story_ID: 203221
Speaker 1: Now, you said your mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] was someone who loved to cook.  Your mother loved to cook for her family?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: And what are some of the special smells, or holiday memories that you have?
Speaker 2: Well, what I really--the holiday--my mother set up beautiful tables.  And she--and I have brought stuff, when my mother died and then my father [George Walker] died, my brother gave us, divided, he gave us different things.  I took a sewing machine that she had, because my brothers had modern homes, and they didn't want that.  I have a sewing machine that peddles that still sews; he brought that to me.  And also, if you notice in the back hall, that hat rack, we grew with that hat rack.  I grew up with that in my mother's house.  And that's what I brought back.  And my mother's dining room set went to my son [R. Bruce Burke]; he took that in the Washington [D.C.] area.  And in the buffet drawer there were a lot of linen napkins that were hem-stitched, and I brought them home.
Speaker 1: So, again, I'd like to--I'm sorry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, she had--she used to set beautiful tables, and I'll always remember that; we set up the tables.  And even now I won a prize with the [Cleveland] Restoration Society [Cleveland, Ohio].  That's been years ago when they first started out.  We had a dining decor, and all the stores were invited--Higbee's, Halle's--one would tell us to set up tables.  And a lady who's deceased now, Maxine [Goodman] Levin, was the president of the society.  And she called me and said, "We don't have enough tables, and you have to set up a table."  And I said, "Oh, please."  I think I had just been on the bench for about a year, and I was running for election and I didn't think I had the time.  But I did set up this table, and I'll never forget, we had numbers.  And Kay Halle came in from Washington to speak at the luncheon that we were going to have on Saturday.  And I was down there on Friday, it was at the Hotel Statler [Cleveland, Ohio].  And the tables were all set, and she went around.  And I, to my chagrin, she said, "That is the table I'm going to vote for."  And that was my table, I was so pleased.  And don't you know, I won the prize.  But it was, I think it was a bond or something, but I gave it back to the society--anybody that won that was a member, we'd give it back.  So, I gave it back to the society, whatever I won.  But I was the first prize winner on table setting.  And that was because my mother had taught me that.  I mean, I just knew that I had to do it right.
Speaker 1: Is that something she did for holidays, or just on a regular basis?
Speaker 2: Well, holidays especially.  But we all ate together as children.  I mean, that was nice, we all ate together.  And my mother cooked just lots of food, and we enjoyed it, we enjoyed the food.
Story_ID: 203222
Speaker 1: There's one question that we like to ask of all of the interviewees.  And that's to tell us about some of the sights, sounds and smells associated with your childhood in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Some of the things I did?
Speaker 1: Sights, sounds, and smells.
Speaker 2: Well, what happened was that there was something I remember, and I would like to tell you about that.  During the [Great] Depression, they had, we had coal furnaces.  And because Pittsburgh was a place of smoke and steel--it was a coal-mining town, or a steel town.  And we didn't live in the coal-mine area.  We were in the steel area, but I knew about the coal-mine areas.  And during the Depression it was hard times, and people would just get in a few days' work.  And I can remember when people had to go down when the trains, the freight trains used to come by with all this coal.  And they would slow down to a crawl, and let the people get up--the men would get up, and they would let them knock the coal off so the people could--the boys would have baskets and bring the coal.  And this was what the people did.  I remember that during the Depression--take all this coal and bringing it to keep the furnaces.  And I thought--so, many years later I was in that place called Macau that was a Portuguese place near Russia--Red China.  And we couldn't, at that time when I went, we could not go cross the border at that time.  And I was in Macau--so they, I sat there and watched them let the people come in from Red China, they had crossed over.  They were supposed to be--certain things they couldn't bring in.  And I watched the people turn their heads, and see the people come in and bring the food that they needed to bring.  And I thought about the time that we would--when they'd let the trains slow up and let the people get the coal.  Those were the two things that I put together, and that was in my childhood in Pennsylvania.  Now I'm an adult and I'm seeing this in Red China, and I thought it was unique that I could put the two together.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 203223
Speaker 1: So, the [Great] Depression in Pennsylvania.  I know you said there were a lot of men working in the steel mills?
Speaker 2: In the steel mills.  And when the steel mills--and of course at that time they didn't have the welfare programs that they have now.  So, the people, I guess people had plenty of food.  They, I guess they, they had gardens, and chickens, and all that sort of thing.  So, the food was never any problem.  But the coal, they needed it to heat the--because it was really cold.  In October--I can remember in Pennsylvania, Halloween was so cold.  You just--here [Cleveland, Ohio], it's nice in October.  But at that time, it was very cold.  And we had a lot of hills, and I can remember going to Sunday school.  We lived up on top of a hill, and the cars couldn't get up there in the wintertime.  We had to--if I wanted to go to Sunday school, I had to get on a box and ride down this hill to go.  And we were, we were bobsledders; we knew how to handle the hills.
Speaker 1: Now, during the Depression era, was there widespread unemployment that you were aware of in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I didn't, all I know is that--I think at the time it was the [President Herbert Clark] Hoover area.  And I heard my parents [George Walker and Ozella Daviston Walker] talking about it.  But because we lived in an area where you had--my mother had a garden.  And she grew, and she canned, and she was raising chickens, and had eggs and all.  So, we didn't have any problems.  And I guess most of the people in the small areas didn't.  Because people were very, they did things to make their food and to--they did everything to make it go.  And the people helped each other.  They would can, and they had quilting nights.  They did--I mean you had a community.
Speaker 1: You mentioned just a few minutes ago that the welfare programs that we have in place today (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) They were not there--
Speaker 1: Right, nonexistent.
Speaker 2: They were nonexistent then.
Speaker 1: Do you remember when [President Franklin Delano] Roosevelt and the New Deal--
Speaker 2: Yes, I remember when the New Deal--I remember when Social Security came into being.  I remember when the first Social Security, and all of that, yes.
Speaker 1: Were those programs generally well-received in the community, or were people a little reluctant?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you.  We were out in sort of an isolated area, and I think most of the people were resigned to accept.  And I think Mr. Roosevelt was sort of like a savior to most of those people, because at that time, as I remember, most of the black people were Republicans.  And after that, then all the black people became Democrats after that.  So, it must have been that Mr. Roosevelt had a great influence on black families.
Speaker 1: I heard you say earlier that you're a Republican.
Speaker 2: I'm still a Republican (laughter).
Speaker 1: You're still a Republican.  You never gave up in the Democratic era?
Speaker 2: Not really, no.  My family was Democrat, but they thought I was kind of hypocritical because I--and the reason why I--my philosophy was this:  I believe that I was liberal when it came to human rights, but when it comes to finances and things like that, I'm very conservative.  And I don't believe in spending what you don't have.  I have never believed in that.
Story_ID: 203224
Speaker 1: But right now, I want to talk more about your family life.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I know you mentioned Sunday school earlier.
Speaker 2: I went every Sunday.  We had BYPU [Baptist Young People's Union of America].  We were taught the Bible.  I could, even now, I can give you all the verses of the Bible, verbatim after all those years, sixty or seventy years, I can say--I can start with Genesis and go on to Revelations without stopping; we learned that.
Speaker 1: That was in BYPU?
Speaker 2: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: All right.  You just mentioned BYPU.  Can you tell us what that stands for?
Speaker 2: Baptist Young People's Union.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the family was active in a Baptist church?
Speaker 2: Yes, we were Baptist.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the church?
Speaker 2: Macedonia [Baptist Church, Duquesne, Pennsylvania], it's still in existence.  I go back to funerals.  All the family is buried there except my sister [Sandra Walker (ph.)] and my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker].  We moved into the city, and after about, in the '40s [1940s], later they were, had moved out of Duquesne [Pennsylvania].  But we have all ties back there.  We have a lot of nephews, nieces, and all.  And that's where I'll be going a couple of Sundays from now.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I want to also tell you that I have, we had a great childhood, because we did a lot of outdoor--bobsledding in the wintertime.  And we had a lot of sports, and I was very active in basketball.  In fact, I played basketball in [Duquesne] High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania].  But once you got into--after high school, girls had to, we had to let all that go.  And I think I remember playing some tennis after that.  But the basketball, I had to let go.  But I was very good at that.  And I did take, when in my childhood I took piano and voice.  And I was sort of--well, my cousin said I was sort of a person out there that--in that small town, if the people needed something I was the person to--if they needed their hair fixed, I could fix their hair.  If they needed music, or whatever they needed, I was the person, I could do that.  But those were the good old days.  I used to try to sing opera, and I played at the church.  I played the piano, and I used to sing a lot.  But I don't do that now.  I'd fool with the piano because I was connected with The Music Settlement [Cleveland, Ohio] for a long time.
Story_ID: 203225
Speaker 1: Okay well, since you mentioned the music education, why don't we talk about some of your other school experiences?   Do you remember what the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: I went to, I went to a school called Oliver [School, Duquesne, Pennsylvania]; it no longer exists.  And in Duquesne [Pennsylvania] we had, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania they had the Carnegie Free Libraries.  Every little town had a library, and I want to tell you that I spoke over there in Pittsburgh about two years ago, and there is no library out there.  And I can't believe that in this day and time, a city would have a school with no library.  But they had the Carnegie Free Library.  And I learned about Negro history by reading and going to the library, getting clips and all.  And in nineteen--around 1932, I believe, somewhere along in there, I started a literary club called The Phillis Wheatley.  And that club is still going on today.  And we started that club to try to encourage our kids to go to the library to read books, and to learn.  That's how we, that's the only way we could learn about Negro history.  When I was going, there were no, I never had a black teacher, there were no black teachers.  And when you thought about going to school, they would discourage you about teaching.  But social work, you know, you could do social work.  But the teaching was just, you were discouraged.  And I think Cleveland [Ohio] was further ahead than Pittsburgh when the teachers started here.  They were teaching elementary mostly here.  Because when I came out of college, I had secondary certificates.  And because they were paying secondary teachers more than elementary, all the black teachers were encouraged to go into elementary.  And we had a lot of elementary teachers here in Cleveland.  I did not choose to go into elementary.  It was just a little bit far removed from what I was thinking, so I went to law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio].  But getting back to Pittsburgh--I think that out in Duquesne, that's a little town twelve miles--I don't think we had any--in McKeesport [Pennsylvania], which was across the river about five miles--we had two black doctors, Dr. Habin [ph.] and Dr. Getten [ph.].  And Duquesne, after I left they had a black doctor, but not while I was there.  They had a pharmacist when I was there.  So, really, in the professional area, it was, the little city didn't have professionals.  We had one, I remember two or three people who went to West Virginia State [University, Institute, West Virginia].  And this kid who graduated from West Virginia State, she couldn't even get a job teaching in Duquesne.  So what they did, they set up an evening class for her, and encouraged all of the older blacks to go to learn elementary education.  And it didn't work out.  Somewhere along the line--because the disparity of teaching--she was teaching--some people didn't have any kind of reading skills, and the others did.  And she was trying to put 'em together.  And those that had a little reading, they felt put upon.  So, it didn't last.  And then I knew another young lady who went to Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], but when she left she never came back.  And so, really, when I left and went to school there were very few blacks out in the small towns, but in Pittsburgh there were.  But in the small communities, we didn't have the--I used to go and my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] used to take me into Pittsburgh.  And I was connected with the Y [ph.], so I was apprised of what was going on.
Story_ID: 203226
Speaker 1: Now, you said you went to, your elementary school was named Oliver?
Speaker 2: I went to Oliver [School, Duquesne, Pennsylvania] and I went to Crawford School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania].  Crawford School was the school I left and finished sixth grade from.  I went to fifth grade and sixth grade at Crawford School.  And I mentioned it to a girl the other day, something I'll never forget.  I was taking an exam in geography, and one question--I sat there and I knew all the questions on the exam but one.  We were given ten questions.  And I gave, I turned my paper in.  Now, there was something--let me tell you about this teacher.  When I first went to fifth grade, she was a playground teacher.  And when the first period came up for the report cards, I was unhappy because I had not made the honor roll.  And a lot of those--I can think I must have been the only black there.  And there were, they were all making--I didn't think they were as smart as I was.  And so, I stayed in and I talked to her about it.  And, but she didn't get angry with me.  She just asked me--and this is what she told me.  She said, "Well, I had them on the playground, and I got to know them better."  She said, "But now that I know who you are, you're going to, you'll probably make the honor roll the next time."  So then we had a session where she was so upset with the response--because I was the only one seemingly responding--that she told the class about I had stayed in and talked about not being on the honor roll, for the mistakes that she had made.  And so, she was sort of following me.  So, when I took this exam and I turned it in, I had all the questions right but one.  I couldn't think; I didn't put anything down.  And she gave me the paper back and said, "You're handing your paper in too quickly."  She said, "You sit there and think that answer."  And I sat there for another half hour, and I could not think that answer.  I just couldn't think of it.  And I turned it in, and I told her I was satisfied with--I couldn't think it.  Do you know what it was?  "What was the capital of Belgium?"  I just couldn't think.  And then I'll never forget Brussels [Belgium] as long as--I'll never forget that, after I found it out.  I just couldn't, I knew it, but I couldn't think of it.  And so then I got 90 on the exam and I was satisfied, because I couldn't think it.  But I was very happy, because she had responded when I talked to her about the honor roll.  Because I knew I was right, and she did too.  And then she sort of followed me, and I thought that was nice.  And after that, I was, I got along pretty good with--I had some bumps, but I was able to work them out.
Story_ID: 203227
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, we were chatting about your school days in [Duquesne] Pennsylvania.  And we talked about elementary school [at Oliver School and Crawford School, Duquesne, Pennsylvania], but I'd like to talk now about your junior high school years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what junior high school you attended?
Speaker 2: Yes.  It was Duquesne Junior High [Duquesne, Pennsylvania], seventh, eighth, and ninth grades.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have any special memories about the school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, we had domestic science.  They call it home ec [home economics] now.  We had domestic science, and I must say we had cooking and sewing.  The first half of the day was cooking, and then the next half was sewing.  And so, cooking--this one day we were--every time we went, we cooked something special and we set the table.  And we sat to eat, and we would share it with each other, different ones, and talk about the texture and what we had done.  So this particular day I went in and we had biscuits, we were going to make biscuits.  And when I looked at the recipe, I was not impressed.  (Laughter).  And so, I didn't want to make my biscuits the way the recipe called.  So what happened was, my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] had been making biscuits, because that's all the kind of bread we ate was biscuits every day.  So I turned my back on the teacher, and I made up my dough, and I didn't follow instructions.  And she caught me, and she came over and she really got after me.  She really lambasted me for not following orders.  And then she went further than that.  She told the students when the bread is cooked and done, they couldn't share theirs with me, because mine was going to be so bad that I couldn't share it with them, and I'd just be left out.  And I felt, I felt terrible.  But I knew my bread was going to be good, but I said a little prayer.  And when they put the bread in the oven and it was all ready and everything, she opened the oven door, and I could smell my bread.  I couldn't smell anybody's bread.  (Laughter) I knew what mine smelled like.  And when she opened that oven door--because I put a little more shortening in mine than she was calling for.  So, when she opened up the oven, my bread was real high, and the rest of them were just flat; they didn't raise their bread.  And so the kids starting asking her what was happening, that mine was getting so high and theirs was not moving.  She said, "Well, give it a chance."  And then finally when the bread was brown and their bread was raised, then she came over and she hugged me, and she told me that mine had turned out better than anybody's, and she was sorry for what she had said.  And she said that, and then she told the class that black people were natural cooks.  And so, I thought we were natural cooks (laughter).
Speaker 1: You took that as a compliment?
Speaker 2: I took it as a compliment.  And then as, but as I grew older, I wasn't sure what it was.  But then--but I knew I could cook well, I mean, I knew that.  And I was so pleased that my--whatever she said, it didn't matter, because my bread had told the story, and everybody wanted to taste my bread.  And I just, I didn't even need to taste it, because I knew what it was like.  I told them to help themselves.  And I'll never forget that as long as I live.
Story_ID: 203228
Speaker 1: Were there other classes in [Duquesne] Junior High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania] that you really enjoyed?
Speaker 2: I enjoyed literature.  I enjoyed literature because I was the type of person, I lived my character.  I was always a character when I read.  And I read--and I'm going to tell you about something else that happened.  Because I read a lot.  And we were without a minister at my church [Macedonia Baptist Church, Duquesne, Pennsylvania].  And a man came out from, a minister came out from New York [New York], and he met with the young people.  And I might have impressed him, because he went back and he sent me a lot of books.  And I was--and the books were very, very, good books.  And it was about the New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York], and we didn't know a thing about that.  And so what happened was--and I'm getting away from my story now, but I want to tell about this incident of reading.  And I came--and so what happened was I was in a class, one of these large classes that they have.  If you're pretty good, they let the people get together with current events.  And I met in this class, and I think we were in eighth grade, I was in eighth grade at that time.  And I had a brother who was older than I who was in this class.  Seventh, eighth, and ninth graders met in this class.  And of course we were, my brother was a 'W' alphabetically, and he sat behind me.  And he worked in my grandfather's [Nelson Daviston] store.  So the teacher wanted to know what did we know about the stock exchange, the New York Stock Exchange, and about the, whatever was--talk about the amount of money that they--the number of volumes and all.  And so, I had read this book.  And I had re-read it because I didn't have a lot of material, so I was re-reading.  And so, my hand flew up.  And my brother said "Put your hand down.  You don't know what you're talking about."  So, I put it down.  And so the teacher caught him, and he said, "You don't want your sister to recite?"  He said, "She doesn't know what she's talking about."  So, he says, "How do you know?"  He says, "Well, because I know she doesn't know."  And so the teacher said to me, "Do you know what you're talking about?"  I said, "I think I do."  He said, "Get up and recite."  I stood up and gave a dissertation on the stock market.  (Laughter) Not that I, not that I understood everything that I was giving, but I knew I was giving what I had read.  And so, even the teacher was shocked.  So then when I sat down, he said, "Hm, now," he said to my brother, "now, how do you like that?"  He was shocked.  But see, what I found out later was at that time the people in those communities played numbers.  And they got the numbers from the New York Stock Exchange that they won on every day.  So, I didn't know anything about that, because we were at home; I didn't know anything about the numbers.  But I found out later that he did not--he thought this was what I was going to get up and talk about, and I didn't know anything about it.  That's all he knew, because he was at this store where the folks did a lot of talking.  And he knew about the numbers they were playing, and about how they won it by getting it off the New York Stock Exchange by the newspapers.  And I didn't know that, and I didn't know a thing about it.  But this was why he did not want me to recite.
Speaker 1: Oh your brother?
Speaker 2: My brother.  He was--and I didn't know that, but I did.  And I will always feel pretty good that the teacher allowed me to get up and speak my piece, and I did.
Story_ID: 203229
Speaker 1: Now, getting back, now that I've told that, getting back to the cooking and the sewing.  I went through--we learned how to sew, we learned how to make things.  And I was not interested in sewing.  I only did it because it was required, but I did my part.  But on the cooking, I was very good at it.  And it's a wonder I didn't follow through later, but I didn't; I went on to something else.  But it was a great experience.  And the biscuits caused me to get a lot of bows and respect from the teachers and the students, I want you to know that.  And what do you think?  Do you think that was not a compliment when she said black people are natural cooks?  Tell me, what do you think of that?
Speaker 2: Well, it's sort of a backhanded kind of praise.  (Laughter) You'd done a good job, so she had to be able to explain that.
Speaker 1: Well--
Speaker 2: Maybe because you had good teachers--your mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] and your teacher at school.
Speaker 1: Well, I told my mother about it later, and she didn't say too much.  She smiled, you know.  But those were experiences.  And I sang in the chorus, the [Duquesne] Junior High [School, Duquesne, Pennsylvania] chorus.  And I might have been in [Duquesne] High School [ Duquesne, Pennsylvania] when we had to come out by music.  And I did some playing on the piano for them, to come out by music.  I had a music teacher to come to my house.  And I taught Margaret [Richardson] music.
Speaker 2: Which Margaret?
Speaker 1: I taught Julieann's [Julieanna Richardson] mother.  I taught her music.  You know how you have--you teach what you learn.  I taught her what I was learning, and that's how she learned how to play.
Story_ID: 203230
Speaker 1: You've mentioned several special loves from your schooldays--the love of reading, your interest in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Loved to read.  I was a character in every story.  When we, I always got to be--I made myself one of the characters, and I lived with those people day by day.  When we got into [William] Shakespeare, I got to be a character.  When we were doing just regular stories, I just, it's a wonder I didn't get into play acting, because I always felt that I was a character.  But then I did, but it was--I don't know why I felt a part of the play, a part of the story.  I always felt--I remember the 'Ancient Mariner' ['The Rime of the Ancient Mariner,' Samuel Taylor Coleridge].  Do you remember the 'Ancient Mariner?'  And on that ship, I thought I was on that ship.  I think that story went on in the classroom for about three weeks.  We were discussing it, and I thought, well, gee, I'm never going to get off this ship.  (Laughter) And we talked about the albatross, you remember, that bad luck bird.  I just, I just remember--and let me tell you something.  That was in the late '20s [1920s], and I'm thinking, now I remember that now.
Speaker 1: Were there any special teachers whose names you can recall, who encouraged your love for reading and your love for music and cooking?  Do you remember their names?
Speaker 2: I remember, I remember--let me say this.  When it comes to music, I loved the music, but I never felt that I was--I had a greater voice than I think I was on the piano.  I sang in the chorus, and then if they needed a play--and I remember we were at gym.  And I don't know whether I was in seventh or eighth grade at that time, I just can't remember.  But I do know that the teacher asked me, the gym teacher asked me to play 'Take Me Out to the Ballgame.'  And I told her I didn't know it, and she didn't believe it.  It was just, it was one of those things that--and I'll never forget that.  She really was angry with me, and I really, I didn't even know that.  My parents [Ozella Daviston Walker and George Walker] didn't know it.  That was--we didn't go--I mean they had the black teams.  They had the Pittsburgh Pirates, but we didn't go.  We only went when we became grownup later on.  And I didn't know anything about 'Take Me Out to the Ballgame.'  And they had the black teams like Satchel Paige, the pitcher.  But we didn't go to those things, we just knew about them.  And so when I told her I didn't know, she just, she thought I was just acting cute and didn't want to play.  And I think I was punished for that, I'm not sure.  But I always thought about that later when I talked with the teachers.  I said, "Don't ever assume that the kids," I said, "because if the parents don't know it, they don't know it."  And I knew all the other patriotic songs.  I knew 'Oh, say can you see?' [sic. 'The Star-Spangled Banner'] and 'God Bless America,' and 'America the Beautiful.'  I knew all those songs, because we sang them.  But 'Take Me Out to the Ballgame' was something they did only at the ballpark, and we didn't go.  But she just couldn't think of that.  And I thought about how many kids had been punished because they didn't know something they were not privy to when they grew up?  But you know something, I went to the library and asked the teacher if they had--I asked them, and they got that music for me.  And I learned that song, and I knew how to play 'Take Me Out to the Ballgame.'
Speaker 1: Did you ever get to play it for that teacher?
Speaker 2: No, I did not.  I never even discussed it with her anymore.  But, you know, we went on to something else.  She didn't hold that against me, we went on to other things.  And I played a lot of other things that I knew and--but that I didn't know.  I never, I just didn't know the song, and she thought I did know it.
Story_ID: 203231
Speaker 1: Do you remember the names of any of the music teachers you had in [Duquesne] Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: I had, I'll tell you.  The one that I know most of all was, the one that taught me music was named Clark [ph.], her name was Miss Clark.  I can't think of--Gussie Clark, that was her name.  She taught me music, piano.  And also Mary Cardwell Dawson's school of music [National Negro Opera Company] in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], she taught me voice and piano, and she had me singing coloratura and all of that.  I enjoyed it when I was taking it, but somehow or another I guess I was taught that I had to get something to make a living.  Now, my brother was a great artist, he could really draw, but he never followed through on it.  You have to make a living, you know.  You have to earn a living, so you let those things go.  But when I came to Cleveland [Ohio], I got hooked up with The Music Settlement [Cleveland, Ohio].  I did take some music, and once upon a time I was just great.  I enjoyed playing, and I did a lot of it.  But now that I'm older, and the arthritic fingers and all that, I don't do a lot.  But last week, a gentlemen, Levert Stewart [ph.], came and played the piano, and we talked about music.  And I used to have a lot of, I was on the board.  So, I used to have a lot of music fests and have the people in, and we used to do that.  Because at home, because we didn't have a lot of activity, we had to, we organized and we had song fests, and everybody could sing.  Oh, people could harmonize.  We could just do things.  We didn't have the formal training, but we could automatically--all those choirs were great.
Speaker 1: So, people throughout the community were singing?
Speaker 2: Yes, we used to have community singing.  We used to, I used to go to a girl by the name of Marion Watson [ph.].  She got a lot of us together, and we had a big choir.  And I remember I could sing alto; whatever part I needed to sing, I was put there to sing it.  And because I knew music, I could fit those roles.  And we did that, and we did a lot of that.  And we didn't have anything else to do, so in the wintertime, we'd sing.  And at Christmastime we used to do Christmas carols.  I used to take the church group, and we caroled all over the city, and loved it.
Speaker 1: I wonder, with a great love for literature and also for music, were you aware of the Harlem Renaissance artists in the 1920s and '30s [1930s], and if so, do you have any favorite black writers and musicians?
Speaker 2: Well, frankly, the teacher that taught me piano didn't, I don't think she was as well-versed as the Cardwell Dawson.  That's where I really--and then in the schools, we had music teachers.  And I sang in the choir, and Mary Cardwell Dawson had me singing coloratura, and the music teacher in [Duquesne] High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania] had me singing alto.  So, I never really got the two together, but wherever they put me, that's where I went, and I just tried to do.
Story_ID: 203232
Speaker 1: But I tell you, when I graduated from [Duquesne] High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania] I wanted to write about music, but I did not feel that I had enough time to research it.  So I took--I don't know why I chose this man, but I chose him because I knew I had to choose a black, I knew that.  Because I'm trying to tell these other kids that you've got some black people that have done well, and you've got to know this, because we weren't taught that.  And we didn't have black history in the schools, you see, and so we had to do it ourselves.  So, I took Paul Laurence Dunbar, and the kids didn't want me to use the dialect that he--they didn't want me to use the dialect.  And as you recall, in the schools, in geography and history, anytime that you came across--they didn't call them blacks then, they called them Negroes--they did not paint them very nicely; they didn't have them looking very good.  And so then when you got to that, the black kids didn't want to go to school on those days, because it was sort of humiliating to come in to something like that.  But I decided that I'm going to represent these black folks, so I'm going, and I'm going to sit there.  And I did, I never took a backseat on that.  And because I did read about black history--I read Carter [G.] Woodson, you know.  And Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] was a church school, and I had some knowledge.  And so I tried to shine a good light on black history, but I don't think they listened to it too much.  Because I had read it and I was able to say it, I felt pretty good about it.
Speaker 2: So, that was during the Negro History Week [Black History Month] program?
Speaker 1: Yes, whenever I talked about them.  And when we came up--even when they brought up the subject--when we came across it in the classroom about Negroes, it was not as favorable as that could be.  That's when I had a chance to speak my piece, and I was able to do that.  There weren't many, there weren't a lot of black kids at that time, you know, around; there were not that many.  You see, at that time they did not have--if you didn't understand--if you quit school--and those that didn't quit--they were big in first grade and second grade, and then they were forced to quit because they were humiliated.  We didn't have the tests and all of that then.  You went, and if you couldn't learn it, you stayed there and you just kept repeating the first grade.  And I remember a gentleman who was, he must have been around fifteen or sixteen.  He looked like a man to us, because he was in first grade and he was behind all the kids and all.  But you didn't have--now they have--they have the different levels, and they wouldn't allow that.  But I came along when if you didn't learn it, you stayed there.  And I made sure I was going to, I made sure I got my lessons.
Speaker 2: You said you enjoyed the writing of Paul Laurence Dunbar?
Speaker 1: Yes, I did.  I did the dialect, but the kids, the black kids didn't want me to do it.
Speaker 2: Do you have a favorite dialect poem by Dunbar?
Speaker 1: "Caroline, bring me that ol' strap" [sic. "Come hyeah; bring me dat ah strap!" from 'In the Morning,' Paul Laurence Dunbar]. Didn't he write that?  Who wrote that?
Speaker 2: Caroline, perhaps?
Speaker 1: "Caroline, bring me that ol' strap, and I'll whip you till you drop" [sic. "Come hyeah; bring me dat ah strap! Boy, I'll whup you 'twell you drap..."].  Somebody wrote that--
Speaker 2: It sounds like Dunbar.
Speaker 1: Huh?
Speaker 2: It sounds like Dunbar.
Speaker 1: It sounds like him?  But he was, he had a lot of dialect, and I know that, and I wrote about him.  And I went back, I went to the library.  I wanted to get a copy of what I had written, but they couldn't find it, they couldn't give it to me.  I don't know what happened.  I really--evidently I don't know whether I had a copy at home or not, I don't know.  But I really, as I, when I grew older I wanted to go back and look at it and see, and I couldn't get it.
Speaker 2: So, this is research you completed while you were in high school on Paul Laurence Dunbar?
Speaker 1: When I finished that book, so that was my thesis.
Story_ID: 203233
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the name of the high school again?
Speaker 2: Duquesne High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Duquesne High School.  And let me tell you about the high school now.  Now, I'm going to that city in two weeks.  I'm going there because they're having our family reunion on my mother's side [Ozella Daviston Walker].  And I might be the oldest of the living ones that they know.  And we've got a cousin coming in from New York who might be a year or two. But the high school now has a black principal.  The man that's a minister at our church [Macedonia Baptist Church, Duquesne, Pennsylvania] there used to be the principal.  They have one school, and it has all the grades in it, from one through twelve.  In fact, I really feel that instead of moving up, I think maybe the city has sort of taken the turn to move back.  They have no library.  This one high school has all the grades in it now.  All the white people have moved way out, so they no longer go to the school.  And also, they have a pocket of black kids going to this school.  And this principal, the man at the church, he quit and went to some other place farther away.  And so they got, I don't know who's there now, but they have another.  And I'm not sure--I spoke there, I spoke, but they had me speaking on financial--starting endowments for the church with the foundations, and that's what I spoke on.  But frankly, somebody needs to go out there, in education, and turn that town around.  Because I don't think they're doing our children any good, I really don't.  And once upon a time, they turned out some bright--I tell you, there's a girl in Atlanta [Georgia] by the name of Marva [Jones] Brooks.  She was working with--what's the gentleman who died who was the mayor down there?  [Maynard] Jackson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Maynard Jackson?
Speaker 2: --was it Jackson?  Maynard Jackson.  She was, when he became the first mayor, she was the, he made her his solicitor, which is our law director.  She graduated from Harvard University [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  She was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], and Hugh Scott, who was a senator, met her and said to her, "Where are you going?" she was finishing Howard.  And she had set up to go, she was going to law school at Howard.  He got her a full scholarship to go to Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts], and that's where she went.  And she came out, and she was cumma sum laude [sic. Summa cum laude] and all that stuff.  And she is down in Atlanta, she's with a law firm now.  She's very bright.  And there were other kids who came out of Duquesne High who were really good students, and they did very well.  But they had to leave Duquesne to get the jobs.  And, but now I don't think--I just don't know what's happening, and I'm very distraught about it.  And I think that's one of the things I plan to try to pursue when I go in two weeks, to find out what's happening.  Maybe I can sort of get to the--find out and do something about it.  Somebody has to do it.
Story_ID: 203234
Speaker 1: Can we talk a little bit more about your schooldays coming out of Duquesne [High School, Duquesne, Pennsylvania], and thinking about college (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I was a--well let me say, I was a basketball player, I was a letter person.  And we went to a lot of places, there were no blacks to play.  And I'll never forget, we started a varsity team when you're a sophomore in tenth grade.  Oh, I could play before I got to tenth grade because we had an outside team.  And I could--I don't know whether you know too much about basketball.  But in those days the girls had a six-man team for the varsity, and they were zoned, they couldn't move into certain areas.  So, what happened was I could play both, the boys and the girls.  So, in tenth grade the coach said to me, "I know that you're a good player," he said, "but we have to play the seniors and juniors.  We have to give them the opportunity."  And he said, "From time to time, you'll get a chance to play."  And I said, "Fine."  So, the first game we had was in West Newton [Pennsylvania].  That's a little town, a little coal-mine town.  There were no blacks on the team there.  In fact, I guess I didn't see any blacks at the place.  And I did not start the game, and so but they were just--when the game started, oh, my goodness, gracious, they were just taking us to the cleaners.  So, the coach came and said to me, "I think we're going to have to put you in."  I was so pleased.  I went in, and I tell you, the whole crowd was, "Watch that colored girl."  They quit saying Negros, they would call us colored then, and, "Watch that colored girl."  And I turned that thing around, and we came out winners.   So after that I played on all--I played every--after that I never missed a game, I played the whole time.  And I received letters and all of that.  And I really tried to have my brother look for some of the pictures and things that--my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] had a cedar chest, and in that cedar chest we kept a lot of the things that we got from high school.  And I had my sweaters and my beads and all my little papers and certificates.  And I really wanted to get those, and that would mean a lot to me now to see them.  But I haven't been able to find them, and my pictures when I was on the team.  I was, I thought I was a great player, and because I could play, I could play with the outside team; I was very good at it.  So I had an advantage over those kids who were just trying to learn something, and I could play all around them.  (Laughter) And I was a volleyball player, and I could run.  I was track, I could run.  I was very good at all of that.  Now, I don't know why, I don't know why, but it just happened that way.
Speaker 1: But you said--
Speaker 2: But I enjoyed my, I enjoyed school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You said girls weren't encouraged to continue with the athletics beyond high school (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, oh no.  After that, my mother--they thought girls jumping up and running around, it wasn't--you know, it was not--you had to stop that after so long.  Oh, yes, I did--after that, I let it go.  I quit basketball; everything--
Story_ID: 203235
Speaker 1: We were talking about leaving the sports behind, moving away from the [Duquesne] High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania] athletics.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then when you came to Cleveland [Ohio] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, I came to Cleveland.  I was going to say that when I first came from [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], I did some substituting.  I was put in a placement at John Adams High School [Cleveland, Ohio].  I taught there for, I was put in a placement for a semester.  And I--then after that, I was--they were trying to encourage me to--if I wanted a contract, I would have to go to elementary.  And I remember I spoke about--it was, it must have been Negro History Week [Black History Month] or something, because I spoke to (unclear) School over there on Antill Road [ph.].  It's right down the street there.  I spoke there, and I was there the whole day.  So, the girls had gym.  And somebody whispered to me, "They said you were a basketball player."  I went and I played a little basketball with them, and I was delighted, I hadn't played basketball in years.  And so they asked me why did I give it up?  And I told them that at the time that I came out, the people didn't think it was nice for girls to be jumping up and down; they had to go home and sit down and act like ladies, and they were no longer tomboys.  And that's why I had to go, and I gave it up.  But I enjoyed playing with them that day, and I still had some skills, I want you to know.  (Laughter) I think I could out-play them (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay--
Story_ID: 203236
Speaker 1: All right, and you said you graduated from Duquesne High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And what year was that please?
Speaker 2: That was '34 [1934].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what college did you choose at that point?
Speaker 2: Then I went, at that time I did not go--I went to Duquesne University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] for a year.  And then I was, I didn't any more money, so I came out, and I was trying to get a job.  I worked for a year with, I worked with the insurance company for a year.  And then I came--then I decided to come to Cleveland [Ohio] to see if I could get a job, and I did.  So I left Cleveland, yes, I did.  And when I got to Cleveland, the war [World War II, WWII] started.  So then I left here and went to Washington [D.C.], and was there for a couple of years, and I saved my money.  So when I came back, I went on down to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio].  But I thought I had saved enough money, but let me tell you, that money ran out so fast.  I had to--because when you have to pay for food, for board, and books and tuition, I just didn't realize how much money it took.  And yet, it was a state school.  And so then finally, I had some relatives there.  And my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] came, and I moved in with my aunt.  I was trying to pay for my board.  I moved with my aunt and that was how I was able to, that helped me out a whole lot.  I didn't have to pay for my--and plus, in fact you couldn't live on the campus anyhow.
Speaker 1: Oh why was that?
Speaker 2: They didn't, they didn't have any place for black folks on the Ohio State campus at that time.  They had a lot of problems with that.  They had one place that I might have been able to stay, and that was the International House, and I went there.  Everybody was wearing everybody's clothes, and the kids were just--it was such a mess; I knew I could never last there.  And so, I went to live--I had an aunt there and I lived with her 'til I finished there.
Story_ID: 203237
Speaker 1: But the whole time I was down there [The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio], I worked.  I worked at the Y [ph.], I worked at the [Ohio] Statehouse [Columbus, Ohio], and I worked for some lawyers, I did all kinds of things.  I, in fact, one of the fellows, when I went back to see him, his hair had turned white.  Now, mine's turned white (laughter).  I went back to see him after I--not only had I finished college, I came back to Cleveland [Ohio] and I finished--this was in '47 [1947] in January, they had the mid-year.  I finished in January of '47 [1947] in Ohio State.  I came back to Cleveland, and in 1966 I went to Columbus [Ohio] on the [Ohio] Industrial Commission.  So that was twenty years, from '66 [1966]--twenty years--I went back to Columbus.  But I was going, I went on Mondays, and came back to Cleveland on Thursdays.  So I had son [R. Bruce Burke] fifteen years old at that time, and a husband [Ralph L. Burke].  So I was commuting, and I went in, and I went to find this man that had hired me and gave me the hours--any hours that I could work, I could work the hours.   And each semester, I was changing according to my semester, what I had coming up.  And we were doing license plates; I don't know what you call that.  It was not, it was typing, but it was like a ten-something.  It was a different thing.  And I'll never forget, he said to me, "You can work any hours you want to, because you can do more in one hour than most of these folks can do in half a day."  And I was very fast.  And so I used to just go in anytime they would arrange for me to come in and work.  And that's how I got my, that's how I did it.  And then I worked for some lawyers for a while.  And I took dictation, I could do that.  I took dictation, and I would take dictation and leave it, and the girls could type it, type the letters and all.  And then I worked at the Y for a while, and I liked it, because I knew the executive director.  And when they would have--and the reason why I got the job, they had an NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] convention in Columbus.  And at that time, they weren't, black folks weren't--Columbus was sort of a southern town, and they didn't have all the eating places to go to.  So, they had to go to the Y.  And I had, the director called me and asked me could I help with the--when the convention came, and I said yes.  And what happened was the dining room got clogged up, and I just took, I just went into that dining room and started straightening things out.  And I knew the folks out there, and I started helping the folks get their things.  So then after that, the director said "You've got a job, and anytime you want to, you can come in."  So, I worked at the Y for a long time.  And so I really had some nice jobs to help me out, through it.  And so, for that reason, when I left my job I wanted to set up something to help somebody else if they had a little hard time and didn't have the money.  That's why I wanted to set up a scholarship, to help somebody else, because I know what it means to be out there struggling.  Now, my son didn't have that problem.  You know why?  When he went to--he went to Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] in 1969.  He stayed until he finished law school, he stayed there seven years.  And the only time he worked was when he came home for summer.  And I was able to put him on just about any job he needed to be put on.  So, he just really, he doesn't know really what it means to have it so easy.  But I worked, I just did not have any free hours.
Story_ID: 203238
Speaker 1: Were you working full-time and going to school [at The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio] full-time?
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I worked my hours in.
Speaker 1: Oh, so it was part-time?
Speaker 2: Always able to work my hours in.  But let me say this.  It was not easy because especially when--you understand that when you go to high school, you got chapters.  When you go to college, you got books.  (Laughter) I mean, you don't--and you've got to get through with them.  And you had to write papers and you had to do it.  I was, but I did what I had to do.  And then when I came--then I left Ohio State.  When I graduated from Ohio State, my first job was in the summer, working with a summer program at John Hay [High School; Cleveland Early College High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  And then the, that was in '47 [1947].  And then in January, I went and served in a placement.  Some teacher had to go to the hospital, I don't know what happened, but I served.  And do you know, remember Reverend Wade McKinney?  His daughters [Virginia Ruth Henderson and Mary Louise Miles] were in my classroom.  And I'll never forget, they made the honor society while I was there in that homeroom.  And there were a lot of black kids, and they came to me.  And I was teaching Sunday school at Antioch [Baptist Church, Cleveland, Ohio].  And those kids came to me and said, "Look, it isn't fair that the McKinney girls should get in the honor society.  We can't get in it because our parents are not big in the community."  And I had to let them know that they can't hold that against the McKinney girls.  You know a lot of people feel that way.  They felt that they could--they were angry with these girls making it.  "We don't think they're any better than we are."  But I said, "If they've got parents who can help them, hurrah for them.  You just hope that something good can happen to you.  It might not be in that area, but some other area."  And I find that not just then--I've seen that as I've--all along, where people feel angry because somebody else is getting breaks that they're not getting, because--and that's wrong.  And this is, and I found that out.  But then after I left that placement, the teacher came back, and I was, I couldn't get a contract in secondary.  And I, and they had a place, and they wanted to train you.  And you could go get trained at this place.  The teachers were being re-trained for elementary, and I did not want to go into elementary.  So, I went to law school, and so that's where I am.  And so, now, when I was at Ohio State, I was interested in finance and marketing.  And my counselor came to me and said, "Look, if you're going to live in Cleveland [Ohio], you won't be able to get a job.  So, your job will be limited to something like the Phillis Wheatley [Association, Cleveland, Ohio]."  And they said, "They don't have enough jobs for you, so you've got to go to New York [New York] if you really want to use your marketing skills.  So, we suggest that instead of going into marketing," well, I had done all these courses, "we suggest that you take method courses and teach, because you can get a job."  And so that's why, so then I took twelve hours of teaching in business machines, and shorthand, and bookkeeping, finance, and business education.  And I did the teaching, I taught for a semester in methods courses on that.  And so, when I graduated, I had two--I was certified to teach social studies and business.  And so then when I came to Cleveland, they wanted me to drop those and get certified for elementary education.  Now, I must say this.  They had the tools set up, you could go and apply.  I don't know whether it was at Kent State [University, Kent, Ohio].  I think it was, but we could do the changing over.  But I did not want to change over.  And I was interested in, I guess, the legal aspect part of it anyhow.  So I went with the law school, I went to Cleveland-Marshall.
Speaker 1: Cleveland-Marshall College of Law [Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio].
Story_ID: 203239
Speaker 1: And so, now, and so when I finished Cleveland-Marshall [College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], which was in between the time I was in law school--well, I guess I married [Ralph L. Burke]--I went to law school in '47 [1947] right after I--but I went to, but I married in '48 [1948], and I graduated from law school in '51 [1951] in May.  My son [R. Bruce Burke] was born in February of '51 [1951].  And so then I thought, well, I guess I won't take the [Ohio] Bar [Exam], because it's just too--with the baby it's just too much.  So, the dean got together with my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] and all, and they decided that if I didn't take the bar, I might never take it.  So, my mother said she would take the baby.  So the dean said to me that--I was out of school for about, you know, February, March, and January.  I was out of school for about three or four months.  And so he said, because the weather was bad, and so he thought that the four years I had been--he was very nice.  He said, "I think this should stand you up for taking the bar."  And he gave me this, and he said, "Just think that you're a lawyer and somebody has come to you for advice.  And on any question you get stuck on, unless it's a book answer," he said, "If you have to think it through," he said, "just think you're giving them the best advice you can give."  And that's what I did.  When I got a problem, I--you had a lot of problems that you had to solve, and I thought about myself as giving somebody the best advice I could give them.  And so, I want to tell you this.  Because I had been down to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], I knew some people down there.  So, in my group, there were three black women taking the bar at that time.  It was Mary Hutchins [ph.], I don't know whether you remember, she was a referee.  And Marva Willis [ph.], who was a teacher, and myself, the three of us were taking it.  Now, the black fellows who were taking the bar were Armond Robinson, Cleveland Jackson [ph.], and [HistoryMaker] Stanley Tolliver [Sr.].  Those were the three black fellows taking it.  So, you had it for three days.  And what you do, they'd discuss the questions and all.  And Armond Robinson was an insurance man with Atlanta Life [Insurance Company; Atlanta Life Financial Group, Atlanta, Georgia], and I'd known him.  And we studied together, we studied.  And Mary Hutchins, Armond Robinson and I, we studied for the bar together.  So, when we--after we'd have half of the exam, we would be coming down, and then you'd go out for lunch, and everyone was talking about this question or that question.  So, he said to some of them.  He said, "Did you put that down?"  He said, "You flunked already."  And he said--and I was so pleased.  I just sat there, and I knew I hadn't put that down.  You see, what happened was in the law school, when you have these cases, if you're not careful when you get an exam question, they'll turn the case around, you know, they'll go another direction.  And if you're not thinking, as soon as you, "This is the Cobb Chapel case," and then you just go on and write what you think, because you know the case.  And they've turn the case around, if you'd read it in the fine print, and it's altogether different--
Story_ID: 203240
Speaker 1: So, they--well, I knew to think about that.  So, when the [Ohio Bar] Exams came out, the newspaper called me and congratulated me, and had a photographer out there to take me and the baby [Burke's son, R. Bruce Burke] before the papers came out with the thing.  So, I was privileged to get to know that I had passed.  But that year, several of our people flunked, and they were very sad.  But what happened was, I have a friend down there who was a minister.  And her daughter was in school with me, her granddaughter.  And I went to see her, and I took the two girls with me.  And Mary Hutchins [ph.] and I roomed together, but the other girl was another room, she went with us.  And we went to see this lady.  And let me say, both of these ladies--my friends, the two law students, they're both deceased now.  We went to see this lady, and I said to her, I said, "Mother Dear," I said, "you know this is a long thing, if we're going to have it."  I said, "I'm going to need your prayers."  And so the girl got after me, because she said I was selfish--that I was not asking for them, I was just asking for myself.  And so, I said to her, "Well, the Lord knows I'm honest.  If anybody has to flunk out, I don't want to be the person.  I want to pass."  And so she said that she wouldn't feel that way; she would feel that if they had to have a choice, she would take the fall.  I said, "Well, you take it, because I'm not taking it."  (Laughter) And so what happened was it turned out that that girl flunked, and we didn't.  And I felt sad about that, because we'd had that little run-in.  But we talked about it later, and she didn't hold it, we got over it.  But it was just really funny how people think they're fooling God, because he knows full well that everybody wants to pass.  I mean, I wasn't going to try to fool him myself, because I knew that if anyone flunked, I wouldn't want it to be me, I wanted those other folks to.  (Laughter) They say in law school so many has got to flunk, and so many has got to pass.  I said I don't want to be one of those that flunks, I don't care what they say.  Well, anyhow, I passed, and the newspaper came out and made the story.  The headline was "Mom's a lawyer now" and all of this.  And after that, then I set about--I wanted to put my baby in Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] nursery so I could go to work.
Story_ID: 203241
Speaker 1: May I ask before we continue--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --your husband's name and your son's [R. Bruce Burke] name?
Speaker 2: Ralph L. Burke. My husband's name is Ralph L. Burke.  He was--worked--I met him, I'll tell you how I met him.  Once upon a time, Cleveland [Ohio] was gung ho with fraternities and sororities.  And I was very active with the AKAs--
Speaker 1: Which stands for?  AKA?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: What does that stand for, AKA?
Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha [Sorority].  And he was, he was an Alpha [Phi Alpha Fraternity].  And he worked at the post office, he was a registered clerk at the post office, and he was an Alpha.  His brother was an Alpha, so if you knew the family--so, we used to go to all these affairs, and so that's how I met him.  And so, then from--now, what we were talking about before I got to my husband?
Speaker 1: You were just about to tell me about placing your son in the Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] day care.  But I wanted to get the names of the family members (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yes, and that's how I met him.  And we married in 1948 in June.  In June, we got married.  And because it was, it was--we were all running together, this fraternity group and the AKAs.  But the funniest thing about that, after my son was born, I did keep up with them.  But when I came out of law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] and started to--and trying to get him going and then I was going to put him in nursery so I could do something completely.  And I had gone to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] to get him, and I left Pittsburgh and went to Washington [D.C.] to visit a friend.  And I couldn't stay.  My mother [Ozella Daviston Walker] called me--I came back the next day, because the baby cried the whole night because I had deserted him.  And so, my mother said, "You've got to come back," said, "you're in his life today and then you leave the next day.  He thinks that something is wrong."  So, I went back.  Now, he was not--he was born in February of '51 [1951].  Now this is March in '50 [1950].  This is, let's say March of '52 [1952].  And so how old?  He must be about--not a year old yet, is he?  Is he a year old?  He's a year old, isn't he?
Speaker 1: Just about a year.
Speaker 2: And he's a year old.  So, now he knows something.  So, I came back and I stayed with my mother for about three or four days, and then I came back to Cleveland [Ohio].  So, then I've got to think about, now what am I going to do with my career and everything?  So, I'm offered this job, and I'm going to take it.  And I was going to send him to the Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio] nursery.  And the next morning I got up and I couldn't part with him.  I cried, I couldn't send him.  And so, I didn't--I just kept him, I let the nursery go.  I'll never forget that, I just let it go.  And I'm going to tell you, I was pleased I did it.  Because when he--when I did--when he was big enough to go to school, I would get home--I would always get home in time for him to--when he hit that back door, he'd say, "Mother, I'm home."  I knew that I had to be home when he came, and I was always home when he came from school.  And I, I wouldn't take any job that would not let me be home when he was.  And the fact that I had gone to Washington [D.C.] and he had cried all night long, let me know that he thought that I had deserted him.  And I would never, I would never do that.  And now, we have a great, we have a great relationship--
Story_ID: 203242
Speaker 1: But let me tell you, when my husband [Ralph L. Burke] died, my husband died--and I'm going to jump, because this is--he died in '82 [1982].  I was, I had gone to a meeting in San Diego [California].  At that time I was nominated, I was nominated to be something for the American Judges [Association], and I was nominated for something then.  And I just can't remember what it was, but it was something.  And I went from there to Los Angeles [California] to visit a friend, and he called me to tell me my sister [Sandra Walker (ph.)] had had a stroke, and that they wanted me to come home, back to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  My husband called me in Cleveland [Ohio].  So, I got a plane out the next day, early that next morning I got a plane out, and he met me at the airport.  And he told me that he had checked my car out, and my car was sluggish, and I should let the people blow it out before I took it on the trip.  So, when I took the--he took the car in that morning.  But I didn't take the car in--yes, I did, I took the car in and they said that they couldn't, they wouldn't have it ready for me.  So then I said to my husband, "Put me on the bus.  My son is going to meet me in Pittsburgh, and he'll be driving.  He's going to drive in."  So, he, my son met me in Pittsburgh to see my sister.  Then Sunday night, my son put me on the bus to send me back to Cleveland, and he went back to Washington [D.C.].  And my husband picked me up at the bus station and brought me home.  It was after the election in November, because I was in Los Angeles during the election, because that was when my friend was close to the mayor there.  What was his name?  [Tom] Bradley (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Mayor Bradley.
Speaker 1: And they wanted me to be there, so I went there with them.  So, when I came--so now my husband had saved all the papers for me for the election, and I'm going to sit there and start going through these papers.  And he said he was going to bed.  He had got--I had had my dinner.  And all of a sudden I heard this noise, and then I looked and he was acting funny, and then he was so sick.  He said, "Call the ambulance, call emergency."  And I called 911, I'll never forget it.  And when they came with all that noise and everything, they came to my house.  And I don't know why they were making so much noise when they came.  And they came up and took him off the bed and they put him on the floor, and they started working with him.  And then they said, "We have to get him to the hospital."  And now, I just don't even now remember how I got to the hospital, whether I was in the ambulance.  I think they carried me.  And so when I got there, they asked me for my closest friend, and then they came over, who is Daisy.  Do you remember Daisy Montgomery [ph.]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't.
Speaker 1: Well, she's a minister's wife.  She was my son's godmother, she came.  Another girl who--both of them are deceased--Selica Evans [ph.]--they came to the hospital.  And then they came and said they couldn't--my husband had died.  And so, they called my son.  And I couldn't believe that he was walking in the house early that next morning--that they had brought him, had got him there.  So, they got my son there.  So, what was unique about that--now, everybody came from different places out of town.  They were staying--all my family came.  And after about two weeks, everybody was going home, but my son wasn't leaving.  He was just hanging around.  So, finally I said to him, "When do you have to go back to work?"  He said, "Well, I was just thinking that I can't leave you."  He said, "I can't leave you like this."  He said, "I was just thinking, I'm going to have to give up my job or you're going to have to give up yours.  And I'll come to Cleveland back home, or you'll come to Washington."  So I said, "Wait just a minute, I've got something to say about this."  I said, "We're both adults."  I said, "You've got your life to make, and I've got to keep going."  I said, "No, no, no, you can't come back home.  You've got to stay on your job."  I said, "We're both as close as that telephone.  So, if you need me, I'll drop everything and come running."  And I said, "If I need you, I want you to do the same."  He said, "I will."  And so then that was the only time he was able to lift his spirits, and he decided to go back to Washington on his job.  And that, I was so pleased that I was able to do that.  And since that time, when I need him, if I call him he'll grab a flight and come on in.  And so, that's the way we worked it out.  And when I was running for election, if I felt--I remember once I was running for election and I felt very sad, especially about this thing.  I was running for election during this FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] sting [Operation Corkscrew, 1977].  And I called him, and he said, "Mother, come on up."  And I left, I was running for--I went on up to talk with him.  And you know, we had a lot of, we had to go to Washington to testify before [U.S.] Congress.  And he took time off the job.  And when everybody, when we were before the committee [house subcommittee], they wanted to know who this was.  He said, "I'm her son.  I'm not here in an official capacity.  I'm here because she's my mother."  Oh, I was so pleased, I was so pleased.
Speaker 2: Now have you mentioned his name yet?  I want to make sure we include his name.
Speaker 1: Have I called his name?
Speaker 2: Yeah, would you call it?
Speaker 1: R. Bruce Burke.
Speaker 2: What is it again please, your son's name?
Speaker 1: R., Rodney.  We just call him R.  He doesn't use his first name. 	R. Bruce Burke, and that's his name, and we're very close.  And he's married and he--I've been on a lot of trips, where I've taken him and his wife with me on a lot of trips.  So, very close.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: But I wanted, I knew he had to have his own life.
Story_ID: 203243
Speaker 1: So, it seems that you were able, when he was in school, to combine motherhood and sometimes working outside the home.
Speaker 2: Yes.  And really, when I was running, when I won the judgeship, let me say this.  When I left--I was working with the [Ohio] Attorney General's office, and then I left the attorney general's office and I was appointed by [Governor James Allen "Jim"] Rhodes on the [Ohio] Industrial Commission.  It was a three-man commission.  If the Republicans were in power--two Republicans and one Democrat, or vice versa.  So, I was vice-chairman.  And because I had worked with the attorney general, I was trying the lawsuits.  [William Bart] Bill Saxbe had asked me to try the lawsuits.  I worked with George Voinovich.  He and I were the lawyers trying the lawsuits on workers' compensation.  And I took a course in it so I could learn it, the workers' compensation, they called it.  At that time, it was workman's compensation.  So, when I went to serve on the--my sister [Sandra Walker (ph.)] had visited with me.  And when they asked me to take this job, I had, I was apprehensive, because I had a fifteen year old son [R. Bruce Burke] to go to Columbus [Ohio].  But what happened was Cuyahoga County [Ohio], politically, they called themselves entitled to various spots.  And they felt there were entitled to that spot on the commission.  And they couldn't get the [Ohio] Senate to pass on any of the candidates they had sent down there, and they were about to lose that spot.  And so, the county chairman came to me and the governor and decided that I could, the senate had to pass me, that they couldn't turn me down.  So, they called me in and asked me would I take the spot.  And, but one thing they assured me was that if it interfered with my husband [Ralph L. Burke] or son, if things got out of... that they would bring me back to Cleveland, that I wouldn't have to stay.  So I decided to--so I talked with my son and my husband, and frankly, it was one of the nicest jobs I've ever had.  It was just commuting, going to Columbus every Monday and coming back on Thursday.  At noon I was hitting the road, coming back to Cleveland.  And so once I took the job, some of the well-wishers decided that it should be a full-time job, that I should be working on Friday, a half day Friday.  I said, no, I wouldn't do that, I would leave first.  So, the governor said "Don't worry about that, they're just signifying."  He said, "You just do what you have to do."  So, then the governor decided, he had promised that I was going to come back on the bench.  So, now while I was--there were a lot of things that happened while I was on the commission that's too long to go into.  But they raised the salaries.  When I went to the commission, it was $12,000.  Now, the vice-chairman of the commission, everybody got the same.  But when I went on, the chairman couldn't stand getting the same amount I was getting, so he went to the [Ohio] Legislature and said, "You can't give me the same thing as that lady."  So, they raised the salary to $12,500 for the chairman, and for the rest of us, we would get--I'm the vice-chairman, and I only got $12,000.  But what happened was I was only serving a one-year term, I was finishing out somebody's term.  I had to be re-appointed--once you finished his term--his term was out at the end of year.  So, when I finished the term, they had raised the salaries from $12,000 to seventeen five [$17,500]--
Story_ID: 203244
Speaker 1: --[Governor James Allen "Jim"] Rhodes appointed you?
Speaker 2: Appointed me.  It was a three-man commission [Ohio Industrial Commission] at that time, and I was the first woman to serve on that commission.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how about if I ask a question about well something, I'll make up something (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And before that, I served with, I was an assistant attorney general with [William Bart] Bill Saxbe.  And, you know, a lot of times in my work I ran into a lot of male chauvinists, and I had to deal with that.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: Judge [HistoryMaker Lillian] Burke, in the last segment we talked about your combining motherhood and wife, and running the household and working sometimes outside of Cleveland [Ohio]--
Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) and you describe some of your experiences in Columbus [Ohio] as part of the industrial commission.
Speaker 1: Well, let me tell you.  The governor said to me--at that time, we didn't have [Route] 71 going all the way through up to Cleveland.  I had to go down to Medina [Ohio] when I started, to get [Route] 18.  I had to get 18 and go down to 18 to 71.  Then they finally took, brought it up, and they didn't have the Innerbelt [Bridge].  Finally they put the Innerbelt in, and what I was doing in three hours, I could now do it in two hours, because we were doing seventy miles an hour.
Speaker 2: Seventy miles--
Speaker 1: And we were afforded a state car, and we had Oldsmobiles with big engines.  So, they would put you on the road pretty good.  And the governor told me when I took the job that women have been calling for equal rights all through the years, and that men have been coming and going to Columbus through the years.  And he wanted to know if I was equal to the task.  And so, I took the job and took the challenge.  And frankly, when the weather was bad I got to work before most of the folks in Columbus got to work, because they couldn't deal with the snow like I could.
Story_ID: 203245
Speaker 1: It seems based on the things that you've told us, within this last hour especially, that you learned some important lessons about life, in working in and around Ohio.  But I wonder also about your law, your education in law.  You mentioned some training that you had to prepare you for the job.
Speaker 2: Well, frankly, when I came out of law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio] they had, the Justice Center [Complex, Cleveland, Ohio] was not into being at that time, and we had to go to 21st [Street] and Payne [Avenue].  And the black lawyers came to me and said you could choose your cases.  There were a lot of judges who had never--now, we don't want to really get into the--you want to get into going into law?
Speaker 1: Well, basically, the study of law, you know and how it prepared you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I'll tell you about when I did get into it at 21st and Payne, the black lawyers came to me and said, "Now that you're on the bench, we don't want you to stay away from the sordid things.  Your people need you."  So, when I went, I went with the idea of trying to hear all of the cases, I didn't want to turn anything down.  When I went on the bench, there were judges who never heard a jury trial.  There were judges who never did this and did that.  And some didn't go to criminal court, they only wanted civil.  At that time, we had an assignment room, and you could get that done.  You could play favorites, you could get it done politically.  So when I went, I did not want to do that.  I wanted to learn everything I could learn; I wanted to have some experience in everything.  So, when my time came to go over to 21st and Payne, I stayed over there sometimes longer than I should have, because the folks didn't want to come over there.  And now, when I first went into law, I did not want to get caught doing my law practice over there.  They would call that "ambulance chasing."  So, when I first came out of law school I thought it would be nice if I could do some, get some experience in civil law.  Most of us got started in criminal law and did the best we could.  So, I went to the law department and talked with the law director; I made an appointment.  And he couldn't imagine, so I told him that I was coming out of law school in June or May, and that I wanted to see if I could get some experience by being hired as a law clerk.  And I told him I had a Bachelor of Science degree from [The] Ohio State University [Columbus, Ohio], and I was certified to teach business and social studies and secondary.  And I laid my credentials on the line, and I thought they were sounding pretty good.  And he said to me, the first thing, he threw his hand, "We don't have any women down here.  We only have men."  And so, I said--that didn't even faze me.  I said, "I could be your first one, you know."  And so, he finally told me that I was a brave soul.  And finally he said before I left that he would see if he could find a place for me in the secretarial pool.  And at that time, there was only one black woman as a secretary in the law department, and one black fellow lawyer.  So, the fellow who was the lawyer was the late Judge Charles White, who had finished Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  And the black secretary, you wouldn't know that she was black unless she told you, because she was as fair as any other white person.  And she had graduated from Wilberforce [University, Wilberforce, Ohio] with a Bachelor of Science degree, and she was a secretary there.  And I dare say a lot of them didn't finish high school, they went to some business school and got their business training.  And I said she probably had more education than anybody else in the thing, in the law department, in the secretarial group. And I told the guy, "No, thanks," I wasn't interested in the secretarial pool.  And so soon after that, as time went on, I started getting jobs, different jobs that led me into the courtroom.  And the person told me that they always knew that I was going to make it.  They did tell me they knew, and I thanked them and just moved on about my business.  So, you can't ever let people discourage you.  You've got to know what you've got in front of you; you've got to go on out and meet the challenge.
Story_ID: 203246
Speaker 1: You know I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) See, at that time, I had no idea that I would be sitting on the bench.  All I wanted--an opportunity to practice law in a civil courtroom, that's all I wanted.  And later on I met the gentleman, and I was sitting on the bench.  And it was kind of nice to meet him, I really liked it.
Speaker 1: You mentioned the fact that you became a [Cleveland Municipal Court] judge in an era when there weren't very many women on the bench (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.
Speaker 1: And certainly no African American women.
Speaker 2: None in Ohio.
Speaker 1: And few African American attorneys who were working--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in prominent positions.  But in 1969, you were appointed to the bench.  So, can you just describe that moment in history, what that meant, how that changed history in Ohio for women in law?
Speaker 2: Well, let me say this.  By the time--when I was appointed, I was serving on the [Ohio Industrial] Commission.  I had a six-year term, and I only, I served a year on an un-expired term, and now I'm on a new six-year term.  I had only done two years on the new term.  So, now I've got four years that I can serve, and it was a very nice job.  And I had learned--everybody, we were getting along beautifully.  And it was something to give up something and come back to the bench.  And you got to run the same year, plus the fact that I'm appointed in January and I got to run in November, and there's a chance that I might not make it.  And so, the people were telling me that I should consider that.  I had a son [R. Bruce Burke] who was getting ready to go to college, and he finished high school in January at the time.  And he was going to college, either--if he went to a state school, he was going to go in January.  But if he was going to an eastern school, he's got to go in September.  So, he was going to school in September.  And so I decided--the governor [James Allen "Jim" Rhodes] called me and gave me the assurance that I should take the job, that he was backing me.  So I took the challenge, and I beat [Daniel O.] Corrigan.  And I said that was something unheard of in the State of Ohio.  The man that I beat was the president of the school board.  And he, his name Corrigan was like magic in Ohio.  And I took a hundred women and we got out here and we beat the bushes.  They called it the wrecking crew.  And when the votes were in, we beat this man.
Speaker 1: So, all of this is happening in 1969?
Speaker 2: Sixty-nine [1969].  My son had gone off the Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  The kids were all on the phone.  He had the whole thing, they were all pulling for me.
Story_ID: 203247
Speaker 1: So, you're appointed [municipal court judge in Cleveland Ohio]--
Speaker 2: I was appointed in January, and I'm running in November.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And in January, becoming the first African American woman--
Speaker 2: And listen, they had--
Speaker 1: --in the State of Ohio.
Speaker 2: And the nicest thing, in March, a group of club members got together and decided to have an affair for me down at the Renaissance Hotel [Cleveland, Ohio], it was called Stouffer's Hotel [sic. Stouffer's Inn on the Square, Cleveland, Ohio] then.  And over twelve hundred people came.  In fact, that whole balcony was filled up.  And [Robert] Bob Taft [Jr.], who was a senator, he came out from Washington [D.C.] for the affair.  It was just a great affair.  And the, everybody was trying to get seats, we sold out.  And because it was such--the people were new, and everybody wanted to be a part of it, that's how great it was.  And it was one of the nicest affairs--a group of women who didn't know a thing about politics.  I had to prevail upon them to let the county chairman sit on the podium.  They weren't--I had to prevail upon them to let the people who had clout be a part of it, and they did.  And then of course after that, after that, we just--everybody wanted to be on the committee and we just--everybody wanted to be a part of the committee.  And it was really rolling, it was really nice.
Speaker 1: You said these were club women who got together and organized this event?
Speaker 2: Club women--I belonged to a club--got together and decided to have this affair, and packed that ballroom.
Speaker 1: So, was this the National Association of Colored Women's Clubs [NACWC], or--
Speaker 2: No, it was just a group, just a social group that I belonged to.  But I did belong to the [National] Council of Negro Women [NCNW].  I had all the club group support.  Let me say this.  I must say the churches and all the groups--I went to church every Sunday.  I was at somebody's church every Sunday talking about the campaign.  And I got all the support, I really got plenty of support.  And most of the, the party thing didn't mean too much, except for a few old-timers.  There were a few old-timers who didn't want to be around the Democrats.  But I can say [Michael R.] Mike White, when he came into the picture, he didn't do anything without inviting me.  Bell [ph.] was a councilman, he--but most of them embraced my campaign, they didn't have any fear.  But the weak ones didn't do it, but it was alright because I was, I had the support of a lot of people, the Democrats.  And frankly, they thought that by me being appointed, it had transcended party lines, it was just--and plus the fact that we were running, we were running--we were not running on any party ticket.  So, but a lot of them wanted to point out that she's a Republican, you know.  But it didn't matter, because, you know, I'm in a Democratic stronghold, and if Democrats don't vote, I can't win.  So--
Speaker 1: Do you think that their fear and resistance was just because you're a Republican in this Democratic stronghold, or part of that was because you were a woman?
Speaker 2: Well, it could be both.  I've always said, I've always said when I'm discriminated against, I can decide whether I'm black or whether I'm a woman.  You can make a choice, but I really tried to be objective.  I really tried to be objective, and politically, I don't worry about people giving me the business, because you might be able to turn those people around.  I'll give you an example.  This woman--my husband [Ralph L. Burke] was working at a polling place.  And I was running one year, and I went down to the place to take, I took some goodies; I had Danish and hot coffee.  It was a bad day.  And my husband told me that the woman was mad because she said I'd sent her son to jail.  And she said she wasn't going to vote for me and she wasn't going to help me.  But I said that's okay.  And so when I took the food, I made her welcome, and I just insisted that she take some coffee and Danish.  And when I left, that lady was so pleased that I had given her the Danish and the coffee, and that I did not object.  Because my husband told me right away that she was not for me, and she heard him say that.  But I said, "That's all right," I said, "she has the right to her own opinion."  And I said, "Give her, she can have anything she wants."  And when I left, that woman had everybody voting for me.  She was passing out my literature after that.  So, this is what you do, you don't get upset over people doing things, you try to win them over.  And that's what you do, because you know you're not going to get the truth out of everybody politically, and so you don't worry about it.  You say, well, hope that you can turn 'em around.
Story_ID: 203248
Speaker 1: Well, it seems that we've almost crossed that bridge from the second segment, which usually focuses on education, and gone into a formal discussion of your public career.  But before we actually close the door on the schooling, I'm just wondering if there's anything you'd like to say about your experiences as a student at Cleveland-Marshall College [of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: At law school?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Well, I want to say that it was a great experience.  I had--there weren't a lot of black students, but we were there to get an education, and everybody was serious about what they were getting.  And I must say that the dean was a wonderful man.  And he was encouraging, and I'm sure as he encouraged me, he encouraged all the students.  And he just, even when I was appointed on the bench--he had retired and was down south with his family and wife.  And they had, the medical wives had 'This is Your Life' for me, and he came back for that especially.  And frankly, I was so worn out until I almost flubbed and dubbed, because I decided whatever they had, I wasn't going to be a part of it because I was just tired.  They had worn me out going to all these affairs.  And I said the dear old lady, Mrs. Wallace [ph.], who was the doctor's wife, she was the president of the group, she had to call me because she couldn't get any--I wouldn't accept it--but she called me and had to tell me that they were doing something special for me, and that I had to be there.  Or else, I would not have gone.  And when I went, and when I heard my sister's [Sandra Walker (ph.)] voice, and I heard all these people coming in from out of town and everything--see, I'm a very poor person for surprises.  I broke down, and then I must have cried for half an hour; I couldn't get it together.  So my sister, the dean, friends from all over, they brought them in for 'This is Your Life.'  And I hadn't counted on that, and I just went to pieces, and it was very difficult for me.  I don't like surprises.
Speaker 1: Have you found that throughout your career, and even during your retirement, that classmates and teachers have continued to follow your progress in law?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I went to a fifty-year--fifty years ago they had a big thing down at the law school, and I went.  And it was really a whole week, a week of activity.  It was very nice.  It was very, very nice, heartwarming.  In fact, one of the things that happened--you remember [HistoryMaker] Stanley Tolliver [Sr.]?  Stanley Tolliver and another judge, I think it's Judge [Terrence] O'Donnell.  I think he's running for the Supreme Court [of Ohio].  Anyhow, they came and they told, they got up to tell, they were asking folks about their experiences.  And he told that Stanley Tolliver was representing a case in his room.  And I walked in with a battery of policemen to get Tolliver.  You see, if you had a criminal case and didn't dispose of it by a certain time, they threw it out.  And Tolliver had so many cases he couldn't keep up with them.  So, I was making sure that this case was not going to be thrown out, so I was following Tolliver.  And when I went up, he was--to get him out of this courtroom--he was trying this lawsuit.  And the judge wanted to know what was happening.  And they told about that, it was really funny.  And so, he finally called a recess and let Tolliver go down so I could try the lawsuit.  It was real nice.  We talked about it; they're fond memories.
Story_ID: 203249
Speaker 1: And so, Mr. [HistoryMaker Stanley] Tolliver [Jr.] again was one of your classmates?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Stanley Tolliver, yes.
Speaker 1: In addition to those classmates who stayed in touch with you, were there any special mentors or teachers whose work in the classroom really inspired you?
Speaker 2: Whom I felt that was special?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the dean.  The dean was very, very special, because I did not want to take the [Ohio] Bar [Exam], and he insisted that I take it.  And the dean was very special to me, he encouraged me.  And I remember once I was downtown for something, and I stopped in to see him.  I saw him from the window, he was--and I went in, and when I got in there, there were some people there from the Commission on Accreditation [ph.].  And the thing about it, back when I went on the bench in 1969, in 1970, I was called by that Commission on Accreditation, in Washington [D.C.] to serve.  And I wanted to know--and Judge [C. William] O'Neill was the chief justice [of the Ohio Supreme Court] at that time.  And I wanted to know from him if I would be in conflict if I took that.  And he said, "No, you take it, because that's an opportunity."  And I, and I was so pleased, and I served on that commission for four years, on accreditation.  And I was a layperson, I was a lawyer, and I did not have any idea what it entailed.  And I was the one person, that if the weather was bad, that they could bring in for a quorum.  If everybody else--the commission was made up of people all over the country, and they couldn't get there through the planes sometimes.  And I was the one person that they could always count on from Cleveland [Ohio] to Washington [D.C.] that could get there in an hour.  And so when I was honored by one of the clubs here in Cleveland--I don't know whether it was the Altrusa's [Altrusa International, Inc.] or the businesswomen's blub, but they honored me, and they were not going to tell me about it.  And I was out of town and they called my husband [Ralph L. Burke], which my husband deflated them when he said, "Oh, she's got a drawer full of those things."  And so, they were deflated.  But anyhow, they had to tell me that I had been chosen to be honored, because I was going to the commission in Washington.  So, I went to the meeting on Thursday, and the meeting was Friday night.  And the commission allowed me, on government orders, to come back to this affair on Friday night and then come back to Washington Saturday morning for the rest of the meetings on Saturday and Sunday.  And so, it was a great experience, and I met a lot of fine people.  And you get to know, you meet all the senators and the representatives.  It was just a great group, plus the fact that they gave you all of your per diem and your expenses plus a hundred dollars a day honorarium.  So, it was a nice group to serve on.  As a result of that, they asked me to serve on the chiropractic board later.  And I served on that for about five or six years.  When I was told by the [American] Bar Association--the supreme court was Democratic at that time--they said I was in conflict, and I had to get off.  So, I got off.  But I had served.  So all total, I had about twelve, fourteen years in some area that I didn't know about, which was very rewarding.
Speaker 1: Now, the information that you've shared with us so far suggests that you're never afraid of a challenge.  And I'm wondering where that kind of courage comes from.  Is that something that was just in you?  Is it something you picked up in school along the way?
Speaker 2: Let me say this.  I came from the little town [Duquesne, Pennsylvania], and we had a close-knit family.  You know, sometimes it isn't all about formal education, it's about common sense and practicalities and mother-wit and all.  And I came from a very practical family, and I came from a good family.  I came from a home with good people.  And in my time, the churches kind of led the way to educate people and let them, help them to know what was good and what was not good.  And we counted on that from our churches, and that's what I got.  And as I told you before, my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker], I must say, was a praying woman.  And I'm sure right now I have the benefit of some of her prayers.  And I will never discount that; that is always number one in my book.  And with that kind of backing, and feeling that you've got a personal relationship, you can't lose.
Story_ID: 203250
Speaker 1: You know, as an attorney, as a public servant, as a member of the judiciary branch of government in the State of Ohio, you've made history over and over again.  But I wonder, you know, when you were in school, in law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], did you really aspire to do all of those things?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: How did it happen then?
Speaker 2: Really, what they say, "To whom much is given, much is expected."  And I've always known that if you had an opportunity, you were responsible to share it and help somebody else, and I always felt that responsibility to give back to the community.  And that's one of the reasons why I got tied up with the foundation.  I'd like to give something back to the community, and in every respect I've tried to do that.  I've tried, even with the investment clubs I think that it's meaningful that people know how to spend their money, and how to make the money, and how to save their money and all of those things.  And in every way, I've wanted to give something back, and I've tried to do that.
Speaker 1: Now, the foundation that you referred to, which one is that?
Speaker 2: The Cleveland Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio], one of the greatest.  It's the second largest one in the country.  And I came up--now they have a new director.  Steve [HistoryMaker Steven A.] Minter was the director, and I was fortunate to have his counseling and his advice.  He was the one to, when I first got the scholarships started, told us how to get it done and all.  And he was very pleased with that, and as a result we have--he started a committee, and we have brought in so many people as donors, because most people think that to be a donor with The Cleveland Foundation or any foundation, you're supposed to have a lot of money, but $10,000 dollars will get you started.  And you can go build on it.  And once they start to get your portfolio--you get your portfolio together--it increases.  And what I like about it, it's a perpetuity.  When I started my scholarship, we started with $24,000.  And at one point, it was over $83,000.  And they give, every year we give scholarships away, and we're really pleased.  And I went to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and we started one with a high school, a club that I organized in the '30s [1930s].  We give a scholarship, we started one with The Pittsburgh Foundation [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with $22,000.  That was around 1990, '91 [1991], somewhere along there.  And now they've got, they give a scholarship every year, and they don't have to scramble and give bake sales; the money is growing.  And it's over $50,000 now, that scholarship, and it's a perpetuity.  After all of us are gone, it will still be there.  And if Duquesne High School [Duquesne, Pennsylvania] is no more, they'll find another high school.  If there's no more Cleveland-Marshall law school, they'll find another law school.  That's what I like about that--
Speaker 1: All right. You--
Speaker 2: --forever.
Story_ID: 203251
Speaker 1: In addition to your service then as an attorney and also as a judge, you keep referring to these club activities, these civic affairs that you're involved in.
Speaker 2: I've been involved in a lot of civic--I've been on boards and I've served in all--I was with the--here in Cleveland [Ohio] I was with the [National] Council of Negro Women [NCNW].  I've been, I saw where [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height had made some--I thought at her age, if she can keep moving, we should not quit.  She received some honor just about a couple of weeks ago.  And I thought of Mary McLeod Bethune, who set, she set the pace for us.  And I remember her when she would encourage us to--no matter what, how difficult life was--that we could make it, and I really believe that.  And I served with the council, I've served as president of the Council of Negro Women.  I have, I have gone to New York.  I went to Cornell University [Ithaca, New York] and spoke to a group.  And I've gone here in Ohio to different colleges, to John Carroll [University, University Heights, Ohio].  I've been on--speaking about women and about black people, African Americans, and our chances and what I think.  And it's just been rewarding.  I'm very happy that I played a part.  And since I have retired I've served on the planning committee [Cleveland City Planning Commission], and I've served on the Landmark[s] Commission for the City of Cleveland [Ohio].  And to show you that party doesn't mean anything, [Michael R.] Mike White was a Democrat, and he appointed me to these.  And I served for a number of years on the planning commission.  And it's just, it didn't matter whether I was Democratic or Republican, they felt, he said, "If you've got something to offer, I need it."  So, it's just nice.
Speaker 1: Okay, well we're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And I have done that.
Story_ID: 203538
Speaker 1: --Specialty like I wanted, I was doing workers' compensation.  Then I went back to school and took the courses.  And I'll tell you another course I took was legal medicine, so I could cross-examine those doctors.  You can't do it unless you've got some knowledge, and I, that's what I did.
Speaker 2: The specialization comes after the general courses?
Speaker 1: After, that's right.
Speaker 2: So, is that though continuing education in law?
Speaker 1: Continuing education.  And even now, if she has to, we all--every lawyer now, we all have to continue education, we have to take courses.  Even I'm retired, I have to take so many courses a year.  And I think I've been practicing more than fifty years, and I should give it up.  But my son [R. Bruce Burke] says, "Mother, you can't quit."  So, I'm taking courses.  I just turned my courses in.  Every two years, you turn 'em in.
Speaker 2: And then you have an ongoing license to practice in the State of Ohio (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Ongoing.  You have to go to, you have to take courses, ongoing, absolutely.  And I've been taking them a long time.
Speaker 2: At the end of our last segment you mentioned the name [Michael R.] Mike White.  And I just want to be clear on who he is.
Speaker 1: He's the honorable mayor [of Cleveland, Ohio], and he was a Democrat.  Because most of the mayors in Cleveland--well, from time to time--George Voinovich was a Republican, and he and I worked together.  You see, when you have a great experience--when you've worked with all these folks before they get there--you know, you know them.  I worked with George Voinovich when we were assistant attorney generals. And then he went on to the [Ohio] Legislature, and I went to the bench.  And then he came to Cleveland as a mayor, and I'm still on the bench.  So then he left and he went to Washington [D.C.] as a senator.  But now, when he went to, when he was made senator, I think I was retired, or retiring.  Because he came--they had this thing at the foundation's Union Club [Union Club of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio] and he came, because they were honoring me.  And he told that we worked together for a long time.
Story_ID: 203539
Speaker 1: So you said that you had good working relationships with both Republican and--
Speaker 2: And Democrat (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Democratic mayors, okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, I've had that relationship.  I've known the mayors from a long way back, and the governors.
Speaker 1: Now, you were appointed to the bench [Cleveland Municipal Court] during the--
Speaker 2: Sixty-Nine [1969], by Governor [James Allen "Jim"] Rhodes, who's now deceased.
Speaker 1: Yes, and that was during Carl Stokes' first term in office.
Speaker 2: Carl Stokes came as mayor, and he'd been mayor--it was a two-year term at that time.  He ran in '67 [1967].  He was on for '67 [1967] and '68 [1968], and I was appointed--he had run, he was running at the same time I was running for '69 [1969].  And for '69 [1969]--no, he ran in--let me see, '68 [1968] and '69 [1969], and then '70 [1970] and '71 [1971].  And he was running when I was running.  He was running for his two-year term.
Speaker 1: So, he was the first African American mayor of Cleveland [Ohio] running for re-election in '69 [1969] at the same time that the first African American woman who was appointed in the State [of Ohio] to the bench is running for election (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yes, and let me say this.  When I was appointed and they were going to have the swearing-in, I had had a swearing-in with the [Ohio] Industrial Commission.  We had that in a courtroom.  So I thought, so I thought that perhaps I would have it in a courtroom.  And so, the mayor called me up and said, "Oh, you won't have enough room in a courtroom."  And frankly, we were down in the chambers, and it was, this whole floor had filled up.  The people came, the black people just filled that place up.  And it was just, it was just sort of--I belonged to them, you know.  This was a first, and I belonged to them at that time; it was really nice.
Speaker 1: So, did you have a good working relationship with Mayor Stokes?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I made sure that we were working--had good working relationships with them all.  I mean, we had our ups and downs.  And from time to time, I spoke my piece.  But in the end, you know that you can't get things done unless you work together, and we were able to do that.  I don't have any ill feelings toward anybody that I've worked with, and I don't think that they have--they feel the same way.
Story_ID: 203540
Speaker 1: Did you feel that you were under a lot of pressure to live up to certain expectations as the first African American woman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, I tell you, when I first went to the courts [Cleveland Municipal Court], they didn't have schools for judges, and they didn't have anybody to tell you... you had to feel your way around.  And sometimes I felt a little pressure, but I knew that I had to work it out.  So, you can't worry about pressure.  You've got to find out what you got, what's your next move.  So, you just get busy.  But now they have schools, and they have all this help, but we didn't have it then.  And, but I wanted to learn everything.  So you got busy, and you tried to learn everything that was out there to learn.  And I was happy, I didn't have a regret.  I've enjoyed it, I've enjoyed life.  Life has been great.  I have enjoyed a long life, and living.  And I'm very grateful to the Almighty for the opportunities and for the good life.  Those are his blessings that we're all entitled to.
Speaker 1: Now, I'm thinking about the history that has been made in Cleveland [Ohio] since 1969, especially for women judges in Cuyahoga County [Ohio] and the City of Cleveland.
Speaker 2: You know, we have a lot of women judges now.
Speaker 1: Have you been able to work with them?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, they had a meeting--Judge [HistoryMaker C. Ellen] Connally called a meeting at the time my son [R. Bruce Burke] was in town.  And his godmother died and we went to the funeral, and I was a little late.  But I went to a meeting out there and I got a chance to meet all the judges, the new judges.  It was really nice.
Speaker 1: Is that C. Ellen Connally?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, it was at her home, C. Ellen Connally.  She was going on a trip, she told me.  She's running for the [Ohio] Supreme Court, you know.
Speaker 1: Yes, now I know there are so many other judges.  I'm just wondering, because I see a lot of them at the same events.
Speaker 2: Yes, young women--
Speaker 1: Is there a formal structure?
Speaker 2: Young women running, isn't that marvelous?
Speaker 1: Is there any kind of body in the city, though, that brings all these women together?  Or is it just--
Speaker 2: The judges just get together, they get together.  I told them that eventually I was going to--I told Judge Connally that I was going to invite the men for lunch and have them all come and we'd just sit and talk.  Judge [Shirley] Strickland [Saffold] was--Judge Saffold--was supposed to--they were supposed to have something at her home, but it didn't work.  I don't know, something happened, but Connally did it, and so I said I would do the next one.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, that's Shirley Strickland Saffold?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And C. Ellen Connally?
Speaker 2: Connally, C. Ellen Connally.
Speaker 1: Anyone else in this group--
Speaker 2: Well, there's--
Speaker 1: --of women judges?
Speaker 2: Judge Una [H. R.] Keenon, she's going to be retiring, I think after this year.  And Judge Mabel [M.] Jasper, she's going to be retiring.  And let's see, who else, of the old-timers?  Judge Lillian [J.] Greene is still there, she's a lovely lady.  And you know, Judge, what's her name, she always comes around--Judge Stephanie [Tubbs Jones].
Speaker 1: Stephanie Tubbs Jones?
Speaker 2: She checks on us.  We were in touch.
Speaker 1: She's now a congresswoman, I think, Stephanie Tubbs Jones.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she's now a congresswoman, congressman.  And she comes, but she comes and she checks.  And I see her from time to time.  I used to go to Bible class over at her church and see her mother [Mary Tubbs].  And her mother passed, you know, and I haven't seen her.  I did not go to the Y [YWCA, Young Women's Christian Association] affair.  I'm sure she was there, because she has a scholarship set up.  But she knows my son.  They bumped into each other down there, and they couldn't place her.  They just knew they knew each other, and was trying to find out who they were.  And so, they discovered each other.
Story_ID: 203541
Speaker 1: When I think back on the history of the 20th century and the women of your era, I think about Lena Horne.  I think you were both born in the same year.  You said 1917?
Speaker 2: Seventeen [1917].
Speaker 1: Yeah, she's born somewhere around in there.
Speaker 2: She was from Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  I knew her husband, I knew the Hornes.  She was not, she was married to--that's her maiden name.  She was married to Paul--her husband's name was Louis [Jordan Jones].  And Paul was very, they were politically conscious in Pittsburgh.  Paul was a lawyer, but her husband wasn't, the brother was not a lawyer.  I'm trying to--Paul Jones and Louis Jones, that was her husband's name.  She had two children by him.  And they, her father was Ted Horne.  He was in, that was in the Pittsburgh Courier within its heyday.
Speaker 1: I wasn't aware of that connection, that you knew the family.  But actually I thought about her because, again, you were born around the same time.
Speaker 2: A beautiful woman.
Speaker 1: But because of her activism as well in the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Yes, very.
Speaker 1: So, she was sort of an activist actress.
Speaker 2: And then I'll tell you, somebody else who was from Duquesne [Pennsylvania] was Fatha [Earl] Hines.  His brother, Boots Hines, they were all musical.  But they're all dead, the whole family, they were all musical.  They had a sister by the name of Nancy [Hines].  They came from a little place like Duquesne, out from Pittsburgh.  And there was another fellow who sang, Percy Woods.  And they were, and I'll tell you somebody else who came from my hometown, George White.  I knew his whole family, his father was a minister there.  As you know, he's retired, but he was a federal judge, Judge George White.
Speaker 1: Well, now is that, I believe, the Cleveland Browns Foundation [Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: The Cleveland Browns Foundation?
Speaker 2: Yes, he's with them now.  But he was, he's from my hometown.  His mother is still living.
Speaker 1: From Duquesne?
Speaker 2: Yeah, from Duquesne.  I've known him since he was a little--
Speaker 1: I guess I wanted to ask about that activism.  So many of the folks that you've named who've come out of--
Speaker 2: Small--
Speaker 1: --out of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The small town of Duquesne (laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, when I think of George White coming out from Duquesne, isn't that something?
Speaker 1: It is something.
Speaker 2: When I first came here, my sister [Sandra Walker (ph.)] came to visit me once.  And one of the lawyers said to her, "Where are you from?"  She said, "Duquesne."  He said, "I've always known [HistoryMaker] Lillian [Burke] was a small town girl, but she's telling us Pittsburgh."  Well, you know, after my mother [Ozella Daviston Walker]--you know, when we grew up she moved to the city, but we really grew up out there in a little small town.  And he's like, "I always knew she was from a small town."
Speaker 1: Well you said it was only twelve miles, right?
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so Greater Pittsburgh.
Speaker 2: Greater Pittsburgh, that's what it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 203542
Speaker 1: So, when you think about your life and your work, your public and your private life, what do you think has been your greatest accomplishment?
Speaker 2: Well, I think maybe I reached more people--I think even in the criminal branch, I helped a lot of people.  I think I might have helped a lot of folks on that bench [Cleveland Municipal Court] because I wanted to, I wanted them to feel that if they had done something wrong that they had a responsibility.  I wanted them to not just walk through the courtroom, I wanted them to get a lesson.  And to know that this is not--in fact, I met a gentleman who was head of our fish department at Tops [Friendly Markets]--what did they call it before that?  It was something else before Tops.  But he left after--but he stayed with Tops a little while.  But before that, he was head of the fish market.  Now, I did not--I saw him once, and I said to him--he said, "Hello, Judge [HistoryMaker Lillian] Burke."  And I said, "Hi, how do you know you?"  He said, "You sent me to jail."  And I said, "It must have been, you must have been very bad."  He said, "Oh, I was terrible."  He said, "But I tell you, I've straightened up."  He said, "I'm working now and I'm doing good."  And I like that.  And he was--and I always, even now, they get my fish cut right for me.  Because he made sure that they got it all right for me, and that's where I go and get my fish.  And when I meet these people whose lives I've touched, and they feel that I've said something or I've done something to move them on, that makes me feel better than anything that I could ever do--
Story_ID: 203543
Speaker 1: Now, you left the bench [Cleveland Municipal Court] in 1987?
Speaker 2: I beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: You left the bench in 1987?
Speaker 2: Nineteen--I've been off for a number of years now.
Speaker 1: Well, it sounds like you're still very busy.
Speaker 2: Well, I haven't had any dull moments.  I travel extensively, and I have organized investment clubs all over the city.  And I belong to the NAIC, that's the National Association of Investment Clubs [sic. National Association of Investors Corporation], it started in Michigan.  Men couldn't get loans from the bank, and they started this club.  And that's how they got started, and it just mushroomed and grew into this.  And so now they teach you how to attract stock.  And what really makes me happy when I get these people together and see them now--they get the Wall Street Journal, and they knew why they get it; they see the ticker tape going and they know what it means; they know about NASDAQ [Stock Market] and they know about New York Stock Exchange [New York, New York]; they know about American stock.  They know all of that that they didn't learn before because nobody told them.  And investment clubs are not the easiest to get into; they're governed by the rules on the New York Stock Exchange.  So, we've organized clubs so that blacks could come in and learn how to do it.  And believe me, they've done a good job.
Story_ID: 203544
Speaker 1: You know, I heard you say earlier this afternoon that you could--that there was a point in your career where you could choose whether you were being discriminated against because you were black, or because you were a woman.  Are you still making those choices?  Or have we overcome all of that?
Speaker 2: Well, we haven't quite overcome them.  But I don't think about it as much, because my contact is not as sharp as it has been.  I don't get into those fights like I used to.  You know, I used to be in the thick of things, but I'm not in the thick anymore.  But if I have some, if somebody needs me, then I will try to do what I can.
Speaker 1: Oh, you're still fighting.
Speaker 2: Well, I try to do what I can, but I know that--and let me say this about being on the bench [Cleveland Municipal Court].  You know, when you--sometimes you can sort of cripple yourself from other activities.  Because when you're on the bench, there are certain things you can't do or say.  And so, you are, you have to--for example, when you're on the bench, you don't sell tickets.  I mean, you can't--in other words, if I'm on the bench I should never let people use me for an advantage.  And this is what you have to--because people will truly try it.  And, but a lot of them don't know, and you just have to, you know, you have to let people know what it is.  But I've enjoyed it, and I must say that I was fortunate to be able to--I would say that I, too, was fortunate to get some of the results of the sit-ins and fall-ins and all.  Because, you see, when I went on the bench they were still sitting in and doing all these things.  And I know that as a result, I must have benefitted by it.  And how anybody can say that it hasn't benefitted them, I don't know.  I know that I reaped some of the rewards, and I was happy--I mean I could have been older than I was, and not have gotten that opportunity.  But I did get the opportunity, and I was pleased, because I do think that the movement, affirmation action, has been a great thing.  I think it has helped us more than we can know.
Speaker 1: Well, since you mentioned that, we haven't focused so much on the Civil Rights Movement.  But those were hot times in America in the 1960s.  And you're being appointed just after the assassination of [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King [Jr.]--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --a year after his assassination.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Not even a full year, because he was assassinated in April--
Speaker 2: It was sad, wasn't it sad?  And I knew him when he came in.  But I knew the old-timers, and I knew [Justice] Thurgood Marshall, and I knew [Roy] Wilkins who was on the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].  I'm a life member, and I knew them.  And when I went before the [U.S.] Supreme Court and presented my son [R. Bruce Marshal] for a candidate to practice before the Supreme Court, Thurgood Marshall was there.  That was one of the greatest feelings that I've ever had.  He smiled at me when I said, "I present my son, finally."  I was really pleased.
Speaker 1: And what year did that happen?
Speaker 2: I don't know, but he was still living.  He was on the Supreme Court at that time.  It was before he got sick.
Story_ID: 203545
Speaker 1: But, when your son [R. Bruce Burke] begins to practice? Is he about thirty (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) My son went--let me tell you, give you some dates.  My son went to, graduated from undergrad [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut] in '73 [1973], and '76 [1976], he graduated from law school.  And in '76 [1976], he went to Washington [D.C.] to take--that's where he's been working in a job ever since, in Washington.  And during that time, I was with the American Judges Association, and they were very active in getting people to the [U.S.] Supreme Court to practice.  And even though I was put before the Supreme Court and I was on the bench, I was pleased to be able to--in case I needed--if somebody needs me, I can right now go and represent them.  And so, when I was able--so then my son--so it must have been in the late '70s [1970s], or maybe it was in the '80s [1980s] when the, it was before [Justice] Thurgood Marshall--that's what happened, because I knew him.  And there was another chief justice that I knew, too, that was named--oh, he knew my son.  They met at a retreat, and he came to Cleveland-Marshall Law School [sic. Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio].  And I was privileged to be invited to participate in the close-up things, and go to the luncheons with him.  He's deceased now.  I can't think--his name starts with a B.  Do you know the Supreme Court judges?
Speaker 1: Some of them.
Speaker 2: This was a--
Speaker 1: This name is escaping me.
Speaker 2: And he was, and he was there.  And when you know somebody and you go, it makes you feel pretty good.  And we went early that morning; you have to go through early, and we went early.  And when we went, we saw all these long lines waiting to come in.  And of course, we went in, and we had to--before they got started, you know, there's a lot of processing they do.  But, and no matter what, you have to clear this and clear that when you go in, but it was nice.  And I don't know whether I'll ever go back there or not, but it was an awesome feeling.
Speaker 1: You said some positive things came out of the civil rights era.  You mentioned the appointment of Thurgood Marshall to the Supreme Court.
Speaker 2: I thought that was just an excellent appointment, excellent.  And I'm not, you know, a lot of my friends are still seething over [Justice] Clarence Thomas.  I just hope that no matter what a situation is, I hope that there's always some good in it.  And I'm sure that he was appointed because some good had to come out of it.  Although I might have been one of the persons at that time who was a little bit unhappy, I hope that it has benefitted the country.  And if I'm benefitted, the country has benefitted.  If the country has benefitted, I should be benefitted, so I hope that has happened.
Story_ID: 203546
Speaker 1: You mentioned affirmative action, and your opinion that that was a good thing for America.
Speaker 2: I think it's a great thing, because it has given a lot of people a chance that would not have had the chance.
Speaker 1: Well, I'm sure that you know Justice Clarence Thomas is not a fan of affirmative action.
Speaker 2: I know that.
Speaker 1: When you think about the makeup of the [U.S. Supreme] Court, are you optimistic?
Speaker 2: And I even think that he might have been, got some goodies from affirmative action, you see.  Well, you see, a lot of times people do things for political reasons.  And a lot of times I've been disappointed in listening to a lot of my colleagues as I move around.  But I'm hoping that it was just a thing they did because it was politically good, and then pass over, and that their real conviction was different.
Speaker 1: So, are you generally optimistic about the future of affirmative action and similar kinds of programs that were designed to open the doors of opportunity for women and minorities especially?
Speaker 2: Well, I have to be optimistic, because I believe in the Almighty, and I think that He's going to make things right.  I just have to be optimistic.  I think that--do you remember the story of Joseph?
Speaker 1: With the coat of many colors (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) When he was sold, when he was sold by his brothers.
Speaker 1: Yes, I heard about him.
Speaker 2: In the end, he was the head of the welfare department, and all of that, you know, went on.  And one thing that I'll always think of.  He said to his brothers, "You meant evil against me, but God meant it for good" [Genesis 50:20].  Now, this is what we have to do.  I mean, we have to--when evil--take for instance the [Iraq] War.  I was very unhappy when the war started.  But I had to keep thinking that my trust is in something even greater than a war.  So, having that kind of belief, if this is what my belief is in, what am I griping about?  If I know that if He's in charge, and that's the man I trust, what am I griping about?  Listen, I've been on this earth for a long time.  And I've had ups and downs, but I knew in the end that things were going to work out.  And I don't mean that I'm just going to sit back passively and let things fall in my lap.  I mean, I want guidance and I want to know--I want divine guidance, and I want to know where I'm going.  And I really believe in my heart that when He said, "If my children will humble themselves," he said there's nothing He wouldn't do for us.  I would do for my son [R. Bruce Burke] everything I could do for him to make his life worthwhile.  How much more--and I'm not preaching to anybody, I'm just telling myself how much more?  So, I really know that things are going to work out alright for this country.
Speaker 1: Well as we approach the end of our conversation this afternoon, I just wonder if you have any words of advice or wisdom for, especially young women who aspire to have successful careers in law?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I would say to them, move on.  If they've got an idea and they feel they can do it, move on.  And I would say to all of my people that we want opportunities, but we have to carry the responsibilities with the opportunities.  You just can't do it without having responsibility.  And if we take our responsibilities seriously, we'll take care of the opportunities, no question about it.
Story_ID: 203547
Speaker 1: Well, thank you very much for sharing your story with The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 2: Oh, I wanted to tell you that--
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: --one more thing.  I want to say that I am so delighted about my little cousin, Julieann [Julieanna] Richardson, who has started this program.  I think it was very much needed, and I think she's the person to do it.  And I don't know how well--she was a very bright child, and we always knew that she was going upstairs.  And we're behind her, and goodness knows where she's going to end, because she's not finished, you know that.  She really is, she's really got a vision, and I think she's going to be all right.  We're really proud of her, and I'm proud of the project, although I didn't want to come in on it at such a late date; I thought it was more for the young.  But Julieanna, God bless you, and I just want her to just move on.  And part of my family, and I just love my family.
Speaker 1: Well, thank you so much for adding that comment.  I'm sure she'll be pleased to know that you're in her corner, and on her side.
Speaker 2: You know, I want to say, once upon a time, who would have ever thought that when I was little that we would have children going to Ivy League schools and graduating from--she went to, she was up there in Michigan at this, what's this place where you do plays [Interlochen Arts Academy, Interlochen, Michigan]?
Speaker 1: I know her theater degree is from Brandeis [University, Waltham, Massachusetts].
Speaker 2: I know.  But she was in Michigan doing this, and I have another cousin, Kelly [King Dibble], who was up there.  And when I think of them, I can't think of--it has something to do with drama, dramatics.  And then she went to Brandeis, and Kelly went to, I think Kelly went another school, but she ended up at Harvard Law School [Cambridge, Massachusetts].  Julieanna--you know, my son [R. Bruce Burke] could have gone to Harvard Law School, but he chose to stay at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].  And, but these are all young--not the generation next--they've skipped a generation, and I'm really pleased that they were able to have a vision and to go to these colleges.  When I went to [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], I was glad to get to Ohio State, but my son didn't have to think of Ohio State.
Speaker 1: Is that a measure of our success?
Speaker 2: Well, it's not--I think it's a measure of opportunities.  Because if we don't pick opportunities, there's no success.  And with that opportunity, I just want people to know there's responsibilities.  And you've got to, you've got to give something back.  You've got to--you just can't get it free, you've got to give something up.  And these kids are really--I think Julieanna's generation has really done us proud, I really do.  And they've taken advantage of the opportunities; they've gone into government.  They all went into government and they were doing things.  We couldn't even get into government when we started.  They didn't even want us to pick up the telephone.  Now, they're making policy.  So, she went in--who was it?  No it was somebody--did Julieanna go into cable when she first went to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: She was the cable commissioner.
Speaker 2: See, and so now I have another cousin, and she's doing something there with the finance--Kelly Dibble.  She's doing something with--she has a great job, and she's, I think she's about three or four years younger than Julieanna.  So, the kids have got it made.  All they have to do--let me tell you, just stay with it and you can make it.  You know that; you're a young woman, you've got it made.  You're a young woman, you know that, and I mean I think it's marvelous.  I mean, you're here interviewing me, asking me all these hard questions.  And I think it's just great, I'm proud of it.
Story_ID: 203262
Speaker 1: And Judge [HistoryMaker Lillian Burke], tell us about this portrait.
Speaker 2: Well, I want to know it's just glorious for me to look back thirty years and see me so young.  (Laughter) I love that.  But that's the first picture I had made when I went to the bench [Cleveland Municipal Court].  I went to the bench in '69 [1969]  and they make all the pictures of the lawyers and the judges every so many years.  And I think it's every three to four years you can have it made.  So, I'd had these pictures made periodically, except since I've been retired I haven't followed through.  That's the first picture I had made when I went to the bench.  And it's almost like an oil painting.  When they take the picture, they do it up for you.  That's chosen when the people come and they want something for history week, for example.  They took that picture from among all the other pictures, they took it to the shop.  And the people even recognized me.  After thirty years, they recognized that was I sitting there.
Speaker 1: All right, next.
Speaker 2: That was a picture that was made in the courtroom.  It was made in 1986, and they were making all the judges that year.  And I like it because I'm standing by the flag, and I get very patriotic when I'm standing by the flag.  And my law books are behind, you'll see.
Speaker 1: And where is this picture?
Speaker 2: It's in my chambers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--
Speaker 2: It's in the Justice Center [Complex, Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And we're looking at the program of your retirement?
Speaker 2: Of my retirement.  And that was the picture they chose for the book.
Speaker 1: Okay, can we see the cover, and we'll get a quick shot of that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I want you to see my motto.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When I was sworn in, that was given to me by Judge Perry B. Jackson.  He thought that was nice, and I've used it ever since, "And what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justice, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's one of the pictures, this is one of the pictures that they made for the lawyers and the judges, which goes into that every so many years.  And that picture was taken, I have it here at my house, and that was used for the-when I was on--by the Women's City Club [Of Cleveland, Ohio] to put on the program.
Speaker 1: Okay, next.
Speaker 2: This was in the Cleveland Magazine.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: Wait, let me find out how old he was then.  What year was that?  This is my son [R. Bruce Burke] when he graduated from undergraduate at Yale University [New Haven, Connecticut].  He was about twenty-three years old, twenty-two or twenty-three years old.  And you see, he's sporting his Afro.  But he's a darling son.
Speaker 1: How old is he?
Speaker 2: I think that says eleven months.
Speaker 1: How many months does it say, five?  Is that five months?
Speaker 2: No, it says eleven months.
Speaker 1: Eleven months, okay.  You ready?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: This is my son when he was eleven months old.  And he was a very jolly baby, and I couldn't give him up for nursery school, I had to stay and take care of him.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is my deceased husband [Ralph L. Burke], a very, very, good father and a good husband.  We lost him in 1982.  He was a member of the [U.S.] Armed Forces, he as a Sergeant in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: Okay, next, I'm ready.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my late husband.  I think he was retiring at this time from the post office.  And they were having something for him, and I was--there I am in attendance with my beautiful gray wig on.  (Laughter) I didn't have gray hair at that time, so I chose to get a wig that was gray.  We had a great time.  He was a wonderful man.
Speaker 2: Okay, we'll start on the bottom.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my son when he was five months old.  I was in law school [Cleveland-Marshall College of Law, Cleveland State University, Cleveland, Ohio], getting ready to graduate in May.  And the picture above is my graduation picture.  And after graduation, my mom [Ozella Daviston Walker] came up to Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and took him back to Pittsburgh so I could study for the [Ohio] Bar [Exam].  And in March, I passed the bar and got on a train and went to Pittsburgh to get my baby.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.  You're on the far right?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is one of the pictures, was made, I think was made around 1970 or '71 [1971].  On this picture, the black judges who had joined me was Judge [Sara J.] Harper and Judge [Charles W.] Fleming.  And there were, I think, three of us.  And I believe it's Judge Ted Williams [ph.] on that--I don't see him now.  I was thinking that he was on that--yes, he is.  That's Judge Ted Williams down at the bottom, there's four of us, he's down at the left.
Speaker 2: Standing?
Speaker 1: He's sitting to the left of Judge [Ann] McManamon.  The only judges living on that--the only judges that are living in that photo is Judge Harper up to the left, and Judge Catalinis [ph.], who is no longer on the bench, in the center, and myself to the right.  And Judge [Salvatore] Calandra is up above me.  All the rest are deceased.  And that's Judge [Joseph] McManaman up above.  The two McManamons are still living, they're in Florida.  I was the only, we had two husband and wife teams, the McManamons, and Judge Harper and her husband, Judge [George] Trumbo.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Now, this is one of the first pictures that was made.  And on this picture is Judge Coleman [ph.] standing up there next to Judge Miller [ph.].  And Judge Williams is sitting next to me.  Judge Stearns [ph.] is to my right and the other two judges, I can't call their name.  And Judge Miller is up to the right.  But they are, they are all deceased.  Every judge on there is deceased except myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of some of the younger judges who had joined us.  Judge [HistoryMaker C.] Ellen Connally is to the right, and then Judge Fleming, and then I'm, I'm sitting down there to the left.  And then up above me is Judge, Congresswoman [Stephanie] Tubbs Jones.  And down below is Adrian [ph.].  And is Judge Williams on that picture?  And Judge Trumbo is to the very right.  I don't see Judge Williams, he might not have been there.  Did I say Judge Connally?  I called her name, didn't I?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, you called her first.  Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Is that my daughter-in-law?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: I couldn't see it.  This is my daughter-in-law getting her degree when she was down at the college in Maryland.  I just can't think of what the, the college's name.  But she's a teacher in the Maryland school system.
Speaker 2: I think this says George Mason?
Speaker 1: What does it say?  Okay, George Mason University [Fairfax, Virginia], thank you.
Speaker 2: And what's her name, please?
Speaker 1: Kim, Kim Burke, K-I-M.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: This is my grandson, he's Tony [ph.].  He's getting his high school--I have to tell you the truth.  I'm not sure whether that's a high school diploma or--he went to, he went to a [U.S.] military school.  That would be a high school diploma, wouldn't it?  He got a high school diploma in Virginia.  He did go to a military school before he went to Hampton [University, Hampton, Virginia].
Speaker 2: And my picture, you have a picture of me.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, I do have, we have the color photo.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That's a picture of my son and his wife, Kim, and myself and a friend, Elliott [ph.], Mrs. Elliott.  We were on a cruise.  I think we went to, where did Tiger Woods' mother [Kultida Woods] come from?  That's where we were.
Speaker 1: (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me at one of the, a long time friend's home in Duquesne, Pennsylvania where I was brought up.  She invited me there after I retired, to speak to a group of women.  And as a result, they had a big affair, and we were able to set up a scholarship at The Pittsburgh Foundation [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] with the Phillis Wheatley Club.  And every year they give a scholarship to a high school graduate.  And it's a wonderful thing, and they're happy about it.  They have over, at this time over $50,000 in the fund, and we expect it to be, in another ten years, over $100,000.  And we know one of the things about these funds, they're in perpetuity, they last forever.
Speaker 1: Next photo.
Speaker 2: There's that we talked about a lot, one who was on my mother's side, who's deceased, he lived to be ninety-eight years old.  I don't have a picture of him available, but his name was Nelson Daviston.  And this is on my father's [George Walker] side.  His name is Pete Walker [ph.], and I thought he was a pretty jazzy gentleman there with his silk suit.  He was a slave, and he was an overseer in his time when he was a slave.  And my father said that he didn't like to talk about his part too much.  But he was, after slavery he had a lot of land, and he was a pretty prosperous old gentleman.  And he knew me, but I didn't know him, I was too small to remember.  But I understand that he was a very forward-going person.  Maybe I got some of it from him, because I have never looked back.
Speaker 1: Okay, ready.
Speaker 2: I have some pictures of my other part of my family.  In fact, I have a picture of Julieann [Julieanna Richardson], and I'm sorry I don't have it to show.  She might not like the picture, but I think it's cute.  And I wish I had been able to get it out, but I have that picture, and I will always cherish it.  I think she's a wonderful person.
