Story_ID: 187898
Speaker 1: I am Clarissa Myrick-Harris and I am the interviewer.  With us today is Scott Stearns who is our videographer.  Would you please state your name, place and date of birth, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Juel Pate Borders Benson and I was born in Chicago, Illinois and my birthday is August 26, 1934.
Speaker 1: And would you spell your name please?
Speaker 2: My first name is J-U-E-L and it is a contraction of my mother's first two names, Julia Eleanor.  My father named me and he took J-U from Julia and E-L from Eleanor and named me Juel and it's pronounced like Noel.
Speaker 1: And if you would just say today's date please?
Speaker 2: Today's date is March 25th in the year of our Lord 2004.
Speaker 1: And your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I'm a gynecologist and also a minister of the gospel of Jesus Christ.
Speaker 1: And which denomination?
Speaker 2: Baptist
Story_ID: 187899
Speaker 1: Well now we've come to the five warm up questions that I told you about.  The first, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: I would have to say in the category of fruits and vegetables, a blended fruit with apples, bananas, pineapple adding on sunflower seeds mixed, I guess that's my favorite.
Speaker 1: That sounds good.  What's your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring because of the freshness and the beauty of the trees and the flowers and the tie in to the Lenten season and Easter and resurrection.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: I guess I have several.  I'm going to say beige probably.
Speaker 1: And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Favorite vacation destination, my goodness there's so many places that I've been and so many places I would like to go.  The last place that I went and enjoyed very much was Alaska.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I am somebody.
Speaker 1: Oh, yes. Yes indeed.
Story_ID: 187900
Speaker 1: Now I'd like to get into your family history.  Could you tell me about your mother, first her name?
Speaker 2: Okay, my mother's full name was Julia Elinor Pansy Pate.  Her maiden name was Pate.  She was a very strong willed; very brilliant, very hard working, dedicated, sacrificial woman and I think she is the most important person in my life in terms of trying to shape my life and in terms of trying to guide me.  Every time I've taken a major steps, it's either what she's asked me to do or what she's asked me not to do or she's given me some advice about it.  And she passed in '65 [1965] but because of the manner in which she taught me and her method of repeating over and over and over, the voice is still clear and the advice is just as if she is speaking to me right now.
Speaker 1: Before we go further (unclear), would you please spell your mother's name please before we go on?
Speaker 2: Okay Julia J-U-L-I-A, Elinor E-L-I-N-O-R, Pansy which she almost never used, she dropped that P-A-N-S-Y and then her maiden name Pate, P-A-T-E.
Speaker 1: And where and when was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Barnesville, Georgia in 1907.
Speaker 1: And did she grow up in Barnesville as well?
Speaker 2: As far as I know she did grow up in Barnesville and she had her early education there.  She came to Atlanta [Georgia] when she entered Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia].  She came from a relatively poor family and she had to work and go to school and at that time they had what they called a study-work program.  Most individuals, if they entered that program would not be able to complete the four year course, but she did.  It was called a five four program because you had to stay there for five years in order to work and take all the courses but she worked and finished with her class which was a very outstanding thing.
Speaker 1: A great accomplishment.  Do you remember any stories about her growing up that she shared with you?
Speaker 2: I cannot remember any of the early stories.  It seems to me that some of my deepest and earliest memories have to do with Spelman College and her college years and her struggle there to maintain herself and the contacts that she made.  There was a very interesting story that she told me in reference to her relationship with then President Florence Matilda Read.  She's deceased, of course, at this time.  She was a very exact person and she paid attention to details very much and it seems that she was walking on the campus with the president and it could have been that the work that she was assigned had something to do with the assistance of the president.  Anyway she said to Dr. Read, "you haven't worn those stockings in a long time," and that was unusual as far as President Read was concerned because she didn't think that anyone was paying that much attention to her.  So she picked up that this was a person who was watching very carefully and since my mother was paying attention to her, she began to pay attention to my mother and they became friends.  I thought that was interesting.
Speaker 1: Yes it is.
Story_ID: 187901
Speaker 1: How did that personality, that attention to detail the kind of personality very exacting, how did that essentially play out later in her [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] life in terms of her interactions with you?
Speaker 2: Well this is what happened with my mother, her field was English and when she finished Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia] she went to Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois], if I'm not mistaken to work on her degree.  She met my father [William Holmes Borders] who was then going to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia], she was in Spelman, he was in Morehouse and they--when they finished they went to the Chicago [Illinois] area.  Once they fell in love and got married her career was sort of put on hold and she became the minister's wife and the person who was a background person and a supportive person and then a foundation person.  She worked very diligently in the church and also very diligently in the home.  When it came to--you asked me about details and how that affected my life, everybody had a job in our home and she would on Saturday mornings give us a memo, there were certain things that we had to do and she gave you an inexhaustible list, it was no way that you could finish it.  So it was from one to twenty or whatever and you would just be, you know, "did you finish what I asked you to do?" "No, I didn't."  Or if it wasn't done correctly, she would go behind you and check, you'd have to go over that.  She would sort of do the same thing at the church as I recall.  This was not the day of computers and you could not go back and change--it's the typewriter so if she looked at the manuscript and there were errors, you had to take another piece of paper and start all over.  The late Mrs. Sophia  Loveless [ph.] worked as an assistant to a lawyer but she also did secretarial work at the church and she tells a story of how many times--four and five times or more that she'd have to go back with one manuscript in order to make it absolutely paper picture perfect.  Every letter and every word, every paragraph so that kind of attention to detail would flow over to anyone that she taught and that was everybody.  If you came in contact with her in the home, at the church wherever, she's constantly teaching.  She was a great teacher.
Story_ID: 187902
Speaker 1: And what about your father?  Would you state his name please and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: All right his full name was William Immanuel Holmes Borders.  He dropped the Immanuel and would just say his name, "I am William Holmes Borders," W-I-L-L-I-A-M and then Holmes, H-O-L-M-E-S and Borders, B-O-R-D-E-R-S.
Speaker 1: And where was he born?
Speaker 2: He was born in Macon, Georgia in 1905.
Speaker 1: And where did he grow up?
Speaker 2: In Macon and tells--now he was the one that would tell more of the early stories in terms of the hardships and the large family and lack of opportunity, limited financial resources.  He was a mail carrier and one day he had to decide whether he was going to stay in Macon and help his father raise a large family or attempt to move up and out and forward and he made the decision to move up, out and forward and I think it was a wise decision.
Speaker 1: And what did he do to move up and out?
Speaker 2: He came to Morehouse College [Atlanta, Georgia] and a very interesting thing about that was that he had no transcript from his high school and I'm assuming that if he didn't have that he might not of had any references or any of the credentials that the high school student would need in order to enter the prestigious Morehouse College and for him to not have any support--being the most outstanding person in his family, they depended on him.  So he didn't have anybody to fall back on.  It was here I am, I believe in myself, I want to be educated, no I do not have a transcript, but you need to give me a chance and that chance was given to him.
Speaker 1: What year was that, that he entered Morehouse?
Speaker 2: I'm going to say approximately 1925 finishing in '29 [1929] approximately.
Story_ID: 187903
Speaker 1: And at that time John Hope was president?
Speaker 2: At that time John Hope was the president [of Morehouse College, Atlanta, Georgia] and that's a very interesting story too.  Between John Hope and the late William Holmes Borders, Sr. because there was limited money and he could not pay his tuition, he was asked to leave Morehouse College but he didn't go (laugh).  He would tell that story over and over.  He just stayed in the dormitory and kept on going to class and he said one day he had to confront President John Hope.  John Hope was approaching and he was walking toward him and he just kept walking toward him and President Hope said, "Son, I thought I told you to leave," and he said he looked him straight in his face and said, "But I did not have any place to go," and John Hope's response was not a verbal response; it was a tearful response.  He did not insist that he leave anymore.  So he stayed, he made arrangements to go to the tobacco farm and work and pay Morehouse College back.  He talks about how in the summertime he would go to the tobacco farm and work and he would send his father a certain amount and send Morehouse College a certain amount until that bill was paid.  I don't know how much that bill was.  Believe it or not when I finished--while I was going to Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], I'll put it this way, tuition and this was in the year 1950 to 1954, tuition was $125 a semester, $250 a year, $1,000 for the whole four years.  So that was 1950, 1954 so I don't know what the cost was when my father went to Morehouse but I'm thinking it was less than that but less than that in that time was still today like thousands and thousands.  It would take a lot of energy and a lot of work to pay back what would seem to us in this day to be nearly nothing.
Speaker 1: And when did he finish Morehouse?
Speaker 2: I think approximately 1929, I think that was--it's in that neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Was there--when he went in around--(simultaneous) (unclear)?
Speaker 2: '25, 1925 coming out in '29 [1929] or there about because they married January 1, 1931 and they had both finished by that time and were doing graduate studies.
Speaker 1: And where did your father do graduate studies?
Speaker 2: He went to Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois].  At that time before you could enter the seminary, even if you had a B.A. degree, you had to get a Bachelors of Divinity [degree] before you could get the Master's of Divinity [degree].  So he had a B.A. degree when he finished Morehouse.  He had to get a B.D. Degree before he could get that go into the seminary and get the Master's degree and then he went to Garrett-Evangelical Theological Seminary in Chicago [Evanston, Illinois].  And it was during that time that he received an invitation to return to Morehouse to teach philosophy and ethics.  Oh, what a great honor that was, and you can imagine how happy he was that they thought enough of him to ask him to return and when you put those two stories together, you must leave because you cannot pay, and we want you to come back and teach because we think you are worthy of returning to your alma mater, you can imagine how that made him feel.  So those stories I heard over and over (laughter).
Story_ID: 187904
Speaker 1: And when did he [Borders's father, William Holmes Borders] return to Atlanta [Georgia] to teach?
Speaker 2: He came in 1936; I'm going to say because he took the pastoring at Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] in 1937.  So it must have been a little bit before that time that he came back to Atlanta to teach.  There was a great struggle in terms of shall I do both or shall I just be pastoring.  I think he did both for awhile and there were those who told him that he was going to fail which would always be a great stimulus for him.  If you ever came up to him and told him you don't have the stuff, you're not worthy, you don't have enough education, you don't have enough money, you don't know what you're doing, oh that just stimulated him to show that person you absolutely don't know who you're speaking to because if God has ordained that I do this then I'm going to do this and I'm going to do everything that I know to do to do this.  So he, for awhile, I think, taught and was the pastor, then after the church grew and grew and grew, he retired from teaching and gave his full time to pastoring and community service.
Story_ID: 187905
Speaker 1: What do you know about your aunts, your grandparents on your mother's [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] side, your father's [William Holmes Border] side?
Speaker 2: Okay on my mother's side I did not know my maternal grandfather, he had already passed.  My grandmother on my mother's side was a very strong person, very strong.  She was soft spoken until you crossed her and if you crossed her then she would not--she would remain a lady but her voice come up an octave and you would know that she demanded respect.  She was short and my mother loved her so.  We would go to Chicago [Illinois] for vacations and the first thing that my mother would do when she would come into the family house was to find her mother, cup her hands around her mother's face and kiss her face all over.  It was so much love, so much love there.  She was very sacrificial, a very good cook and she demanded respect from all of her children and even though her sons were way up in age and very much taller than she, she would remind them I am your mother and I'll hit you if I need to.
Speaker 1: You said that she lived in Chicago?
Speaker 2: Yes
Speaker 1: Did she go to Chicago in the early part of the 20th century as part of the migration of African Americans there from Georgia?
Speaker 2: I would think so because as far as I know, there was nobody left in Barnesville [Georgia] that my mother ever talked about.  All of her sisters and brothers, her mother were all in Chicago.  So I think as a family and I never--as I was growing up they were always all there.  We never took the trip to Barnesville, we always went to Chicago.  So I'm assuming that that probably is what happened since they were all there.
Story_ID: 187906
Speaker 1: And your other grandparents?
Speaker 2: I had the great experience of having my father's father [James Buchanan Borders] in our home in the parsonage and whenever there's a good grandparent, it's just wonderful.  There was a great relationship between my father [William Holmes Border] and his father.  He was a proud person, minister of the gospel, supported his son in every way that he knew, would attend church all the time, would come down to the gate of the parsonage and talk to people as they would walk by.  The parsonage was right next to the church and so he would say to people who--he didn't have to know you and at that time it was very safe to be on the sidewalk and to speak to people who would just walk by in northeast Atlanta [Georgia].  He would just say, "Do you know my son?" and they may say yes, and if they said no they had to stand there and listen to who his son was and all about Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and he would invite them to come.  He had a special seat in the church and whenever it was almost time for the climax of the sermon and he could feel it coming on, he would turn around and look at everybody and say that's my son just in case anybody did not know.  So he was very, very proud.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: His name was James Buchanan Borders and as I'm--as I recall there was a great tendency to name children after presidents during that time now it's very different but at that time it was not unusual for a black child to be named for a current or past president.
Story_ID: 187907
Speaker 1: And I didn't get your mother's [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] mother's name.
Speaker 2: It was Mary Ann Pate.  I don't know her maiden name but very frequently I can still hear her voice giving her name to people, Mary Ann Pate, Mary Ann Pate. She was, yeah.
Story_ID: 187908
Speaker 1: Now on your father's [William Holmes Border] side of the family, essentially it's a family of ministers; your father, your grandfather [James Buchanan Borders] and could you tell me a little bit about what you know about your great-grandparents?
Speaker 2: What I have been told is that the first generation minister in our family was named Pernell Borders [ph.].  He was a slave and I know very, very little about him and about his wife.  As I was telling you earlier, I inherited a photograph of them and cherish it very much and I sort of read into what I think might be their personal characteristics by the way they look--
Story_ID: 188233
Speaker 1: --You were telling me about your great-grandfather [Pernell Borders (ph.)], really great-grandfather and mother, on your father's [William Holmes Borders] side.
Speaker 2: Yes I was saying that he was a blacksmith and my father inherited the hammers that he used in his occupation and I was told that he worked to buy his body and his wife's body out of slavery.  Those hammers, of course, are very, very valuable.  In the parsonage my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] always had an altar, always and the bible was there and the hammers were there and sometimes depending on what the sermon might be, my father would take the hammers up in the pulpit to show them.  The home in which I live is a home that my father purchased for my mother and he put the deeds in her name.  I say that with pride, he really was very satisfied with the parsonage and didn't desire to have anything other than that but she wanted a home of her own and in that home she had an altar, she always had an altar.  That was where she placed those hammers and they are right there to this day.  I had hoped to build my own home and to have it exactly like I wanted it but as it happened when my mother passed in '65 [1965], the late Mrs. Geneva Haugabrooks, who is another very famous, outstanding mortician and who worked very diligently in the church and in the community and all over Atlanta [Georgia] spoke to me one day and said somebody needs to be in that house, it should not be empty and I knew it should not be sold because it was gift from my father to my mother.  She was very concerned when she was near death about the care of the things that she cherished and so my husband very wisely, I think, decided it would be best if we moved them where we were to that home.  So I still dream about what I might have built but I'm happy about the fact that I carried out one of her wishes and that was to be sure that the historical objects are cared for.  Mother had her library, daddy had his library, my grandfather had his library with the Harvard classics and so we have a family library in that home.
Speaker 1: And where is the home located?
Speaker 2: It's on Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, 1426 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: Is that the home you actually grew up in as a child?
Speaker 2: I grew up in the parsonage and I loved the parsonage and I am hoping that the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia] will understand at last, at some point the need to have that parsonage restored.  It's in the historical district because it's right next to Wheat Street down the street from Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], down the street from the burial sight of [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. and so many historical things happened in that parsonage.  So I'm hoping that one day it will be restored and that the history of that place can be passed on because it's very important that be done.
Speaker 1: And the parsonage is located on Young Street [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: Okay originally it was 24 Young Street Northeast, that street name was changed to William Holmes Borders, Sr. Drive [Atlanta, Georgia] and the year that that was done, I'm going to say approximately ten or twelve years ago, I may be off a little bit but.
Story_ID: 188234
Speaker 1: What do you remember about growing up in that historic community, Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] community?
Speaker 2: Actually we were in a poor black neighborhood.  The houses around that parsonage were very old.  There was an alley way, some people don't even know what that is.  There was an alley way right next to the parsonage that led to a two-story house in the back and it was a challenge, I think, for my father [William Holmes Borders] to attempt to minister to the people that lived in that whole neighborhood.  Some of those individuals were our members and some were not.  The people in the back--on Saturday night, they could get loud and say some things that I couldn't repeat on the camera, and I was--at times I was apprehensive and fearful of what might happen.  He did not seem to have, I'm talking about my father, he didn't seem to have any fear whatsoever.  They were fighting and cursing and whatever and he would just get his bathrobe, put it on, go back there and say, "Listen, you all need to hush, whatever you're fussing about, you need to stop."  All of that sort of made me apprehensive and I have carried some of that apprehension in my system and I still have it depending on who I'm confronting.  To give you an example, when I was at Candler School of Theology, Emory University [Atlanta, Georgia] we had to go out into the community as part of our ministerial training and the particular church we would have the choice of either teaching some of the students, working in the kitchen, or going into the shelter.  And, I volunteered to do some teaching but my instructors for whatever reason they picked up that I needed to go into the shelter.  Even though I wanted a program, I wanted an outline, this is my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] now.  I wanted my list, what am I suppose to do when I get there and there was no list, I was to figure out myself, future minister, what it is you're supposed to do and you have to interact with these people.  And of course, as you know, in the shelter you have a variety.  You have all kinds, males, females sometimes children with mothers and sometimes that rowdy, aggressive, belligerent, cursing male that I had to listen to as a child and that I was afraid of.  So I had to try to overcome that before I could do what I was supposed to do as a minister.  It was difficult and it's still difficult, it's not an easy job to do that.  For some people it's very easy but for some others it's not very easy.  But I'm still working on that.
Story_ID: 188235
Speaker 1: What are some of your more pleasant memories of growing up, holidays, special events with your family?
Speaker 2: Well my brother [William Holmes Borders, Jr.] and I had very happy times playing with the other kids in the neighborhood.  We didn't do that much, it was--I would watch the boys, sometimes it was a marble game, sometimes it was just playing hide and go seek or something very simple but everybody in the neighborhood knew everybody else and we--at least I didn't go down to Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] it was just sort of on Young Street [Atlanta, Georgia] and sometimes across the street but never up in the houses--way up behind unless my mother was with me, I didn't venture that far but it was very happy.  Most of the experiences that I had that I thought were glorious were in the church and of course the parsonage was constructed whereby you didn't have to go outside to go into the church.  You could just go up two or three steps, open the door and you would go from the parsonage right into the church.  I had these all-day experiences on Sundays.  I'd get up and my job was to play the chimes, then it was Sunday school, and then it was the 11:00 service.  We would go back to the parsonage and we would have Sunday dinner which was the same dinner every single Sunday and that was fried chicken, rice and gravy, spinach, biscuits and I think water, I don't remember a lot of punch.  Then it was study time and then the Baptist training union would be attending at 6:00 and then there was evening service at 8:00 and that was the whole glorious day but I enjoyed it. You know, it was peaceful and wonderful and I'm so glad that I had that much poured into me that early.
Story_ID: 188236
Speaker 1: Now I know that you are younger than the King children, and the Dobbs children, but do you recall any interaction among your families, [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr.'s family, which was not very far from where you lived, their home on Auburn [Avenue, Atlanta, Georgia]?  Did you ever visit their home and interact in any way?
Speaker 2: There was more interaction between the two ministers, Reverend William Holmes Borders, Sr. and Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr., they were rivals.  The wives however, Mrs. Alberta [Williams] King and my mother, Mrs. Julia Pate Borders [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate], were the dearest of friends and they loved each other very much. And they would laugh--they would talk and laugh about the conflict their husbands would have and would hope that in time they would out grow it or come to some happy conclusion, you know, about the whole matter.  And I have--on the occasion that I preached at Ebenezer [Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia], I told the congregation that at last--my mother didn't live to see it and Mrs. King didn't live to see it, but I lived to see them come together very peacefully and it was on the occasion of the death of Mrs. King.  When she was shot [in 1974], of course we were all in a state of shock--the whole world was in, was in a state of shock. And I remember my father saying, "Get up, get dressed we are going to see Reverend King." That impressed me so much.  He got us all together and we went to the home of Dr. Martin Luther King, Sr.  He was sitting in the kitchen eating, it must have been lunch or early dinner or something and my father, who was fully dressed, came in and spoke to him and said, "These are my children." And Dr. King graciously received us and I can't remember really what they said to each other, I was just so happy that we had this peaceful union, and of course, from what I could tell from my mother and Mrs. King what they were fussing over was nothing, I mean it was just a--next to nothing, it was just two great big giants one block from each other.  Both with churches, and so there you go.
Speaker 1: Competition--
Speaker 2: But, but for him to say, "Get up, get dressed, we're going to see him," and then to say to Dr. King, "These are my children," and in other words we have come in love, it was a great moment.
Story_ID: 188237
Speaker 1: And a wonderful tribute to your father [William Holmes Borders], was the fact that [Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King, Jr. I'm told, I read, actually patterned his oratorical style, in large measure, after your father's style.
Speaker 2: Yes when I was at the church, I was almost always unless I was ushering or singing in the choir most of the time I was on the main level so I never saw Martin Luther King, Jr. in the balcony but the historians record that he was there and that he would sneak off because he really wasn't supposed to be there and come and sit in the balcony which was a way of trying to hide from the people that might recognize him and it was a natural thing, I think to want to listen to as many ministers as he could listen to.  His mind was young alive and so it was an honor to know that he was there.  I never saw him myself but I'm told that he did come and I think my father did confirm the fact that he was there.
Story_ID: 188238
Speaker 1: Could you tell me about your other siblings?
Speaker 2: I have one sibling and that's Dr. William Holmes Borders, Jr. who is now a retired physician.
Speaker 1: And your relationship with your brother growing up?
Speaker 2: Well I think it was good.  My brother was very smart, could master whatever the lesson was.  He was one of those students that would get it quickly, finish the assignment and then cause disturbance in the classroom (laugh).  So it was always necessary to find extra work for him to do in order to keep peace.  I heard Bishop Eddie Long give a very detailed account of many, many, many stories between father and son and the conflict between father and son and what that's all about.  Your father wants you to do this so you can rise to be that and the son may either not choose to do it or in order to prove that I'm just as much of a man as you are, I don't have to do what you want me to do.  So there was always that conflict between my father [William Holmes Borders] and my brother.  It was ongoing, it was ongoing and quite a challenge.  So he chose medicine and that was his right to choose medicine if he wanted to but that became sort of a conflict right there.
Story_ID: 188239
Speaker 1: And your relationship with your father [Williams Holmes Borders] growing up, how would you describe that?
Speaker 2: It was good.  He was very--very loving and very kind.  I don't know what I did but he reprimanded me about something and he spanked me and I don't remember it, but he said I cried all day long and he decided that he would not ever try to correct me again, I'm going to turn you over to your mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate], I'm not going to bother you anymore.  So she didn't have to do anything but look really or to call me. She would usually call me "Juel" twice only if I didn't answer after the second time it was "Juel Pate" that means I'm really not going to call you anymore.  So her--it didn't take that much to discipline me I don't think, I may be wrong but I don't think so because I remember her having to physically get on me one or two times but most times it wasn't that much.  But growing up going back to your original question because my father took away that punishment side, it was I think very positive.  He was demanding in a quiet sort of way in terms of your performance in school, in church wherever you're called upon to do whatever then you have to give it your best; if you give it your best it will be outstanding.  That was his approach.  He could not tolerate failure, not showing up, not being dependable.  You had to take your assignment, you had to do it, it had to be 100 percent and I was very apprehensive about having to show him anything that was substandard.  I don't think I was afraid of him, but I would not like to hear what he would have to say in terms of, why didn't you do so and so.  Rather than hear that I would just make every effort to have things just so.  I think once I got married and had my own children, we came again into a little bit more of a conflict because as a grandparent he demanded more good things to be done for them because he always believed in moving up.  So whatever I did sometimes was not quite up to where he thought it ought to be in terms of what I was doing for my child.  To give you an example, on Sunday morning I could not go to church because my son was ill and as I recall it must have been very close to the time that he was supposed to be in the pulpit at 11:00 but he was on the phone talking to me.  Give me a report, what is his condition, what have you done, who is the doctor, what did the doctor say.  I mean it was just (laughter) but in general the whole relationship, I think was good.
Story_ID: 188240
Speaker 1: I want to move to your education.  Where did you go to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Okay I went to the elementary school that was adjacent to the Morris Brown College campus [Atlanta, Georgia].  It was an excellent school and the teachers were excellent.  I was looking at television the other day and felt so sorry for the third graders who were not going to be promoted to the fourth grade because they couldn't pass the test.  I said to myself I could understand the standardized test and the scores and all that but I just couldn't remember an instance in which the students didn't get it and there nobody that was "left behind".  Everybody went on to the next grade and it seemed so automatic and so simple, it's a little bit more complicated now.  But it was a very rich experience.
Speaker 1: And this was the laboratory school?
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: The Atlanta [University] Laboratory School [Atlanta, Georgia] in the Oglethorpe [School, Atlanta, Georgia] Building-
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) --yes.
Speaker 1: Which teachers stand out in your mind as being very good during that period of time?
Speaker 2: Oh they were all good.  Ms. Fisher was my first grade teacher, Ms. Lewis was the sixth grade teacher, and Mrs. Woodruff [Theresa Ada Baker] who was the wife of the famous artist Hale Woodruff was the third grade teacher.  We had those kind of wonderful, dedicated persons in the classroom and there was obedience, there was discipline and when it was time to be quiet, we were quiet and I'm just--I'm so happy that I came through at the time that I came through because if I can use this word everything was in order and now there is so much disorder, yeah.
Speaker 1: You were there in the '40s [1940s] around the same time that Maynard Jackson was at Oglethorpe School [Atlanta, Georgia].  Do you remember him at all?
Speaker 2: No, he was younger.
Speaker 1: He was younger--
Speaker 2: He was younger.  And I didn't cross his path at all until much later.
Speaker 1: --Much later, okay.
Story_ID: 188241
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school after that [Atlanta University Laboratory School, Oglethorpe School, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: After that I went to David T. Howard High School [Atlanta, Georgia] and here again, I was blessed to be in an atmosphere that was very disciplined. The principal was Principal Charles Gideons, and he was a rapid talking, rapid walking, no-nonsense person and the girls were usually more disciplined.  There were a few "bad" boys.  When I say bad boys, they were not bad boys in the sense of knives, guns and drugs but just wouldn't obey and at that time nobody had to give permission to anybody.  If Mr. Gideons felt you needed to come into his office and he needed to whip you, that's what he would do.  He'd say, "Come here, boy, and you go into my office, I'm going to whip you."  So Mrs. A.W. Robinson [ph.], she would just take her eyes and roll them around that meant everybody in here be quiet; And, "When I say notebooks are due"--that's what she meant, yeah--
Story_ID: 187473
Speaker 1: --Sights, sounds, smells, tastes that remind you of childhood?
Speaker 2: Okay I'm going to say smells: the smell of a rose, sight: there was a large holly berry tree in front of the parsonage that is still there, sounds: the preaching voice of my father [Williams Holmes Borders], smell--I told you a rose.
Story_ID: 187474
Speaker 1: And before we go on to Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] once again, how would you describe yourself as a child, what were you like as a--
Speaker 2: As a child?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I think I was shy, quiet.  I wanted very, very much to please my parents [William Holmes Borders and Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] and to make them happy.  So I was very hesitant about going against their wishes.  My brother [William Holmes Borders, Jr.], on the other hand, was the very opposite.  So there would be times that he would get me to do some things that we shouldn't do like leave the house in our pajamas and go up the street at night.  When my mother discovered that--no what happened was Ms. Landers [ph.] who was a member of the Baptist church [Second Baptist Church, Evanston, Illinois] that my father pastored in Evanston, Illinois called to let my mother know that we were safe at her house and of course my brother was quick in thinking and he would out-think you in a minute.  I was sobbing and crying because I knew we were in serious trouble and as my mother walked us back home, he said to his mother, "Sweetheart,"--that was what my father called my mother--"sweetheart what are you going to do to your children?"  She said, "I just don't know what I'm going to do."  So he said, "Well you should have been watching them and they wouldn't have left the house" (laugh).  But as a child--that's the contrast I'm crying and sorry and he's getting me with him, in other words hopefully they wouldn't whip either one of us.  If he had been by himself, he would have been probably in big trouble.  And I really don't know whether we got spankings that night or not, I don't remember, I don't remember, I don't think so (laughter).
Story_ID: 187475
Speaker 1: Well, let's fast forward a bit to your time at the Palmer [Memorial] Institute [Sedalia, North Carolina] when did you go there and what was that experience like?
Speaker 2: I went there in the tenth grade and my brother [Williams Holmes Borders, Jr.] also was there at the time and I think it might have been my mother's [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] idea to have us exposed to what was thought to be the finest and best.  I think it was a good experience.  I was an introvert, my brother was an extrovert so he loved being away and the people and the new experience.  I preferred to be at home but looking back on that experience it was good because here again we had wonderful, dedicated teachers.  The standard was very high.  We were introduced to all the social graces.  I had the opportunity of meeting Dr. [Charlotte Hawkins] Brown, listening to her, watching a great black woman who had done such wonderful things.  So later in life just to tie it in with a story, I was sitting in the hospital at the desk recording a note on a chart and a patient--no, a nurse looked at me that I remembered from tenth grade, which was 1948 all the way to what must have been 1985, a nurse looked at me and said, "Did you go to a finishing school?"  I don't know what I had done or said but I was very grateful for that experience, very rich.  The young people were privileged came from families that could afford the tuition without a problem but I was very homesick and when I finished that year, see the plan was you do tenth grade, eleventh grade, twelfth grade there but when I came home I begged my father [William Holmes Borders] not to send me back because I was happier at home and he was wise enough to realize that if you are away and unhappy that's not a good situation.  So I promised him that I would work so hard in the church that he would never regret having me stay.  And, so I did double duty and my lay ministry to the non-hearing started then.  That's when I got in to that ministry and learned the sign language.  The missionary that came to our church--came to the parsonage and wanted to introduce our church to this particular ministry and my father said alright you teach her.  So I had a one-on-one class and then that grew to a larger class and then one of the non-hearing members, the late Mr. William Lindsey [ph.] taught.  But my experience at Palmer, great as it was, drew me back to my own home and then I began to get on this pathway of ministry looking back.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 187476
Speaker 1: Before we leave Palmer [Memorial Institute, Sedalia, North Carolina] all together, did you ever have any personal interactions with Mrs. [Dr. Charlotte Hawkins] Brown or do you remember any of her assemblies, or would she talk to you--?
Speaker 2: I remember her speaking to the student body in reference to a student who had gotten out of line.  It made her very upset; I can't remember what the student had done.  I don't know whether it was to leave the campus or--but it was something that was unbecoming to a lady and she reprimanded the whole student body and her question after she had finished lecturing to us and telling us what we should and should not do, she posed a question, she said, "Anybody in here disagrees with me, stand up."  And one student stood and gave her name, she said, "Dr. Brown, you are talking about my sister."  I won't ever forget that day.  The other encounter that I had with her was on campus.  I was--I had left a notebook or pen or something and I going from the dormitory back over to the classroom building and she saw me and was displeased with the way my face looked and so she stopped me right there and gave me a lecture about the way a lady should look at all times, I won't forget that one either (laugh).
Speaker 1: Your face was--did you have makeup on or not have makeup on, what was the problem (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well I did not have any makeup on, I was clean but I didn't please her and I don't remember that there were many students that were obviously made up or over made up.  Generally speaking my mind was more on my school work and I felt that if I had a bath and had clean clothes on and my hair wasn't going every kind of way and it was after school hours and I was just going back to pick up an item then I didn't find it necessary to go back and redo my hair or to put powder on.  But I think it was lack of makeup that she was upset about.
Speaker 1: At the time you were there, and when was that exactly?
Speaker 2: It was--I think it was '47 [1947] to '48 [1948] or right in that area.
Speaker 1: Did she require the reading of her book 'The Correct Thing to do to be--(simultaneous)--to wear?
Speaker 2: 'The Correct Thing to do to Say ['The Correct Thing To Do--To Say--To Wear']--oh yeah that was a part of the--we got that book before we were admitted to the school.  That was a part of the package that came.  So you were supposed to read that and have that under control before coming.  So evidently I didn't have that under control (laughter).
Story_ID: 187477
Speaker 1: And after that year at Palmer [Memorial Institure, Sedalia, North Carolina] where did you go to school? You were back in the city [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I was back in the city--back at David T. Howard High School [Atlanta, Georgia] and I had enough credits to finish up in the summertime which saved me a whole year and I went just right across to Booker T. Washington High School [Atlanta, Georgia] and finished whatever required courses that I needed to take in order to go on to college so that's what I did.
Speaker 1: Who were some of the teachers you remember that made an impression on you at Booker T. Washington?
Speaker 2: I was only there for a summer and as I recall one of my home room teachers was also working there.  At that time I don't believe they would have summer school going both at David T. Howard and Washington High and that's how as a David T. Howard student I got over to Booker T. Washington High.  But at David T. Howard besides the principal I told you about--Principal Charles Gideons, Mr. Furlow [ph.] he was another one that had glasses and would just open his eyes wide if anything was out of line and that meant stop.  Mr. Banks [ph.] was in social science, Mr. Reuben Taylor [ph.] was the mathematician, Mrs. Robinson [ph.] was in history and social studies, those were some of them.  But all of them were unusual, very unusual, very dedicated and very concerned that you master the subject and it was no such thing as not being able to go on because you didn't master 'cause you're going to master this; you are going to do this.  So the concept that you can't move forward, that would be rare or I was so focused on moving forward that I can't recall too many people who dropped out.  My biggest impression was, "You got it!" because they made you get it somehow, they would get it into you and you would go on.
Story_ID: 187478
Speaker 1: And where did you go to college?
Speaker 2: Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia]. I entered in September of 1950 and graduated in '54 [1954].
Speaker 1: Did you ever consider going any place else or was that pretty much a decision you made awhile back?
Speaker 2: The decision was made for me.  I didn't make that decision, but having been with my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] on so many occasions, it was something that I would want to do, there was no reason for me not to want to and here again, remember I'm the child that wants to please so if this is what you think is best for me, you're my parent, you know more than I know about it.  But the experiences that I had, I would have to go with my mother just about everywhere.  If she had a reunion on Spelman's campus, I went with her.  I would have to sit through the meetings and so I was very familiar with the campus and some of her friends and some of the dignitaries that were there.  So it was--I never ever thought of any other place and if I had, I don't think it would have mattered because you will go to Spelman College.  There's no place other than this place that would be any better for you than this institution and I was very happy there, I think.  This is my fiftieth college reunion year, I'm getting ready for that this May and looking back the greatest experience was the chapel experience.  All of the students in every class had to be in Sisters Chapel Monday thru Friday from 8:00 to 8:30 and we worshipped.  We started our day with hymns of praise and prayer and exposure to great people, and it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 187479
Speaker 1: How old were you when you went to Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: I was sixteen, I had skipped a grade and then by going to summer school, I was able to save a year.  So I was getting there two years earlier.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like, when you were sixteen--(simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: That was--I think I did fairly well academically.  I had not determined what I wanted to be or what I wanted to do and therefore I took classes that I enjoyed.  I enjoyed psychology so I just decided I would continue to take psychology courses and--but in thinking about my lifetime goals, I didn't want to teach because I didn't think I had the patience required for what I thought would be small children.  I don't know why I thought I would have to be in elementary education, maybe it was because most of the students at that time had majors in elementary education and most of the students were being prepared as teachers in that area.  I thought, there's got to be something else plus I don't know that I can do that just day in and day out 'cause it takes so much. I wanted to finish with my class in '54 [1954].  I didn't want to stay longer to try to find myself or take additional courses.  So I just finished out that major in psychology and here again it was my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] who tried to help me to focus on what to do because I wasn't sure.  So she was the one that said well why don't you think about psychiatry since you like psychology so much and that required medicine and that's how I got to the University of Pennsylvania [formerly, the Woman's Medical College of Pennsylvania, later Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] doing pre-med work, attempting to get into medical school.
Story_ID: 187480
Speaker 1: You graduated from college [Spelman College, Atlanta, Georgia] in 1954.  That was the year of the Brown vs. the Topeka Board of Education decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954].  Your father [William Holmes Borders] was an activist--civil rights activist, do you recall that period and some of the projects, protests, planning that he was involved with during that time?
Speaker 2: Believe it or not, I was very protected from a lot of strife, a lot of background planning, a lot of negativism, a lot of racism.  I was taught in the home, you are not beneath anybody, you are just as good as anybody else, you can do, but I did not have all of the first-hand experience following him as I did my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate].  I was more with my mother who was in a peaceful, settled environment organization or whatever, and the--It was later that I was either told about or I read about or he told me about after the fact, some of the things that had happened during that time.  I do remember the story that he told in reference to the bus desegregation, very interesting story.  We had trolley cars before the buses and it seems that there was a soldier in uniform that was attempting to get on the trolley car on Auburn Avenue [Atlanta, Georgia] right in front of the [Wheat Street Baptist] Church [Atlanta, Georgia].  We had Haugabrooks Funeral Home [Atlanta, Georgia] across from us and then the church right on Auburn Avenue and the conductor was white and was refusing to let this soldier get on the front of the trolley car.  At that time you entered that back door, I guess, and came up and put your coins in then you went back to sit in the back.  There was a near riot, people gathered, someone thought let's go get Revered Borders, and of course if he was not out of town or in a meeting, he was either right in the parsonage on the porch or inside the church or very accessible.  So they did get him and he came and I think what he did was to convince the soldier to come in that back door in order for peace to prevail.  Then when he had settled that, then he himself went out of the front door, in other words if you're going to attack somebody, you're going to attack me and I know you're not going to attack me right here in front of my church.
Speaker 1: A few years after that he and five other ministers [the Love, Law, and Liberation (Triple L) Movement] essentially attempted to desegregate the bus system in Atlanta [Georgia] and he was arrested for that.  Did he ever talk about that experience?
Speaker 2: No he didn't talk about it to me here again it's protection but I do remember seeing the picture on front of the book that he wrote entitled 'Big Rock Jail' [ph.] and there he was with his hat coat behind bars.  That is all that I can tie in, you know, with that particular incident.
Story_ID: 187481
Speaker 1: Tell me about your medical school days.  Where did you go to medical school?
Speaker 2: Okay I went to the Medical College of Pennsylvania [formerly, the Woman's Medical College of Pennsylvania, later Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It was very interesting that with my interview at that school which was located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, they had never heard of Spelman College [Atlanta, Georgia], never heard of Spelman College and at the time that I went for my interview my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] was with me here again my support.  The students were--actually they teased me about my mother being there which didn't bother me at all that they teased me.  She came in, she sat, she said nothing but she sat there and that was a big thing for her to leave what she was doing and to come all the way to Philadelphia to support me and she did that consistently.  Anyway they said to me that if I was able to make the same type grades at the University of Pennsylvania that I had made at Spelman College, they might consider me.  It was a school that was all-female at the time and what happened was that they had a quota for blacks and they would allow either one or two per year not more than that, and I think what they did was to take their black applicants and choose from that group in order to have that one or two.  So I was selected and I had to work like I had never worked before.  I really wasn't totally prepared for having to take those many courses at once and to try and pass them all at once, yeah.
Story_ID: 187482
Speaker 1: [HM] Dr. [Juel Pate] Borders I'd like to pick up with your telling me about your experience at the University of Pennsylvania Medical School [the Woman's Medical College of Pennsylvania, later Drexel University College of Medicine, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  What was that experience like as a young black woman, one of only a few in that environment?
Speaker 2: Okay at the medical college of Pennsylvania the schedule was very full and long so generally speaking once I came home, I was just so exhausted until I would have to just sort of stretch out before I could pick up again and start studying.  I learned early that I would need to be in a study group.  The first year I don't think I was but maybe beginning that second year I did and had a good relationship with three or four individuals in the study group.  It was tough, it was challenging.  I was determined that I was going to get through it and by the grace of God I did but it was not easy, it was not easy at all because of the amount of material that we had to try and master in a relatively short period of time.
Speaker 1: And what about how you as a young black woman were treated in that environment?  You came out of a very protected environment as you've said here in Atlanta [Georgia] and really did not experience to a great extent racism and discrimination directly.  So what was the experience like in Pennsylvania?
Speaker 2: At the medical college, I don't remember having any negative encounters with the students or the faculty members.  Everybody on the faculty was supportive and at times they would go out of their way to make sure that I had everything at my disposal.  So it was good in that sense.  If I had to fight in the academic sphere as well as overcome some of the negative interpersonal things, I think that would have been just a little too much.  But I didn't have to encounter that in the school and maybe it was because those individuals were more progressive and maybe the overall philosophy was such that it wouldn't allow them on this level in medicine to do some of the things that I might have encountered in another situation.  It was positive as a black young female.  I knew that--I think I was a little bit more self conscious than maybe I should have been but I grew stronger in that environment the longer I stayed in it.
Speaker 1: And how long were you there?
Speaker 2: I was there for four years--
Story_ID: 187483
Speaker 1: --I think I met more opposition coming back to Atlanta [Georgia] in the professional societies which I didn't anticipate.  I didn't think that after you've gone through medicine and the internship and residency program that you wouldn't be accepted by a colleague, but I have--and this hasn't been that long ago that I have just been passed by as if I'm not even there or I'm sitting at a table and individuals are talking and it's like I'm not there.  But I was taught as a child that prejudice is ignorant and I see that as ignorance in that person and I know that everybody is not like that and I don't get out of the society because there are a few that are still ignorant.  So it's a struggle still.
Story_ID: 187484
Speaker 1: And when you came back to--well before you came back to Atlanta [Georgia] you mentioned your internship and your residency, where did you do those?
Speaker 2: At Einstein Medical Center Northern Division, Albert Einstein Medical Center Northern Division in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  As a resident I am sure that I was the first black--not the first female but the first black female that they had.  Most of the attending physicians were cordial and there was some who did not want to interact and so I--what I had to do was remember that I had to go through that internship and that residency program and I had to take board examinations.  There was such a thing as being blocked on your board examinations, in fact statements were made to other residents in my hearing, there is a possibility that you can take that examination as many times as you want to but you won't pass it.  So I had to swallow down a lot of things and I had to hear and not hear a lot of things in order to get through and I just kept saying to myself I'm not going to be in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], I'm not going to practice here, I will not be here but I must go through this experience in order to go back to Atlanta [Georgia].  I hadn't planned to come back here, I was going to go I don't know where but I was thinking maybe that I would be freer and away from strict discipline if I just started my practice in an area other than Atlanta.  But my father [William Holmes Borders] asked me to return, and so I did and I was glad that I did because I had a very short time to spend with my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] before she died and my roots were here.
Story_ID: 187485
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to specialize in, in obstetrics and gynecology (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) And gynecology, okay. (Pause) I wanted I thought to pursue psychiatry. Up to this point my father [William Holmes Borders] had not really interfered with the choices.  Remember he turned me over to my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate], but he had a long talk with me in reference to practicalities and he said, "Who's coming to see you? I mean who will be your patients? Where do they get the money--who will be able to afford psychiatric care?"  Now this was in the 1960s.  At that time there was less stress and I'm going to say in general the approach would be if there is a major emotional problem either you go to your family member or you go to your minister, but psychiatrists at that time (shakes head).  So I listened and I thought about it and I said to myself, well what are my other options and considerations? And OB [obstetrics] was a happy specialty and gynecology would mean that there was some surgery involved and there would be patients and patients and patients.  And so I got into this field indirectly.  It was--in retrospect it was a good move and I have been blessed with those who have come into my care and the amount of work and sacrifice required prepared me for the ministry that I'm in.
Story_ID: 187486
Speaker 1: What did you do when you came back from Atlanta [Georgia], what did you do first to set up your practice and where did you set it up?
Speaker 2: I was first at a medical building that my father [William Holmes Borders] built on Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive, 759 Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive [Atlanta, Georgia].
Speaker 1: At that time it was still Hunter Street [Atlanta, Georgia]?
Speaker 2: It was still Hunter Street at that time.  He did not want us to--let me back up and say that my father was a very much in charge person.  He would usually make the big decisions and because he was the patriarch, it was either difficult to go against it or very unpleasant if you did and he thought that it would be good to not have us looking for a place or whatever.  He was very much into the value of land, you don't ever lose when you get land, in fact this building is sitting on a piece of property that he just gave to me and he taught me that if you're going to invest, invest in land you're not going to lose.  The value of that property is going to go up and some values will be higher than others depending on where that property is.  So against my mother's [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] wishes because she had said you've done enough, you've sent them to college, you've sent them to medical school--my brother [William Holmes Borders, Jr.] and I were in medical school at the same time.  We graduated in the same year.
Speaker 1: Where was he in school?
Speaker 2: He was at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.] and if you can imagine what it took to put two young people through medical school at the same time on a minister's salary.  She said you've done enough for them; it's time for them to do for themselves.  They can set up wherever they want to set up, go wherever--no, no.  So he built this building and that's where we started and it was such that my brother in internal medicine, my husband [Dr. Theodore Benson] in dentistry and myself in OB-GYN in this building and that's where I stayed for eight years and I outgrew my one third of the building.  Then there was the whole family discussion about whether or not there should be a second floor on that building in order for me to stay in the building and my father decided that in order for that to happen we had to be unanimous and we were not unanimous when it came to the vote.  So in order for me to grow, I had to move from that, I didn't want to but I had to move.  So I moved to the first floor of the Wheat Street Towers [Atlanta, Georgia] which is right across from the church [Wheat Street Baptist Church, Atlanta, Georgia].  I had to go all the way back across town and then make long trips back and forth to the hospital.  I stayed there for about eight years.  I was on the bottom floor and there were thirteen floors--twelve or thirteen floors above me and these were senior citizens.  One day when I came back after working at the hospital practically all night, I came in to my area and water was just coming down through the ceiling.  Someone one of the top floors had turned on water in their bath tub and left it running so I said to myself this is enough of this.  So my father said, "you ought to have your own land, your own place.  I have some property, I'll give it to you," and I thought it was too much, he said, "it's not too much," and my father, my husband were in agreement it's not too much it can be done.  So I added three other pieces of property, adjoining lots and we built this building.
Story_ID: 187487
Speaker 1: When did you meet him [Borders's husband, Dr. Theodore Benson]?
Speaker 2: Met him in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] when I was at the end of my second year in medical school [the Woman's Medical College of Pennsylvania, later Drexel University College of Medicine, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he was in the dental school at the University of Pennsylvania [School of Dental Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], the only black in his class.  He was a graduate of Morris Brown College [Atlanta, Georgia] finishing in 1952 and he came to Atlanta [Georgia] to just visit and a friend of mine said to him I know somebody in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  So what he did while he was still here was to call my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate], give his name and said that he would like to meet me.  She was very--well how I can say it, she gladly--I'll put it this way--she gladly gave my name, my address and my phone number (laugh) because she had met him but she just said this is an opportunity for me to meet someone and I thought that since she gave him all this information which was unusual for her to do that, that maybe it was okay for me to talk to this person on the phone.  And, at the time that he called, I was going to come to Atlanta so we were crossing like this.  So he said okay well I can take you to the train station and when he arrived he told the taxi man, "you don't have to wait, I'm taking her."  He hadn't met me but that's what he did.  He was very tall and handsome and very different from anybody that I had met before.  In dental school up in Philadelphia and I was there, only black in my class and lonely, no social life, nothing. So just to have another person to talk to was good.  I was engaged at the time and--(simultaneous) (unclear).
Speaker 1: To someone here in Atlanta?
Speaker 2: I was engaged at the time.
Speaker 1: What's that story (laugh)?
Speaker 2: That story is that the person was a very good person but I couldn't see but my mother could see that probably was not the person for me and maybe that was the reason why she was so anxious to give all this information out.  When I met my husband I told him, "I'm engaged and I'm not supposed to do anything but be a chatting friend with you," and so he said to me, "how many rings do you have on your finger?"  I said, "I have one engagement ring," he said, "well, I can talk to you, you're not married," and that's how it got started.
Story_ID: 187488
Speaker 1: And when did you [HM Dr. Juel Pate Borders and Dr. Theodore Benson] decide to marry?
Speaker 2: After one year we wanted to get married.  That would be the end of my junior year [at the Woman's Medical College of Pennsylvania, later Drexel University College of Medicine, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and my mother [Julia Elinor Pansy Pate] gave me the advice of waiting, you've worked so hard, you've gotten this far and what you need to do is not to get married right now, you need to finish medical school and then consider it.
Speaker 1: And so you actually married in what year?
Speaker 2: I married one week after I graduated from medical school.
Speaker 1: In 1958
Speaker 2: In 1960, they wanted me to wait so I waited; it was one week later that we got married.
Speaker 1: And where did you get married?
Speaker 2: In Atlanta [Georgia] at Wheat Street Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: And who officiated?
Speaker 2: The late Dr. Wade [ph.] and Dr. [Frank] Cunningham, who was the president of Morris Brown [College, Atlanta, Georgia], very sacred, large wedding, yeah.
Story_ID: 187489
Speaker 1: And your family, your children?
Speaker 2: I have two, my son [Reverend Theodore Benson, Jr.] is a minister of the gospel and he's our fifth generation minister.  He graduated from Georgia State [University, Atlanta, Georgia] and Morehouse School of Religion ITC [Interdenominational Theological Center, Atlanta, Georgia] this past May 2003.  My daughter [Dr. Elinor Benson] is in her residency OB/GYN [Obstetrics/Gynecology], Medical Center of Central Georgia which is associated with Mercer University [Macon, Georgia].  She fought medicine, she said if medicine is such that you are away from the family, you don't sleep like you're supposed to, you're overworked, you're tired, you're irritable sometimes, that's not what I want to do.  So she went the route of computer science, mathematics, business administration and was on her way to law school when her cousins said to her, "you're going to law school and you have all of this all laid out for you, why would you do that?"  I think that was one of the things that made her rethink it.  But she had to-- she had to come to the conclusion herself.  My husband [Dr. Theodore Benson, Sr.] before he passed, he said she's going into medicine, don't worry about, don't discuss it with her and he just relaxed.  He would never discuss anything with me longer than twenty minutes, after twenty minutes that was the end of that discussion, he wouldn't worry about it, he'd just read his paper and look at television.  But I would ponder and he said just leave her alone which was very good advice and I did.  And I was really--see I had retired in stages so I was just coming on down, she just walked up to me and she says, "I'm going to take pre-med courses," just out of the blue.  I said, "oh" and we talked and she has made me very proud in terms of what she's done and I've been very proud of my son as well who's worked very hard to get to where he is.  He has a--he's working as a credit counselor and I think it's credit consumer counseling service, that's his full-time job.  But he's one of the associate ministers at Wheat Street Baptist Church [Atlanta, Georgia] and he was appointed as chaplain to the individuals in the Wheat Street Towers [Atlanta, Georgia] and they have many activities and a service on the second Sunday and the fourth Sunday of every month.  He has been very enthusiastic about the prison ministry and organizes the other associate ministers in terms of who is suppose to go, who is going to preside, who will be preaching and that kind of thing.  He works with the young people with basketball since he played--he is very tall also--he played basketball in high school and college and he's working very diligently.  So I see both sides of myself in the children.  I'm trying to help them as I was helped.
Story_ID: 187490
Speaker 1: You know, other than the knowledge of salvation through Christ which is the greatest thing, having parents that stay together in a marriage and parents that love you and counsel you and support you, that's so great and I was given so much, so much.  There was nothing that I really wished for that I didn't have and everything that was required here it is that was the way I was loved and trained and so we were also taught to give--if you were given so much then you give back plus then that helps the next generation to be smarter and taller and better.  I love being a mother, I love it, I love it more than anything else that I do.
Speaker 2: How old are your children [Reverend Theodore Benson, Jr. and Dr. Elinor Benson] now?
Speaker 1: Shouldn't tell their ages (laugh)
Speaker 2: --(Simultaneous) (Unclear)
Speaker 1: --Shouldn't tell their ages (laugh). But they are full grown and my son is married, has two children, my daughter is not married at the present time.  Trying to get her career on track and I have fifteen and a half months before she finishes and she'll be in this place.  She's also my business manager now and because of her background in computer science and business administration, she's been able to computerize the office and she takes care of the insurance, a lot of the policy making and I should also say that she has worked with me since she was five years old in my practice doing one thing or the other and so now she's coming into the top spot and I'm relieved to--here it is, turn it over.
