Story_ID: 631271
Speaker 1: The videographer--I'm here today with [HistoryMaker] Mary Bush, the videographer is Matthew Hick-
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Hickey [Matthew Hickey].
Speaker 1: --Hickey, and I have Larry Crowe as the observer.  Would you please state your name?
Speaker 2: I'm Mary Bush, Mary Kate Bush.
Speaker 1: Would you please spell your name?
Speaker 2: M-A-R-Y, K-A-T-E, B-U-S-H.
Speaker 1: And your birthdate?
Speaker 2: My birthdate is April 9, 1948.
Speaker 1: And your place of birth?
Speaker 2: Place of birth is Birmingham, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Well, I've had so many (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your current occupation?
Speaker 2: Currently I, I'm what one might call a professional board member.  I serve on several public company boards.  I have been in finance most of my life, corporate finance, international finance and the banking world in New York [New York] and some here in Washington [D.C.] as well.
Speaker 1: And where are we today?  Where are we located?
Speaker 2: Well we're in my, my home, 3509 Woodbine Street in Chevy Chase, Maryland.  My office is right downstairs so it's my home and my office.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  March 2nd?
Speaker 1: Seventh?  March 7th.
Speaker 2: March 7th already.  It's March 7, 2012 (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Story_ID: 631272
Speaker 1: Now let's talk a little bit about--what, what, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: That's tough because there are so many that I love.  I would say the top would have to be blues, light blues, turquoise, royal blues.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.  It's the time of year I was born and I love spring.  It's so beautiful and everything is blossoming and energetic and coming alive.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Italy.  Love it.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "To thine own self be true.  Thou canst not then be false to any man," ['Hamlet'].
Speaker 1: Would that be Shakespeare [William Shakespeare]?
Speaker 2: Oh, I believe it is.  Yes, thank you (laughter).  I had to think about that for a second (laughter).
Story_ID: 631273
Speaker 1: Let's take a walk through your family history, and what was your mother's name?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Augusta Bennet was the maiden name and it was Augusta Bennet Bush.
Speaker 1: And where was your mother born?
Speaker 2: Uniontown, Alabama.
Speaker 1: And where is Uniontown, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Uniontown is the way I normally think about it is that it's about 100 miles from Birmingham [Alabama] which is where I was born.  It's close to somewhat close to Tuscaloosa [Alabama] and Marion, Alabama, so it's a bit south and I believe west of Birmingham.
Speaker 1: And so your mother was born in Uniontown, Alabama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And do you know anything about your grandmother--tell us a little bit about your mother's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, my grandmother's name, my mother's mother, was Georgia Etta [Georgia Etta Bennet].  Gosh I, I actually don't know her maiden name.  I probably have it in my records, but it was Bennet.  She married and became Bennet.  And my mother's father was James Bennet.  They certainly lived in Uniontown and fairly certain that they were born there as well.
Speaker 1: And what can you tell us about them?  Did you know them?
Speaker 2: Ah, yes I did.
Speaker 1: Any stories you wanna share about your grandparents on your mother's side?
Speaker 2: Oh gosh, well they had a farm in Uniontown.  It was a small farm.  In fact we, we still own it.  It's still in the family.  I, I believe if I recall correctly it's about oh just thirteen, fourteen acres.  They grew cotton on the farm and we visited my grandparents a lot.  They were very close to us.  Just as I said a hundred miles away so a lot of weekends and then some summers my mother would take us down or send us down, my brother [Ronald Bush] and me, for a couple of weeks.  So they grew cotton and I had the experience of trying one day to pick some cotton but it stuck, it stuck to my hands so it was, it was just an experiment and I decided I didn't like that very much.  They had a wonderful orchard on the farm and that I really loved because it had apple trees and pear trees and peach trees and pecan trees and they also had a couple of horses and cows and chickens and, and that kind of thing.  My grandmother was tall.  She was a really, really sweet lady.  I mean maybe most grandmothers are but she was just wonderful and loved being with her and loved being around her.
Speaker 1: Did she tell you any stories about her, her family?
Speaker 2: You know I'm afraid not.  I'm afraid not.  I'm afraid that because this is, this is something that I've been curious about and thinking back about much more lately, but our family just didn't talk very much you know about their ancestry or their family or growing up.
Speaker 1: And what about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather, also wonderful man.  I don't remember him quite as well as my grandmother.  I think I was just naturally closer to my grandmother.  But he was always there.  He was a serious man, a quiet man and, and I know he was, he was sick later in life.  I think with kidney problems.  But I remember him very fondly.
Speaker 1: Now were your grandparents educated?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I honestly don't know.
Story_ID: 631274
Speaker 1: What about your mother [Augusta Bennet Bush]?  Was your mother educated?
Speaker 2: My mother went through the twelfth grade.  In Uniontown [Alabama] the high school that they--I'm sorry, through the tenth grade, I apologize, the high school that they had for blacks was just a two year high school and one could go no further unless you know you went away to school or something like that.  So she went through the tenth grade and, and, and I don't know at what age she met my father [Johnny Bush] and got married.
Speaker 1: Now your mother, what did she do for an occupation?
Speaker 2: My mother was--her occupation was housewife and mother for the most part.  I think for a short time she worked part time in a cleaners and, and she would help my father because my father worked three jobs.
Story_ID: 631275
Speaker 1: Okay, so my father [Johnny Bush] worked three jobs.  He was a steelworker.  Steel was big in Birmingham [Alabama].  He was with U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation].
Speaker 2: What, what, what years are we talking about when your father is doing this do you think that time?  Is this in the '40s [1940s]?
Speaker 1: Well let's see.  Yes, I don't know exactly when they moved to Birmingham but just knowing you know when I started elementary school [Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama] and a few years before that I would say it probably would have been in the mid to late '40s [1940s] when they came there.
Speaker 2: So before that they're living in Uniontown [Alabama]?
Speaker 1: They were living in Uniontown.
Speaker 2: And this is before you were born--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --your mother [August Bennet Bush] and your father?
Speaker 1: Exactly.  And I know in Uniontown my father worked in a paper mill and as I said in Birmingham he worked in a steel mill and had two other jobs.  The reason that that's significant is that my father later in life developed lung cancer and at when I--when we were exploring and talking to doctors and then my brother [Ronald Bush] and I were learning more about Birmingham and people who had worked in the steel mills, it is quite possible that it was what was then called black lung disease.  But, but you know I don't know that, that for sure (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, let's talk--
Story_ID: 631276
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Let's talk about your father's [Johnny Bush] side of the family.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: How far back can you go in, in tracing your ancestors on your father's side of the family?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  I'm actually having the ancestry traced right now for my mother's [Augusta Bennet Bush] and my father's side of the family.  So I have some written information and family tree type information, which I just received a few days ago.  So I haven't really studied it.  But what I do know in fact I have some pictures out here as well, my father's father's name was James Bush and my father's mother was Rena Bush.
Speaker 1: How do you spell Rena?
Speaker 2: R-E-N-A.  I know and this kind of became joke in our family, one of the things that I do know is that my father's father [sic.] was white.  I, I don't--
Speaker 1: So your grandfather?  No great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: Great-grandfather.
Speaker 1: Your great-grandfather.
Speaker 2: My great-grandfather and same on my mother's side, my mother's father was also white.  And I remember this because when my brother [Ronald Bush] and I learned this, you know people didn't, in the South particularly this was a factor of, of shame in a way because of what it meant was that your great-grandparent wasn't married to that person so black families didn't talk about this very much.  My brother and I learned this bit of information I would say we were preteen or teenagers and we were pretty astonished you know because we simply hadn't thought about it very much and so we sort of made up this, this little song that we would sing around the house and make my mother and father very angry (laughter) and that little song was, "My great-grandpappy was a white man" (laughter).
Speaker 1: Did you know anything about the great-grandpappy, the name or origin?
Speaker 2: I do have that and I can give it to you before we, before we close but I, I don't remember it because as I said I just gotten this information from someone who is doing the research for me.
Speaker 1: So you, so your parents did not react very well to your music (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh no, oh no (laughter).  In fact they let us sing it a couple of times and then no more (laughter).
Story_ID: 631277
Speaker 1: Now how many siblings did you have?
Speaker 2: Well I--
Speaker 1: Or do you have, rather?
Speaker 2: --I have one full brother.  His name is Ronald, and--Ronald Bush.  Both my parents [Augusta Bennet Bush and Johnny Bush] had prior marriages, prior to marrying each other.  So I have three half-brothers and a half-sister.
Speaker 1: Age chronology for you guys was what?
Speaker 2: Well, the--my half-brothers and half-sister are a full generation older.  I have one half-brother who just died.  I actually just came from his funeral and memorial service.  He was eighty-seven, would have been eighty-eight in another month.  The other half-brothers are one of them is deceased and I believe he would have been older.  No a little bit younger than, than the eighty-seven year old if he were still alive.  One is in his--the one that's still living is in his early eighties and then my half-sister is in her eighties as well.  But if she ever sees this and knows I told that, I'll be in deep trouble (laughter).
Speaker 1: So okay so your, your par- your parents are in Birmingham [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 631278
Speaker 1: Let's talk, talk a little bit, tell me a little bit more about what your father [Johnny Bush] did.  You said he worked three jobs?
Speaker 2: He did.  He did.  He was a steelworker, at U.S. Steel [United States Steel Corporation], Tennessee Coal and Iron [Tennessee Coal and Iron Company].  It was called TCI. That was the division of U.S. Steel in Birmingham [Alabama] that he worked for.  He was classified as an unskilled laborer.  My understanding from reading history is that most black men regardless of the skill level that they had were classified as unskilled during that time.  But so he would work that job from seven a.m. until three [o'clock] in the afternoon.  As I told people, he always came home clean as a whistle even though he'd been you know doing hard labor essentially, fixing scales.  I think that's what he did a lot of the time.  So he would come home, he would have a nap, rest, have dinner and then he would go to his two other jobs.  And one was with the, the credit union for the steelworkers and the other was an insurance company, Liberty National Insurance Company [Liberty National Life Insurance Company].  He was what, what today his job would be called maintenance engineer.  He was a janitor essentially at those, at those two companies.  My mom [Augusta Bennet Bush] sometimes when my brother [Ronald Bush] and I were a bit older and able to stay home on our own, would sometimes go and help him with those two jobs in the evening so that he could get back home quicker and then sometimes on Friday evenings, my brother and I would go as well and we would do our homework and that kind of thing while he and my mom did the work.  So that's--those were the three jobs that he had.  What you also find is that many black men in Birmingham and certainly in my neighborhood which is called Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Could you spell Titus?
Speaker 2: T-I-T-U-S-V-I-L-L-E.  Many of the black men whether they worked for a steel company or whether they were teachers or principals also had second and third jobs.  I'm thinking of one friend of mine whose father was a high school physics professor but in the, in the evening he put on his little white jacket and he went to Birmingham country club [Country Club of Birmingham, Mountain Brook, Alabama] to wait tables.  And this is the way that black men supported their families well during that time.  They did whatever it took, if it meant working three jobs.
Story_ID: 631279
Speaker 1: Your father [Johnny Bush], tell--can you tell us a little bit about his education?
Speaker 2: Ah, this is, this is a very interesting story.  My father was a highly educated man.  However, he had to stop school when he was thirteen years old because his father [James Bush] died.  He was the only boy in the family and he had to stop to do the farm work.  This hurt him for all of his life and I know this because he always talked about it.  His mantra was you better get some education because you don't wanna work hard like I did and but what he did was he educated himself because he read constantly.  He read books, every book I can think of. He read magazines.  He read newspapers.  He was well educated about not only things that were happening locally, but things that were happening nationally, internationally.  He was the great conversationalist.  My mom [Augusta Bennet Bush] and dad loved giving dinner parties and having their friends over and I just always remember him at the head of the table and he's holding forth and leading the conversation about whatever is happening in the world.
Speaker 1: So as a, as a child then growing up in that home--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you're watching your father read and listening to his conversations about politics and things like that?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, I was.
Story_ID: 631280
Speaker 1: So let's, let's move to, to you and your early childhood.  And tell me about--think back to sounds and smells and sights, early childhood, what are your first sights, sounds and smells that you can remember?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy.  Well smells, oh gosh (laughter), it just came to me so strongly, and that's honeysuckle because we had honeysuckle growing along the the sides of our, our backyard [in Birmingham, Alabama] and I love the smell of honeysuckle plus I used to love to pull the little blossoms off and you know you can suck the juice out and it was very sweet and very good.  The other smells that come strongly to me are the smells of my mother's [Augusta Bennet Bush] cooking because she was an outstanding cook.  Just about, she cooked anything and anything that she made was really, really wonderful so the smell of food is just fantastic for me.  As for sights, I would say just nature.  When I bought this house [in Chevy Chase, Maryland] about ten years ago, one of the things I said is, I want a big backyard and if you look out the back before we leave here today, you'll see I have a big backyard and that's because we had a big backyard at my home where I grew up and just the trees and the flowers and just the beauty of nature so those, those kinds of things just really resonate with me today still.
Story_ID: 631281
Speaker 1: So what are your first recollections of your interactions with your mom [Augusta Bennet Bush] and your dad [Johnny Bush]?
Speaker 2: Well, one of my first recollections about or one that really sticks with me about my father is that when I was oh I don't know three or four years old, with his love of reading and love of knowledge essentially, he started teaching me the timetables and so when I started kindergarten and then started elementary school [at Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama], the teachers were somewhat astonished that I already knew many of the timetables up to about four, the four or five times.  I don't know if kids today even know what you mean by the timetables you know but one times one is one and you go up to ten and then two times, and three times, et cetera.  So that is one of the times that I remember very strongly about him.  One of the things that I remember very strongly about my mother is just her involvement with me and with my brother [Ronald Bush] and our school and also their focus on our lessons and being sure we got our homework done and interest in our grades and you know if there were not all A's or all A's and a couple of Bs, then you know wondering why and talking to the teacher and making sure we got those grades up.
Speaker 1: So as a young child, you got a big backyard and you're there and your mother is cooking great food--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: --what kinds of things are you doing?  I mean do you have friends that you're playing with?
Speaker 2: Sure, well one of the things that just popped into my mind is that, is that I used to make mud pies.  (Laughter) Maybe, maybe I was thinking about my mother's cooking pies when I was out there in the, in the backyard I can remember actually on the side because there was a small porch that led out from our kitchen and sometimes I would just play out there in the mud making, making mud pies and that was a lot of fun.  The, one of the other things about my father is that he loved to barbecue and he made great barbecue and my mom made the barbecue sauce and on the 4th of July and on Labor Day those were the days on which he did it primarily, he, he actually sort of created his own barbecue pit, or barbecue grill from these huge cement stone blocks and then you would lay this wire across them and absolutely fantastic and my brother and I would go out and help him or, or eat some of course when it's ready (laughter) and try to learn how to do it.  So those were wonderful memories.  They are wonderful memories (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well--
Story_ID: 631282
Speaker 1: Let's fast forward to elementary school.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What year do you think you remember going to elementary school?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing I remember is before we moved to the house with the big backyard, we were living at another house which was I would say a mile and a half away from my elementary school and and so my mom [Augusta Bennet Bush] would walk me to school the first few days and then there was a woman who lived around the corner from us, her daughter was Barbara Moten [ph.] and her mother was walking her to school.  So then we would sometimes do it together and so this is kind of an embarrassing story, but I'll tell it anyway.  (Laughter) And, and that is after a few weeks a month or so, they decided it was very, very safe neighborhood [Titusville, Birmingham, Alabama], different times, they decided they could trust the two of us to walk home together.  So I think we did it once and then the next day Barbara, at the end of school said to me that she was going to play with a friend and she wasn't going home.  Well, then this terrified me because, because you know I hadn't thought very much about just doing it on my own and walking all the way home.  So I started out and I got a few blocks and then I just started crying and just bawling and I was walking the right way all the time, but there was one of our neighbors I got within about maybe four blocks of home and one of our neighbors saw me crying and she said, "Well what's your name and what's your phone number?  I'll call your mother."  She called my mom and I was headed the right way all the time but it was just that you know at six years old being out on your own for the first time in an unexpected way that that really kind of shocked me at first.  After that I was fine.  But, I think the other kinds of stories that you might be interested in you said with regard to school?
Speaker 1: This still is elementary school?
Speaker 2: Elementary.
Speaker 1: What's the name of your elementary school?
Speaker 2: It was Center Street Elementary School [Birmingham, Alabama].
Speaker 1: Center Street Elementary School.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Is, is it an all-black school?
Speaker 2: It was then certainly.  It may well still be (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) (Unclear) at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yes.
Story_ID: 631283
Speaker 1: And you're starting in the 1950s to, to elementary school [Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954], Brown versus Topeka, Kansas dec- decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954]--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --is coming out--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --but you don't know anything about Brown because you're only what, six years old (laughter)?
Speaker 2: That's right (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay so tell me about your school and your elementary school?
Speaker 2: It's a fabulous school.  Roscoe Shehi [ph.] was the principal.  We had fantastic teachers.  My first grade teacher was Mrs. Mosley [ph.], I remember her quite well.  She was great with kids for some reason.  I always, I was blessed with doing well in school as I mentioned earlier most of the time, got all A's or I think they were Es at the time for excellent right.  I loved school.
Speaker 1: What was your favorite subject?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure I had a favorite subject.  I just loved school.  In fact when the summers came, I was very sad because there was no school in the summer.  But I, I absolutely loved it because I always loved learning.
Speaker 1: What was the environment like with the teachers and the students?  Was it a cohesive kind of environment?
Speaker 2: It was a fabulous environment.  It's, it was very different from what I hear about schools today which saddens me greatly.  The teachers were fantastic teachers.  The students were well behaved for the most part.  You know you might have a little naughtiness here and there but well behaved students.  The emphasis was on learning.  It was also on character development.  (Cough) Excuse me. So in addition to teaching us what was in the books, there were always these slogans that teachers posted in their classrooms, excellence, honesty, integrity.  At that time, we could still have prayer in school and we did.  At that time we pledged allegiance to the flag with our hands over our hearts and that meant something to us as children and we could tell it to our teachers as well.  I, as I said I, I always had the fortune of, of doing very well in school.  I skipped one grade.  In fact I skipped another grade and went to high school a little, a little bit early.
Story_ID: 631284
Speaker 1: So when you were in elementary school [at Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --what were your activities outside of el- elementary school?  Were you involved in, in a church, or--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --or tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, oh the church was extremely important.  My church was Sixth Avenue Baptist Church.  It is, was then and still is today, one of the largest in fact maybe the largest black church in the Birmingham [Alabama] area.  My friend [HistoryMaker] Freeman Hrabowski who I know you all have interviewed as well, went to the same church and Freeman and others refer to it as High Baptist.  (Laughter) The minister was the first minister was Reverend John Goodgame [John W. Goodgame, Jr.] and I think his father [John W. Goodgame, Sr.] had been minister at that church as well.  One of the wonderful things that I remember is that Reverend Goodgame when I was a child went from having a three hour Baptist service on Sundays to one hour which was just pretty amazing.  He was succeeded by Reverend Porter [John Thomas Porter]--
Story_ID: 631285
Speaker 1: So Reverend Porter [John Thomas Porter] was a very dynamic minister, a very well educated, very sophisticated and also very spiritual.  He took a great interest in the young people of the church.  He started what's called our youth fellowship organization and I'll show you a picture of that and I was in his first youth fellowship group and we did many things.  We did bible study, we took tours.  I can remember a trip he took us on to Stone Mountain in Atlanta [Georgia] because he wanted us see some of the world outside of Birmingham [Alabama].  His wife, Dottie Porter [Dorothy Porter], who is still living today, was educated at Juilliard [Juilliard School of Music; The Juilliard School, New York, New York], she had a fabulous operatic voice and I was part of the choir and the, the whole church music scene.
Speaker 2: So now in your church [Sixth Avenue Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] was there any politics brought to the church?  Did he talk about the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Yes, yes he did.  He, he did in particular after Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] started--
Speaker 2: Okay but not when you're very young?
Speaker 1: I don't recall much of that at all.  It was, it was mostly focused on religion and spirituality on those kinds of things.  It was really when the movement started that we started hearing more from him about political issues, about the Civil Rights Movement.  He and Martin Luther King were close.  I, I believe that Martin Luther King did his installation.
Story_ID: 631286
Speaker 1: So let's, so in elementary school [Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama], you're loving school--
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and you finish elementary school early actually?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And from whe- from elementary school what school did you then go to?
Speaker 2: Ullman, Ullman High School [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama], U-L-L-M-A-N.
Speaker 1: So you went straight from elementary school to high school?  There's no middle school?
Speaker 2: No, there's no middle school.  Yea elementary went through the eighth grade.
Speaker 1: I see.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So tell us about your high school--and what year are you at your high school?
Speaker 2: Let's see I finished so it must have been 1961.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-one [1961].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so you're entering high school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And what's going in your life in this school?
Speaker 2: Oh, just more fun learning (laughter), more fun learning.
Speaker 1: Have you picked a subject that you liked better than another?
Speaker 2: I again, I liked it all.  I really loved it all.  The only thing that I didn't like was geometry and that's because I wasn't very good at it.  I was great at algebra, but not, not, not really good at geometry.  I loved French.  I loved history.  I, I loved those kinds of things but I just loved learning and I, I still do today (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What kind of activities are you involved in at school?
Speaker 2: Well I, I was in student government.  I did some oratorical things.  I participated or was this elementary or high school?  I think it was high school in the citywide spelling bee, came in third as soon as I said the wrong letter I knew it.  But one of my best friends [Cheryl McCarthy] to this day is the person who came in number one and then she went on to win the statewide one.  I've always, I've always been, been very good at the, the spoken word, the written word, communications, so I, I loved those kinds of things.
Story_ID: 631287
Speaker 1: Tell me about some of your other classmates that are going to school with you from Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama] and Dynamite Hill [Birmingham, Alabama], tell us a little bit about, about those places and the students that attend your high school there?
Speaker 2: Sure.  Well I mentioned one earlier and that's [HistoryMaker] Freeman Hrabowski.  Freeman--
Speaker 1: You wanna spell his last name?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  It's H-R-A-B-O-W-S-K-I.  Freeman is president of UMBC, University of Maryland, Baltimore County [Baltimore, Maryland], which has been ranked one of the top, top liberal arts schools--not just liberal arts, his real, his real focus is science, engineering, match, technology and he's been selected as one of the top educators in the country, top college presidents, top ten college presidents, was just given the Carnegie Corporation [Carnegie Corporation of New York] award for being one of the you know top college presidents in the country.
Speaker 1: He's a classmate of yours?
Speaker 2: He was.  Freeman is either one or two years behind me.  So he grew up across the street from me.  He's like, he's like my brother and Freeman went to Ullman [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama], one of the things that's significant there is that Cheryl McCarthy, another one of the Titusville kids that I'll tell you about, and I sort of anointed him to be president of the honor society when she and I were leaving, were leaving Ullman and that's because he was (unclear) so we wielded our bit of power and and put Freeman in office.  You wanna know more about the kid, Cheryl McCarthy, who was my best friend.  She lived around the corner from me and Cheryl is a syndicated writer with New York Newsday, she's an author, she's a professor, communications and the like.  She's had television shows.  She's absolutely brilliant.  Cheryl and I this was great fun because one we were best friends but we were also competitors because we always vied for you know the top place in everything in school, both in elementary school [Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama] and in high school and generally in terms of grades, either she was number one and I was number two or I was number one and she was number two.  Special projects you know we, it was a healthy competition.  It's a friendship and a really healthy competition.
Speaker 1: And Condi Rice [Condoleezza Rice], she's just a little girl at this time.  But she's also from this same area, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Condi is also from Titusville.
Speaker 1: But in high school you don't know Condi yet, is that correct?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, yes, yes.  I did know Condi.  Condi lived about oh half a mile from where Cheryl Freeman [ph.] and I lived and she's about I guess about five years younger than the rest of us but we knew her well because her father Reverend John Rice [John Wesley Rice, Jr.] was minister at the Presbyterian church that was in our neighborhood in Titusville.  So he also started a youth fellowship group.  In fact I think his was started a little bit before Reverend Porter's [John Thomas Porter] at my church [Sixth Avenue Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama] and since he was right--lived in the neighborhood, his church was in the neighborhood, he came to our parents, just came and knocked on the doors and introduced himself.  And I mean some of the parents already knew who he was and he said he was starting this youth fellowship group and he wanted--would like very much for us to join, which of course we did.  And this was fantastic because he as well did bible study but kids who needed help with their school studies.  He had teachers there to help them with that.  He took us out for social events and cultural events and Condi was always there.  So we thought of her as Reverend Rice's little girl just kind of running around bugging us.  (Laughter) And as she likes to say today, "Yes, I would tell their parents or, or tell my daddy that he should tell their parents when they did something wrong," (laughter).
Story_ID: 631288
Speaker 1: Now Alma Powell's father [Robert Charles Johnson] is also in Birmingham [Alabama], isn't he?
Speaker 2: It's a, this is a fabulous story.  Alma, Alma's father was principal of the other large black high school which was called Parker High [A.H. Parker High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  Now Parker High is where the kids from--where the kids from Dynamite Hill went to high school.
Speaker 1: And Dynamite Hill is a section of Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Dynamite is, Dynamite Hill is a euphemism.  It's really called Smithfield [Birmingham, Alabama].  Smithfield is the community that was contiguous to Titusville [Birmingham, Alabama].  It's called Dynamite Hill because Arthur Shores who was an attorney, his house was so frequently bombed during the Civil Rights Movement and other places as well.  But anyway Alma's dad was principal of Parker High where the Smithfield kids went to high school.  Alma's uncle was my principal at Ullman High School [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  Is, is that fascinating or what?  And, and this is where the kids from Titusville went.  They were both, I didn't know her father, but George Bell my principal, I would love it if we could, if we could recreate or clone about a thousand or more George Bells for high schools around the country today.  This man was absolutely fantastic.  He was a diminutive man.  He was, he was thin.  He was not at all tall, but if the guys got out of order and I'm talking about sometimes you know really tall, huge guys you know he would back them up against the wall and kind of grab the, the shirt collar and say, "You listen here," and he had this very booming dynamic voice and they absolutely feared him.  So the discipline that's missing in schools today and it's missing for a lot reasons, I recognize that, but this man had it.  He had the discipline or the disciplinary skills without you know hitting kids or anything like that but as well he was highly intellectual.  He was a mathematician and he encouraged [HistoryMaker] Freeman Hrabowski you know to go into math but he encouraged all of us in whatever our talents and gifts and skills were to develop them to the highest.  I worked in his office.  He was a man who was so committed to his kids and to the smart kids you know and to--he was committed to all the kids but what I'm trying to say is that being smart at that period of time was a good thing you know.  It wasn't looked at as nerdish as it is today.
Speaker 1: Now the composition of that school, it's all African American--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --is it from what you have farmer's children, middle class children or is everyone intermingling there socially with different classes?
Speaker 2: You wouldn't find farmers in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You might have farmer's grandchildren.  I was a--I'm a farmer's grandchild.  But yes, it, it was, Titusville is quite a middle class neighborhood but yes, there were people from every socioeconomic rung of the ladder that were def- definitely mingling.  Yes, absolutely.
Story_ID: 631289
Speaker 1: So what would you say would be the highlight of your high school years [at Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama]?
Speaker 2: One was learning French.  I loved it.  I loved the language.  We had an absolutely dynamic teacher.  She's still in Birmingham [Alabama] today.  Her name is Danetta Thornton, Danetta Thornton Owens.  So I absolutely loved French.  One of the other things was being I guess I was salutatorian the number two and giving a speech at my graduation and having a chance to you know for that kind of that public oratorical forum if you will.  Another was, was our teachers.  Here is, here is one of my other theories.  We had some--Alabama and Mississippi at that point in time thought their educational, public educational systems were ranked at the bottom in the country.  However, our high school, our elementary school [Center Street Elementary School, Birmingham, Alabama] were absolutely fantastic and I have a theory about that.  One is the, the dedication of the people, the principals and the teachers but when you think about it in the South at that point of time, people of my parents' generation, the highest profession to which they could reasonably aspire was to be a teacher or to be a principal.
Speaker 1: This was the 1950s we're talking about and '60s [1960s] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Nineteen fifties [1950s] and, and '60s [1960s] essentially.  You know they simply didn't have, the doors simply weren't open at that point in time for them to rise to the highest levels of business or to become secretary of state or to be on the board of the International Monetary Fund as I have the privilege of being, so they became teachers and they became principals and I think that we got the best minds, partly because of that.  So unfortunately they didn't have the opportunities but God did they give us their very best.  I can remember one of my teachers when one of the kids raised his hand one day when we got our textbooks handed out and one of the boys saw that this was the secondhand textbook from the white schools because something was stamped in it and he raised his hand and he said, "Well why do we have to get you know these secondhand books you know from the white schools?" Mrs. Marks [ph.], my teacher, she was a very proper fabulous lady, southern belle type lady, she said, "Now, don't you children worry for a minute because we your teachers will get one copy of the new edition, the latest edition of the textbook and we will teach you everything that's in it."  So in other words, it, it she was saying, don't worry about the limitations that other people try to place on you, just go ahead and learn and do your studies and get your education and everything is going to be fine.  And they were absolutely--and that's the attitude that all of our teachers had.  That's the attitude that our principal [George Bell] had.
Story_ID: 631290
Speaker 1: So now you're salutatorian and you've made some decisions about college.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us who, who influenced you about your decisions on college and where you decided to go and why?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Well, I had visited Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] as a high school student.  I was sent there for some project in high school [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  I don't remember precisely what it was.  I also knew that Fisk was one of the top ranked historically black colleges [HBCUs].  I liked it.  I felt good when I was there and its, its academic ranking as well as the fact that the campus was very attractive.  It's a small school.  It was a small campus.  It's only about twelve hundred students.  Those were the things that that really influenced me.  I thought about other schools.  At, at that time when I was finishing high school, some of the Ivy League colleges had begun to accept black students.  I mean I'm sure many, many I know many, many years ago, they had you know one or two or three or four but they were kind of beginning to open their doors to black students and two of my close friends I mentioned Cheryl McCarthy, went to Mount Holyoke [Mount Holyoke College, South Hadley, Massachusetts].  They made that decision to try one of the Seven Sisters colleges.  I also thought about Oberlin [Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio] and Vassar [Vassar College, Poughkeepsie, New York] but for some reason my comfort level was just with Fisk.  My father [Johnny Bush] wanted me to go to Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] right there in Alabama partly because he wanted me close to home, understandable, and partly because they had given me pretty much a full scholarship.  I had a partial scholarship from Fisk but I was just determined to go to Fisk because I just fell in love with it when I, when I went there.  And so he finally relented.  My mother [Augusta Bennet Bush] supported me, thank goodness.  He finally relented.  I went and after the first year I had done so well with my grades that I had the Scott Paper Company Leadership Award which was money.  I had more scholarships from Fisk and so they ended up paying for everything and the only thing my father ever had to do after that first year was to send me spending money.  So I ended up with drawers full of cash (laughter) so but the way I used it most of the time, was like most kids, I loved to eat off campus you know.  The food on campus wasn't that great so you know three or four, or four or five times a week, I could go to these wonderful little restaurants you know close to the campus and, and eat instead of having to eat on campus.
Story_ID: 631291
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now I, I have to backtrack just for one second.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: I forgot to ask you about a very important incident, and that would be the church (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and the bombing of the church when you're thirteen I think?
Speaker 2: About that yes.  About that.
Speaker 1: And the impact that it had on you.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was it your church?
Speaker 2: Was not my church.  Was not my church.  Interestingly my family went to church and Sunday school pretty much every, every Sunday.  Occasionally they would miss a Sunday.  We happened to miss that Sunday for some reason we were at home and I remember, I will never forget, I remember very clearly standing, I was in the kitchen maybe getting breakfast or something like that and the radio was on and the radio announcer said that my church Sixth Avenue Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama] had been bombed.  And I just stopped sort of dead in my tracks.  I had heard the bomb go off, but you have to understand we heard these you know with some regularity.  When it happened, when I heard the bomb, I said, oh my goodness, what have they bombed now?  And I think the announcer first said it was Sixth Avenue and that hit pretty hard.  Then not too much later, I'm guessing within minutes maybe ten minutes or so, they said it was 16th Street Baptist [16th Street Baptist Church, Birmingham, Alabama].  They issued a correction.  The two churches were frequently confused because my church was on 6th Avenue south and 16th Street.  The church that was bombed was on 6th Avenue north and 16th Street and they both had sixes in their names.  So it was 16th Street Baptist that was bombed.  But then later in the morning or later in the day, we started hearing of course that children had been killed and then at some point during the day, I learned as many of us learned, that several of our friends had been killed and one--there were two of the four girls that I knew well.  One was Cynthia Wesley, she lived in Smithfield [Birmingham, Alabama] and she just been at my birthday party you know just a few months before and the other who I, who I actually knew even better because I'd had known her since she was a small child, was Denise McNair.  Denise was the daughter of one of my elementary school teachers and, and I knew her so well because, because her mom [Maxine McNair] would actually have her there at school with her quite a bit you know whenever Denise finished her classes so she'd hang out with her mom.  She was smart and bright and energetic and precocious and I mean just the star of a child and she would have been a star of a person.  So those, those things were very painful, very painful.
Story_ID: 631292
Speaker 1: You said in your mind, "What did they bomb now?"  What--so this--the things had led up to this, what were those things?
Speaker 2: Well, there were I think I mentioned Attorney Shores earlier, Arthur Shores, who lived in Smithfield [Birmingham, Alabama] and had a beautiful house sort of on the top of the hill, his house was bombed two or three times that I recall and even though it was Smithfield the next community over, you could, you could hear those as well.  Reverend Shuttlesworth [HistoryMaker Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth] lived a little further out.  I don't think I, I couldn't hear when his home or church was bombed but of course we would hear about it.  There were, there was a house about a block and a half from me where another minister lived, his home was bombed.  There were shrapnel bomb planted in the sidewalks where we had to walk to school one day.  When, when I was in high school [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama], we would walk about two, three, about three and a half blocks you know to get to the bus on 6th Avenue to go up to our high school and shrapnel, I don't know if you know what it is, but it's all these sharp things that were planted beneath the sidewalks and the shrapnel went off along about a two and a half, three block radius just the pathway that many of us would walk to school, Freeman [HistoryMaker Freeman Hrabowski], Cheryl [Cheryl McCarthy], Sandra Copeland, many of the kids in the neighborhood, and they went off and the other interesting thing is this shows how cohesive our not just our churches and schools were but our communities were, a couple of my teachers and my brother's teachers, Freeman's teachers lived on the street that was closest to 6th Avenue.  So when the shrapnel went off there those teachers got on the phone immediately and they just started a chain going, "Keep your child home, keep your child home, keep your child home."  And it's a good thing that they did because one might assume this shrapnel, these shrapnel bombs had gone off and then it was you know safe to go onto the bus, but indeed those phone calls were very important because our parents indeed kept us home and just about the time when we would have been actually walking out to go to school, another set of shrapnel bombs went off.  So the bombings were frequent and regular.  In fact that's kind of how Birmingham [Alabama] got its nickname, Bombingham.
Speaker 1: And this is the 1960s, you're at this point this is high school years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're going to school, the external environment is hostile.  The internal environment is nurturing and supportive.
Speaker 2: You put your finger right on it. (Laughter) Yes, yes.
Story_ID: 631293
Speaker 1: So when you're making your decision to go to college, you're coming out of the environment of Bombingham [Birmingham, Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --but you're decided to still go to school [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] in the South?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why is that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think you know one of the great things that our parents and neighbors and teachers did for us is that they somehow instilled in us that we could never think of ourselves as victims and we couldn't live in fear.  You had to keep your life going.  So we didn't make decisions that were fear based decisions.  We just kept going and trusted in God.  And this is the other reason that you know we talked about church and the kinds of things we did but the spiritual thing that church did and that our families did with constant prayer is that I think it gave us, it gave me a spiritual strength to keep walking, to keep moving and to trust that God was gonna protect me.
Story_ID: 631294
Speaker 1: So you take that spirit with you to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And tell us about your first year at Fisk?  This is 1969 I believe?
Speaker 2: Ye- Nineteen sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-five [1965].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So we're in the Vietnam War around this time?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you're starting off--did your father [Johnny Bush] take you from Uniontown [Alabama]--I mean Birmingham [Alabama] to Fisk?
Speaker 2: To Fisk?  My mother [Augusta Bennet Bush] and my father did.
Speaker 1: Your mother and father?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they drove me up, packed all my things in car (laughter) dropped me off, very exciting, very exciting.  Well I guess just, just sort of staying on the subject, one of the things that happened during my years at Fisk was the death of Dr. Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.], the assassination of Martin Luther King.  Stokely Carmichael [Kwame Ture] was, was big you know he would go to various towns.  In fact he was in Nashville [Tennessee].  I don't remember if he was there at the time of the King assassination, but he had been there around that time.
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-eight [1968], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I'm sorry, '68 [1968], yes that's right.  So you know the main focus again was academics, getting your studies but yes these other things were going on and you listened and you stayed attuned and you stayed abreast of all of those things.  I remember and I guess this was when King was assassinated and riots started and I was away from the school.  I was out visiting a friend but I was at least a mile away.  So I called my parents and I say, "I'm at a friend's place."  You know but they knew it was somebody around my age so they weren't trusting that.  (Laughter) I'm at a friend's place and I don't know if I can get back to campus because there's rioting and but they said to me, "Just get to campus.  You know however you get there, get to campus."  I said, "Oh my god.  People are out there rioting."  But I trusted their judgment and so I just started walking and made my way back there.
Speaker 1: You walked to campus?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?
Speaker 1: You walked? You weren't on public transportation?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I, I walked.  I walked.
Speaker 1: So what's happening at the campus?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Are there protests going on on the campus as well?
Speaker 2: No, Fisk was a pretty, pretty quiet, tame place.  There weren't protests going on.  It was I think more things in the community.  Tennessee State [Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] was close by.  I think the kids at Tennessee State were more active, some kids at Fisk were active, but, but no, I don't, I don't recall actual protests.
Story_ID: 631295
Speaker 1: You're--Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] is a historically black college--
Speaker 2: It is, yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) and then, can you tell us a little bit about the history of Fisk, do, do you know anything about the history of the university?
Speaker 2: Oh, Fisk gosh, I'm embarrassed that I don't have it at my fingertips but fantastic school.  One of the things that stands out about Fisk and that still stands out to this day, is the Fisk Jubilee Singers and this is a small choral group that got started what at least a hundred years ago and they have performed around the world.  They still perform around the world and at several times in history when Fisk has been financially challenged, they have gone out to perform and raised money to save the school.  As I said it at that time it's ranked as one of the top historically black colleges in the country, very well known for its academic rigor.  Today it's having financial problems again you know which is, which is sad because I think as are many of the historically black colleges and universities [HBCUs].  Sad because, because these colleges have served and still serve a great purpose.
Story_ID: 631296
Speaker 1: So your school, Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], is founded in 1866 and what are you, what are you majoring in at Fisk?
Speaker 2: I majored in economics and political science.  When I went in I thought I was gonna major in biology.  I thought I wanted to be a doctor but then when I had to take organic chemistry and then when I had to dissect animals I said, "No, this is not for me."  (Laughter) So I was taking some economics courses.  I said, "Boy, I really like this," and then there were--I had two business courses in the economics program and I said I really, really like this.  So I majored in economics and then I ended up with a double major with economics and political science.
Speaker 1: And what year did you graduate from Fisk?
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty-nine [1969].
Speaker 1: And you graduated with honors as I recall?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah (laughter).  Yeah, I was, I was probably number two I guess I think, I think.  I forgot to tell you that I, I did have the opportunity also to go to college a year early and after the eleventh grade and my mom [Augusta Bennet Bush] and Dr. Bell [George Bell] talked about it and they said, "Nah, we think she needs to stay with her class," which was fine with me 'cause I loved high school [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama].
Story_ID: 631297
Speaker 1: When you're senior--at your senior year of Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee], you're thinking about your future.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What, what are you thinking, what's your process going on now?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I wanted more school and I started thinking about a Ph.D. in economics because I was very much enjoying economics.  I thought about the M.B.A. because I absolutely loved those two business courses and so those, those--oh and I thought about a law, law degree and, and I decided well I'm really resonating with this business thing and I said, "Well Ph.D. in economics what do I do with it?" And the main thing that I knew one could do with it is to become a professor and I said, I don't think that's what I wanna do.  I had been to University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], had visited it, also found out that it had one of the top business schools in the country and University of Chicago offered a, a big fellowship and the other thing was this shows even though I said earlier I loved school and I hated when the summers came because there was no school, by the time I finished college, I was just getting a wee bit tired of school so I was really leaning hard towards the business because those two business courses just, they just clicked with me for some reason and then I thought well business school is two years, Ph.D. in economics is three years, I'll take the business school (laughter).
Speaker 1: And you chose the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I did.  I did.  Now that's interesting also because as I said I knew it was one of the top business schools.  I had visited it, felt comfortable, liked Chicago.  When I got to the school and I went to my first few classes including just a, a business the sociology of business, everything was being taught with calculus equations and I looked at this and I said, "Oh my god." 'Cause Chicago is a very, very--the business school's a very quantitative school. That's what it's known for and I had not had calculus.  I had not even had pre-calculus even though I majored in economics at Fisk it was not quantitative at all.  So I said I looked at that and I said, "I'm in trouble," because I had absolutely no idea because they were assuming that you had a, a basis, a grounding you know in that level of mathematics.  And I went to the dean, the dean of students, I said, "Dean, I'm in trouble."  Because I have no idea what all those you know formulas are that they're putting on the board.  Dean Metcalf [Harold R. "Jeff" Metcalf], he said, "Eh Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Bush], don't worry about it, we'll get you a tutor."  I said, "Okay."  Indeed he did and it was one of my fellow classmates.  His name is Wendell Gunn [ph.], remains a close friend to this day.  His godchildren--his children who are my godchildren, their picture is right over here.  But Wendell already had I believe a master's in economics and master's in chemistry.  He had worked before coming to the University of Chicago.  He became my tutor and he literally taught me the math.  And what he ended up saying after working with me for a couple of months, he said "Mary, you have a great aptitude for math, you just haven't had it."  But this gave me a great level of comfort because that's really what helped me really be able to do well in the business school.
Story_ID: 631298
Speaker 1: So this is 1969 you're entering business school in, in, in Chicago [Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.  Yes.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about the environment of Chicago.  You've gone from Birmingham [Alabama]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to a big city--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --during still a pretty politically tumultuous time and going from South to North so--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --tell us a little bit about the--this great leap and what's going on in your head at the time?
Speaker 2: Well, it was, it was a great leap but, but, but I was still on essentially on campus, the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] owned much of the land and many of the buildings around the school.  I had my own apartment, which was in a school owned by, by the--in a building owned by the university.  So that, that was new and different because at Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee] you know I lived in the dormitories for all four years.
Speaker 1: Those would not have been coed dorms right?
Speaker 2: Oh my goodness, no. (Laughter) Absolutely not.  So I had my own apartment and the apartment it was all students, either from the business school [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] or some part of the university.  So the environment was still pretty protected in a way and you know, if you chose to go outside of campus then, then normally if I did that, I was doing it with other friends from, from the business school.
Speaker 1: And this is--the business school is in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], is that right?
Speaker 2: It is in Hyde Park.  Yes.
Speaker 1: So you're getting to Chicago a year after the democratic convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] with all the riots that's taking place, if I got my dates right--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and then it's also Operation PUSH [Rainbow PUSH Coalition, Chicago, Illinois] is very active in--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --alive at that time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So the external environment is, well let me let you explain to me so are you impacted at all about--with the external environment?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, my focus was education.  You know I was taught since I was a child, keep your eyes focused on where you're trying to get to and my focus was getting that M.B.A. Chicago was a tough school.  Here, here, here is one of the signifi- significant things.  My class, I think each class was around three hundred students if I recall correctly, we had six black women and maybe eight or ten black men.  And even though we studied with and did things with our, our white colleagues in school, we were really very close knit and very much helping each other because this was a tough school.  It was you know this was the first probably the first couple of years of, of admitting a significant number of black students, most of us were on fellowship.  We had to maintain those fellowships.  So our focus was on study and getting that education.
Story_ID: 631299
Speaker 1: Well tell us about some of those classmates?  Was [HistoryMaker] Barbara Bowles one of those?
Speaker 2: Barbara Bowles was one (laughter).  And she remains a friend to this day.  She's very, very successful as I am, as I am sure you know.  Some of my classmates Tony Jackson [HistoryMaker Anthony Jackson], Ed Rutland [ph.], Karen Williamson.  Ed Rutland was again very significant because for the mathematics, the quantitative methods at Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] because Ed, but he had to help all of us, not just me.  Ed was very good at you know what they call the word problems, the things that you have to reason through not just doing the mathematics and so we would, several of us would get together and study and we'd talk about the problem and try to figure it out and Ed would start pacing the floor, pacing and thinking, pacing and thinking and eventually Ed would say, "All right, all right, I, I, I can see my way clear.  I can see my way clear."  (Laughter) And you knew that when Ed could see his way clear, then we were gonna be able to get it too.
Story_ID: 631300
Speaker 1: So you suc- you successfully complete your time at the University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and what's the next step in your life?
Speaker 2: My next step was figuring out what kind of job I wanted to have.  I interviewed with lots of different kinds of companies, many of course came to the University of Chicago to recruit.  I interviewed with--for marketing jobs like at Procter and Gamble [Procter and Gamble Company], for mostly financial jobs in New York [New York] and some in Chicago [Illinois], commercial banking, investment banking.  The interesting thing is at that time you know you did not have to work after college and before going on to get your M.B.A.  At most of the good schools nowadays it's a requirement that you have some experience before you get the M.B.A.  So I knew I loved business and I liked this financial, this finance thing 'cause I ended up concentrating in finance.  But I had, had no exposure to the business world you know.  My father [Johnny Bush] was, as I said, a laborer.  Everybody around us were teachers.  I had not exposure but I knew it just resonated with me.  So Interviewed for all of these places, one of my interviews was with Chase Manhattan Bank [JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and they made me an offer as did several others and when I was back at school and I was talking with some of, some of my white friends you know about having this offer, some of the white guys I should say, about having this offer from Chase Manhattan Bank, several of them looked at me and said, "Oh my god, I would kill for an offer from Chase Manhattan Bank."  I said, "Oh, I guess this is the one I should take."  (Laughter) So Chase had what was recognized as the top training program for, for loan officers in the country.  It prided itself on the number of folk who did not finish because they were tough.  You had to take these exams, they call them desk and pits like the pit referral because you were literally down in a pit making a presentation to you know officers of the bank and you know at the end of the program and you had to do well or you were out.  So this was--it was fantastic, just fantastic.
Speaker 1: So you completed the Chase program, obviously successfully.
Speaker 2: I went through the Chase program.
Speaker 1: And you worked for Chase what years would this have been?
Speaker 2: I started in '71 [1971], that would have been probably late '71 [1971] and stayed there for about eighteen months, enough time to get through the training program and through what they call credit analysis, which means that the officers who are already lending officers of the bank would send their companies to you.  Let's say they were thinking about making a loan to Procter and Gamble or IBM [International Business Machines Corporation] so you as a credit analyst would have to analyze the company, the industry, all of the economic factors that would affect the company and then make presentations to the lending officers.
Story_ID: 631301
Speaker 1: So I stayed through that eighteen months and I, I went to Citibank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.] after that and first (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) In Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: No, no, all of this was New York [New York].
Speaker 2: Oh, in New York okay.
Speaker 1: And, and New York, New York, this again was a transitional time where the banking world, the financial world was just at it's, at the, at the beginning of taking a significant number of blacks, hiring a significant number of blacks and, and women as well.  Chicago was not quite as open minded about that yet.  A couple of my friends got jobs in Chicago, but New York was much more open to it.  The significance of going to Citibank, I had many friends either from University of Chicago [University of Chicago Graduate School of Business; University of Chicago, Booth School of Business, Chicago, Illinois] or other schools who had taken jobs at Citibank when I took my first job at Chase [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and I had met one of the people in human resources there who had been trying to recruit me for about the second half of that eighteen months.  Chase Manhattan, when it was time for me to actually get a job, a position as a lending person with corporate relationships, had just put their first woman into the corporate bank and I think they were not about to try another woman until they saw how that first one was gonna work out.  Citibank on the other hand offered me three different positions in their corporate bank and that's what I really wanted.
Speaker 2: So when you say corporate banking, describe for us what you were doing as a corporate banker when you went to Chase [sic.].
Speaker 1: Sure.  Sure.  As a corporate banker, when I, when I went to Citibank--
Speaker 2: Citibank.
Speaker 1: --'cause that's where I started with my own clients, you were assigned a number of relationships, generally, relationships that the bank already had, some were prospects that they wanted to have relationships with.  The first department that I was in was called food, beverage and tobacco.  So I had the major food companies, tobacco companies, R.J. Reynolds [R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company], Philip Morris [Philip Morris Inc.; Altria Group, Inc.], Kellogg [Kellogg Company], the old Swift meatpacking company [Swift and Company], later called Esmark [Esmark, Inc.], as their clients.  Some of those were assigned to me.  My responsibility was to meet their banking needs, whatever they might be, whether it was borrowing money from the bank, whether it was some of their subsidiaries overseas borrowing money or cash management, just the whole range of things.  So again, this was, this was new for banks to have blacks and women in those positions.
Speaker 2: And you rose through the ranks at the bank, is that correct?
Speaker 1: I, I rose through the ranks at the bank?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: At Citibank I became the first level officer, which was, which was then called account officer.  I think later they might have changed it to assistant treasurer.
Story_ID: 631302
Speaker 1: And I moved to Bankers Trust in 1976, and that's where I rose to the level of vice president.
Speaker 2: And team leader?
Speaker 1: And team leader, yes.
Speaker 2: And will you tell us in 1976 when you're vice president and team leader, are you one of the first African Americans to ever hold that position?
Speaker 1: Yea certainly, certainly one of the first African Americans.  I might--in, in the corporate lending area, I think I was the first African American and I was I believe I was also the first woman.  I actually became when I went to Bankers Trust, I was assistant treasurer, then a couple of years later assistant vice president and then vice president and team leader.
Speaker 2: And you were in corporate finance and lending, is that correct?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 1: Oh god it was fun times.  And let me tell you why.  Bankers Trust at the time was, was essentially kind of a third tier bank in terms of dealing with the Fortune 500 companies--
Speaker 2: Just explain what third tier versus first tier--
Speaker 1: I, I, I will.  The, the banks that were--had lead positions with large companies, large Fortune 500 companies were banks like Citibank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.], J.P. Morgan, Chase Manhattan [Chase Manhattan Bank; JPMorgan Chase and Co.] and they would generally have their legal lending limit which is a certain percent of your capital available for those companies.  Bankers Trust would have a lot less than its legal lending limit available.  And Bankers Trust, when I was, when I joined the bank, made the decision that it wanted to start playing like the big boys.  In fact that was one of the reasons whey recruited me and other young bankers to come in to be aggressive about marketing, to be innovative with customers and to move up in, in, in the ranks in terms of the way those companies viewed Bankers Trust, and the way they dealt with them.
Story_ID: 631303
Speaker 1: So two of the things that I am most proud of are things that as Bankers Trust had put them on the map and for a couple of major companies RCA [RCA Corporation] and JCPenney and one for JCPenney I did a in conjunction with my colleagues at the bank a major private placement and that is we acted as agent and brought insurance companies in to lend to the company in conjunction with a bank loan.  The structure of that was very innovative.  It had never been done that way before and I think that it met--because it met their needs that was one of the reasons that they selected us and that we moved up to being a first tier bank with them to being one of their main banks.  For RCA, RCA was doing a major acquisition of CIT Financial [CIT Financial Corporation; CIT Group, Inc.].  They called me, the treasurer called me at home one Saturday and he said, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Bush]," this was 1979, he said, "we need to borrow--," I think it was I don't know about a half billion or so, a little bit more than that, "We don't wanna borrow from the bank," because prime rate was then 20 percent.  This is when we had very high inflation.  Paul Volcker was head of the Federal Reserve [Federal Reserve System].  He was trying to wring inflation out of the economy.
Speaker 2: This is Jimmy Carter [President James Earl "Jimmy" Carter, Jr.] years?
Speaker 1: I think that's right, '79 [1979], I think that's right.  Volcker is a friend--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --of mine so that's you know--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --that's the person I focused on.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Because Volcker and I later got to know each other quite well.  Then they also said, "We don't wanna borrow in the public run markets because those are also double digit interest rates.  So Mary, get creative okay?"
Speaker 2: And what did you create?
Speaker 1: What did I create?  In conjunction with what we called our money market group, we created a facility, it was, it was called four two notes under the 1934 securities, the 1934 securities act [Securities Exchange Act of 1934].  You could issue paper, issue notes to a small set of highly sophisticated institutional investors and you know negotiate the rate with them.  This was new for commercial banks and new to finance and acquisition that way.  Normally RCA might have gone to its investment bankers to do this kind of deal, but I had been very aggressive about calling on them, presenting different ideas over a period of a couple of years.  So I felt honored and privileged to get that phone call on that Saturday and to have that opportunity.  I later met their investment banker.  This is many years later, the person who was their investment banker at the time, he was with Lehman Brothers [Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.] and when he met me and when heard my name, he said, "Oh, you're Mary Bush."  I said, "Yes." And he said, "You're the person who took my RCA account you know a decade ago".  (Laughter) I said, "Yeah, I guess so."  So those were, those were things that were written up in you know American Banker [American Banker Magazine] and other publications because they were totally new and innovative for the commercial banking world.
Speaker 2: So you stay there until 1982--
Speaker 1: I did.
Speaker 2: --and then you took a, a shift from the private sector to government?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Story_ID: 631304
Speaker 1: Tell us what--how you got to become the, the assistant to the deputy s- deputy secretary for the department of, of treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury]?
Speaker 2: It was one of those things that it was a godsend and it came at me totally out of the blue.  I had never been politically involved.  I knew very little about Washington [D.C.] and what, what went on in the city.  I got a call one day asking me if I would come to interview to be the special assistant to the number two man at treasury--
Speaker 1: Who was Tim McNamara?
Speaker 2: Tim McNamar [R. Timothy McNamar].
Speaker 1: Tim McNamar?
Speaker 2: Tim McNamar, yes.  Yes.  And I said, "Gosh, this is very interesting.  How did you get my name?"  And they really wouldn't tell me at the time and I said, "No, I'm not interested," because I loved banking, I loved what I was doing.  Luckily for me they continued to call back and I finally had the good sense to talk to my boss who's another fabulous story, fabulous man.
Speaker 1: Who's your boss?
Speaker 2: I said John, I'm getting--his name is John Bliven [John S. Bliven, Sr.].
Speaker 1: Can you spell his last name?
Speaker 2: B-L-I-V as in Victor, E-N.  He was head of the New York City [New York, New York] division at Bankers Trust.  In other words Fortune 500 companies located in the New York area, and he was also head of the airlines aerospace division, lending to the bank aerospace and airline companies.  So I said, "John, I'm getting these calls from Washington about some job at treasury and I've been saying no, but I figured I'd better ask you, ask your advice." Very wise old man.  He said, "Bush [HistoryMaker Mary Bush], you gotta talk to somebody who's done a stint in Washington."  So he got two people for me to talk to.  One was the chief of Conister Bank and Trust [sic. Conister Trust Limited; Conister Bank Limited] and one was someone outside the bank and when I went to see these people and told them what was happening and that I've been saying no, they sort of looked at me like I was out of my mind.  In fact they said, "Are you out of your mind? People would kill for an opportunity like this." So I finally decided I would come to Washington and see what it was all about.  I came down, I interviewed, they offered me the job, I still said no because I still loved New York and loved what I was doing and they called back again.  It turns out they had gotten my name from someone who was then a client.  He was international treasurer at Revlon [Revlon, Inc.] and Tim McNamar, the number two man at treasury was his old friend from childhood and when McNamar in treasury needed a banker because of bank deregulation, because of the developing country debt problems, the treasury was doing some lending, they said we really have to have a commercial banker who understands this business.  He had called his friend Mike Curtin [Michael E. Curtin] at Revlon and said who would you recommend?  And mine was the name that was given McNamar.
Speaker 1: So it wasn't--you were not active in the Republican Party at this time?
Speaker 2: I wasn't active in anything political or.
Speaker 1: Ronald Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] is president.  This is the Reagan administration, right?
Speaker 2: This is Reagan, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay but you okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah this was Reagan and so I finally said yes, but I have to tell you I came kicking and screaming (laughter) being pushed you know by folk who, whose wisdom and knowledge of the world I respected turned out to be one of the best things I could have ever done (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 631305
Speaker 1: Tell us about that job?
Speaker 2: Well, it was absolutely fabulous.  I mentioned earlier the--some of the innovative deals I was doing at Bankers Trust, and those deals had to be very innovative to get done what the client wanted done but we had to walk a very careful line because the old Glass-Steagall law [Glass-Steagall Act of 1932] was still in effect.
Speaker 1: Glass-Steagall was the separation of commercial banks from investment banks.
Speaker 2: It divided commercial and investment banks.  So we had to walk a careful line to be sure we were still on the right side of the law, but still able to do the deal.  I found myself at the treasury department [U.S. Department of the Treasury], sitting in the room with Paul Volcker, head of the Federal Reserve board [Federal Reserve System], Don Regan [Donald Regan] who had been chairman of Merrill Lynch [Merrill Lynch and Co., Inc.; Merrill Lynch Wealth Management] and who was then secretary of the treasury, with Todd Conover [C. Todd Conover] who was comptroller of the currency, who had jurisdiction you know over many of the banks in the country, looking at the same kinds of issues from the policy point of view, looking at Glass-Steagall and figuring out whether or not we wanted to make some changes to, to, to Glass-Steagall so that commercial and investment banks could essentially enter each other's businesses.  So I had to at some point just pinch myself and say, how on earth did you from Birmingham, Alabama, young girl from Birmingham, Alabama, how did you get here (laughter)?
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: Fabulous times (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: Now--
Story_ID: 631306
Speaker 1: --And this is the era of the beginning of Reaganomics?  Is that correct?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Can you explain a little bit--were you, did you partake in the development of the economic, this economic policy?
Speaker 2: Well I partook of it in an international sense.  Art Laffer [Arthur Laffer] you know the creator of Laffer Curve, a very famous economist, he drew that Laffer curve of about tax rates and economic productivity on a napkin, he was one of President Reagan's [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] advisors.  Art Laffer was a professor at University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  Art is a friend to this day.   You know, I, I went into the Reagan administration but it's, it's interesting how things happen.  Some things are serendipitous.  It happened that from an economic standpoint thinking things like free markets and capitalism, the power of free markets to lift people economically and even socially.  I believed in as well.  I believed in those things very strongly.  So I ended up working for Reagan and I of course I found out you know more about him before I actually accepted the job, but his philosophy just very much coincided with, with my philosophy.  So the way that I helped was more when I was on the board of the International Monetary Fund.  This was after the job at treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury]; I was thinking I stayed in that job two years, sorry want to ask something else.
Speaker 1: Yea before we move on the I- IMF (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes.
Speaker 1: --you stay in treasury for two years?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And then you had another job before the IMF, didn't you?  The executive director of the Inter- oh that is IMF.
Speaker 2: That came after (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay. Okay--
Story_ID: 631307
Speaker 1: So you're at treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury] for two years and it's the era of the Reagan- Reaganomics--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and what do you do after you, you leave treasury, what's your next career move?
Speaker 2: My, my next career move was still in the Reagan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] administration.  Quite frankly I had thought that I would do that job for two years and then go back to New York [New York] and I was about to do that and then Don Regan [Donald Regan], secretary of treasury, Beryl Sprinkel [Beryl W. Sprinkel], the great economist now deceased who was undersecretary and the White House all said, "We would really like for you to take a presidential appointment, presidential appointment, [U.S.] Senate confirmation on the board of the International Monetary Fund."  I was a little skeptical at first because the IMF, the International Monetary Fund is comprised largely of Ph.D. economists and they said, "No we really need a banker there because the debt crisis."  Part of the reason that they had asked me to come to treasury department was because the treasury was deeply involved when Brazil, Mexico, Argentina were all you know they walked in the door of the treasury on August 13, 1982, eight months after I arrived there and they said, "We're broke."
Speaker 1: Was this the oil crisis that was--
Speaker 2: No, not, not the oil crisis, it was, it was simply like you have today with some of the European countries.  Too much debt, over borrowing and, and a series of other economic matters that, that, that brought their economies to a halt essentially.  So the treasury had to do some lending.  We also were very much Tim McNamar [R. Timothy McNamar] and I and others at treasury were very much involved with organizing these loan packages if you will between the treasury, some other governments, the IMF, the World Bank and the commercial banks of the world and this was really one of the first times that you had such a massive effort to bring together the right kind of funding and loan extensions in order to to help set these countries right again.  Now so they asked me to go to the IMF board because this situation was still in process and even though the countries you know were making some strides, they still needed huge loans from the IMF and, and what my bosses Don Regan and, and presidential personnel at the White House said to me is that, "We really need a banker over at the IMF because again they have all basically economists and we still have to be involved in putting these, these packages together."  The job that they offered me that was available was on the board of the International Monetary Fund.  It's called the alternate executive director.  It is every country that is a member of the IMF, and at that time it was most of the countries in the world except for Russia and the Eastern Bloc and a couple of, a couple of others.  Every country is represented on the board of directors.  The large countries, certainly the United States, the G7 [Group of Seven], Italy, the United Kingdom, Germany, a couple of others all represented just their own country.  Some of the smaller countries like for instance you would have maybe ten Latin countries represented by one person or ten African countries represented by one person.  The United States then had a close to 20 percent of the voting power.  It still has probably about 18, 18 and a half something like that.  So the U.S. voice was, is, is--was and is very, very important in what happens in--at the IMF, and what happens in terms of lending to countries that need to borrow.
Story_ID: 631308
Speaker 1: What would you say your, your, the, the accomplishment is that you're the proudest of at the time that you were at the IMF [International Monetary Fund]?
Speaker 2: The, the thing that I'm most proud of is creation of a new lending facility.  Again it was that--
Speaker 1: Structural Adjustment--?
Speaker 2: --the Structural Adjustment Facility referred to shorthand the SAF.  It was later called the Expanded Structural Adjustment Facility [sic. Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility].  The reason was that our [U.S.] Congress and the other governments around the world decided to add more money to that fund.  But here's the reason that it was significant.  The IMF was lending to countries and when the IMF lends, it negotiates economic programs with the country.  Those economic programs are focused primarily on fiscal policy and in other words budgets, how much you're spending, taxes and that kind of thing and monetary policy.  What they--what those programs were not focused on as I saw it were the things that actually, the business part of it.  The practical things that really get economic growth and that comes from business, it does not come from government.  So I saw that issue.  The other issue was that many finance ministers and essential bank governors would walk into my door and so they would always meet with the United States because of our strong voting power as well as with the management of the IMF and so many of them said to me the IMF and the World Bank, which is the sister institution to the IMF are giving us different conditions, different things that they want us to meet when we borrow from each institution and they frequently conflict with each other.  And I said this doesn't make sense.  So that was one thing that didn't make sense.  The other thing that didn't make sense was that when we were, even though we were lending to a country and they would pay down some of the money, the next year or the year after, they were back again with the same problem and I said, "We're not addressing the problems, we're not addressing all of the problems."  The Structural Adjustment Facility was aimed at doing that.  Number one it brought the IMF and the World Bank together to negotiate with the country together and to be sure that the economic conditions that they were requiring were in sync with each other but number two, I wanted us to focus and we did focus and the Structural Adjustment Facility on investment policy.  In other words with the right regulations in place so that people living in an African country, a Latin country, an Asian country would want to keep their money at home and invest it there.  Were the right policies in place where they could attract foreign investment? Were the right tax policies in place so that they were not confiscating an enormous amount of the productivity of business?  Was there a lot of red tape that prevented or that hindered the formation of new businesses and new companies? Those were the kinds of things that the SAF addressed, addressed.
Speaker 1: Who was head of the IMF at that time?
Speaker 2: Initially it was Jacques de Larosiere and during my last oh, year and a half there, it was Michel Camdessus.  Both Frenchmen, both outstanding.
Story_ID: 631309
Speaker 1: Now so, it's 1985, you're thirty-seven years old--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --pretty young for such an amazing job.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: And what do you do next?  I mean how do you top the IFF--IMF [International Monetary Fund] experience?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Well, I talked to various people when I was considering leaving the IMF and I considered New York [New York] again but I'd also grown to like Washington [D.C.] and one of my friends actually got my resume to Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and it got to the office of the chairman, my resume, and again another serendipitous event because when he saw the resume, he asked to see me and ended up hiring me to create for them a department of international finance.
Speaker 1: And Fannie Mae is a quasi-governmental entity that--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Quasi-governmental entity that spends--that uses trillions dollars of assets to help finance the housing markets.  Unfortunately as I am sure you know Fannie Mae in, in recent years has not fared well.  It began taking a lot more risks quite frankly than it did in the years that I was there and so it's, it's having its share of problems.  But at the time Fannie Mae was in, in good shape.  They were the second largest borrower in the world next to the U.S. government, but they were raising maybe 1 or 2 percent of their funding outside of the United States.  So this made no sense given the growth of international capital markets.  I was asked to come in to take Fannie Mae into the international capital markets.
Speaker 1: And is that what you did?
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: And how long did you stay at Fannie Mae?
Speaker 2: I was only there two years but we had some very major accomplishments.  One of the things that was the following, Fannie Mae is a big issuer of mortgage backed securities, those kinds of securities that as I said after they started taking more risks you know ran into big problems later.  At that time they were not taking the kind of risk that they took in the last decade.  So they wanted to market and sell their mortgage backed securities to overseas investors not just to U.S. investors as well as their bonds and as well as their equity.  So I was--what was said to me was one you know finance, you know the financial world.  If you know finance you can learn mortgages you know because they have some special features and two because you've been on the IMF board and the treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury] and you must know everybody around the world, both of which were true.  So what I was charged with doing was again getting their securities known and ultimately sold overseas.  One of the, one of the big things that we did was the following: I went to call on and some of my first months at Fannie Mae, many Japanese institutional investors. Japan at the time was major in terms of investing in treasury securities and other securities around the world.  They had huge, huge reserves.  So I needed first to understand their investment objectives for their commercial banks, the insurance companies, the trust banks, all of them and then I, I heard--what I ended up hearing were two things, one on the mortgage backed securities, they really didn't understand you know the securities and how they worked and different interest rates and rate environments and two, that they didn't have the back off assistance to handle you know the prepayments that happens if people pay off their mortgages, but they were interested.  I then met Larry Fink [Laurence D. Fink].  Larry today runs BlackRock [BlackRock, Inc.], which is if not the largest one of the largest mutual fund companies in the world.  Larry had just started his firm at the time.  But he's one of the people who created the mortgage backed securities market and when I met Larry at a dinner at Fannie Mae, he was talking about a mutual fund of mortgage backed securities that he just done for U.S. investors.  The light kind of went on in my head and I said that's the answer for the Japanese.  I got together with Larry, we talked about it, he agreed that this would make sense, we formulated something in conjunction with the treasury people and the other people at Fannie Mae who were in the mortgage backed securities area and we ended up creating a prototype, the first deal was a half billion dollar deal for Japanese investors, institutional investors.  Fannie Mae did several more.  Freddie Mac [Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation] ended up copying it, so again it was a new innovative--innovative deal to answer a specific need.
Story_ID: 631310
Speaker 1: And in 1991 you were named woman of the year in the business conference, at a business conference?
Speaker 2: University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], is that the one I think?
Speaker 1: Was that result of the work that you had done at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association]?
Speaker 2: I think it was a result of, of many things.  I think it was the Fannie Mae work.  I think it was my banking years as well as the things that I'd done in government.
Speaker 1: So what made you--
Speaker 2: It's a nice honor.
Speaker 1: --and what made you decide to leave Fannie Mae?
Speaker 2: Well, I was offered another position (laughter) this time back in the government.  This is when George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush], Bush the father, Bush 41 we call him, was president.  We were in the middle of the savings and loan crisis and in the middle of that crisis there was some legislation referred to as FIRREA, F-I-R-R-E-A [Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989].  I can't remember what all the initials stand for, but what I was asked to come and do was to run a part of the system that had oversight responsibility for the twelve Federal Home Loan Banks.  The home loan banks did a lot of lending to the S and L industry.  So they were one of the main funders for, for the S and Ls.  It was the healthy part of the system, but even though it was the healthy part of the system, we had many requirements that had been put on us by the FIRREA legislation and one of those requirements was to create an affordable housing program and to use some of our profits to do that.  Another was to help keep the savings and loan industry afloat, the part of it that could still float I should say.  The savings and loans were mostly members of the Federal Home Loan Bank System and therefore for their capital as members they put in capital so they expected dividends.  So we had to fashion a dividend policy that kept my twelve banks healthy as well as you know helped the S and Ls with their funding requirements and then of course we lent money to the S and Ls as well.  So I had to oversee all of those things as well as the, the, the regulation or viability of my banks, which were at that time about 150 billion [dollars] in assets.
Story_ID: 631311
Speaker 1: Now at that time where you're overseeing all of these banks--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --you mentioned Larry Fink [Laurence D. Fink] was one of these people that you had interacted with previously--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --who are the other individuals? Are there, are there other any other women or minorities that are involved at a high level in the business at this time?
Speaker 2: In, in that particular business?
Speaker 1: Or even in the banking, the banking sector at that time?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay what I'm trying to understand is you're still a very young woman--
Speaker 2: Yes, okay.
Speaker 1: --in a very high powered position.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Are there other women or other minorities that were there working with you?  Are you the trailblazer?
Speaker 2: Well, quite frankly I guess I was the trailblazer.  I guess I was the trailblazer.  I was the first, the first black female you know vice president at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] and running a major department and doing business for them around the world now.  That doesn't mean that there were not blacks and women in other parts of the financial world.  My friend Walter Morris [ph.] who lives here in this area was in banking, he ran a mortgage bank, he ran part of a commercial bank for a while, he was in California and then New York [New York] and I still had friends who were in banking in New York when we had worked there together when we were much younger, but in terms of these kinds of things I, I can't think of, I can't think of anyone else offhand.
Story_ID: 631312
Speaker 1: And when you're doing all this work, are you--Condi Rice [Condoleezza Rice] is also in the administration, right?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.
Speaker 1: That little girl that was trailing you around is now here in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yes.
Speaker 1: Are you guys socializing?  What are you doing together?
Speaker 2: Well it's really funny because you know Condi's family left Birmingham [Alabama] when she was I think about twelve years old.  We'll have to verify that age.  They moved first to Tuscaloosa [Alabama] and then they moved to Colorado.  So when her family left, we had no more contact.  Then one day I got a phone call and this is when we were both working for President Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush].  I didn't know she was here, she didn't know I was here.  And I got a phone call from someone who had worked with me when I was on the board of the International Monetary Fund and this Meg Lundsager. Meg was a career government person not a political appointee so she was normally at treasury [U.S Department of the Treasury] and she had come to the IMF to work in our office for a while and then she went to the National Security Council.  So when she was at the National Security Council, she called me and she said, "Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Bush], my new boss is someone that you must know because she's from Birmingham.  Her name is Condi Rice."  And I said, "No Meg, I, I don't know a Condi Rice."  And I'm very busy because I'm always focused on getting the job done and getting the next deal done or whatever it might be and she said, "Oh no you have to know her.  She's kind of around your age, Birmingham is only, only so big.  Condi Rice."  And I said, "Meg, I, I don't know her.  You know I gotta get ready for this trip, this meeting whatever," but she was persistent and she said, "Well, her full name is Condoleezza Rice."  At that point I almost dropped the phone.  I said, "You are kidding me.  Little Condoleezza Rice is your boss?"  (Laughter) And so she got us back together and the three of us had lunch and Conde and I have been together ever since.  The great thing was that you see I was very close to her father [John Wesley Rice, Jr.] when I was growing up in the youth fellowship.  He was also the guidance counselor at Ullman High [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama] where I went to high school.  So when Condi and I started getting together and then she was of course living in Stanford [California] and her father had moved out there and I started going out, I went on the board of the Hoover Institution [Hoover Institution on War, Revolution, and Peace] and when I would go for my board meetings that's when I got back together with her father and I would stay you know for a couple of days with him and we reconnected in such a wonderful way.  I mean I felt like he was my godfather almost.
Speaker 1: So then you both find yourself in Washington?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: In high powered jobs--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and you had an ally, a cohort here then at that point in time.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah a cohort but we were in very different fields, very different fields.  So but what was wonderful for me and I think wonderful for her it was like finding family again you know because even though you know we were somewhat different in age, we both had that common background and common upbringing and our families knew each other so we saw each other quite a bit when she was here in that first national--this is when she was running the Eastern Europe, Russia part of National Security, but then when she came back as, as head of the NSC and then secretary of state, we really formed a bond.  It was really, really like having family here.
Speaker 1: What were you doing at that time in your career when she came back?
Speaker 2: When Condi came back, I was primarily serving on corporate boards.
Story_ID: 631313
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You started your own business by that time, right?
Speaker 2: I--yes, I had started my business, yes.
Speaker 1: And that would have been in what, 1991 or so (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Ninety-one [1991], '91 [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay. And what was, what was your business?
Speaker 2: My business was doing advisory work for foreign governments as well as U.S. companies.  Foreign governments it was kind of a takeoff on my IMF work and and it was primarily helping governments with their banking and regulatory systems.  It was--my IMF [International Monetary Fund] as well as my treasury [U.S. Department of the Treasury] and Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association] work so it was mainly developing country, emerging market governments that needed to modernize like for instance Bulgaria when the wall [Berlin Wall] came down and when Eastern Europe came out from behind the curtain [Iron Curtain], I mean one of the first things that they wanted to do is how do we become capitalist and so I was on a mission for instance to Bulgaria, headed the banking part of the mission to study what they had and to make recommendations as to how to come into the modern, modern world for their banking systems and their financial markets.  I've advised other governments like for instance during the Asian debt crisis, Korea, the Philippines, and others.  The other side of the business I was working with U.S companies that wanted to expand abroad and some of it was helping them understand the markets, particularly the financial markets.  Sometimes it was meeting people at high levels in government and doing studies for them and that kind of thing.
Story_ID: 631314
Speaker 1: So you move to the corporate boar- board world?
Speaker 2: I did (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How did you do that?  I mean a lot of people wanna be on corporate boards, how did you make that, that move?
Speaker 2: Well, you know it's clear, it is something that I had dreamed about.  I remember when I was at Bankers Trust and every couple of months or so, I'd see this very distinguished men walking through to the boardroom, one of whom was Vernon Jordan [HistoryMaker Vernon E. Jordan, Jr.], who later became a friend, and I would look at this and I would say, "Oh my goodness, I wanna be on boards someday."  But I hadn't started to pursue it.  The way it actually happened was I had met a man who was head of the trust department at a local bank which is then a local bank here in the Washington [D.C.] area, American Security Bank, his name is Walter Fatzinger [Walter R. Fatzinger, Jr.].  That's F-A-T-Z-I-N-G-E-R.  Walter remains a friend to this day.  In fact we serve on a board together now.  But Walter and I just started getting together for lunch.  He got to know me, got to know some of the things I've done professionally and then one day out of the blue, he said to me, "I'd love for you to come in and meet the chairman of the bank.  I think you'd make a great board member."  And indeed he arranged for me to meet the chairman.  The chairman invited me on the board.  It was banking.  I knew banking very well and that was my very first board.
Speaker 1: And then after that, you were on Texaco's [Texaco, Inc.] board, is that correct?
Speaker 2: I was on Texaco's board.
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about how that came to be?
Speaker 2: The Texaco board I got a call from a headhunter.  I got a call from a headhunter who asked me if I would be interested.  And I said, "Oh my goodness of course."  Now it happened to be at the time when Texaco was going through a difficult racial problem and they already had a black on the board, a black person on the board but I, I think, I think they did you know want more representation you know from the black community but they also needed a banker because they had their other banker who was going off the board.  One of--their corporate secretary actually saw my my short bio and a picture of me in I believe a prospectus from Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation where I was on the board.  So he or I know it was some his, his number two to the corporate secretary, so the number two the assistant corporate secretary walked into the corporate secretary and said, "How about [HistoryMaker] Mary Bush?" Corporate secretary said, "Who's Mary Bush?"  And then they started researching and then they got a headhunter to call me.  Went up to interview with the corporate secretary who's very active--
Speaker 1: Now, where was this? The Texaco headquarters at that time?
Speaker 2: I'm sorry?  Texaco was in Purchase, New York, but we did the interview I think we did it right here in New York [New York]--in Washington but after he did his assessment then he wanted me to go and see the CEO, chairman and CEO and that was in Purchase and they did decide to invite me on the board.
Speaker 1: Were there any other women on the board at that time (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, there was one other woman.  I can't remember her name at the moment, but we could research it.  I think she was a, she was CEO of something.  Can't remember.
Story_ID: 631315
Speaker 1: Now this is the oil company, I mean this is--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --these are oil companies.  These--this is known as a man's world.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What was that like?  Tell us about your experience on being on a big oil company's board?
Speaker 2: I thoroughly enjoyed it.  I've been on, I've been on a couple of these boards that are considered very macho type boards like Briggs and Stratton and when I say Briggs and Stratton to a woman--
Speaker 1: That's Milwaukee, Wisconsin?
Speaker 2: It is and it's lawnmowers and generators and women usually say, "What's that?"  And men say, "Oh, you're on the board of Briggs and Stratton?"  'Cause they think about these big you know lawn equipment and that kind of thing, but Texaco [Texaco, Inc.] was it was wonderful.  It was wonderful learning the oil business.  The oil business is affected and affects so many things in our personal lives, in our businesses.  So many, it's affected by so many things around the world.  So it was a great chance to really use my experiences, my international experiences as well as the financial experiences that I've had.  Texaco also had two or three women who were in very senior positions including the positions that are thought of as typically male positions, like exploration and development, very senior women.  So it was terrific.
Story_ID: 631316
Speaker 1: What other boards do you serve on?
Speaker 2: I am on the board of Pioneer mutual funds [Pioneer Investment Management, Inc.; Amundi Pioneer Asset Management, Inc.], just came from that board meeting.  It's located in Boston [Massachusetts] about fifty billion [dollars] in assets owned by large Italian bank [Pioneer Global Asset Management S.p.A.].  I'm on the board of Marriott International [Marriott International, Inc.], ManTech [ManTech International Corporation], which is a defense contracting company out here in the Washington [D.C.] area out in northern Virginia.  Great, great little company, as are all of them.  But ManTech's business is also typically a very male business you know.  It's all about high tech system securities, cyber security.  They do a lot of work for the [U.S.] military, the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense], all of the things that require ultra high security in terms of communications and the like.
Speaker 1: Do you, do you serve on board committees?
Speaker 2: Oh of course, yes.
Speaker 1: So tell us about some of the board committees that you serve on?
Speaker 2: Well my work typically has been on audit committees.  I chaired the audit committee at Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation, MGIC, oh about twelve, fifteen years.  Finance committees, governance and compensation and compensation as you know now has--is getting as much, if not more, attention then audit.  In fact when, when the Sarbanes-Oxley legislation [Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002] passed, this was after all of the accounting and corporate scandals which I'm sure you recall, that passed legislation that required so much more of companies and their audit committees in terms of the controls and, and just being sure that everything was right and shareholders were getting the proper information and at the time I was on four audit committees (laughter), which was really kind of a heavy load as we were trying to figure out all of our new responsibilities, and to do them properly.
Story_ID: 631317
Speaker 1: You also--tell us a little bit--you give lots of speeches and write articles--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --can you tell us a little bit about your, your, your work in that area and the corporate governance area.
Speaker 2: Sure, yes.  Well this year, I, I spoke at the Outstanding Directors Exchange [Financial Times Outstanding Directors Exchange]--I'm sorry last year.  I, I spoke at George Washington University [Washington, D.C.], the Florida Directors' Institute [Florida Directors' Institute Program] in Florida and the subject matter has been varied but, but similar some of it is about corporate governance as you said and the responsibilities that directors have and what I would call a new world and it's a new world because we didn't just have 9/11 [September 11, 2001] terrorist against the defense department [U.S. Department of Defense] and the World Trade Center [New York, New York] and you know the airplane that went down, we've also had corporate terrorism.  And that corporate terrorism has made--has, has put a lot more attention by the regulators, by boards, by managements on making sure that things are done right and what I, what I mean by when I say things are done right, what I mean is the accounting that are reporting to the public, are reporting to shareholders, is accurate, that's it's correct, that we are not favoring say one set of investors over another by giving them information that the other set doesn't have, that employees are given the right story about what's going on in the company particularly if they have 401(k) plans for instance and a lot of their funds are invested in those plans.  You'll recall the--some of the problems with some of the companies that, that did face those problems where employees even lost a lot of money.  So--
Speaker 1: So you--so corporate terrorism to you would be things like companies like Enron [Enron Corporation], that type of thing?
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely.  Companies where, where the managements, where managements don't act with integrity, yeah, where a managements do not act with integrity and where people end up suffering because of it.  Their investors suffer, their employees suffer.  The public suffers.  So some of that, some of my speaking is on government--governance, some of it is on risk management, how does, how does a board make sure that it's appropriately  monitoring the various types of risks in a company whether they are operational risks, financial risks, reporting risks, reputational risks, the entire thing some of it's on audit and sort of latest developments and things that are going on around the world, but I also speak on things like I've done in Germany and Austria, several times in the last five or six years, the Stern Stewart Institute, one subject one year was China and it's growth in the world and how that affects Europe, how it affects the, the United States.  I speak on things--I was asked to speak once out in Chicago [Illinois] at the Economic Club of Chicago on what it takes to be on a corporate board or how do--is it--how do women prepare to be on a corporate, corporate board.  And what I said was that it starts in childhood because it's all about the values that you learn or that you absorb because I think that's the most important thing, integrity is the most important thing.  Clearly to be selected for a board you have to have the right kinds of experience, you have to have a certain degree of professional development, hopefully you've excelled in whatever your field is, whether it's finance or marketing or the law or science.  But your character and integrity, that's where it all starts.  So I speak on things like that as well.
Story_ID: 631318
Speaker 1: Well now we've (clears throat) taken a long trip from Birmingham--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to various places in your life, and this is usually the point in the interview where we ask you some more philosophical questions.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: And you know one of them would be: what do you want to be remembered for?
Speaker 2: What I want to be remembered for is my soul.  I, you know we, we started out I think you asked me what's one of my favorite expressions or quotes and it's, "To thine own self be true" ['Hamlet,' William Shakespeare]. "To thine own self to be true," to me rings, knowing what you are and staying true to your principles and hopefully for the majority of folks those are good principles for integrity and I wanna be known also or remembered for helping people and helping young people. I do a lot of that, kind of one on one now.  I mentor young folk, kind of all ages both professionally and personally.  I'm also writing a book and this book is about some of the things we talked about.  It's about growing up in Birmingham, Alabama, in a very turbulent time, but the real focus of the book is the large number of very, very successful black kids that came out of that environment and why, why we are so successful, why is it that that we have the blessing of being leaders in the world and I think a lot of that really came from our communities, our parents, our teachers, the messages that they gave us, you can do and be anything that you want in life, but you've gotta be twice as good and it was about faith and it was about hard work.  And I see an America today that I, I just don't think that those kinds of values are as strong as they were in America when I was growing up, certainly in the neighborhood in which I grew up [Titusville, Birmingham, Alabama].  And I--so a part of my reason for writing the book is to tell this untold story, but it's also hopefully to inspire and motivate young people today to let them know that it's okay to be smart, it's really cool to be smart and to let them know that if, if they use their talents, that they develop and use their talents, it's good for them, it'll be good for their children, it'll be good for our country.
Story_ID: 631319
Speaker 1: And looking forward, looking forward in this next phase of your life, what do you want to focus on?  What do you want your contribution, your continuing contribution to be?
Speaker 2: I, I, I want it to, to focus much more on what I've just been talking about.  I've spent a lot of time at my career in the financial world and the international world.  I love it.  I love, I loved banking and finance, I love serving on the boards.  It allows me to use a lot of the skills and experiences that I've developed or had in my life, but I really wanted to be focused much more on young people and in addition to the book, I've got some other ideas as to things I wanna do which I haven't gone public on yet (laughter), but that's, that's, that's what I'd like to do.
Story_ID: 631320
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Augusta Bennet Bush] or father [Johnny Bush] get to see you rise and move through the ranks?
Speaker 2: Not far enough.  My father, my father got to see me do my very first deal when I was at Citibank [First National City Bank; Citibank, N.A.] and it was a small deal, but to him it was just extraordinary.  I mentioned the old Swift meatpacking company [Swift and Company], Esmark [Esmark, Inc.], they had a subsidiary in Korea that needed to borrow money and I had been you know just very diligent about talking to the treasurer out in Chicago [Illinois] and you know helping him understand the market and what was going on.  Banks didn't have as much local currency you know like in Korea and other countries at the time to lend so sometimes you had to wait for a while and so we finally had currency available, made him an offer and when he called, he called to accept my offer and I got that deal and when I called to tell my father and it was just $3 million okay, $3 million having done you know half billion, billion dollar deals, like it's really tiny, my father said, "3 million," (laughter).  It was almost like he couldn't conceive of it so he got to see that but as I said my parents had both been married before so we came, my brother [Ronald Bush] and I came late in life.  So he didn't live much for only, he only lived a couple of years beyond that.  My, my mother got to see that as well, but that was about it.
Speaker 1: Is there anything else you'd like to share with us?
Speaker 2: Only that this has been absolute fun (laughter).  Absolute fun and I hope you continue to do this with many people around the country, and I've enjoyed it very, very much.
Story_ID: 631321
Speaker 1: First the occasion was what I call the Birmingham [Alabama] dinners.  When Condi [Condoleezza Rice] moved to Washington [D.C.], I was seeing her a lot and then several of our other friends said you know we wanna see Condi too.  So I started something here called the Birmingham dinners, getting all the Birmingham friends together.  But then we rotated.  We go to Condi's house, Freeman's house and this is one at Freeman's house.  So, on the left Danetta Thornton [Danetta Thornton Owens] who was my French teacher in high school [Samuel Ullman High School, Birmingham, Alabama].  She also taught Condi on Saturdays, taught her French.  Condoleezza Rice is the second one.  Then there's Mary [HistoryMaker Mary Bush] of course and Dottie Porter [Dorothy Porter] who is the wife of my minister [John Thomas Porter] at Sixth Avenue Baptist Church [Birmingham, Alabama].  Jackie Hrabowski [Jacqueline Hrabowski] on the far right who's the wife of [HistoryMaker] Freeman Hrabowski who grew up with me and Freeman's head is peeking over the back.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is my mother, Augusta Bush [Augusta Bennet Bush].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  About what year?
Speaker 1: I don't know, sorry. That's my father Johnny Bush.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: That's one of my favorite pictures, my brother and me, Ronald Bush and Mary Kate.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  You're about what four years old?
Speaker 1: I would guess about that yeah. That's a note from President George Bush [President George Herbert Walker Bush].  I had the great honor that he offered me several jobs in his administration, deputy secretary of the treasury [U.S Department of the Treasury] or undersecretary of the treasury and after much prayer and meditation and for a lot of personal reasons, I finally had to say no and he's telling me thanks for my kind note and that he understood why, but I really wanted to do it.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay, thank you.
Speaker 1: That's me with George Shultz [George P. Shultz], former secretary of state.  This was at a party that I gave here for Condi Rice on her fiftieth birthday.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  And what was the occasion here?
Speaker 1: This was also this was the night before on Condi's fiftieth birthday.  We had a party which I helped arrange at the British embassy.  The surprise for me was the president was my seat mate.  That's me Mary Kate Bush and President George W. Bush [President George Walker Bush], W.
Speaker 2: This is Mary Bush on the left, Jennifer Howse [Jennifer L. Howse] on the right.  This is when I was leaving the board of the March of Dimes [March of Dimes Foundation] where I served for two terms.  Jennifer was president of the March of Dimes.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  All right.
Speaker 2: One of my most prized possessions, me Mary Kate Bush and the Dalai Lama after a fifteen minute audience with him--and here in Washington.
Speaker 1: This is the advisory council for the Global Leadership Foundation which is the organization of F.W. de Klerk.  He is the one, two, three, fourth from the left.  de Klerk and I am the second from the left.  de Klerk was president of South Africa and was the man who freed Nelson Mandela.  I'm a member of his council.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: Alan Greenspan former head of the Federal Reserve board [Federal Reserve System] on the left that's me Mary Kate Bush on the right at an economic club [Economic Club of New York] dinner in New York [New York].
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: These people are the chief, the top management of Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corporation, MGIC, Jeff Lane [Jeffrey H. Lane] on the left, Curt Culver [Curt S. Culver], Mike Lauer [J. Michael Lauer], that's upon my retirement from the board.
Speaker 2: This is me presenting the results of a report for a committee that I headed, congressionally chartered committee on reforming foreign aid.  So that's me on the left in the red jacket.  President Bush on the right and we're making our--I am making our report to him at the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Can you start on the left, please.
Speaker 2: On the left is my great-great-grandmother Sylva Ann Moten [ph.] and on the right is my aunt whom I never knew, my father's sister, and her name is Mary Kate Bush.  I am named for her.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: On the left is my grandfather James Bush, my father's father.  On the right is my--James Bush my father's father.  This is Rena Bush, my father's mother, my grandmother.
Speaker 1: This is the first youth fellowship group at my church, Sixth Avenue Baptist Church in Birmingham.  My minister is in the center, one, two, three, four, five, six, seventh from the left and I, Mary Kate Bush, am second from the right.  Cheryl McCarthy is the first one on the right my best friend in high--in growing up in Birmingham.  Cheryl McCarthy and then next to me on my--next to me on the other side is Sharon Geitan [ph.] who was one of my very close friends and her daughters are two of my mentees.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my grandmother on my mother's side, my maternal grandmother Georgia Etta Bennet.
Speaker 2: This is my maternal grandfather James Bennet.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) This is me Mary Kate Bush when I was about eight or nine years old.
Speaker 2: That's me Mary Bush article in Fortune magazine about some of my accomplishments when I was at Fannie Mae [Federal National Mortgage Association].
Speaker 1: This is the board of directors of the International Monetary Fund where I was the alternate executive director for the United States.  I'm way in the back on the left, second row, right there.
Speaker 2: This is a wonderful letter sent to me by President Bush, hand delivered by Condi Rice on my sixtieth birthday (laughter).
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE):  Oops, I'm sorry. Can I get that one back there?
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This, this is a letter from President Regan [President Ronald Wilson Reagan] when I left the board of the International Monetary Fund congratulating me on some of my accomplishments while there.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: This is me, Mary Bush, in the Philippines giving advice to the government of the Philippines during the Asian financial crisis.
