Story_ID: 58815
Speaker 1: Okay, we're going to start out by slating it and my name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer and Scott Stearns is the videographer.  And I'd like to have you start out by stating your name and spelling it for us, and give us your date of birth and today's date?
Speaker 2: All right, my name is Bernice Brown, B-R-O-W-N.  The first name is spelled B-E-R-N-I-C-E.  I was born June 19th, 1935, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
Speaker 1: And I need to have your middle name. We're going to-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My full name is Bernice Leona, maiden name is Baynes, B-A-Y-N-E-S, and my last name is Brown.
Speaker 2: And your date of birth again?
Speaker 1: And my date of birth is June 19th, 1935.
Speaker 2: Okay, and today's date?
Speaker 1: Today's date is March the 26th, 9--2002.
Speaker 2: And also your profession?
Speaker 1: My title is that of academic dean in charge of a welfare-to-work program for all of City College of San Francisco.  I call my profession education, an educator and that spans everything from teaching at the elementary and secondary level through the college or four year level.
Story_ID: 58816
Speaker 1: Okay.  This--there are five questions I ask of everyone--they're somewhat "People Magazine-ish" but I ask them of everyone.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably seafood, fish.  I am a--I really enjoy seafood and I like shrimp and fish.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: My favorite color is blue.  Interesting, blue is my favorite color but I wear a lot of browns and beige tones.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: My favorite time of year is spring time.  And it's changed.  When I moved to the west coast from the east coast, spring time became my favorite time of the year.  On the east coast, the fall because of the brilliant colors, but you only find them truly on the east coast.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I guess my favorite phrase or saying is, "all things are possible if you believe."
Story_ID: 58817
Speaker 1: Okay.  We're going to start and I'd like to start out by asking about your mother.  If you could give her name and what you know about her growing up and her background.
Speaker 2: If I would give her a name?
Speaker 1: No, give her name.
Speaker 2: Give her name?  Her name was Henrietta Hodges Baynes and up until 1991, with the time at which my mother passed, we enjoyed a very close relationship.  We did not always live--we, you know before I got married of course I stayed with her and then after moving to the west coast, she moved to the west coast and lived in a family--our own kind of family compound, which is a set of flats that I happened to own.  My sister lives in one and I live in the other.  My mother's life, her earlier years I think had a great influence--knowing about her early years had a great influence on me and what I was able to do with my life.  She always felt-
Speaker 1: (BRIEF INTERRUPTION) She always felt that I should accomplish what it is I want.
Story_ID: 58818
Speaker 1: My mother had to be mother and father to the three of us.  I had an older brother and I have a younger sister.  But my mother always found a way to meet whatever our desires were.  When I was very young I thought I wanted to be a pianist and she gave me piano lessons which I immediately decided that was too much struggle.  But then I decided that I wanted to paint and she was very supportive of that and ultimately I went to college and have a degree in fine arts.  My mother was the kind of person who in fact did housework.  She scrubbed floors and cleaned bathrooms so that I could go to college and so that each of us could pursue what was whatever our life's goal.  I went to college.  I went to Carnegie Mellon [University, Pittsburgh] and part of the reason I was able to go was that my mother worked as a maid and housekeeper and it allowed for me to have a, what was called at that time, a remission of tuition so that I could cover the cost of going to school.  So I'm--if anybody has a hero, my mother was indeed my hero.
Speaker 2: Did she share with you any stories of her growing up?  She was born in (unclear)?
Speaker 1: She was born in Middletown, Delaware and she did.  Her mother died when she was quite young, she was about ten.  And she had an experience of being sent to live with relatives and then finding, it was a very unpleasant situation.  And so she wrote to her father who had remained in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and he brought her back.  And we knew my grandfather and we were very close to him because of course he was the person who had allowed her to kind of grow and do some of the things that she thought she wanted to do.  She married.  I think she must have been in her late teens, like maybe eighteen, nineteen.  And part of the reason she used to tell us was that she really wanted to get out from under her father's thumb and she was of course influenced by her peers who said, "Oh, this is the man you should marry," my father.  And she often talked about the struggles and I watched what she was able to do later in life, having had the experiences with my father who devoted a lot of his time to himself and to his mother at the expense of his own family.  And then at the time that my grandfather, my mother's father died, I think it was the day after the funeral that my father then said to my mother, "We'll get a divorce."  So that I knew the experience and what she was going through, but she never let it deter her.  It didn't get her down.  And it was that kind of strength that she had and you know as I grew up and got married and of course she didn't like my choice and I discovered that she was always able to get over it, to put that behind her, to quote forgive and move on to the next thing.  So that's the kind of role model that I've had all my life.  And my mother was also the kind of person that often she was my best friend.  I would go to her and talk to her about things that we could talk about family things, but I could also talk about my friends.  And she always took on my friends as her friends.  So even as a working adult, she would--my colleagues would come to the home and my mother was as comfortable with them as she was with me.  And that I think ultimately had its effect on how I see myself and what I see might be my way of contributing to others.
Speaker 2: Now when did your parents get divorced?
Speaker 1: In nineteen, I believe it was 1949.  You said-
Speaker 2: And you were about--?
Speaker 1: I was about twelve.
Story_ID: 58819
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me any--what you know about your father and his background?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My father, I did not know his father and he never commented.  My father grew up with his mother and after the--my father was in World War II.  After--and I can recall the times when I still have this image of my mother packing a box to send off to him.  You know they put cookies and things in the box when they'd send things to the soldiers.  But I also recall that when the war was over and my father came back, he did not live with us, he stayed with his mother.  I recall going to junior high school and my brother, my older, my brother who was older and I, every morning on the way to school we had to stop by my father's house to get lunch money because he wouldn't give us an allowance or money for the week.  He only wanted to give us the lunch money the day that we were going to school.  That was to make sure he wasn't giving us any extra.  But it's very interesting because what I--I have those images and those recollections after I married--well actually after I--well I can recall when I graduated from high school, my father came to the graduation and presented me with a watch.  And it hurt my mom who had struggled to make it possible for me to achieve and excel in high school and he sort of walked in and took the bows, you know.  But she got over it.  When I graduated from college, he then became again the proud father but that was okay because we've all learned that he needed us perhaps more than we needed him.  By the time I married and moved West, my sister had already married, my younger, and she's the youngest and she was already here in California, my father came twice to visit.  While I was in college my father remarried and the--his second wife experienced two nervous breakdowns.  My mom would jokingly say, "I could have told that woman he would drive her crazy."  But when he came to visit, he brought his daughter by his second marriage, stayed with my sister and because we're in the flats together we took him to our summer place at Lake Tahoe.  He was--I can remember my daughter walking him down to the lake one morning, it was about a mile and a half from the condo and so we were able to develop a relationship that we did not have as young kids growing up.  I didn't have the father I thought I needed when I was growing up.  I can remember being ashamed cause I thought, "My god, I'm the only one who doesn't live with their father."  I mean little did I know, a lot of people were divorced or did not have what we call intact families.  But I always wanted to hide that.  And yet, I was fortunate because my sister and my brother and I, because of what my mother was able to do for us, every summer growing up, my mother sent me and my sister to summer camp and we didn't go for one two-week camping period, we sacrificed and sent us for two months.  That was probably one of the other most rewarding experiences of my childhood.  I have friends that I made while at summer camp who are still lifelong friends.  And it was my first introduction to black history because it happened to be a residential camp named for James Weldon Johnson [former American author, educator, lawyer, diplomat, songwriter, and Civil Rights activist].  And all of the counselors and all of the campers in fact, were African American.  And it was in Pennsylvania, the only residual camp where African Americans could stay.  But all of that is kind of tied into how my mother was able to compensate for the fact that I--we grew up without having my father on the scene.
Story_ID: 58820
Speaker 1: Let me ask you, when you--what is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory, I guess I was--well interestingly enough kindergarten.  I, as you know, I grew up in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania and I developed a fear of dogs from an experience I had walking home from kindergarten with someone else in the class and got bitten by a dog.  And so I kind of vividly remember that.  I also remember it was a time during which, of course it was during the war, the--World War II, during which they used to give you raisins and juice or something as a, you know when you first got into the classroom, so I remember that.  And I also remember being in grade school and finding, except for my current voice, vocal condition, I have a fairly low voice, octave, and I can't sing.  I have never been able to sing.  When I was in about the fifth or sixth grade the--this is something you will never forget.  The teacher--I was throwing the class off key.  We sang, the class got off key and the teacher then had all the boys sing and then she had all the girls sing and I threw them off key.  Then she went row by row until she found the row where they were singing out of key.  And then she went student by student until she got to me.  And interestingly enough, this is about the fifth or sixth grade, she then told me that I should go to the art room everyday rather than go to the music class.  But that was actually in my best interests because I enjoyed painting and drawing, I was good at it and that's what ultimately led me on to my career in painting for whatever it was worth.  I taught art for years.  So I, I sort of have those images growing up about I guess the hurdles that you experience in life.
Story_ID: 58821
Speaker 1: Now give me the schools you went to, you know starting with elementary school.
Speaker 2: All right.  I went to, the first school I went to in elementary school, the kindergarten was a school called Minors Field.  And it was torn down after I guess the first year and then we all transferred to Vann, Robert L. Vann Elementary School which is in, it's in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  After Robert L. Vann [Elementary School] and after my--oh, and then I went to Herron Hill Junior High School for one year I believe it was and then we moved from that side of town which was the Hill district to the North Side of town.  And moving to the north side of town, I went to an elementary school that went through the eighth grade and it was called McNaugher Elementary School.  From McNaugher [Elementary School]--and that's when my world really began to change.  The elementary and junior high school, the early, the first two, I was living in the ghetto, the black ghetto so my environment and my associates of course were all like me.  When we moved to the north side we moved to "an integrated community".  So when I went to McNaugher [Elementary School] I happened to be in this integrated classroom but I was the only African American.  That's what integration was back then.  And then I went to Perry High School and again I believe I was the only African American at Perry in that graduating class out of about three hundred, three hundred fifty students.  Then I went to college, I went right out of high school to, at that time it was Carnegie Tech, which ultimately became Carnegie Mellon University [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 58822
Speaker 1: Now when--you spoke of your interest or your aptitude for art.  When do you--when did that aptitude develop?
Speaker 2: Oh, when I was very young.  I used to draw pictures.  I can remember even I think right after my father came home from the service, I had drawn a picture of my brother and he wanted it and we gave it to him.  And I was still in grade school.  So it was always something that I enjoyed doing and very early.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you think that just, you were creative by nature or was it, were there things that around you, that stimulated that?
Speaker 2: Well, I think probably a combination of the two.  My mother liked to draw and my mother was creative.  She used to make our back to school outfits so she sewed.  Growing up she used to build our toys like little kitchen sink that you play house with.  So there was that kind of creative encouragement that was a part of our environment and--but I was the one who drew.  I was the one who wanted to draw.  My brother played the violin and he was again supported and encouraged.  He played first violin citywide.  So I think we were in a supportive creative environment.
Story_ID: 58823
Speaker 1: And can you give your siblings' name and their birth order and where you fit in there?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My brother, his name is Jacques Virgil Baynes.  He was born in 1932.  He's three years older than me.  Then I was the middle child and my sister was born in 1937, and her name is Virginia.  It's Virginia Baynes Wood.
Story_ID: 58824
Speaker 1: Now were you a child who sort of lived in your head or were you quiet or were you, you know, were you outgoing?  What kind of child were you?
Speaker 2: You know growing up, when I was very young I had pneumonia, a severe case of pneumonia which left me with a rheumatic heart.  And I think in part that contributed to a kind of quiet, introverted nature that I had.  But as I would go to summer camp, I was able to become more extroverted and I was able to develop a greater awareness of the people around me and I guess I developed a desire for communication and talking with people.  And while I used to like to think I was quite, shy, my friends would say to me, well Bernice, you're really not that shy, you know.  So I guess I evolved.
Story_ID: 58825
Speaker 1: And who else was influencing you, do you think, you know in those years, in your formative years?
Speaker 2: Well as I mentioned, the [James Weldon Johnson] camp experience was a tremendous influence.  It exposed me to a world of African Americans who were going to college, who were professionals.  And it presented the role models which I honestly believe if I were to hit the lotto, I'd start a camp somewhere because it just did so much in terms of stimulating and encouraging people, youth to want to excel and succeed.  And it didn't just end with summer camp.  Every year at the end of the camping season and into the Christmas season all of the campers were invited to go to one of the, to a senior citizen's home and take gifts and meet with the elderly in the community who were shut-ins.  And so it was character building and I think that that had a--it was giving.  It was the giving of one's self that I think had a great influence on me.  And I can't leave aside the fact that I think in every learning situation I was in, I've always had teachers who I've felt were a positive influence on my life.  I--when I went to college, I worked at the sum--at a summer camp.  I worked at the playground and, during the summer.  And I can recall the director of the playground saying to me and this is something that will always stick with me, and he said, "You must learn to enjoy every minute of your life.  If you're riding the bus," which I did every day, he said, "Think how you can enjoy that bus ride."  And something I think about.
Speaker 1: Now this camp, it was a black camp?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you--you never gave the camp's name.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Do you know anything of its history?
Speaker 2: Yes.  The camp was Camp James Weldon Johnson.  It was founded by the, I think the Urban League and it was primarily a, an opportunity for African American youth to have a residential camping experience because they didn't integrate camps.  And it was in Raccoon Creek State Park [Pennsylvania].  Interestingly enough, we've had a couple of camp reunions and you know I talk to lawyers now who were campers when we were campers, dentists who were campers and we've gone back to a reunion.  The person who had been the camp director for at least six, eight years remains a very close friend.  He's long since been retired of course and he and his wife live in Maryland, but I call and talk to them and they always call me by my camp name, you know.  So it was, it had that profound and impression on my life.
Story_ID: 58826
Speaker 1: I want to go back to--you said that--when you were talking about Derrick off camera.  But are there--you said camp had a profound experience on you so we-
Speaker 2: When you talk to Derrick you ask him about Camp [James Weldon] Johnson.  I mean it's just, it will ring a bell.
Speaker 1: Did you meet him in junior, in high school?
Speaker 2: I met him at Camp [James Weldon] Johnson.  I was about twelve years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now can you talk about the Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] that you grew up in?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Yes.  I grew up in August Wilson's Hill District.  You know all of August Wilson's plays are set in the Hill District in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And Pittsburgh was the quintessential black community.  It was the black community of the very poor and of the people of means.  Gradually, I can recall how people moved on from the Hill District to the South Side or to areas where we thought you know they're really moving up now.  But while it was a ghetto, because housing was not good, I can remember the house we lived in had no central heating.  We had the potbelly stove.  Through my mother's hard work we had to put a shower in the basement but we took baths in the tin tub.  So I have all of those memories about Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania].  And when we moved to the North Side, we moved to the housing project but that was a step up.  And in fact it was indeed a step up.  At the time that we moved into the housing project on the North Side of town, the build, one building away from us the mayor's brother lived.  The Mayor of Pittsburgh's brother lived in the housing project.  So that it was--it's interesting, there must have been about maybe eight buildings and there was one building that was dedicated to African Americans.  And all the other buildings in the housing project were for whites.  But it didn't matter 'cause we had the same improved conditions, you know more bedrooms, etc.  But in terms of Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], the growing experience, you could do--I guess your exposure you were not limited.  Like I used to go to Saturday art classes and one of the, one of my very good friends and I would meet midway between my house and the Carnegie Museum [of Art, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] which is where we went to Saturday art classes.  We would walk over the hill together.  That friend is Raymond Saunders.  Is that a name you know?
Speaker 1: [No audible response.]
Speaker 2: Ray and I would walk to school together, walk to Saturday art classes together because we had the exposure.  And it may have been a function of the size of the population of the entire city, but also there was a, I think there was constantly a, an effort to help people get out of the doldrums of you know poverty and those conditions.  I was noticing in the most recent issue of BET--oh, not--Black Enterprise, and on the cover there are three African American media personalities, females.  And one is the daughter of a very close friend who you know we went grade school, went to Vann [Elementary School] together.  She went to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh] and I went to Carnegie Mellon [University] but we remained very good friends.  So I think Pittsburgh was able to spawn a population of not necessarily achievers, but a population of people who had a vision and who were willing to grow and move forward.
Story_ID: 58827
Speaker 1: Now when you--how did your decision to go to Carnegie Mellon, how did that come about?
Speaker 2: Well I was the artist and Carnegie Mellon [University] at that time was probably one of the top art schools on the East Coast.  People came from New York, Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you know the South to go to Carnegie Mellon [University] for art.  And also when I--there was no place else for me to go for art but Carnegie Mellon [University].  And it was not a matter of my not being able to get admitted, I didn't have academic problems at all and so I was able to pass their entrance exams, pre-SATs, but you know I could get in.  And then my mother enabled to help support me.  I got those little mini-scholarships you know where you get hundred dollars here or hundred fifty dollars there, but at Carnegie Mellon [University], that was not nearly enough.  And so she went to work and working in one of the men's dorms.
Speaker 1: Now did--at the university?
Speaker 2: Um-hmm, at Carnegie Mellon [University].
Speaker 1: Hmm, so she was close to her daughter still?
Speaker 2: That's right.  That's right.
Story_ID: 58828
Speaker 1: Did you--how--what was that experience like for you even though it was in the same city, it opened up a new world I bet?
Speaker 2: You know, this year, this October, I will probably go back for my forty-fifth reunion.  Gee, I know it floors me.  I went back for my fortieth reunion and I--one of the reasons I went back for my fortieth reunion was that a friend who had graduated the year before me who is African American and who lives in New York said, "Bernice, you ought to go back."  We'd never think about going back because there were almost no African Americans on the campus.  And--but you were into your study but you didn't have the "real college experience" and that was the other reason Camp [James Weldon] Johnson was so meaningful because that gave me the kind of social experience that I didn't get at college.  I had very close friends but I could not join the sorority because they were not, they did not have one charter citywide.  I didn't go to the homecoming dance, the homecoming whatever.  We didn't, we just didn't fit. About two years ago, Carnegie Mellon--no, well maybe four years ago they inaugurated something called the Carnegie Mellon Black Alumni Association which was new.  There had been an extensive outreach to recruit more black students over the years.  And about two years ago, three years ago, I went back because there was an effort to try and get one hundred black graduates back to Carnegie Mellon for the college's 100th anniversary.  Now that's not saying much in one hundred years to try and get a hundred people back, that's like one graduate a year.  And it was a good experience.  I was so pleased that there were--that the people who are going to Carnegie Mellon [University] now have a different college experience than what I had.  I remember there were--the graduating class, 1957 is when I graduated.  The graduating class probably had about, must have had about three thousand graduates.  Remember they had the College of Engineering, they had music, they had Carnegie--Margaret Morrison which was kind of a girls' secretarial and home economics school, then fine arts and drama, so we had about three thousand graduates.  There were three African American girls who graduated and two of us went back for our fortieth reunion.  So the--I was sort of prepared for it having gone to Perry High School.  Perry High School was essentially white and I just learned to--it was not a burden, you know what I mean?  You can reflect back on it but you sort of had--you lived in two worlds and I learned to live in those two worlds.
Speaker 1: Now did you learn a lot in terms of crafting your art, you know with this--?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  I would not trade my college experience for anything.  I still believe Carnegie Mellon [University] is one of the finest institutions in the country.  I think I experienced racism from some of the faculty but not from many and I think I developed--I was able to enhance my skill and talent at that institution.
Story_ID: 58829
Speaker 1: Now when you graduate, what are your thoughts that you're going to do?
Speaker 2: By the time--well, the way in which Carnegie Mellon [University] at that time was established, the College of Fine Arts, your first two years, everyone took in painting design and sculpture which was my field.  You took the same courses, took all the painting, you took all the design, you took anatomy, you took all of those things to hone your artistic abilities.  By the time you were a junior, then you could major, you could focus on sculpture or you could focus on teaching.  And I decided when I was a junior that I wanted to be a teacher.  And I recall one of the reasons I wanted to be a teacher was because I got such a wonderful feeling about being able to give what I had learned to somebody else, and I was good at it.  I went out and I started teaching.  So there was no question, there was no doubt in my mind when I graduated.  I graduated and I had a, you know I had done my student teaching and I taught.  I guess I had been teaching two, three years when at that time Carlow College [now Carlow University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania] invited me to teach there.  And so I taught--the--it started out at--as Mount Mercy College in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and then it went through a name change.  But I taught painting and art education and drawing at Carlow College.  I--that caused me to go back and get a Master's [degree] because they said we'd like for you to be full time but we cannot offer you a full time position without a Master's [degree].  And so I went back, I went to Pitt [University of Pittsburgh] and I got a Master's [degree] in Education at the University of Pittsburgh.
Story_ID: 58830
Speaker 1: Now within the context let's try to put this within the context of the time because this is--you get your Master's [degree] in what year?
Speaker 2: I think I got my Master's [degree] in '60 [1960]--it must have been '2 [1962] or '3 [1963].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you--so this is really at the time that the Civil Rights Movement is starting to pick up.  Are you influenced at all by that or are you involved, are you--?
Speaker 2: It was in fact at the very beginning of the awareness.  You know there were stories I can remember about the marches, the Civil Rights marches, you know.  And while I was aware, I was, you know I can remember in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] marching around one of the department stores that would not hire African Americans as sales people, Joseph Owens.  You probably--you lived in Duquesne you probably knew about Joseph.  And so--and marching at Duquesne Light because they had not hired people, African Americans at that time, was our first issue.  And so I was involved in that.  It happened, just so happened that as a teacher at Mount Mercy College or Carlow College, I had one black nun, it happened to have been the first black nun I had ever met.  And she used to come to me and say, "I really want to do more but I feel like as a Catholic nun, there is little opportunity for me to get involved in the Civil Rights Movement.  What can I do?"  We are friends today.  One of the things that she did was to start something called the Black Sisters Conference, the Black Sisters Movement [Dr. Patricia Grey].  And it was a way in which--I had nothing to do with it, but I think she was so motivated by everybody's activity including mine, in becoming more sensitive to what was happening in our culture, in our--in society.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you--so you're teaching, at the time that you enter like Carlow, are you one of the few [black teachers]--?
Speaker 2: The only.
Speaker 1: The only, okay.
Speaker 2: And you know, that's never really been important to me.  I mean I've never felt a drive to be the only one or the first.  It was just an opportunity for me to do something that I felt I had the talent and the skill and the ability to do.
Speaker 1: And what do you think you learned out of that experience?
Speaker 2: Well I think that's probably the basis on which I have my motto.  I learned that you can do what you set your mind to do.  And the--you know you can apply yourself in any situation.  It's not going to be easy but you can continue to push forward and you don't have to be deterred by it at all.
Story_ID: 58831
Speaker 1: Now what led you to San Francisco [California]?
Speaker 2: Well I got married and my husband [James Brown] said we--you know he went to Duquesne [University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].  He said we shouldn't just die in Pittsburgh.  We're born here.  Let's move.  At that time my sister had already married and moved to California and he said, "Why don't we move someplace where we don't have bad weather to contend with?"  So two years after we, about two years after we married I had a big party for all my colleagues at Carlow College and you know we started out cross country and that was really the only motivating factor.  We just did not want--we had been born, raised and employed in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] and we wanted to change the environment.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And out here you got involved with Lone Mountain College [San Francisco, California]?
Speaker 2: That's right.  At that time it was called San Francisco College for Women.  When I moved to San Francisco [California], I--when my husband and I moved here, we didn't have jobs.  But you know I was young and he said, "Well we have education, we have degrees, we ought to be able to get a job."  I thought, okay.  So in fact I began initially working for the Bay Area Urban League.  At that time they had a position called an Education Specialist and I became their Education Specialist.  But it gave me a chance to learn what was happening in the education scene in San Francisco [California].  And it put me into--one of the elementary school principals said to me one day, he said, "Bernice, he said you know San Francisco College of Women is trying to increase its population of African American women and they want to work with inner city people."  And since I had taught in the elementary school, etc., said you ought to go and apply for that job.  Well you know, I was just enjoying not being a teacher but I went and I applied for the job and then I remember going home and thinking, I think I got that job and I don't want it.  So I thought, "Now how am I going to get out of that?"  Sure enough, a day or so later, the vice president called me and offered me the job and I said well we need to talk about that.  And I went up and I said, it's not enough money.  So then they raised the money.  They raised the offer.  And so I went to work there coordinating a teacher-training career ladder program, which was good.  I mean it was a good experience.  I enjoyed it.  I met and worked with students who have been able to go on academically and professional and I think I've played a role in that.
Story_ID: 58832
Speaker 1: Now with--what were you learning about the whole field of education and the positive and negatives of that?  And this was a time, California, I'd like you to comment was also changing.
Speaker 2: That's right.  One of the things that became very obvious was that inner city schools suffered a great deal from teacher attitude, poor teacher attitude, I felt, and from a lack of confidence in the ability of African American youth to learn, and a lack of respect for the families of African Americans.  So as I coordinated that program one of the goals that I had was to take the parents and put them into a different relationship with the teacher so that they could in fact have a subtle influence on the way in which teachers--when a parent now walked in the room the teachers response wasn't what do you want, but you know, is there some--would you like to stay?  Would you like to observe?  Would you like to be here?  And so we--I think we did a lot to sensitize teachers in inner city schools to some of the needs that the kids had.  And most of those needs are needs that every child has and that's to learn.  But they also needed to develop a respect for the ability of people of color to learn.  And I saw that and I--and Lone Mountain [College, California] had, was a--it was not called Lone Mountain at the time.  It was called San Francisco College for Women, was a liberal arts college which was very much like Mount Mercy College [Carlow College, Pennsylvania] so I had had that experience once.  They had about seven hundred fifty young women who were in either an undergraduate or graduate program.  They had seven African American women so part of my job was to reach into the community and get more women of color to come, more black women we were working on then to come to the college.  But it also meant I had to help sensitize the nuns who were cloistered and they had just come out of the cloister, just coming out of their habits.  You know this was, it was Sixty-Eight [1968] I believe.  They--we bought--I was able to work with them to buy books by and about African Americans.  So the library was not just a library of works by people who were non-African American.  And all of that was a part of the momentum that had started in the early Sixties [1960s] with the, you know the [Civil Rights] movement.
Speaker 1: And with--were there things that the administration learned during that period in terms of recruiting or you think were accomplished and--?
Speaker 2: I think so.  Not only--I like to believe that I was a positive influence on the institution so much so that they hired other African Americans.  When I went there I happened to have been the only black teacher and I was a director, project director.  But later they hired a woman as the Director of Admissions and then they hired--well they, you know every now and then they'd hire secretaries but they became more responsive.  At that time when I first went to Lone Mountain they had the Black Writers Project and that was a very interesting time, put on plays by Baraka [Amiri Baraka], they had blacks from the community who came in to take poetry writing and the nuns had to learn about black poets, about Gwendolyn Brooks and about Paul Laurence Dunbar, you know.  So it was, and I think it, all of those things helped to make the institution more respectful of the diversity in our culture.
Story_ID: 58833
Speaker 1: Now how did you come about serving on the Public Schools' Commission? You know I think it was being in the right place at the right time.  I was a dean at the--by the--I started at Lone Mountain [College, California] in one role.  I started as a project director and then after a few years the nun who was the Dean of Students, she was either leaving the order or something happened and she left.  And I applied for the Dean and they interviewed I don't know about fifteen people and I got the job and so I was serving there as a Dean of Students.  The State Superintendent of Public Instruction at that time was Wilson Riles and Wilson Riles, the state of the public schools in San Francisco [California] was really at rock bottom.  So he wanted to appoint a blue ribbon study commission and I'm not sure how my name surfaced.  I was not too controversial I'm sure and I was in the education arena and so he happened to appoint me.  He appointed me as a commissioner and I served for two years as a commissioner.  And then in the worlds of Richard Bolles, you know, "What color is your parachute," I convinced my fellow commissioners that I should stay on for another six months and be a commission director and that's how I became the executive director of it.
Speaker 2: Of the--?
Speaker 1: Of the [Public Schools] Commission.
Speaker 2: Okay, of the commission, okay.  I see.  Now what are you proud of?  I mean can you--I just want you to put things in context 'cause that was, you were almost for two years.
Speaker 1: That was--yeah.
Story_ID: 58834
Speaker 1: Okay.  I just want to, you know, you to talk about what's happening since your area is education, what was really--what were some of the trends, what was happening?  I just want things in context.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I think what was happening was a closer look at how public education was failing a large segment of the population.  And I was fortunate enough to be in a situation where I could be involved in influencing whatever change might be made in that arena.  So the public schools commission was an investigative commission where we looked at the problems in the public schools, and made recommendations to the governing board. When I left the [Wilson] Riles Commission at its end, I went to the San Francisco Foundation as their program executive with major responsibility for all of their education projects [1977].  And I was able to encourage the [San Francisco] Foundation's funding source to support more innovative projects.  I thought they were innovative and projects that gave attention to the needs of that population.  And you know it's--what happens, you leave one level and you go on to the next but it was very clear that we still were not moving large segments of the African American population into higher education and so that was kind of how that happened.  Actually when I was at Lone Mountain [College], Governor, Jerry Brown was the [California] governor and he appointed me to the governing board for the California Community Colleges and I served on that board for about five years.  And it gave me an inside look at policies and educational programs and it also gave me an education about how community colleges are in fact the first entree to higher education for many African Americans.  So it's that sort of progression that I saw as what was happening educationally in our society.
Speaker 1: So were there--okay, so--(unclear).
Story_ID: 58835
Speaker 1: So what--you said that when you were, when you got appointed by [Governor] Jerry Brown, it--you got to see a lot of things in terms of policy around education of our community-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Community College education.  So I'd like you to talk about sort of you know take some point to talk about, one, what you learned, and--?
Speaker 2: Well at the time that I was appointed to the [California] Board of Governors, the California Community Colleges had just broken away from the K-12 system and they didn't really break away but they were separated.  That was when, that was like, hmm, must have been '74 [1974] or so.  And I think it was maybe in '70 [1970]-'69 [1969] or '70 [1970] that the state legislature and the State Board of Education decided that the community colleges should no longer be grades thirteen and fourteen of the elementary and secondary system, but should be their own segment.  And that's when I began to real--well a lot of things happened.  In fact, a lot of educators moved from K-12 over to the community college.  A lot of the people who continue to work here now were in fact in the K-12 system.  And then when the separation came about, they came over to the community college level.  But it was also for me a kind of awakening and it was an opportunity to see that for many African Americans and other people of color, this was going to be their entree to higher education.  And it also did not carry a penalty.  You didn't have to graduate from high school to go to a community college.  It was only that your high school class should have graduated or that you were eighteen years of age or older.  But for me also because of my own special interests, I wanted to see how we could enhance the collegiate, pre-collegiate relationship.  I wanted to know what can the community colleges do that will make a bridge for youth or for anyone for that matter between K-12 and higher education.  And so that's always been an interest of mine.  It's always been something that I've looked at.  I started something here about four years ago at City College which I call Family College, and I was able to get one of the elementary schools to bring about ninety participants, half of whom were mothers, who brought their babies to a summer experience.  And then there were young kids and they took classes together.  They took computer classes together.  One woman I remember came in with a baby in a car seat and she had worked all night but she had no access to a computer.  She put her computer on the desk.  I mean she put her car seat on the desk with the baby in it while her third grader showed her how to turn on the computer. So my notion at that time and it continues to be, what do we do to make it palatable for people to go in--to move from the foundations of education into higher education?
Story_ID: 58836
Speaker 1: Now can you just talk about maybe the community college and how it developed a system period in the United States?
Speaker 2: I can't talk about the United States but I can certainly talk about California.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And let me preface it by saying when I left Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania in 1967, they were just opening Allegheny Community College.  And there was a private non-profit, I think it was called Point Park Community College, but it was a private non-profit community college.  When I arrived in California and then the separation between the K-12 and grades thirteen and fourteen, which is what, the junior colleges and that's what it was called in those days, was, I then realized the goals.  When I was appointed to the [California] State Board it was embedded in my mind and in the minds of everyone on the Board, that the community colleges have at least three primary goals.  One is continuing education and the model for California Community Colleges is lifelong learning.  The effort was to provide an opportunity for people to learn something as long as they are alive.  A second goal for the California Community Colleges is the transfer.  To provide the foundation in the first two years of a four year degree, so we have a transfer effort.  The third goal, when I first went on the board, it was called a terminal degree.  Well that kind of had negative connotations and now they see it and refer to it as a certificate program, a job training skill certificate competency training program.  So that's what the community colleges really see as their primary objectives, to allow people to go to school forever.  If they just want to learn macrame or painting or a language or to get the first two years of a four year degree under their belt, or to develop job skills that will allow them to become productive in society. Okay.  Now-
Speaker 1: Now I might add to that, those goals and particularly the last one, the job training is what has been picked up by the federal government.  When welfare reform came about in 1997, it was with the goal that the community colleges would be the primary institution to provide job training skills to move people from welfare to work.
Story_ID: 58837
Speaker 1: So--and for--okay, I'm going to come back to that but I--well no, I should ask it now.  What, in this whole area of education, what trends do you see emerging now?  You know there has been a lot with internet you know learning or long--is it long distance--?
Speaker 2: No, not long distance, distance learning.
Speaker 1: Distance learning, sorry.
Speaker 2: That's okay.
Speaker 1: And other--well there have been other things to really take classrooms to you know to the home-
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --Which would seem to be a competitor to sort of the community college or something that could be integral, let's put it that way.
Speaker 2: (Shaking head yes).
Speaker 1: And then I ask this in the context too of California being the leader of all these propositions.
Speaker 2: (Shaking head yes).
Speaker 1: And where--what impact all this has had and what you see the future being?
Speaker 2: You know, while distance learning and the internet or electronic educational programs did not originate did not original with California Community Colleges I don't think.  But California Community Colleges have always been on the cutting edge and in fact the community colleges, you look at City College of San Francisco and we are considered if not the largest, one of the largest community colleges in the country.  We have about ninety-two thousand students when you count them right.  Community colleges get their name because they are responsive to the communities in which they're located.  So if I were to take you to our nine major campuses, if I took you to Chinatown you would see that the bulk of the programs that are being taught in Chinatown are ESL [English as a second language] because they have an extremely large population of limited English proficient speakers.  Or if I were to take you to the downtown campus, they have major programs in clerical training because in fact they're--and they also have a small business institute.  They're centrally located.  It's a place where businesses surround them.  So community colleges were established to respond to the communities in which they were located, the small communities in which they were located.  I see distance learn--well distance learning I think began as a cost saving factor.  Community colleges when they are--they are funded through the state legislature and they are funded on head count.  So if we have twenty people, the class will go.  If we have fewer than twenty people, it's not cost effective and we can't do it.  With distance learning we can have one teacher in one location and the educational program can be projected out to five different communities and each commune--let's say it's an English class and each setting may have twenty people.  So we can get five times the bang for the buck because we are reaching those people with the technology of today that says one teacher in this location is teaching people simultaneously in five other locations.  And I think that that's something that is going to continue to increase.  It was a costly deal, it's an expensive deal and not all teachers can do it. Distance learning is not just taking a regular teacher and having that teacher lecture in front of a class because you have to be sensitive to the feedback from people who are out there who aren't sitting in front of you.  I think with the advent of the electronic era, we are seeing a whole other type of learning and it's, I think it's kind of learning, I think you could call it maybe kind of a virtual learning experience so that now you don't have to necessarily take a trip to study abroad.  But the technology exists that will allow a student to go on the internet or on the computer and visit the Louvre [Museum, Paris, France] and visit and look close up at any painting or visit the Schomburg [Center for Research on Black Culture, Harlem, New York] and look close up at any of the information in that particular institution.  And I think that when people say the world is getting smaller, it is via that vehicle.
Story_ID: 58838
Speaker 1: Now I want to go back chronologically a little bit.  So you left in '77 [1977] to go to the San Francisco Foundation.
Speaker 2: Actually I started there in '76 [1976].
Speaker 1: '76 [1976].  Oh it says here--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Was that what you were talking about earlier?  You weren't talking about that earlier, right?
Speaker 2: Yes.  When I-
Speaker 1: Okay, you were.  Okay.
Speaker 2: (Shaking head yes).
Speaker 1: But that got you into a different mode of foundation grant making and understanding that whole world of development.  And I was wondering just because that took you for a whole period of time, I'm wondering if you can talk about that?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was a ten year experience and I was quite naive even though I was grown and had been "a professional".  I really didn't understand how decisions were made about giving money and I'm not even sure I understood whose money it was.  The San Francisco Foundation is a community foundation and so the money must come from several sources in the community.  And the decision making is by a body of people who are appointed, not by their peers but by appointing authorities.  And I can recall when I first went to San Francisco Foundation one of the appointing authorities that continues today is whomever is the president at Stanford University [California] has an appointment to that Board when certain vacancies roll around.  And at that time Dick Lyman [Richard Wall Lyman] was the president at Stanford and I can remember him saying he felt it was incumbent on him to make sure that there was always one black person at least on the decision making Board of the San Francisco Foundation.  And so he felt that that was his responsibility.  The League of Women Voters has an appointment to that Board and after I began working at San Francisco Foundation, I discovered that politics, you know there was always an effort on the part of other Board members to influence who got appointed.  They wanted people who were a part of their club, people who were their social and financial peers.  And of course the League of Women Voters was moving much in the direction of having people from the community.  So if they were going to appoint somebody to the Board, they wanted to appoint somebody to the community.  I remember the year they appointed a person who wasn't even--was not even a member, but then agreed to become a member so that she could get the appointment so that the League [of Women Voters] could get a grant.  Politics raises its head.  I learned that--working the [San Francisco] Foundation gave me an opportunity to not only talk to people who had stellar ideas about things that could address critical needs, but it also gave me an opportunity to bring them in contact with other funding sources.  And so I saw my role at the [San Francisco] Foundation as linking people in the community to some other resources.  I can remember when [Henry Hampton's 1987] 'Eyes on the Prize'--and I was instrumental in some of its early funding.  And I--we saw that as a way of trying to make sure that this was not something that got overlooked and it was not the kind of thing that at that time San Francisco Foundation would normally fund because it would only fund things in the local community unless there were, called ill-advised grants.  But it was a pleasure to be able to convince the Board that this had significance, not only for African Americans but for the rest of the country.  And they, and they're just you know--those kinds of experiences about which I feel I was able to do something and I enjoy.  I guess I enjoyed more the linking and the helping people to conceptualize, to put into concrete form some concepts that they had.  The parts I didn't like was writing the recommendations, then arguing to make a convincing case but that was all part and parcel of the responsibility.
Story_ID: 58839
Speaker 1: Did you find that in what you did, did you find that you learned sort of surprising things about the world of development and access by different, to, you know to many, by different people cause not many minorities still are involved-
Speaker 2: I know.
Speaker 1: --In the development area.
Speaker 2: That's very true.  I did.  When I first jointed the foundation community, the only affinity group within the larger foundation community nationally was the foundation for black executives.  It was called ABFE, the Association of Black Foundation Executives.  And it was a group of people, of African Americans in the foundations from Ford [Foundation] on down who came together to talk about how do we get more money into the hands of African Americans around the country?  How do we network?  If you're doing something in your community that could be replicated, how do we network to get those things going?  And about the second year of my experience in the foundation community, Women in Foundations decided to get started, about twenty women, and I went on their Board.  And they began to look at ways in which women as an affinity group could influence the donor community.  One of the things that we found in research was that, organizations like Revlon was giving its money to the Boy Scouts and not to women's groups.  And that through, you know, historically that's kind of the thing that happened.  It was a revelation to say the least.
Story_ID: 58840
Speaker 1: Now you left and then did, set up your own consulting service, right?
Speaker 2: Right.  I left--when I left San Francisco Foundation it was--I wasn't sure I was ready to leave.  It was after ten years.  But the San Francisco Foundation had been involved in something which was called the Buck Trust [began with the estate of Beryl Buck] and you may have heard about it.  The San Francisco Foundation had been left an estate which at the time it was left to the Foundation was worth about seven million dollars.  In two and a half, three years' time, it had grown to three hundred sixty-five million dollars.  And the terms of the [Buck] Trust were that the [San Francisco] Foundation could only spend that money on the needs of the people in Marin County [California].  Marin County as you know is one of the wealthiest counties in California and so for, you know for a couple of years we were busy trying to sort this thing out and spend the money.  And then the County Attorney General sued the [San Francisco] Foundation and so that they could have control of that three hundred sixty-five million dollars, which I think by the time the case was settled, it was about four hundred million dollars.  And so I was on trial, I was on a witness stand for four days and so was my boss who was that time, the executive director of the [San Francisco] Foundation and most of the staff.  The [San Francisco] Foundation directors, the Board, the trust, the Board of Directors decided after a long, hard strong in a lot of the trial to give up.  They just said we're not going to fight it any longer so they turned the trust over to Marin County [California] and a Marin County Buck Foundation was established.  The trust, the Board of Trustees decided that they needed to change the image of the San Francisco Foundation.  It was really sullied by the trial because it appeared as though the San Francisco Foundation was trying to oppose the terms of a dead woman's trust--will.  And so we had, we in the San Francisco Foundation had gone to the Attorney General which has responsibilities for wills and trusts, and asked for relief of those restrictions and seeking a relief to be able to spend some of that four hundred sixty-five million dollars in the other seven Bay area counties [California] was viewed in large part mostly by people of Marin [county, California] as breaking the will of that woman.  And so San Francisco Foundation Trustees said we want to start all over.  We're going to start from scratch.  So they downsized.  They went from about forty-five staff down to about seven or eight, which was the size that it was when I first joined them in 1976.  But I was one among those who had been there and who was given a year's severance pay and was released from my role.  But then so was the executive director and so was just about two-thirds of the staff.  And that's why I left.  That was the reason I left.
Story_ID: 58841
Speaker 1: So you did consulting and then also did the Clorox Company Foundation--?
Speaker 2: Okay.  When I left San Francisco Foundation I went into a consulting business and did Foundation consulting.  I consulted with the David and Lucile Packard Foundation for about a year and actually I served as a kind of a program officer doing special grants for them.  And I did the same thing--I did the, a grant for Mott [Charles Stewart Mott] Foundation.  I did, you know so I had worked with foundations 'cause that's what I had learned for the last ten years.  And then the Clorox Company Foundation offered me a job sharing position.  And at that time my mother was quite ill and so I really only wanted to work part time and when I job shared with the executive director, Pat, it worked out well for me.  So I became the co-director of the Clorox Company Foundation.
Speaker 1: Did that differ in any respects?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  Absolutely.  There--community foundations and sometimes family foundations try to be responsive, openly responsive to the general public.  Corporate foundations are interested in the bottom line and they almost literally ask the question, what does this mean for our company?  Clorox Company, the Clorox Company is quite a diversified company.  I mean I, when I went to work there that's when I realized they make Brita Water, they make pritex, the pritex charcoal briquettes and you know all those things where I thought Clorox only make Clorox, right?  But it's, they're really quite diverse.  But they frequently look--well first of all, they like giving corporate foundations in general too and I think this is not an over-generalization.  They like giving to communities where they have companies.  They have a large scholarship matching program.  So if employees give funds, then they'll match.  But they also, they don't give that much, you know.  They give after tax profit, from their after tax profits and they're not as altruistic as we think other foundations are.  And I guess in part because the market, you know they never know what's going to happen.
Story_ID: 58842
Speaker 1: So now you left there and were back-
Speaker 2: And came right here.
Speaker 1: --and came here [City College of San Francisco].  And are there things that you have done here that you are proud of in the last cause you've been here now for-
Speaker 2: I've been here almost ten-
Speaker 1: Ten years.
Speaker 2: Well as of, ten years going on eleven years.
Speaker 1: Right.  So are you happy with some of the things you've been able to do or what--I'm just trying to figure out where you are?
Speaker 2: Where I am.  Well you know, I try to figure that out too.  When I came here, I remember at that time the chancellor was a man by the name of Evan Dobelle.  And I was encouraged to apply for a job cause I was happy at Clorox.  And I said okay, which one of these positions do you think I would fit best in and he said, why don't you apply for five?  And I thought, I've never applied for five jobs at one time.  So I put in the, an application and applied for five open administrative positions and I said to him when I went in for the interview, this is a new experience for me.  I've never been interviewed for five jobs at one time.  And I--he said well, I want to know about your educational philosophy.  I want to know why you want to work at this institution.  I want to know what you see about community colleges.  And so it gave me an opportunity to sound off on what I think is educationally sound and to also talk about what I thought I could bring to the situation.  Having a career and an experience somewhere in between leaving San Francisco Foundation and coming here or going to Clorox, I worked as a special assistant to the superintendent of schools in San Francisco.  So I was kind of his eyes and ears to the community.  I felt that coming here at a time where we had a new chancellor who was trying to shake things up at the institution, I could lend my experiences to almost any aspect of what it was he wanted to do to bring about change.  I ultimately came as the director of faculty and staff development and it was exciting.  I enjoyed it a great deal.  And then he asked me if I would take over as the dean of one of the campuses which was in the Bayview-Hunters Point [San Francisco, California].  And Bayview-Hunters Point is of course the community, a very depressed and deprived community, mostly African--well at that time it was mostly African American.  It is now heavily Asian.  And again, I thought I was able to do some things--I like to experiment.  I like to--you know one person on the faculty there said, "Well I'll tell you one thing, if it's something that can be done, Bernice will get it done."  And I like to see myself as a person who can accomplish things.  And so I think I was able to help change the curriculum at that particular site.  I was able to bring, attract people into the institution.  That's where I started the family college with families and kids.  And then two chancellors later or one chancellor later, Chancellor Del Anderson [Del Marie Anderson] who was the first female chancellor of City Colleges at--in its sixty plus years, who was also a personal friend of mine, said, "Bernice, I'd like for you to the Cal Works, welfare to work program."  I said, "Okay, but I'm going to retire very soon," and so I took it on.  And I'm doing something right now--I mean every year or every setting has allowed me to do, to be creative.  I think I'm creative.  I believe I'm creative.  So starting next weekend I'm doing a weekend college.  Now that's not new, but for us it is new.  For us we will have one course that will begin and end in one weekend and it's primarily to serve these people who are out there working everyday who don't have the time or the inclination to go to school for seventeen and a half weeks or a full semester.  And so I'm proud to be able to find a need and then develop a way of responding to it.
Story_ID: 58843
Speaker 1: When--I have three more questions.  One, when you look back over your life, what do you think are the salient points that have brought you to where you are now?
Speaker 2: That's a very difficult question.  On the one hand, I think I've been fortunate enough to be in the right place at the right time and I think that's a lot of what life is.  In terms of how I've been able to move and progress from one situation to another, I think it's been a result of my feeling that I can, that I have something that I can contribute and so I want to go ahead and do it.  And I really feel as though it's not that I think that other people can't do it, it's just that I want to do it badly enough that I'm willing to go ahead and put the energy into doing it, and it's worked for me.  I guess and maybe finally, I decided a long time ago that I could enjoy anything I did.  I think that wherever I find myself, I can make it a positive experience.
Story_ID: 58844
Speaker 1: And when you look at the black community now and even the black community you came out of, when you talk about the Hill District [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania], what are your hopes and concerns for that community?
Speaker 2: One, is that I, I think we've been derailed and I wish that I could help get a larger percentage of the young people in the black community back on track.  And being back on track to me means finding a self, a sense of self-worth and I think there are a lot of things that contribute to it, resources which I still believe are sadly lacking for many in the black community, self-confidence.  I go back and say my self-confidence came from my mom, my family situation and Camp [James Weldon] Johnson.  I don't see the Camp Johnsons.  I don't see--I think that survival today is such that parents don't have the time and energy to build that kind of self-confidence.  My hope is that at some point we can--overcome is too simplistic.  We can reach a point where we can stand up and be proud.  And be proud of not being able to shoot a basketball or being a comedian, but be proud of what I know is happening and that is making a significant contribution in society.
Speaker 1: And education, the importance of education?
Speaker 2: That's the ultimate and I still believe that we sort of have to take charge.  And taking charge doesn't mean we have to have all black schools for all black kids.  But we must reach a point where we can set the agenda for what happens to youth.  And I believe that one road to follow would be to sort of parallel what happens in the Jewish community with the kibbutz, I believe that we need a living, learning environment for young people.  I believe that the pressures and the tensions in the general community are so great that any kid who survives it is lucky.  If we were to create a situation where they could go to school, get fed and have their art and culture all within a live, learn, working situation, I think they would begin--continue to progress.  I mean I'm not saying that they're not, but I just think that the progression and movement, the forward movement would be greater.
Story_ID: 58845
Speaker 1: Yeah. I'd like my legacy to be that I have been able to propel more African Americans to accomplish their greatest good.  And educationally to attain what their goals have been.  And I, if I--and I want to, I'd like to see myself as the foundation for that.
Story_ID: 58846
Speaker 1: And one last question.  You talk about your profound love of your mother and she was able to see some of your success.  And I'm just wondering when you look at the continuum and you know sort of the importance of family and the role she played in your life, and she obviously encouraged your education, your exposure, I just would like sort of a comment on the role that sort of she played in that whole process?
Speaker 2: She, I think from the time I was very young, she had a vision for all of us that she would project.  She always saw us being if not accomplished, but being able to succeed.  And I would like to be able to extend that kind of vision for not only my daughter but for the people I come in contact with.  And I have found that it does extend beyond the African American community because we live in this diverse society.  But I would like to see myself as helping people to develop their own visions of success and providing the foundation that my mom provided for me.  Now my mother did it economically and at great expense.  So I don't have to go that far.  But I would like to at least be the support mechanism for people.
Speaker 1: That's-
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's it.
