Story_ID: 95828
Speaker 1: So Mr. Bridges we're going to begin the same way we did the last time with me saying that my name is Racine Tucker Hamilton, and I am the interviewer.  And Edgar Carey Lane is the videographer, and Jeralyn Montgomery is observing.  And today's date is Monday, August 16th, 2004.  And if you would please just for the record tell us your full name, including your middle name and, and spell it, please?
Speaker 2: Leon Bridges, L-E-O-N, B-R-I-D-G-E-S, and I'm a senior,
Speaker 1: [Off camera interruption]
Speaker 2: Alright so Mr. Bridges, if you would
Speaker 1: Okay. Leon, Leon Bridges, L-E-O-N, B-R-I-D-G-E-S, and I'm a senior, so it's Leon Bridges, Sr.
Speaker 2: And would you please tell us your occupation.
Speaker 1: I am an architect.
Speaker 2: And the date and location of your birth.
Speaker 1: The date of my birth is 18th of August, 1932, and Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 2: And the location of this interview is in Baltimore, Maryland.
Speaker 1: Right, at my home.
Story_ID: 95829
Speaker 1: So, Mr. Bridges, the next couple of questions are some "People" magazine-ish-type questions, just to help us get to know you a little bit better and help you and I get familiar with the process.  So if you could just give me short answers to these questions, your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti.
Speaker 1: Okay, your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Green.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Oh geez, I would have to say Hawaii.
Speaker 1: And your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: No, I, I don't think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95830
Speaker 1: Now let's begin by talking a little bit about your mother, starting with her name, and where she was born, and where she grew up as a child.
Speaker 2: Okay, mom, her name was Agnes Zenobia Bridges.  Her maiden name was Johnson.  She was born and raised in Los Angeles, California, in 1910, 23rd of October.  And all of her schooling and living was in Los Angeles.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like for her back then and what life was like for her growing up?
Speaker 2: Just moderately.  Mom had a, a very, very vibrant life with her friends, with whom she remained friends until she passed away in 2001.  These were girlfriends primarily that she stayed with, they played cards, they went to the theater and so forth all during her life, starting from elementary school.  Mom was born to her parents, my grandparents, who I never knew.  They passed away before I was born.  He was a, a preacher who traveled about, so he, he was an itinerant preacher.  And her mother was a seamstress who was a, a most gifted tailor who could go into the boutiques and look at clothes she liked, sketch them, remember them, bring 'em home, make a pattern out of them, and, and make clothes.  And in fact, mom picked up that from her and was equally as, as good during her life.  Mom came from a background of people really striving for upward mobility.  And so although her life was from a rather poor background, it, it was less than modest really, she loved school, she attended UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles], in part, never graduated from there.  She married my father [James Bridges], who--shall I tell you about him?
Speaker 1: Well, actually, let me ask you this.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: Sure, how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Oh, mom was a lady, a very genteel person who loved people, and she loved her children just famously, would do anything for us.  She loved her grandchildren, and, she, she dressed well.  She knew clothes, so she dressed well.  Those that she couldn't afford to buy, she made.  She liked theater and I mean legitimate theater.  She liked that very, very much.  She loved playing Bridge, what she did with her girlfriends, and she loved to dance.  Mom and I used to dance because she taught me how to dance, and she loved, she loved to dance, very vibrant woman.
Story_ID: 95831
Speaker 1: Okay, so, now let's talk a little bit about your father, starting with his name--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --and where he grew up.
Speaker 2: Dad, his name was James Alonzo Bridges, and he also was born and raised in Los Angeles [California] by his parents.  His father came from Cleveland, Ohio.  He was a mixture of Cherokee and Negro.  And my grandmother, dad's mom, who was born into a family, a mixture of French, Creole, Negro, and, and Indian.  Dad was born in an area of Los Angeles referred to as Boyle Heights in really the, the area where many Mexicans live.  And so dad's background was very much in, in the Mexican mode, and he spoke somewhat Spanish.  Dad had health problems, so that, that bother him throughout his life.  And he and mom divorced when I was about nine years old or so.  But he was, he was also a very loving father who, who loved his grandchildren very much.  And I remember he would come and want to visit us when we were living in Seattle often.  Dad wanted to be a farmer.  He wanted to be a chicken farmer, so he was always talking about having his chicken farm to which we could go and live or vacation or, or whatever, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did he ever become a farmer?
Speaker 2: Sort of a scratch and find farmer.  He had some land, not very much, in the el--Lake Elsinore area of Southern California.  No, not, not, no, he didn't become a farmer, not really, yeah.
Speaker 1: And why do you think he wanted to be a farmer?  Was, was there farming in his background?  Or why do you think he wanted to be a farmer?  Did he--
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: --ever say?
Speaker 2: No, he never did, and that's an excellent question.  I--there, there was no farming in our background, family background.  The Fortier family, to which he was born into in Los Angeles, was a family of very proud, mostly fair-skinned, and straight-haired Negroes who were great people.  I, I love them mightily now, still.  Great-grandpa was a cigar maker.  From New Orleans [Louisiana] and then San Diego [California] then to Los Angeles [California] he made cigars.  I don't know what my great-grandmother did.  My grandmother had a small house in, in Boyle Heights in which daddy was born.  And she raised all kinds of things.  People in Los Angeles, especially if you were poor, we always raised things.  We had gardens and so forth, ducks and chickens and stuff.
Story_ID: 95832
Speaker 1: What impact did your parents' [Agnes Bridges and James Bridges] divorce have on you as a young boy at such a young age?
Speaker 2: I guess I would have to have someone else really diagnose that for you.  Myself, I became the father, the man, not the father.  I became the man of the household, which meant I had to do all kinds of things representing manliness in the household.  And mom looked to me to do, to do the things such as fixing up, you know, electrical wiring, plumbing, going under the house, which I dreaded, cutting the lawn, taking care of the yard, painting in the house, all, all of those things.  Daddy was, was sort of away.  We, we were an estranged family then, and we really didn't get together, my dad and I, until I was I guess in my, in my fifties even.  And the divorce was nine years old.  So we, we communicated, but we really didn't get together and, and get to re-know my, my dad again.  I didn't know his illness.  He was an epileptic and had serious seizures, and those were his problems.  And in the early 1900s, of course, that was one of those, you were supposedly crazy if you had epileptic fits.  But that was, that was his major problem, and I didn't know about it.  I guess if I had I might have gone to him sooner, 'cause it wasn't his fault that he had those, those problems.
Speaker 1: And did that prevent from keeping steady work or--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --did that--
Speaker 2: --oh, yes, dad (laughter), dad did not hold a job for more than a, a couple of years at, at a time.  He had a, he had a very, very rough time.
Speaker 1: And it was just the disease that people just didn't understand back then.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they couldn't understand, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --well, a person flips out right now, you know, people get all concerned as what's going on.
Speaker 1: But we are a little more familiar with epilepsy now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And a lot of--you know, you can recognize it now and say well, you know, I wonder if that person is having a seizure.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But not--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --not in the forties [1940s] or fifties [1950s]--
Speaker 1: Sure.
Speaker 2: --you know, you know.
Story_ID: 95833
Speaker 1: Sure.  So, Mr. Bridges, let's talk a little, how far back can you trace your origin and your ancestry?  Do you know if you came from free people, slaves?  How far back can you trace your ancestry?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know of any African American who didn't come from slavery--
Speaker 1: (Unclear)--
Speaker 2: --so (laughter)--
Speaker 1: There are some.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay, well, I don't know of any (laugher) who came from--didn't come from slavery.  Of course, we, we were freed after Emancipation.  My--I think it is my great-great-great-grandfather was an Irishman who owned a farm in Clinton, Kentucky.  And I can't recall his name right now, but I, I, we have that documented.  And he married an Indian ac--well, he didn't marry.  He had a child by an Indian slave who married a Negro slave, and those were my great-great-grandparents.  And my--now this is all on my mom's side.  And then my great-grandparents gave birth to Matilda, who is my grandmother on my mother's side.  And she had inherited a rather fair complexion, fell in love with a man as dark or darker than I am from Texas, and was disowned by her family.  So they fled to California before the turn of the century, turn--I mean before the turn of the 20th century.  So I know that much about them on my mother's side.  I don't have a lot of names, and in fact, we've talked about going to Clinton, Kentucky, and seeing if we can research some of that.  On my father's side, the family, as far as I know, originated in Martinique.  It's, that's as far back as I go, Martinique.  They came to--and in Martinique was that mixture of French, Creole, and Indian.  They came to New Orleans, and there the mixture of the Negro came into them.  When I say the Negro, I mean--because Creole has some Negro in it, but I mean real, you know, a hundred percent Negro.  And their family's name was Fortier.
Speaker 1: Could you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: F-O-R-T-I-E-R.  In this day and age they call themselves Fortiers, and that's fine, yeah.  I relate to both of them.  And they are, all of my family is predominantly in Southern California.  There are a few in the Bay area, San Francisco [California] area, a couple in Fresno [California], but mostly in the Bay, in the Los Angeles [California] basin.
Speaker 1: Now you talk a little bit about your grandparents.  I know you said your maternal grandparents you never knew them, correct?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 1: What about your paternal grandparents, did you ever know them?
Speaker 2: No--grandparents?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I knew my paternal grandparents.  I knew, knew, knew grandma.  And, and I met Grandpa Alonzo.  Grandpa Alonzo, did I mention that he had Cherokee blood?
Speaker 1: I think you did.
Speaker 2: --from Cleveland [Ohio].  And he loved to drink, so that caused their divorce, his, his drunkenness.  And so I really didn't know him very much.  He was--I remember meeting him, and he was very red.  I mean his skin was absolutely red, so you can tell he was, had some Indian background.  Grandma Onorelle, that's, that's her name, O-N-O-R-E-L-L-E, she's the one I remember most of either of my four grandparents.  She always had Kool-Aid on, for us to drink, and she always had coffee with chicory in it.  In fact, during the Second World War they had to put her in the hospital when they stopped selling coffee from South America, which had chicory in it, and she almost died.  But grandma was a fabulous person.  She raised geese.  She had all kinds of fruits in her, in her yard.  And she was just a, a rather interesting person, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time with her?
Speaker 2: No, I spent very little time with her as a matter of fact.  I have fond memories of her, but very little time because, of course, she was the mother of my father, and my father and mother were divorced, so.
Story_ID: 95834
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about--actually, Mr. Bridges, tell me what is your earliest memory of growing up.
Speaker 2: My earliest memory, I have several.  My earliest memory was or is [clearing throat]--excuse me--living in Boyle Heights [Los Angeles, California] area, and I remember I had a serious, serious disease then.  I can't remember the name of, starts with an A.  But anyway, it was a very debilitating disease, and I, I'm always been slender, trim, good looking.  Well, anyway, and (laughter) so, at any rate, that was very debilitating.  And I remember I had pictures of myself showing me as a very, very frail, skinny person living in one of my cousin, John's, houses.  He was a second cousin of my, first cousin of my father.  And he had amassed a little bit of wealth, so he had these houses, and we lived in these houses in Boyle Heights.  And I remember as a, a child, we would go into the vacant lots nearby and play with trapdoor spiders.
Speaker 1: What are trapdoor spiders?
Speaker 2: Trapdoor spiders live below the grown in a hole, and they have a woven web on top that serves as their, their, their door.  And if you tap around their door, it opens up, and they spring out and grab whatever is walking around there.  That's how they catch their food and eat.  Well, we would tap around.  They would spring out, and we would scoop them into jars.  And we'd get two of them, and we'd open up the jars and put the open ends next to each other.  This is very cruel.  And we'd put a match on either end that would heat up the jar.  And so these spiders would try to get away from each other, and of course, they'd get in a fight trying to get back.  And I remember that was a lot of fun.  I have been, I guess only in the last 10 or 15 years have I started not being afraid of spiders, deathly afraid of spiders, black widows, 'cause in Los Angeles [California] there were a lot of black widows.
Speaker 1: Scared they're gonna--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --an act of revenge, huh (laughter)?
Speaker 2: I guess other memories though --[clearing throat]--excuse me--was going over to grandma's house.  That's when my father and mother were still together.  And she had these geese in the, in the yard she raised.  And these geese were really, really fearless animals.  And when we went in the yard they would "sss" and come spearing right straight toward us.  And, and they were really frightening.  Well, of course, that was exciting so we would go in the yard on purpose and tease them, you know, and they'd "sss" (unclear).  And I remember grandma with her, her Kool-Aid.  And the, the whole Fortier family lived on Cheesbrough Lane, which is a two-block street in Boyle Heights; it's only two blocks long.  And I can remember we had cousins, and uncles, and aunts all up and in Cheesbrough.  We had sort of taken over Cheesbrough Lane.  And that was, that was fun, communicating with them, yeah.
Story_ID: 95835
Speaker 1: Can you tell us--
Speaker 2: Oh, let me tell you one more thing.
Speaker 1: Sure, please.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this is rather precious to me.  I remember Aunt Ivy, who was mom's sister, older sister, her only sister, who, because my grandmother, who passed away when mom was eight or nine years old or so, Aunt Ivy assumed the role of mother to my mom.  And she was a domestic, and I remember she had this longtime job with the Hogg family, H-O-G-G, a Jewish family up in Beverly Hills [California] or somewhere there.  We didn't know exactly where, but we knew it as a long way from where we lived in Boyle Heights [Los Angeles, California].  And they had food up, I mean they had so much food that aunt, auntie cooked for them.  Maybe she did it on purpose.  We never went without food because she always brought dinner home.  And that, that's--so I remember auntie because she's very, very central to my, my growing up.
Story_ID: 95836
Speaker 1: I lived in a house of women, my mother [Agnes Bridges], my aunt, and my two sisters.
Speaker 2: And speaking of your sisters, can you give us your siblings' names and their birth ordering, including yourself?
Speaker 1: Well, my older sister is 20 seconds older than I am because she's a twin.  Her name is Lynette Bridges Grismore.  That's her married name, G--
Speaker 2: Could you spell it?
Speaker 1: --G-R-I-S-M-O-R-E.  Lynette is L-Y-N-E-T-T-E.  And Lynette lies in Arleta, California, which is in Southern California, and she has two children, daughters, each of whom have a son.  So, and that ends that, you know, lineup.  Lynette and I are, we're fairly close.  And my younger sister who's five years younger than I am is Linda Maureen Bridges.  Her married name is Olivier.  Linda's L-I-N-D-A, Maureen, M-A-U-R-E-E-N, and Olivier, O-L-I-V-I-E-R.  And they are, they live in, in Los Angeles.  Both of my sisters are divorced.  And so, I know, I guess that goes with families who have a history of divorces in them.  That's why I'm so fear, fearless on, on marriage.  I, you get married for life.
Speaker 2: Tell us a little bit about what it was like growing up in a house full of women.  What was that like for you?
Speaker 1: Well, (laughter), individuals, I told you a little bit about mom.  And, and I didn't tell you when we went to high school how mom encouraged all of our friends to come to our house.  So we used our house as the gathering place.  We had parties, uh, oh, the galore.  And we had spiked punch, spiked with lime juice, to which the, the teenagers thought they were really gettin' high, and they would stumble all over each other on this lime juice.  And mom and I, we would just laugh in the kitchen.  And, and auntie, auntie was the gentle one, very gentle.  She didn't speak much about her, her background.  She fell in love as a, as a young mistress in her early twenties, and very much so.  And the boy spurned her and went on to someone else, so she never married, and she never lost that love for him.  She took care of us as the surrogate mother.  In her later years, (laughter), she lived with us and ate ice cream; oh, did she love ice cream.  And she was just a very gentle, very nice, nice woman.  Lynette and I were sort of hellions.  We took advantage of our poor little sister, who was protected by Aunt Ivy, and so she could do nothing wrong.  And I remember this very much so, and so we didn't like that.  And we wanted Linda to do thing--in fact I remember one day I made some Christmas pancakes.  And I colored one batch green and one batch red, and gave 'em to her, and we made her eat 'em.  And she didn't want 'em because they were so ugly looking.  They were, they really were ugly looking.  I remember one time (laughter), another time we made some muffins, and they were good looking muffins, oh.  I was the cook.  I usually did that.  I still cook a lot.  And I just filled it with, with just a whole bunch of brandy.  When mom came home, Linda was bouncing off the walls (laughter).  And Lynette and I, we really did enjoy that (laughter).  We, we had a lot of fun teasing poor Linda.  Linda and I remained, we're, we're good friends now, all of us are, are really very, very good friends.  But that's, you know--it, it was dominated--I was dominated by, by women who, who mostly did the things, so I reveled in, in two of my uncles who would come by and sort of help me out, Uncle George and Uncle Dewey.  Uncle Dewey was Republican.  Uncle George was a Democrat, and so around the table it was fabulous talk.
Speaker 2: And these were your mother's brothers?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, and it was, it was fabulous talk around the, around the table.  Mom had another brother, Uncle Robert, who died in the forties [1940s] from cancer of the mouth.  He smoked a lot of cigars, which is interesting.  On my father's side they made cigars.  On my mother's side they died from cigars.
Story_ID: 95837
Speaker 1: Mr. Bridges, one other thing I wanted to ask you is I know that you don't remember the name of the disease you were stricken with as a child, but can you kind of describe to us what some of the ail, what some of the ailments and the symptoms were?  You, you just said it was a very debilitating disease.
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it was a disease in, in which I, I definitely had to go to the hospital and, and spend some time actually in the hospital.  It, it was one that left you very weak, and, and that's really all I, I can tell you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But evidently it was something that you outgrew?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes, oh yes, yes, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I out, outgrew that one.
Story_ID: 95838
Speaker 1: You told us a little bit about your street.  Can you kind of describe your block for us though?
Speaker 2: Cheesbrough Lane [Los Angeles, California] is today a paved street sidewalk to sidewalk of about 25 feet.  It's very narrow, has sidewalks on either side.  It's cut into a hill so that on one side it slopes up.  On the other side it slopes down.  Grandma's house was in an, on the side the sloped down.  So her house was, was built like on a, on a ledge, and then you went down to a lower level, and then down to even another lower level.  The houses were very small.  I think grandma's house may have had two, maybe three bedrooms on one floor, but the floor size was probably less than 700 square feet, no upstairs.  The basement really was just like a cellar and, and not really a living area and so forth.
Speaker 1: Was it a very vibrant street with activity all the time, or was it a pretty quiet street?
Speaker 2: It was a noisy street.  I wouldn't say vibrant in, terms, you know, of a community sense, but it was noisy and lively in terms of children.  There were lots of children playing and, and running around.  But it was most notable in that the aunts especially, Auntie Vee--I never will forget her--who lived there, Auntie Vee was the marrying aunt.  She had, I think she had four husbands.  They told stories, and unfortunately I don't remember all the stories they told.  My sister is the one.  My sister, Lynette remembers tons of stories.  She knows all of the names--maybe not all--but most of the names of the teachers that we've had from elementary school all the way through high school, I, I don't.  But the street, the houses were small like I described, and the yards were relatively small, not, not--you know, it, it, it was a very poor area, really.
Story_ID: 95839
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds, and smells remind you of growing up.
Speaker 2: Well, yards that are barren, have some grass, but primarily have a barren area, yards full of fruits.  I remember fruits.  In our yard we had figs, bananas, oranges, grapefruit.  We had apricots, we had loquats.  People here don't know what a loquat is.
Speaker 1: What is a loquat?
Speaker 2: A loquat looks like an apricot.  It has great big seeds in it, and it tastes a little bit like an apricot.  I remember for breakfast we had figs and cream, homemade bread, and milk.  And that was a fabulous breakfast, we thought, then.  We now know that in terms of, of health wise, it's a fabulous breakfast anyway (laughter).  So, but we were poor, that's why we had those, you know.  And--
Speaker 1: What, what sounds and smells remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Sounds, oh, Spanish, especially Mexican Spanish, definitely remind me of--my wife and I went to visit my dad's brother, my Uncle Alonzo, in Ibiza, Spain, two years ago.  We had a fabulous time there, and it looked just like Boyle Heights where we were, barren, banana trees, other fruit trees, people speak Spanish.  It was--so, the sound, I'm very comfortable around Spanish speaking people, and that, that reminds me of it.  Streetcars, we don't have street cars now.  So, but I remember the sound of streetcars, especially the red car, which was our, our express, that would really just go down to the beaches.  Smells, I guess, again, have to come back to the Mexican roots, because tacos and, and burritos and, and those sorts of thing, you, they--you know, whenever I go back to Los Angeles [California], I look for a place that sells taquitos because they are so, so good, and, and they're like munchkins you, that you can eat quickly.  Those types of smells mostly remind me--oh, the ocean.  I cannot live in a place that is, does not have access to the ocean, saltwater.  I love the smell of the saltwater and the ocean, and that reminds me very much of Los Angeles.
Story_ID: 95840
Speaker 1: What was the name of the elementary school that you attended?
Speaker 2: Ooh, geez, elementary school--
Speaker 1: Foshay?
Speaker 2: No, Foshay was not the elementary school.  Foshay was the junior high school.  Oh, wait--
Speaker 1: I thought Adams--
Speaker 2: No, no, no--
Speaker 1: --was the junior high school.
Speaker 2: --no, John Adams was the junior high school we went to.  So we did go, yes.  Thank you for prompting me, Foshay Elementary School, that's right.
Speaker 1: Do you remember--
Speaker 2: That was in--
Speaker 1: --some of your teachers at Foshay?
Speaker 2: No, I don't remember any of my teachers.  I remember getting beat up and my sister coming to rescue me all the time.  She--
Speaker 1: Why were you always getting beat up?
Speaker 2: Well, I was a little bit on the frail side.  I was always mischievous, and so I would, I would do things, you know.  I, I probably brought most of it on myself, you know.  I was smart, and as you are probably aware, unfortunately, in the Negro community, being smart to a lot of kids is not a virtue.  My sister and I skipped two grades in elementary school because of our smartness.  We just--they just skipped us.  I think that may have been one of the reasons.
Speaker 1: And tell me, at this time, during the elementary school years, were you starting to show signs that you were very interested in architecture, in that field?
Speaker 2: Not particularly in elementary; yes, in junior high school definitely.  In the seventh grade, which was the beginning of junior high in, in--when I was growing up--
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask you this one more question about elementary school.
Speaker 2: Oh, oh, okay.
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years, during that time, did you have dreams and aspirations?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What were they?
Speaker 2: Of being successful, and, and you know, doing--this was a lot--very much nurtured, of being successful and, and being a good person, doing good, that sort, that sort of thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said--
Speaker 2: But, but I didn't have a direction in terms of, of, of a profession or a vocation or anything like that.
Speaker 1: And you said that you were very smart.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And describe how, you know, the type of child that you were.  You were smart and mischievous.  What else?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was mischievous.  I was smart in my math.  I still have a, a, an affinity for math, except I hate calculus.  But I'm pretty good with, with figures.
Speaker 1: And what were some of the things that you enjoyed doing as a boy during the elementary school years?
Speaker 2: Very typical, nothing outstanding, playing ball--
Speaker 1: Sports.
Speaker 2: Yes--marbles.  Oh, I remember marbles.  We don't play marbles now, but I remember marbles.  That was really something.  Hopscotch, did a lot of hopscotch.  Even as boys, it wasn't unmanly to, to be engaged in a hopscotch game.  In, in fact, it, it's, it somewhat demanding in terms of your skills.
Speaker 1: Were you pretty good at marbles?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was good.  I had a big marble that could just kill 'em.
Story_ID: 95841
Speaker 1: Did you and your family attend church?
Speaker 2: Oh yes--
Speaker 1: What were those--
Speaker 2: --very much so.
Speaker 1: --experiences like?
Speaker 2: My family has always been A.M.E., African American Episcopal [African Methodist Episcopal].  And on my father's [James Bridges] side, they actually were one of the groups that co-founded Aithantown AME Church, which now is called First A.M.E. Church, in Los--
Speaker 1: In Los Angeles [California]?
Speaker 2: --in Los Angeles, yeah.  It's a very well-known church now.  It was well-known then too, Aithan Town.  And yeah, we, we went to church--
Speaker 1: What--
Speaker 2: --all the time.  But we weren't the, the type of family that, that went to church on Sunday morning and stayed until Sunday evening; we weren't that way, no, no.  We were high Episcopalians (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you still had, you were still able to do some other things on Sunday, other than going to church?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 95842
Speaker 1: Let's talk a little bit about junior high school.  What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: Okay, it was John Adams [Junior High School].  John Adams was on the east side.  Foshay was on the east side also, Eastside Los Angeles [California].  John Adams was around the twenties or so and San Pedro in, in the, the heart of the Eastside.  Foshay was, was even further east, so that was the heart of the East Side or the ghetto, as, as it is called now.  And I guess it was then, but it was called ghetto, 'cause we were just a whole bunch of Negroes living in the area.  John Adams is where, when I was attending there, is where mom introduced me to Paul Williams.  And Paul Williams was--he's dead now.  He was the icon in architecture for many people but particularly for black folk.  The, the annals are just full of, of briefs on, on him, so I won't go into, into his life.  But she introduced me to him.  And so he encouraged me to, to continue pursuing architecture.  In fact, I think he probably saved my, my interest, because in junior high school, and indeed in high school, I did not receive the support to continue into, into architecture, but he did.  And so I drew little houses, you know, on eight and half by eleven paper and things like that.  I designed our house, such as it was (laughter).
Speaker 1: And what--were you still a good student in junior high school?
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm, yeah--
Speaker 1: What kind of young--
Speaker 2: --yeah.
Speaker 1: --man were you starting to become?
Speaker 2: Yeah, very polite.  That's the thing I think I probably remember, one of the things I remember the most about my growing up.  Mom taught me to be very polite.  And so I opened the doors for, for ladies.  I helped them, you know.  And you know, I, I remember today even, when young men do that the ladies appreciate it.  I was, in fact, however, that was probably one of the, the reasons I had such a hard time getting dates with, with some of the more fabulous girls there, because I was too nice, and they, they wanted some, some action, some thrill or, or whatever, I don't know, I don't know.
Speaker 1: So in their minds, nice guys finish last.
Speaker 2: I guess so.  I was a rather good looking person as, as a child, and, and I'll say this.  I have some old pictures of myself somewhere that show me.  And, yeah, I was a rather good looking child. And--
Story_ID: 95843
Speaker 1: So, let's talk a little bit about high school now.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: Dorsey, Dorsey Senior High School, in, on the west side [Los Angeles, California].  Now by this time, mom had moved us from the east side to the west side.  And it was, again, this upward mobility of hers, getting a, getting a better life.  And I never forget, we bought that house on Bronson Avenue, which is just below Baldwin Hills, the area where many black folk with money lived around.  And so it was Leimert Park.  That was the, the name of the area, Leimert Park, just below Baldwin Hills.  So we had, we had risen.  I remember mom had a third mortgage on her house.  Now when you get a second mortgage right now it seemed to be that you're really on, you know, on the edge.  Well, she had a third mortgage.  And we ate beans.  I never forget that.  We had beans every night, and even at lunchtime on weekends we had beans and just sometimes at breakfast we had beans until she could recover from that first initial down payment.  But Dorsey High School was right on the edges.  It was a brand new high school, maybe 10 years or so old, mostly Jewish folk and, and white folk were going there.  There were, there were some, some of us black folk, but only about 10 percent of the population were black.  There was a, a field nearby where I remember we could for our science exhibits go get a skunk.  And so we'd get a skunk out of there and bring in for our field exhibits.  That was horrible.  The whole school, whole science wing just, just smelled when that happened (laughter).  But it was a school where Lynette and I particularly, my twin sister, we really melded our relationships with white and Jewish people.  And Lynette, here in Los Angeles, still maintains friendships with those kids at that time.
Speaker 1: You know, sometimes when we talk to twins they'll say that there was a lot of comparison going on.  Well, I wonder which one of you all are smarter, which one of you all can do this better, but of course, in this same sex twins.  Was that the same with you and your twin sister?  Were, was, was there a lot of competition between the two of you?
Speaker 2: Oh, no doubt there was competition.  I, I, I think if you were talking to my sister, you, you might get a, a different take on this.  I don't recall the competition being such, though, that there was any enmity, any lasting enmity between us.  We, there were times when we didn't like each other, but that was because we were siblings.  Lynette is, is very, very smart and, and very skilled at, with numbers particularly and, and supporting herself and, and, and so.  And she remembers people.  Lynette, she would, she, if she met you once and then met you a second time, she would know you from here on out, your name, everything.  You know, she's just that, that way.  I'm not quite like that.  Lynette is, I think Lynette is the smarter of the two of us.
Speaker 1: So let's talk a little bit about high school, what your experiences were like in high school.  Do you remember some of your teachers?
Speaker 2: I remember my drafting teacher telling me that I probably should not consider architecture.  I remember that, but other than that, I don't remember any of my teachers.  I remember very few of my teachers in college.  It's just, they just didn't really register with me.  Now, now my sister can tell you more about them than I can.  I do remember running track.  I had a good time running track.  I excelled in, in the high jump and the hurdles and a little bit in the long jump.  I remember dating and, and some of the girls, you know, I knew there.  I remember my friends of course, the boyfriends, I remember them, some who have gone on to, one was elected a congressman in Los Angeles, then another one died of an overdose.  So there was just that big wide range of, of friends.  I remember Jimmy, one of our friends, having a, a 1939 or '41 [1941] or '42 [1942], I think it was a Chevrolet that, a convertible, and we would drive that to school.  And one time (laughter) we were driving it, and the steering wheel came off.  And we had to grab the spoke to, to drive it.  And we fancied a way, after stopping, putting a screwdriver in it and steering it to school.  I remember that.  That was, that was sort of--little vignettes come up, but you know.
Story_ID: 95844
Speaker 1: Going back to your drafting teacher, why do you think he told you you shouldn't pursue a career in architecture?
Speaker 2: You know, I'll tell you, I, until I became older, I was really not very much aware of racism.  My colleagues in, from birth were Hispanic, and some were Jewish.  Growing up, they were mostly Negro when I went to junior high school.  But the when I went to high school, they were still predominantly Negro.  That, that's, but that was, that was to, that was to me a natural thing.  I didn't, I didn't ascribe that to any racism or anything like that.  But on reflection, I think he had a problem with a Negro going into architecture.  But as a kid, I never really (unclear)--even through college, my first years in college.  It wasn't until I, I went to Seattle [Washington] that I really became introduced to a form of overt racism.
Speaker 1: So while you were in high school, what were some of your thoughts about what you would do with the rest of your life?  What you would--
Speaker 2: Oh, I had no question.  I was gonna be an architect.  Oh no, there was, there was--I have a boyhood friend who told me when I was in the eighth or ninth grade in the Boy Scouts, he said Leon, I can remember ever since knowing you that you wanted to be an architect.  I wanted to be an architect from when I was in the seventh grade when I first met Mr. [Paul] Williams.
Story_ID: 95845
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: I wanted to go to USC, University of Southern California [Los Angeles, California].  It was home, Los Angeles.  I knew it was a good school.  But USC, I think at that time was something like $20 dollars or so a credit, something like that.  So if you took 18 credits, that was $360 dollars, you know.  No way could I afford $360 dollars, so I didn't go there.  I went to Los Angeles City College.  I went to East Los Angeles City College.  These are junior colleges.
Speaker 1: But did you know you were going to college?  You knew you were going--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --to college?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.  In high school?
Speaker 1: Mm-hmm.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, definitely, I knew I was going to ca--I wanted to be an architect.  And the only way you can be, become a registered architect was to go to college, and so, oh yeah, I knew that.  Paul Williams, he finished USC in 1923 I believe it was, before I was born, and yeah.
Speaker 1: So what year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty [1950].
Speaker 1: And what did you do after high school [Dorsey Senior High School in Los Angeles, California]?  Where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went to two junior colleges, East Los Angeles Junior College, Los Angeles City College, and then UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] for semester.  I had good grades in high school, real good grades.
Story_ID: 95846
Speaker 1: So, I went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] for a little bit, and then promptly was, was, I let myself become drafted to the Korean Conflict because my grades started, started falling.
Speaker 2: In what year were you drafted?
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-two [1952].
Speaker 2: And did you--where were you stationed?  Where did you go?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I, I went to, I, I went to Fort Pittsburg I think it is, which is just below Sacramento, California.  I went to Fort Ord [Hollister, California] for my basic training, then I went there to be shipped out, that is Fort Pitt, or Fort Pittsburg I mean it's called, to be shipped out overseas before going to, to Korea.  Boy, that's a time when, when I was there, God was really, God has always been on my side.  Going to, to, to high school, one of the things I remember most in high school was my polio.  And in my polio, I was paralyzed from the neck down and couldn't move for several weeks.  And it was only through the children's hospital there and through all of the, the work they did on me that I was able to, to recover.  And so, right now I'm acutely aware of anything in my back that, because that is a sign of recurrence.  That's the thing I remember, one of the things I remember most and, and when I realized that, that really I, I had a god on my side.
Speaker 2: And overcoming two serious illnesses.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah, that was, that was something.  The other one (laughter), God was on my side was: when I was in, at, at Camp Ord or, or Fort Pittsburg, I went AWOL [Absent Without Official Leave] every week for about a month.  And--
Speaker 2: You would go back home?
Speaker 1: Yes, I would hitchhike 'cause they--hitchhiking was acceptable in those, those days.  And I had a buddy there who, a Jewish friend from Brooklyn [New York], who had never been out of Brooklyn all his life.  He was a funny guy.  Anyway, he would go AWOL on the weekends.  I would go AWOL during the week.  And he'd go into San Francisco because he had never seen a city like San Francisco.  I'd go home.  And it--
Speaker 2: Never got caught?
Speaker 1: It's a miracle.  I mean the angels were watching over me, never got caught.
Story_ID: 95847
Speaker 1: And now, you were stationed in Japan.  What were your experiences like there?
Speaker 2: Fabulous, uh.  If this preacher man, who was in the Army, hadn't convinced me that--this is another racism thing--hadn't convinced me that really I, I shouldn't marry a Japanese girl and I should return to Los Angeles [California], I'd be over there right now.  Japan was absolutely (laughter) for me heaven.  Now this is gonna sound chauvinist, and I apologize for the chauvinistic feeling (laughter).  But the ladies over there knew how to treat their men (laughter), very sorry.  But, I'll tell you, there was a, a, a sense of respect there, and it was returned.  The men respected the, the, the, the women.  I'm not gonna say that there weren't any, any, wasn't any violence or anything between the sexes, 'cause there is an all societies, but there seemed to be this, this, this respect there.
Speaker 1: Were you accepted as a--
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: --black man?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, and this was in the early fifties [1950s].  And well, I was accepted and, and, and there was an interest also.  They wanted to, some of the, of the women especially really wanted to know if black men all had tails.  Now if you've never heard that before, then I am very surprised, but--
Speaker 1: And, and that's respectful (laughter)?
Speaker 2: No, that's not respectful at all.  That was, that was--and in fact that was a real curiosity for me, that, that these women were, were--and I'm talking about primarily prostitutes who were, were interested in, in that.  But the woman that I, I befriended there and, and became very much involved with, ah, she was, she was a doll, yeah.
Speaker 1: And so you were persuaded by someone that you shouldn't pursue the relationship?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was one of the chaplains there who said no, no, no, no, you, you, you shouldn't do that.  You know, you should, you should return and you know.  So, so I did.  And when I came back to the United States I didn't date for two years.
Speaker 1: 'Cause you were just brokenhearted?
Speaker 2: No.  You women here were just too coarse.  I couldn't deal with you (laughter).  I'm sorry.  I--honey, I mean, you know, (laughter) they were just, just too assertive.  I mean that's a good thing, but I, I had become accustomed to a (unclear).  The tea service in Japan, oh, there's nothing like that, the respect for the environment, you know.
Story_ID: 95848
Speaker 1: Tell us about the radio shows you would attend in high school.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were, they were great.  We, we used to get free tickets to the radio shows and in high school [Dorsey Senior High School in Los Angeles, California].  And so this made for great dates, because we could, like, spend 10 cents per person to catch a streetcar to go to Hollywood.  We'd go to a radio show.  We had free tickets, you know, and we'd Frank Sinatra, saw Jack Benny; we saw [Louis] Armstrong, you know, which was really something to see, a black man up there on, on, you know.  And you know, we just saw all these shows for free, then we, we'd leave, get a malted milk or something, and, and go back home on the streetcar.  It was a great date, you know, less than a dollar and, and (laughter), yeah, 'cause the malts only cost 25 cents.  And so I was, it was a great--we had a, we had a good time.  We saw the beginning of television, which was also very interesting, but the radio shows, because they had all these sound people in the background, making all these sounds with paper and, and all kinds of other stuff.  And the audience was there, and they, then we would be hyped up beforehand, half an hour or so hyper.  It just--
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite show?  What, what was your favorite?
Speaker 2: I think Jack Benny with, with Armstrong had to be my, my favorite, yeah.  That was so funny.  I mean that was really so funny.  But we saw Durante.  We saw, you know, the duo.  There is a, a man and, and--I can't remember the name now.  But we saw Milton Berle.  We saw, you know, just--but I--Jack Benny had to be, had to be our, our favorite.  Frank Sinatra would've, would of course have been the second one because it was so much hoopla over the, the man and his voice.
Story_ID: 95849
Speaker 1: So let's go back to the early fifties [1950s] when you were stationed in Japan.  And the one thing we didn't talk about though was, before you were drafted, you didn't--you did begin to pursue an acting career somewhat.  So--
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: --tell us a little bit about what that was like in the fifties [1950s] and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --you know, what you did.
Speaker 2: Actually, it was before the fifties [1950s].  In the middle forties [1940s] I guess, my Uncle Dewey introduced me to theater and actually got me to playing the violin and the clarinet, and I started tap dancing and singing, voice.  And so then I, I became a registered extra for movies, and they would call me in, you know.  And it was great pay.  I don't remember exactly, but the, the, the the dollar figure that, that pops in my head was like $30 dollars for the day.  But that was a lot of money, $30 dollars (laughter) for the day, for just sitting on a wall for four hours.  You know, as an extra that's all, that's all we did, and that was great.  And then from there, just before I went into the service, I joined up with the, the Greek Theatre like Light Opera Company, and wow, was that a blast!  We sang Light Opera from Los Angeles [California] all the way up to Vancouver, Canada.  And it was the first time that I was backstage changing clothes and both sexes, boys and girls, all in this one, jumping on their clothes and putting on their other clothes.  I could hardly get dressed right, for looking.  But it was, it was a tremendous introduction to the fact that the show must go on, and you know, don't, don't be worried about these little other incidentals.  I became interested in--not interested (laughter), but introduced, I should say, to the gay community, then, when I was there.  I, I, you know, found out that there were some men who liked other men and some women who liked other, other women.  And that was--I remember an experience in San Francisco [California] at the old Beige Theatre, Beige Room they called it.  Beige Room is no longer, but its, its competitor, Finocchio's, is still there.  I don't know if you know Finocchio's.  Finocchio's is a, a, or was, a place frequented by the gay community.  So you had a lot of transvestites there.  You had--and I remember we were doing a show and, "Finian's Rainbow, and a group of about seven of us went to the Beige Room.  And I was still very naive, and you know, just enjoying being around with these show folk or (unclear)--they are really some crazy people (laughter), love 'em, I really do.  I was the odd man.  The others were coupled.  And I saw this redhead across the way, and she was absolutely gorgeous.  I've always liked redheads and, and all, my girlfriends in high school were, were redheads or freckled faces and all.  Anyway, I saluted her, and she saluted me back with a drink, holding the drink.  So I went over to her and I sat down.  And this is sort of risque, but she had very nice boobs.  I'm sorry, she really did, and, and she had lovely legs, oh, they were great.  And I had to go to the bathroom.  I was aroused.  Went to the bathroom, and this woman comes walking into the men's room.  "Young man, I don't think you know what you're doing over there."  And that was the light bulb.  I said wow!  What was I doing (laughter).  I headed out the door, and I went back to my hotel.  That was my introduction to the gay world and, and theater.  But theater is, is, oh, I love it.  I, I, I, I've acted in theater now, I just quit the Light Opera Company of Metropolitan in Baltimore [Maryland] two years ago.  I liked it.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Story_ID: 95850
Speaker 1: But all the while, you were still pursuing your interest in architecture?
Speaker 2: Oh, architecture, oh yeah.  Architecture was the base, yeah, oh yeah.  I left Los Angeles and went to--after returning from, from Japan, I stayed in Los Angeles [California] for maybe three or four months and became registered at the University of Washington [Seattle, Washington], which is a public school, so it didn't cost as much as University of Southern California [USC].  And even as a out-of-state student, it was cheaper to go there.  And, oh, I was on G.I. Bill, so the G.I. Bill enabled me to, to, to go there.  And--
Speaker 1: So, what was Seattle [Washington] like?
Speaker 2: Ah, Seattle was great.  One of the (laughter) things--oh, God, here comes my chauvinist again.  One of the things--I'm a Kappa; I belong to the Kappa Alpha Psi fraternity.
Speaker 1: Where did you pledge Kappa?
Speaker 2: At UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles] in Los Angeles.  Kappas, at least when I pledged, were notorious for being very special about their women.  We love beautiful women.  That's why I enjoy talking with you on this interview (laughter).  And Seattle was known to have (laughter) Negro women that weren't especially good looking.  I'm sorry (laughter).  So I told mom, I says mom, if I am going to stay in school, I gotta go to a place where the attraction (unclear).  When I was at UCLA the reason my grades fell was because I was taking the white chicks out and going skinny dipping on Malibu Beach.  I wasn't studying.  I was having a great time.  I had a 1946 Ford convertible, fabulous car, and the chicks loved it.  And we'd get in that car, and head down to Malibu Beach, and had a great time, but I--and my grades and so.  So anyway, I said I gotta go someplace where--because I'm vulnerable.  And again the angels were looking over me.  They said you know, young man, go to Seattle, so I did.  And I met my wife in Seattle, but she's from Oklahoma, so (laughter).  But Seattle was, oh, it is a beautiful city, and for raising a family, it is ideal.  The weather, yep, it rains a lot, but it's a misty rain, so you don't get soaked.  The snows are there.  Very nearby you can wake up on a Saturday morning and say let's go skiing, you just go.  You don't have to do all this packing and carrying on, you know.  The beaches are there.  Mm, the water is cold, yeah, but you get use to it.  We went to, we--our house was very near Lake Washington.  We'd go down to Lake Washington and catch salmon, catch three and pound salmon, you know.  And hiking and--excuse me--hiking and camping and so forth were, were, were readily available.  And the mountains, ah, the mountains are just outstanding there, Mount Rainier.  Seattle is absolutely one of the most wonderful list places on earth to, to raise a family and to live, and, and, and I loved it very much.
Speaker 1: And what classes did you enjoy the most of your architectural classes?  Which was, which were your favorite?
Speaker 2: Oh, design with, without any question.  Design was, was the most, the most favorite.  And we had some excellent teachers in design.  I do remember some of those teachers, Lionel Priest, who was a Beaux-Arts trained architect, which is, is, is a very pristine school in, in, in France,  Ecole des Beaux-Arts.  And then Keith Kobe, Keith Kobe (ph.) had a, a thing with African women.  He had been over to Africa, and he'd seen African women with all their colorful (unclear)--and he came back and his eyes were just glazed with this.  And he always told me about how wonderful, wonderful the African women were over there, you know.  And--but Keith, he was, he was genuine in terms of his, his respect and, and support.  And--
Speaker 1: And were you finding, or, or was it the case that you were like one of the only black students in many--
Speaker 2: Oh, I was.
Speaker 1: --of your classes?
Speaker 2: Not the class, the school.  I was the only black student in the school of architecture.  Now, architecture, unfortunately, and, and this is one of the, the things that I'm, I'm hopeful that people can see some, some of, of this in me when, when it's available to them is that architecture is a fabulous profession and offers so much to, to so many people, our young folk, and offers so much to, to older generations in their appreciation of the environment and of, and of design.  At the school of architecture, the University of Washington, I was the only one of about 500 students, total, 500 students in, in architecture.
Story_ID: 95851
Speaker 1: And let's talk--while you were still a student, you received a job as a draftsman in 1956.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: What was that like for you?
Speaker 2: Oh, it was a good experience.  My first job in Seattle [Washington] was as a draftsman for a millwork shop doing, drafting the, the, what they call shop drawings, which are drawings that show the craftsman how to put things together.  This is for a, a mill--a high end millwork shop on cabinetry, and, and windows, and doorframes, and, and things like, like that.  That was a very invigorating experience.  And then from there, my other job--oh, I was an assistant city planner for the city of San Diego [California] for one summer.  And it's because the, one of the professors in, in Seattle thought I should go into city planning.  He, he felt I had something there for whatever.  But that was a great experience, going to San Diego and being the, one of the assistant city planners for--I was an intern for the name.  But, but I designed, has always been my first love.
Speaker 1: When did you design your first house?  Do you remember, or do you remember and--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --and do you remember what the house--
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: --was?
Speaker 2: I do.  The very first house I designed was for a white couple in Seattle, the Singlers (ph.), Ed and Ed Singler--what's his wife's name, hmm.  Anyway, the house is about 1350 square feet.  It's not very big house, has three bedrooms.  It's a tri-level house, and it overlooks Lake Washington, and it (laughter), it's fabulous (laughter), if I say so myself.  They liked the house, and they showed it off, and I was told by a friend of mine in Seattle.  Now, I'm talking about 1963, okay, that the Singlers have just sold their house, that house, and moved on.
Speaker 1: Wow.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, I, you know.  The next I did of any, any, any note was for Charles and Eleanor Smith in, in Seattle.  And he is now a retired Superior Court--Supreme Court--justice for the state of Washington.  She's a retired teacher and a fabulous teacher I must say, and he is a fabulous guy too.  He's, he is, he's a Republican, Charles is--this is a black couple--a Republican who was very, very much involved in, in Bob, ra, Bobby Kennedy's [Robert F. Kennedy] Department of Justice here, so you, you would call him a liberal Republican.  But that house is a larger house.  That's about 3,000 square feet, built on a slope, on a hill.  Seattle has all kinds of hills, so that was built on a slope and in a very wooded area.  And that was about 1966, 1967 or so, and it's still there, and they're still living in it.
Story_ID: 95852
Speaker 1: And let's talk about a little bit before that.  From 1961 to 1963 you worked for Gotteland and--
Speaker 2: Oh, Gotteland and Kocarski.
Speaker 1: Kocarski.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And you designed churches, right--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Catholic churches?
Speaker 2: Catholic churches, yeah, yeah, they were very much involved in the Catholic Church.  Gotteland was the French counsel for the nation of France in the state of Washington, and so of course he spoke French fluently.  Kocarski was Polish, and so the two of them, they really had, had an angle on, on the Catholic Church.  And I did a lot of 'em.  But while there, I was active with the East Madison YMCA, and they asked me to design their new branch.  And I had just recently became licensed, so this was--
Speaker 1: And when did you become licensed?
Speaker 2: --in nineteen--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This was in 1962 that I had recently become licensed.  So, they asked me to design their new, their new branch, and I took the job to Gotteland and Kocarski.  And I said would you be interested?  No, they said we don't do that sort of thing.  So, that launched me into my first firm, Leon Bridges AIA Architect.  That was the name of the firm.  And I rented space from a very good Chinese friend of mine, Ben Woo, Benjamin Woo, who is now retired--he's still alive though, in Seattle--and did that, designed that, that building.  My, the income fee for the first six months in 1963--let's see, I opened--I must have had that job in July of 1963 because that's when I opened the practice.  For the six months, 1963, was $2600 dollars, that's total, pays consultants, pays rent, supports my family, at which at that time there were, there was two and one on the way.
Speaker 1: And what would that job, comparatively speaking, what would that job garner today?
Speaker 2: Well, the total budget for the, the project was $140,000 dollars for the building.  Right now that building would probably be about, oh, a million five or so, ten times as much now, and, and the fee would be ten times as much a hundred and forty, a hundred and fifty thousand dollars, as compared to fourteen (laughter).
Story_ID: 95853
Speaker 1: And so in 1966 you formed a partnership with--
Speaker 2: That's right--
Speaker 1: --one of our colleagues.
Speaker 2: --with Ed Burke, yeah, yeah.  Ed and Betty Burke, they were just with us last weekend.  They came and, and visited with us.  He's, Ed and I were in, in the same class at University of Washington [Seattle, Washington].  And in 1966 I was able to get this job doing an urban design for an area, and I needed someone to, to help me out.  And I really valued Ed because I, I, he as a smart person, Englishman, very smart person who was a good designer, and, and he was--one of Ed's biggest attributes is that he is, he is organized, and, and he really does manage himself well, you know.  And so we performed a partnership, 1966.  And it would have prevailed today if I had stayed in Seattle [Washington] and not moved to Baltimore [Maryland].
Speaker 1: And you did move to Baltimore in 1972.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Why?  What--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What prompted the move to Baltimore?
Speaker 2: Well, in the late sixties [1960s], Bridges Burke Architects and Planners, which was our firm, gained some work with a department of the [U.S.] Navy, and it was related to the Trident Submarine fabrication.  And they had a base in Bremerton, Washington, which is very near across the streets in Seattle, but their home base, of course, Washington, D.C.  So we said well, we really needed to establish a home base relationship with, so, actually, I was beginning to gain some name prominence myself because I was a member of the national board of the YWC--YMCA.  I became a central figure in Planned Parenthood World Population.  I was chairman of one of their, their more significant committees and on the executive committee.  And so people began to know me because there were--the board was composed of people from around the country.  So my name became known.  I, I, I speak out.  I, I'm not a wallflower, so people began to know me.  So I said Ed we need to take advantage of this.  Oh, and I was also a national board member of the, of the National American Institute of Architects, so I was on those three boards.  So I came down the West Coast and wanted to go to San Francisco.  San Francisco was a bust, nothing happening.  Los An--
Speaker 1: During that time, during--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: This is like the late sixties [1960s], early seventies [1970s]?  Early seventies [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Actually, it was the--no late sixties [1960s], early seventies [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 95854
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Los Angeles [California] equally was, was a problem.  So, I met this person in San Francisco [California] while we were attending an American Planning Association meeting, and his name is Jay, Jay Brodie.  Jay Brodie is now a very, very strong figurehead in the city of Baltimore [Maryland].  Jay convinced me to consider a project in Baltimore.  We had no idea when we (unclear).  So, in considering Baltimore, I considered the East Coast.  And I told Ed let's look at the East Coast.  And my first choice was Martha's Vineyard [Massachusetts](laughter).  And the reason it was my first choice is because our family has, has a place on, on the island, and it's a great place to, to, to be.  So I said hey, that's--well, that wasn't good.  Actually, Massachusetts, Boston, Northeast, their mindset is entirely different from mine, so I couldn't do business there.  Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] was out.  Anyway, to make a long story short, we chose Baltimore; we competed; we did get the job; and in 1970, we opened a branch office.  In 1972, after really scouring for a partner to head up the office, and, and we, we wanted a black partner then, we couldn't one that was acceptable to either Ed or myself together.  So--
Speaker 1: And was it, part of it because the pool of applicants was very small?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: No.  I told you that Ed was a very organized person, and he was very frugal.  I didn't tell you that, very frugal also.  Ed did not want to pay the person who is now heading one of the most prestige architectural firms in the country, Devereaux and Par--Parnell, in Bal--in Washington, D.C.  Paul Devereaux wanted to be our person here, but he needed a salary of $16,750 dollars, annual, in 1970.  And Ed said that's too much money.  We're not gonna pay anybody that much money (laughter)--(unclear).  Now all of this is relative of course.
Speaker 1: Right, of course, of course.
Speaker 2: But, so I, I told the wife, I said well, you know, we might consider moving from Seattle [Washington] to Baltimore.  We had four children at that time.  Eloise, my wife, had, at that time, remembered that her mother discouraged her father from moving to Lang--from moving from Langston, Oklahoma to Fisk University [Nashville, Tennessee] to assume a rather high-paying job.  And she felt that was, you know, a mark against his rise up, and she didn't wanna have that.  So she, you know.  So with tears, I mean, real tears, the children and my wife, they, they, you know, acceded to this man's desires.   And, and, and we've had a good life in Baltimore.  But if I had to do it all over again, I, I would be in Seattle, okay, gone--
Speaker 1: Would have stayed in Seattle.
Speaker 2: I, I would have stayed in Seattle.  Going further back, if it to do all over again, I'd be in Japan (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, so, so you moved the company to--you, you moved to Baltimore.
Speaker 2: A branch office.
Speaker 1: Branch office in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: We opened a branch office to Baltimore.  We still had the branch office in, in Seattle.  And so Baltimore was called Bridges Burke Baltimore; Seattle was called Bridges Burke Seattle.
Story_ID: 95855
Speaker 1: And how--were, were you successful here in Baltimore [Maryland]--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --in the early seventies [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Was there any resistance to, you know, working with an African-American architectural during that time--architect.
Speaker 2: Well, that's very, that's very interesting.  The, the white power structure wanted and felt they needed to have a black architect here.  One of the reasons is because they had tried before and were unsuccessful, one.  A second reason was because the black community here was becoming more and more powerful.  This is right after the '68 [1968] riots, which were fierce here.  And they found this guy, me, who they felt they could relate to.  Now remember, much of my experience has been with white folk, so I, I really could relate to them fairly well.  So, you know, they could relate to me.  I was, I was a Kappa, so I had a certain amount of, of prominence here in, in Baltimore because of that.  My wife is a Delta, so she had equal prominence here.  We're both black.  My wife was, was working on her, her doctorate in, in social work, so, you know, we were accepted by the hoop-dee-doo.  I was a member of Planned Parenthood World Population, very strong here in Baltimore, very, very strong, and I was active with the YMCA.  So we really did come here like with two silver spoons in our mouths, one with hers and, and one of mine.  No, the re, receptivity was very strong.
Speaker 1: And tell us about some of the projects that you worked on in Baltimore.
Speaker 2: Well, the very first project was an urban planning project for the neighborhood of Upton.  And, and this, this was a planning the, the whole community for a redevelopment.  Since then, I guess the, the major projects for which we won awards or received some accolades include: the smaller projits--projects, such as the Bethel A.M.E. Church renovation, interior renovation and addition; the Union Baptist Church, interior renovation also.  The larger projects would be the Penn Station renovation.
Story_ID: 95856
Speaker 1: Just briefly, Mr. Bridges, tell us a little bit about the Penn Station project.
Speaker 2: That's a good project.  We were hired in partnership with Robert Nash, who is a, an architect in, in--was an architect in Washington, D.C.--he's now passed away--to do the rehabilitation of Penn Station.  And I must say that, that I know that getting these jobs, a lot of it is political.  And Bob Nash was very fundamental in, in that.  The project is not a very expensive one in the middle 1980s, at a value of about 4.5 million or so, so it's not a big project.  But it won for us a NEA [National Endowment of the Arts] presidential citation, which is one of the highest honors any project can receive, and numerous national and local design awards for historic restoration and renovation and new design.  And it's right Downtown Baltimore, Baltimore, Seattle--Baltimore, Maryland, excuse me.
Story_ID: 95857
Speaker 1: And let's talk about in 1984 you were nominated as a fellow in, at the College of Fellows, AIA [American Institute of Architects].  Can you tell us a little bit about the importance of that nomination--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well--
Speaker 1: --and being a fellow?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Actually, I think it's 1986--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that I, I became a fellow.
Speaker 1: But--okay.
Speaker 2: It is, the College of Fellows in the American Institute of Architects numbers approximately 2,000 people, if that many, maybe on 1800 or so, out of a total population of registered architects of about 70,000.  Of the number of 7--of 70,000, approximately 15 to 1600 are black architects, very small number.  Of that number, approximately 40, 45 are fellows.  So it's a very, very small number of, of fellows.  Paul Williams, the person I mentioned to you earlier, was the--
Speaker 1: Your mentor?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right, my mentor, and he was the very first black architect member of the College of Fellows, yeah.
Story_ID: 95858
Speaker 1: And so, let me--you know, you have been the recipient of numerous regional and national awards for your design.  When you see your designs, what is that like?  What kind of feeling does that generate?
Speaker 2: Well, the first thing is, of course, getting the, the contract, the award, the agreement to do the work.  But then, you, you get into the design, and you're working with a client, and that's, that's usually a rather thrilling experience because everybody is in sync with trying to, to develop something that is absolutely the very best.  And you're, you have this passion for each other and for the project itself.  And if (unclear)--viewers, then the project gets started in construction, and that's rather tenuous right then because there's the cost of it, and oftentimes, the cost is higher than the owner can afford.  And then there's the contractor and making sure you have the right contractor who, who won't skin the contract to death, you know, but will do a good job.  But then it gets in the ground and gets started (unclear).  And when you see the framework starting, steel or whatever, it's just, it's an exciting thing.  And when all of the steel is done, what they call topping off, when all of that is done, you see this, this framework.  And, and as an architect, I can visualize what's gonna go on it, and it's just a thrilling moment.  When the project is finished, and everybody has signed off on it, and the owner gets into it, then you have people who are going in and out of the building.  And I'm telling you it's, it's like watching the birth of a baby from conception going all the way up.  You know, the, the, the, the growth period is, is going, and then the, the baby comes out, you know, but doesn't stop there, because the baby grows, you know.  And, and you see things happen, you know, and these little things that just excite you because--when I go by any building right now that, that I've, I've designed, I'm, I, I--it's a thrill.
Speaker 1: About how many building would you say you've designed?
Speaker 2: Oh, whoa.
Speaker 1: If you had to guess.
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, maybe two, three hundred or so, you know.  It's not, really it is not that many, you know.  I mean three hundred may sound like a lot of buildings.  It is, but it's not, when you consider there are some architectural firms that are much bigger than we are, they design 20 or so buildings a, a year, 25 or so buildings a year, you know.
Speaker 1: What's your favorite design?
Speaker 2: Of a building?  Are you asking which is my favorite--
Speaker 1: Right, that you, that-
Speaker 2: --design?
Speaker 1: Yes, that you've designed?
Speaker 2: I don't have any one.  I would say the Shoreline swimming pool in Seattle, Washington, the Smith house that I described to you before, and my house.  I, I would say I have a, for our family, it's, it's a very nice house and very livable.
Speaker 1: And when did you design your house?
Speaker 2: I designed my house in 1970.  It was finished in 1974.
Speaker 1: And let's talk a little bit about, in 1976 you co-founded the--so you were talking about some of your favorite designs, and I think you ended with the Shoreline, Shoreline pool.
Speaker 2: Shoreline swimming pool, which is, is one of my favorites, I like roofs, and it has a very fantastic roof on it; the Smith house in Seattle; and, and, and my own house I think.  You know, there are other buildings that are, that fall in, in that, you know, certainly the Pennsylvania Station and, and the Green Street Station up in, in Boston [Massachusetts].
Story_ID: 95859
Speaker 1: Tell me about, in 1976 you co-founded the AIA [American Institute of Architects]/Ford Minority Scholarship Fund.
Speaker 2: Oh yes.
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about that.
Speaker 2: Yeah, for years I had been working with a person, Jim Ellison, who is also a fellow--he's a white guy; he's a fellow in the American Institute of Architects--to try to develop a program that would specifically target low income and needy persons into architecture, from the streets if we could, just, just, you know find--and so we devised this program.  It went to the Ford Foundation, and that's--let me digress.  That's sort of a funny thing, to me at least.  I had been communicating with the Ford Foundation, telling them about this program and our aspirations and so forth.  And so they agreed to, to fund us.  And so they want to meet us and talk about all the arrangements and so forth.  And so before we walked--we, we went up there in New York, that fab--fabulous building they have up there.  And before we walked in the room to meet the gentleman, Jim said, Leon, let me walk in first, and so he did.  He walked in first, and the guy came and he looked, and he says oh, Mr. Bridges, how are you and shook his hand.  And Jim said oh, no, no, I'm, I'm Ellison.  That's Bridges right (laughter) there.  Anyway, playing games.  That program had given, oh, I don't know how many millions of dollars now, scholarships, to primarily black students of architecture to go into the field.  And it funds them for the full five years, in most cases, of their, of their education, not a full funding, but it gives significant funding to them.  And we have found that the students we recommend to the program are usually students from off the street, ones that, that I have found through the ACT-SO [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics] Program that I'm active in or other programs who know nothing about architecture; they just have a dream.  And those students have gone through the field and, and received their degrees at a greater rate than the, the population of white students who go into the field.  So, it's very successful.
Story_ID: 95860
Speaker 1: And how is the world of architecture doing in terms of attracting minorities and African Americans?  Do you think that African Americans are well represented in the field?
Speaker 2: No, and, and we've done a very, very poor job.  In the middle seventies [1970s], we had a real strong push to get more black folk into, into our--and that, that's been our emphasis.  When you say minorities, women are--there's, there's tons of women going into architecture.  There's several Asians, oriental, of oriental background going into the, the field.  And there, to a lesser extent, there are I would say Mexican rather Hispanic, because there are Hispanic who come from Spain, and they're considered as white, Mexicans and, and American Indians going to a lesser extent.  But the black folk has been our emphasis, my emphasis, and it's been a very, very discouraging slope in, in--since the seventies [1970s]; it's going down.
Speaker 1: Why do you think it's going down?
Speaker 2: I think a lot of it has to do with: first, the making aware; two, children, the field of architecture.  There are still many people from whatever background who say architecture or architect.  They don't say archi--they--and, and you ask them what do, what do architects do?  And, and so many of them really cannot describe what, what they do.  So there is that part.  Another part is that it is very, very intense, the amount of, of study that is required.  And, and because of this intensity, this sometimes scares kids away, you know.  Why go to school for six, seven years when I can do it in four?  And then I think the third thing might be the pay.  A student after six years coming out of, out of college may start at 25 or 30 thousand a year.  And you know, in this age of, of, you know, wanting to have things and--
Speaker 1: And competing--
Speaker 2: --spend money--
Speaker 1: --I guess with like--
Speaker 2: --engineering, you know.
Speaker 1: --information technology, engineering--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, it just--
Speaker 1: --other fields.
Speaker 2: --you know, it just cannot, not relate to that--compete with that, so--
Speaker 1: Why do you think we need more black architects?
Speaker 2: Most black architects have come from an environment that heightens their sensitive into how people view things.  And most of us come from an environment where--I'm talking about socially now.  And then also most of us come from environment that has not introduced us to really what is required for fine living.  You don't have to be a millionaire to have fine living, you know, but you should have an appreciation for art.  You should have an appreciation for people, that your relationships with, with people, and, and relate--of your body, and you know, all of these, these things which are, are not as, as tangible as having a buck in your hand.  Black architects come from that in background, that environment, and I think we bring that to the table.  It used to be that all architects, of which they were a hundred percent white, came from families of affluence, and so they only designed for that, that world.  And so common people didn't really realize what was going around them.  You know, how many people would you suspect who go into a building admire the building and look around?  No, they look down on the ground, or they get involved with their friends or something, and the environment is just, is just not there.  But the environment affects them and impacts how they live in their lives.  Black architects, I believe, have a, a large sensitivity to that, not greater than anybody else, but the, but most of us have a large sensitivity to that, so I think that's needed, and for our, our, our communities, you know, our black communities.
Story_ID: 95861
Speaker 1: Tell me a little bit about the Obsidian Group, your--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, our firm has evolved now from Leon Bridges AIA [American Institute of Architects] Architecture all the way now to the Obsidian Group, which is a partnership of architects from New York down to North Carolina.  And so, we're doing projects.  I'm doing a school now in North Carolina and a school here in--I mean projects, not a school, but projects here in, in Baltimore, you know, Maryland, and we're doing work up, up in New York also.  There--we're all black.  There, there's three of us who are partners.  It, it's a fledgling group right now.  We've just organized, and we hope it's gonna continue.
Speaker 1: And would you have ever anticipated that you'd have two black partners when you first began in the, in the world of architecture, you know--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --back in the sixties [1960s]?
Speaker 2: No, it, it didn't occur to me.  It, it wasn't a prominent thing to me.  Again, I'm a West Coaster, and, and, and where I was born and raised and how I was raised, that was not the, the dominant thing, no, uh-uh.  It's become more prominent now.
Story_ID: 95862
Speaker 1: When you look back at your life, Mr. Bridges, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: Oh, the single most outstanding feature of my life is my wife [Eloise Bridges].  There's no question about that.  She is my, she's my rock.  She's a person who, who has, has stood with me through some extremely perilous times, economically and socially and in a familial sense.  We have four children of various characteristics and personalities.  And so she would be the first.  The family has to be the second, you know, and then my, my firm the last.  When I first married, I told my wife that my firm has to come first because if that doesn't come first then none of us will live.  Well, it, it's changed from that point, yeah.
Story_ID: 95863
Speaker 1: And tell me a little bit about the NAACP ACT-SO [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics] Program that you're--when did you first become involved in that?  And--
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: --exactly what is that?
Speaker 2: Well, let me tell you what it is first.  The ACT-SO Program is called the African American Academic, Cultural, Technical, and Scientific Olympics, okay, Act--Academic, Cultural, Technical, and Scientific Olympics.  That has the acronym, A-C-T-S-O, ACT-SO.  And we like to say well, we know how to act so (laughter).  The program is the mentorship in 25 categories of high school students to compete with each other in these categories in terms of excellence.  The categories are in the humanities, in the arts, in the sciences, okay.  And in the arts, it's performing arts and, and visual arts.  I have since 1981, when my son first became active in, in ACT-SO and won the local gold medal for architectural design, I've been active in, in the field.  And I'm a past chairperson of the local branch and so forth.  It's a fabulous program for high school students to become involved and to meet students from other areas of the country at the national competitions.  They get awards.  My students in architecture have won national gold and silver medals.  I haven't won any bronze medals, but, you know.  So, they've, they've been successful.  And some of my students have gone on now to have their own firms, and that's, that's rewarding.
Story_ID: 95864
Speaker 1: Do you think you would have ever chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: What?
Speaker 2: It would have been in, in theater.  I love theater, and I love singing.  And either one of those could have been a major, a, a major thing, either one of those could have been.
Speaker 1: And you say you recently gave up a theater company.  You recently--you're not participating in that theater company.  Why did you decide to do that?
Speaker 2: I wanted to devote myself to the ACT-SO [Afro-Academic, Cultural, Technological, and Scientific Olympics] Program and to my family, both.  Architecture takes a terrific amount of time.  The ACT-So Program demands a certain amount of time.  Well, but if I'm gonna be active in theater and in singing, then that takes a lot of rehearsal time and so forth.  And so my family just falls in the background and is no longer participating.  I had to make a choice, and the choice was to give up the theater, to give up the singing, to be active in ACT-SO, and to travel with my family, and, and, and enjoy them.  I have one grandson, and I'd like to see them as much--him as much as possible.
Speaker 1: And what haven't you done yet that you'd still like to do?
Speaker 2: I think I, I've often fancied that if I ever won a lottery, significant lottery, that what I would want to do is sponsor a development, spend the money to sponsor a development.  I, I don't particularly need money--
Speaker 1: What do you mean--
Speaker 2: --right now, so.
Speaker 1: --by sponsor a development?
Speaker 2: A, do some sort of, of housing, particularly, housing development that would involve all of the, the, the neighbors in, in the building, and the taking care of it, and the operation of it, and which would include a school for ACT-SO.
Story_ID: 95865
Speaker 1: And why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Well, it, it's so debilitating to see people who have no since of, of history, and so they don't know where, where they can go.  I, I heard on the radio today someone who was saying that one of their teachers told him he shouldn't aspire to be a president of the United States.  This happened to be a black individual.  And if a person knows their history, the will know that we have had black presidents, not in the United States, but there have been black leaders all over the world.  And there have been leaders who haven't been perhaps president, but leaders from the black Diaspora who have not particularly shown themselves to be that way, but they have been leaders.  You get people like Putin, you get people like [Alexandre] Dumas, you get people like [Alexander] Pushkin, you know, all in the white community.  And these people have really evolved as, as coming from the black Diaspora, but they've achieved, and then, you know, the knowledge of, in, in our country here, people who have created things, inventors, for example, you know, writers of, of, of prominence.  You know, I, I, I just read in, in the newspaper the other day about this writer, I didn't, didn't know him, who recently received a, a Pulitzer Prize, you know, and he's black.  You know, we can do it, we can do it, but if we don't have these examples, then those who tell us we cannot become the, the dominant ones in our lives, and that is what the people who are on the streets involved in drugs and so forth, that's where they come from, all right.  They haven't been told that there's a life out there that they can really live.
Speaker 1: And what do you wanna say to that teacher back in junior high school who said you know, you probably shouldn't pursue a career in architect?
Speaker 2: Well, I'm a Christian, and so I don't wanna throw it into their face and say see, I told you so.  But there really is a feeling of wanting to, you know, show them up, you know.
Speaker 1: And just say look at me now.
Speaker 2: Mm-hmm.
Story_ID: 95866
Speaker 1: Tell me, Mr. Bridges, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Whoa, that is a very interesting question.  I am in the process, although I haven't really pursued it tremendously, I'm in the process of writing what I want on my tombstone, really.  And it's because the wife [Eloise Bridges] and I have decided that, that we need to have our plots, so we have our burial plots, and we know where we're gonna be and, and all of that, to relieve the pressure on our children.  And so I, I really, I don't have an answer.  I'm going around the bush to tell you I, I don't know right now, you know.  One who was loving, one who loved his family very much, one who believed that he could make a difference by helping out young people.
Story_ID: 95867
Speaker 1: What do you believe your legacy will be?
Speaker 2: I think what I just said, in part, the involvement with, with younger people, certainly.  Without any question, the, the build environment is going to be part of my legacy because the placards are there saying Leon Bridges was the designer, you know.
Speaker 1: And you told us a few regrets, Japan, Seattle.  Any other regrets or any other things that you wish you would have done differently?
Speaker 2: Oh yes, probably, but they're, they're not, you know, it, it hasn't happened; it won't happen; it's in the past.  And I try not to dwell on, on, on some of those things too much (laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Life is good as it is.
Story_ID: 95868
Speaker 1: Okay this is my photograph of my family and my mother [Agnes Bridges] and Eloise's mother.  You see the three ladies sitting in the middle.  My mother is on the left; Eloise is in the middle; and her mother is on the right.
Speaker 2: And could you give their names?
Speaker 1: And, oh, that's Agnes Bridges, Eloise Bridges, and Elesta (ph.) Jones.  And at the top, left to right, it's my oldest daughter, Vanessa Joy Bridges, myself, Leon Sr., and my other daughter, Elise K. Bridges.  And on the bottom on the left is our youngest, Elliot Reynolds Bridges, and my son, Leon, Jr.  And that was taken about 1974.
Speaker 2: Okay and this is me with, shaking hands with Lieutenant Governor [Michael] Steele during the occasion of the (unclear) State College graduation of 2004, so that would be May.
Speaker 1: And that's Maryland lieutenant governor--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, yes Maryland, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this side view picture (laughter)--
Speaker 2: We'll fix it in post-production.
Speaker 1: --is, is me receiving a, a Valued Honors Award from the Ford Foundation.  And this would be about 1996 or so.
Speaker 2: And this is a picture of my wife [Eloise Bridges] and I during one of our vacation trips to the Bahamas.  And that would be 19--no, that would have been 2002, yeah.
Speaker 1: And this picture is of my wife and myself.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: I guess this would be about 2000, yeah.
Speaker 2: And we were on a cruise here and in, on the Chesapeake around 1998.
Speaker 1: And this is the occasion of the wedding of our daughter, Elise Gay (ph.) Bridges to her husband, Robert Hicks.  And so from left to right we have our daughter, Vanessa Joy Bridges, and my wife Eloise, and then my, my son, Leon, Jr., and then Elise Gay, and then her husband, Robert, and above him, myself, Leon, Sr., and then the last one on the right is Elliot Bridges.
Speaker 2: Okay.  In about what year?  I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: That's when they were married, so that would be in 19--1993.
Speaker 2: So early '90's [1990s]?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: This--
Speaker 1: You and your wife.  About what year?  It's from this book.
Speaker 2: I, I think this is, is about the year 2000, yeah, my wife and myself.
Speaker 1: This, this picture was done in about 1995 or so.
Speaker 2: Okay, 1995?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Eloise and I dancing.  Maybe it's earlier than that.
Speaker 2: You sure it's 1995?
Speaker 1: Maybe it's '85 [1985].  Wait, I gotta look at it.  I'm sorry.  Oh wait, no, no, no, no, no, no, this is a real old picture.  In fact, it says it on the back.  This is 1968.
Speaker 2: Okay, great, okay, super. Yep. Thank you, sir.
