Story_ID: 188410
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Geraldine Daniels Brownlee.  G-E-R-A-L-D-I-N-E, D-A-N-I-E-L-S, B-R-O-W-N-L-E-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: April 13, 1925; East Chicago, Indiana.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a retired professor.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Professor of--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: I'm a Professor Emeritus in education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Oh, dear.  Today is Wednesday, December 17, 2003.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the studio of The HistoryMakers.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: 1900 South Michigan Avenue, Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 188411
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five People magazine-ish type questions we always ask; they are lightweight questions, and they only deserve a lightweight response, really.  The first one is, ma'am, what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  Fish.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Salmon (laughs).
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yellow.
Speaker 1: All right.  Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: All right.  And your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Usually where it's warm.  These are--are we being taped?  (Laughs.)  Those are very interesting questions.  I suppose at this time I prefer areas around Georgia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Near the coast or--
Speaker 2: Not necessarily.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Now the last question is:  Do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I think it would be "The truth of the matter is."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 188412
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, I'm going to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.  I'm going to start with your mother's side.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: First of all, I have a natural mother and a stepmother.  My natural mother's full name is Nellie Roberta Cossey Daniels.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: The entire name?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: N-E-L-L-I-E, R-O-B-E-R-T-A, C-O-S-S-E-Y, D-A-N-I-E-L-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And now can you give us her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: January 27th, 1902, in Barbour County, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What do you know about her side of the family?  About your mother's side of the family, your birth mother?
Speaker 1: Oh, I know a lot.  As a matter of fact, I brought with me pictures of her family; that is, her mother, her father, and her eight brothers and sisters.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: So I am family with all of them.
Speaker 2: Do you know anything about their history?  Where they come from and how far back can you trace that side?
Speaker 1: I met my great-grandmother on my grandfather's side as a child.  But I really do not remember where they came from.  Somehow--no, I really don't remember where.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So as far as you know, the family's roots are in Alabama or that's where you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Or thereabout.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And my grand--well, we haven't gotten to the grandfather, have we?
Speaker 2: Nope.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well--oh, if he's on your mother's side.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You can go ahead.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  My mother's father was a carpenter and a farmer who owned enough land to pay poll tax and to be able to vote before the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And his name was Moses, M-O-S-E-S, Cossey, C-O-S-S-E-Y.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And much of our family--many of our family have biblical names.  Like, one of the sons is named Jehodis [ph.].  And another son was named Moses.  So, I've always been impressed with that because we have cousins they named, down the line, Moses; I have a cousin named Moses; and another one named Jehodis.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So it's a tradition--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: The tradition is--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --on that side of the family.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, let's see.  Are there any stories from that side of the family about life in Alabama prior to the Civil War, after the Civil War or how they acquired land and property?
Speaker 1: I really don't know how they acquired the land, but they did have a lot of land; farmland.
Speaker 2: Okay.  About how many acres you think?
Speaker 1: Oh, dear.  I can't say.
Speaker 2: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But I know that they paid--he paid poll tax a lot.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now--oh, were there other black farmers in that area that had land in the same region or were they kind of isolated as the only few landowners around there?
Speaker 1: I don't know.  And I suppose one reason for my absence of knowledge is because the children, my uncles and aunts who I knew, and knew well, came up north around the end of World War I.  And they were young.  And I just don't remember.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Okay.  Now, you said you had a mother and stepmother.  Did your mother die--(unclear)
Speaker 1: My mother died in 1933.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Story_ID: 188413
Speaker 1: So you want to give us your stepmother's name?
Speaker 2: Yes.  My stepmother's name is Nancy Jane Calhoun.  N-A-N-C-Y, J-A-N-E, C-A-L-H-O-U-N; Daniels, D-A-N-I-E-L-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What what's her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Mother was born September 28, 1902, in Gunnison, Mississippi.
Speaker 1: And how do--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: G-U-N-N-I-S-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  What about her side of the family?  Are there any stories about, you know, life in the nineteenth century or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, her mother's name was Fannie, F-A-N-N-I-E; Calhoun.  And her father's name was William Calhoun.  And William, most people agreed, was white, and they--he brought her north to live.  And my mother had two sisters; Ruth and Jessie.  So that family came up north.  My grandmother and whom we called Mama, and her husband separated when I was quite young.  My mother, whom I call mother, but she's my stepmother, and my father [Jerry Daniels] married in 1935.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they lived in East Chicago, Indiana.  That's where they met.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story about how they met?
Speaker 2: In church.  Her father was a minister--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --in the same church where we attended, where we were members.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they just met and fell in love, I guess so.
Speaker 2: Yes (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 188414
Speaker 1: What about your father's side of the family?  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Jerry Daniels.  J-E-R-R-Y, D-A-N-I-E-L-S.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And he was born March 25, 1902.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And was he born in--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: In Barbour County.
Speaker 1: --the South?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Barbour County, Alabama.
Speaker 2: Alabama.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How far back can you trace his side of the family?  How much do you know about them?
Speaker 2: His mother was part Indian, and I'm sorry, I don't know what tribe.  Her name was Elizabeth Lowe [ph.].  And she married Darby Daniels, who died; my father's father died in 1925.  After his death, she married a Mr. Bowen, B-O-W-E-N.  And that's all I can say.  She was always a housewife.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So were there--are there any stories about your father's side of the family that come down about his parents or did they tell about, you know, why they left the South or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yes.  I think I heard this.  My father worked for Central [of] Georgia Railroad.  And that's where he worked until he came to East Chicago, Indiana, right after World War II--World War I; I'm sorry, in 1918.  And he was employed by Inland Steel [Company, Chicago, Illinois]; started as a laborer, and then worked up to skilled--to be a skilled laborer--a skilled worker; and he developed back problems and then was--would assist the foreman because he couldn't continue with his back problems in this job, as I remember as a child, was called a matcher and a doubler [ph.].  Now, I think that that's steelwork language.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Did your father have a chance to go to school beyond grade school or high school?
Speaker 2: My father went to--got certified at Moody Bible Institute [Chicago, Illinois] here. After he came up here, he took courses at Moody Bible Institute and was--got a certificate.  So he did go past elementary school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he worked in the mill but he was a part-timer.  Was he ordained or do--at all?
Speaker 2: A deacon.
Speaker 1: A deacon.  Okay.  All right.  So he was--you said he was a deacon for a long time.
Speaker 2: Yes.  He was ordained the year after, in 1926 and remained in the church until he died in 1989.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what church did he attend?
Speaker 2: Tabernacle Baptist Church in East Chicago, Indiana.
Story_ID: 188415
Speaker 1: Now, what was your father's [Jerry Daniels] personality like?  What was he--you know, what did he like to do and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, I like to talk about my father, because he was, as most people used to say, but I didn't recognize it as much until his funeral, he was a leader and he loved people.  He was very articulate, well read and charismatic.  He--people were drawn to him.  And he talked a lot and shared a lot and especially with younger males.  They spoke of his being their mentor.  And he was very active with the Masons.  As a matter of fact, at the time of his death, he was chaplain emeriti--emeritus at the time of his death with the Masons there in Indiana.  He, as a father, was pretty firm (laughs).  And we understood what was important to him, which was church, character, education, and he, I thought, and my mother who was my stepmother, made a very wonderful pair, because she was sweet and soft spoken and pretty.  And I've given you his character--characteristics.  But he was the leader of the household, and there was no doubt about it.
Story_ID: 188416
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, your--did you--do you remember much about your birth mother [Nellie Roberta Cossey Daniels]?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, what was she like and what kind of personality do you remember from her?
Speaker 2: My father has said more than one time that I reminded him of my mother.  And finally once I said, "What do you mean?"  He said, "Quick tongue."  (Laughs)  "And smart."  My mother was very smart; natural mother was very smart. She showed us ribbons that she had won as Alabama's State Champion Speller.  She went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  She didn't graduate, but she attended Tuskegee.  And she was known to be a very bright person.  And, as a matter of fact, she read to us all the time.  When I went to school, to kindergarten, I was reading.  I never remember when I could not read.  And I can--and she stressed spelling and reading, and she'd read to us and talk to us.  And she too stressed education.
Story_ID: 188417
Speaker 1: What about your stepmother [Nancy Jane Calhoun]?  What was she like?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said before, she was gentle and she was kind and pretty and easy to talk to and to share, soft spoken; and she too read a lot and referred to whatever she read.  She went to school in Mississippi.  She didn't go to college.  I'm not even sure that she finished high school.  But she did refer to school in large and how important it is.
Speaker 1: What materials would your parents read?
Speaker 2: Children's books, the Bible.  I think that's most of it, children's books and Bibles.  We always had a lot of children's books around.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of newspapers from--
Speaker 2: With my natural mother [Nellie Roberta Cossey Daniels]?
Speaker 1: With either one I guess, in the--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  We had newspapers.
Speaker 1: --you know, in the household growing up.
Speaker 2: But we lived about--can I say about a mile--not quite a mile from the library--and I went to the library all the time as the rest of my siblings would do.  But I think I went more than they did, because I read every book in the library.  And the librarian would say, "Come back and we'll have a new book for you.  A book will come in for you."  Or when I came, she'd say, "I put this aside for you because I know how you love to read."  We used to talk a lot about what I had read.  So there were a lot of books that were brought in from the library as well.
Story_ID: 188418
Speaker 1: What was it like growing up?  What was your--what was the name of your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: I lived in a Polish, Slavish, Turkish, Serbian neighborhood.  And it was a--principally a working-class neighborhood.  And it was at the end of downtown [East Chicago, Indiana]--downtown where it turned into a residential area, at the end of the business area.  And that's where I was raised.  And it was very, very close.  As a matter of fact, one would leave my block and walk into the prairie--the prairies of Indiana I roamed as a child, because they were right across the street.  So--and then directly across the street was an empty lot.  There were no houses except for one at the corner.  So the carnivals would come every summer and occupy the empty lot across the street from--and our block, and we lived for the carnivals each summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I don't know what they called our neighborhood.  I know what they would call other neighborhoods, like, across the tracks or over--oh, Indiana Harbor [East Chicago, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was the section of town that I lived in.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And near downtown.
Story_ID: 188419
Speaker 1: Now, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: My mother--both mothers [Nellie Roberta Cossey Daniels and Nancy Jane Calhoun] would always take us for walks.  Of course, we walked downtown [East Chicago, Indiana] and we would do window shopping.  Or we would look in the fruit markets.  So I can just smell the fruit.  And then we would go west into another section, if we crossed the viaduct.  And we would stand on the viaduct and listen to the trains as they would go by, 'cause we would never be able to hear them from my house.  So I remember those walks.  Oh, there was a streetcar that ran on the main street between East Chicago and Gary [Indiana].  So I remember the sound of the streetcar.
Speaker 1: What was that sound?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think I can imitate it.  It was--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Was it a horn or--
Speaker 2: Well, they would ring a bell-type thing at times.  But it was metal rolling around against concrete or something; you know, the wheels are what made the noise, and it was pretty noisy.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what else?  What else?  What other sights and sounds and smells?
Speaker 2: The prairie sounds, the birds and depending on the time of the year.  It was interesting because we used to get snow in those days.  It could have been that because I was small, I thought it was so high, the snow banks.  But there were snow banks on the prairie that we would have to navigate to go to school, that sometimes came over the head, because of the wind--would blow the drifts.  So I remember the pretty snow and the crunching and getting through it (laughs) as a child.  What other sounds do I remember?  There weren't that many cars.  But I had two uncles who had cars, so.  Oh, and as a child, we were within four, maybe--yeah, about four blocks of the high school, and I can remember the cheers whenever there was a football game.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Even when I was in elementary school we figured who got the goal, who got the touchdown; that I can--and I could hear the band practicing, the marching band practicing from where we lived.
Story_ID: 188420
Speaker 1: Now what kind of little girl were you?  What did you like to do and what made you tick when you were little?
Speaker 2: How young?
Speaker 1: Oh, when you were a little girl.
Speaker 2: Little--well, I just read.  I really read a lot.  I played jump rope.  I remember that.  And I did skate, and I did marbles.  And--are you talking about--oh, I always did things around the house.  As a matter of fact, I would help my mother with the laundry.  And I remember on week--on Saturdays, we always made fudge.  So I would help with making fudge.  And we always sang.  I came from a very musical family.  Everyone could sing.
Speaker 1: Would you sing together around the house or would--
Speaker 2: We had a quartet.  And then the quartet grew a little when my brother came--was born.  And we sang all the time.  People would just ask us to sing.  My father [Jerry Daniels] had a beautiful voice, tenor voice; so did my brother.
Story_ID: 188421
Speaker 1: And my sister next to me sang professionally.  She was a professional singer.  She is--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) What was her name?
Speaker 1: Nellie Grace Smith--Daniels Smith.  She traveled as a teenager with the Robert Anderson Singers [later, The Caravans] here in Chicago [Illinois] as a teenager.  And she made her living teaching piano and organ, and being a director of music in various churches.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Right now she's in Georgia.
Speaker 2: How many brothers and sisters do you have?
Speaker 1: Three sisters and one brother who is deceased.
Speaker 2: And where do you fall in that order?
Speaker 1: I'm second oldest.
Story_ID: 188422
Speaker 1: How did you like school?
Speaker 2: Loved it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what grade school did you attend?
Speaker 2: Franklin Elementary; Benjamin Franklin Elementary School [East Chicago, Indiana].
Speaker 1: And were you there the whole eight years?
Speaker 2: Six years.
Speaker 1: Six years.  Okay.
Speaker 2: In our system it was six years and then junior high and then high school.
Story_ID: 188255
Speaker 1: What was the name of your school again?
Speaker 2: Benjamin Franklin Elementary School [East Chicago, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yes.  You said you liked school a lot?
Speaker 2: I liked school a lot, and I really liked certain teachers.  Like, I liked the kindergarten teacher, because she would hold my hand, and she had to pass my house when she was going back and forth, and she'd walk with me.  I liked the gym teacher, because I always liked gym.  And I found Miss Mueller [ph.], the English teacher, very interesting, very nice.  But I didn't like--let me back up just a bit.  My parents [Jerry Daniels and Nancy Grace Calhoun] told us what to expect, and they'd say, "When you crawl across this threshold, you are going to be--oh, it meant, discriminated against, you're going to have problems.  Now this is the way you do it."  So they'd tell us, "Don't create fights, don't"--and they'd tell us what to expect.   But I had a fight in elementary school with a girl.  Her name was Jean Kruduski [ph.].  It was--I still remember her name (laughs), and she was a kind of husky Polish girl.  But she was always very nasty to me.  And in those days, they'd put a stick on your shoulder when you got ready--and if anyone knock it--if the person knocked it off, the fight started.  Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: What did she do to you?  What kind of things would she do to you to annoy you?
Speaker 2: She's make snide remarks.  She was just mean.  And I thought it had to do with the fact that I was, in those days, "colored."  And I could always outrun her, and I was better in class.  And she'd say something about colored folks.  Well, one time she said something and I was ready to fight.
Speaker 1: What did she say to you?
Speaker 2: I don't remember, because this was in elementary school, like, fourth grade.  But she--we started.  I hit her and she went after me with--'cause she was bigger--'cause I was always kind of small, petite.  And I told my sister what I was going to do, my older sister, 'cause she was bigger and she was pretty tough.  I said, "After school, I'm tired of her.  I'm going to really get her."  And my sister said, "Wait until you know I'm out of school."  And I couldn't wait.  I started, but my sister ran up and beat her up, 'cause she was really beating me up (laughs).  She beat up Jean Kruduski.  And after that, she never bothered me anymore.  But I'll never forget that fight.  And it all had to do with--she may have called me what we call a dirty name in those days, like, nigger, or something.  But my folks told us what to expect, that someone would do that and why they would do it.  And--but I--that didn't help after--in this case.  And that was an elementary school experience that I will never forget.  But there were some wonderful teachers.  And by the way, I never had a black teacher until I got to college.
Speaker 1: You said there were very few black students in school with you at Benjamin Franklin?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But in high school I never had a black teacher.
Story_ID: 188256
Speaker 1: So what were your favorite subjects?
Speaker 2: I always liked the language arts and I liked art.  And I liked gym and I liked science.  That seems to me that I liked them all.
Speaker 1: That's--yeah.  It covers a wide spectrum.
Speaker 2: (Laughs.)  Well, I was--but I was always a good student and easy, you know, it was easy for me to learn always.  I liked Mr. Severson [ph.] because he taught me violin.  I started violin lessons in third grade.  And I thought he was a marvelous man because he could play all these different instruments, and he was very patient.  Elementary school generally was a pretty good experience for me.  It wasn't until I got to high school that things were not so good.
Story_ID: 188257
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you attended George Washington High School [later East Chicago Central High School, East Chicago, Indiana]?
Speaker 2: Yes.  George Washington High School.
Speaker 1: In East Chicago [Indiana].
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And you--now, how old were you when you entered high school?
Speaker 2: I was the normal age.  I guess it was twelve?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Twelve.  Junior High School, remember I entered junior high school first.
Speaker 1: --Or did you go to junior high school first.  Right?
Speaker 2: --I entered junior high school first.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: It was the same thing [unable to verify].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Washington High School had a junior high school.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They had seventh and eighth grade there in separate buildings.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did trouble start in junior high or high school proper?
Speaker 2: In junior high was when I first realized how competitive school could be, because there were two girls in my class, who were Norma Freeland [ph.] and Barbara Levine [ph.], who were always trying to--we were always competing with each other.  And that's when I first got--became accustomed to competing academically.  And I didn't like it but I did it (laughs).  I stood my grounds on that.  It was "What did you get?"  "What did"--you know it was always getting a better score.  And they were in junior high school with me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it was high school, when I got to high school, and we were not permitted to swim in the pool.
Speaker 1: The black students?
Speaker 2: Black students were not permitted to swim in the swimming pool.  Black students were not permitted to shower, to take showers.  And I always liked gym and competing in athletics.  And the gym teacher, she would, to me, now that I look back on it, was always very, kind of embarrassed because she was--I think she was a nice person, but she was embarrassed about it, I think.  I got the feeling that she was.  But--and some of my friends who--actually, most of my very, very close friends were white except for my church friends, because we went to a black church.  They were kind of embarrassed and they would kind of talk to me about it, because we would go back and forth to school together.  But then when Miss--oh, the gym teacher's name was Miss Wall, W-A-L-L.  But the women's--the girl's dean--Count Dean [ph.], that's what she was, called me in because she was telling me that I could not--no longer go to the movie with this boy who was white.  And he was willing to sit where we could sit in the movie.  We sat on--he sat on the--you know, where blacks could sit, 'cause whites could sit anywhere they wished.
Speaker 1: How old were you then now?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was, like, a freshman.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was, like, in ninth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is 1938, I guess, or so?
Speaker 2: '39 [1939].
Speaker 1: '39 [1939]?
Speaker 2: Probably.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  '39 [1939].  It may have been--nine, ten, elevan, twelve; '39 [1939] or '40 [1940].  I finished in '43 [1943].  And I really didn't like it, and he didn't either when--the Dean (unclear) didn't call him in.  And--
Speaker 1: What did she say to you?
Speaker 2: That I could not do that anymore.  I could not go to the show with him.
Speaker 1: Did she give you a reason, I guess?
Speaker 2: "We just don't do that."  You know, that's what--you understood what that meant.  "We just don't do that.  We just are not going to put up with that."
Story_ID: 188258
Speaker 1: --I did very well in high school [George Washington High School, East Chicago Central High School, East Chicago, Indiana].  I was in honors class, college prep class and was continually at the top of my class.  I'm not saying I was number one all the time, but I never dropped before being number four or number five, across male--girls and boys.  And my homeroom teacher was Miss Oyler [ph.], and I liked her, too.  I had some teachers that I really liked.  And one day she called me aside.  I believe I was a senior then.  And she had tears in her eyes, and I couldn't understand--she says, "I just want you to know that they voted against you for the National Honors Society."  And I said, "Really?"  She said, "Yes."  And she told me the two teachers who had done it.  And she said, "Remember when you"--and I remember the incident.  They had a Robeson Glee Club because--the Robeson Glee--we could not go to proms.  We could not go to the white prom.  So the glee clubs sponsored the black prom.  And that was one of the reasons I liked to be Robeson Glee Club, even my parents and my relatives objected, and there were other blacks who objected to a segregated glee club.  And we sang Negro spirituals mostly.  Every year--if I'm jumping around and if I'm not making it clear, just stop me and back me up.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Every year, organizations in the high school would have a carnival.  And we would have skits, and then we would get awards for who had the best show or the best skit.  The [Robeson?] Glee Club constantly won.  And we had no competition, really, at all.  Miss Shear [ph.] who was the teacher who was in charge of the Robeson Glee Club; her name was Pauline Shear, said one day that she thought it was about time that we stopped winning and that we should not compete this year so someone else could win.  And I stood up in glee club and I said, "Why?  If we're the best, we should win."  "And, well, you know, you should be good sports, because it's just not working."  I'm using my terms.  And she said, "Furthermore, the music studio was a new room."  And it was really a lovely room.  And she said, "Further, maybe we won't have all these grease marks on the walls if you don't have this room for your skit."  Well, I said, "Excuse me.  If my people put those grease marks there, my father [Jerry Daniels] pays taxes and my people will see that they are cleaned."  And she pointed to the door and told me, "Don't come in until you bring your father."  (Laughs.)  And so I left.  Now, I'm a junior or a senior--junior, then I think.  I'm not sure a senior.  And I told my father, and I was afraid to tell him, because if there's one thing he said, "Nobody should do anything that would cause me to come to that school.  Nobody in this house."  So I told him.  And he didn't like what I had done, 'cause he thought I should have handled it a different way.  But he said he'd go back to school with me and to see that I would get in class.  Well, he came back to school and we had our meeting.  And she said, "You owe me an apology and I'm waiting."  And I said, "I don't owe you an apology."  And my father--I think my father was really shocked that I would not apologize.  And he said, "Well, just apologize."  I said, "I will not apologize.  I don't think I was wrong.  I think that she was insulting my people."  And I did not apologize, and I did not get back in the Robeson Glee--she did not let me back in.  And so Miss Oyler pointed out to me--and that, of course, affected my grade--but nonetheless, I still finished near the top of my, you know, my class--she pointed out to me that Miss--that these two teachers, the one who did the black play, because we--blacks could not participate in the white plays.  We had black plays and white plays--had gotten together and they had decided that no matter what my grades were, my character did not permit them to vote for me to be in the National Honor Society.
Story_ID: 188259
Speaker 1: So I even brought my yearbook from high school [George Washington High School, East Chicago Central High School, East Chicago, Indiana], later  to show you all the activities that I was in and whatnot, but not in the National Honor Society.  Girl Counselor and all that.  So I thought, "Well."  I was hurt.  And my friends were hurt.  Most of my friends in high school were white friends.  And they really tried to support me and comfort me.  But then it came time in the senior year for the counselor--I guess it was Miss DePrute [ph.], the dean, to talk to people about going to college and the possibilities of scholarships and whatnot.  And she called in all my white friends to talk about going to college and never called me in.  And they were upset again.  But, fortunately, my mother belonged to a club of black women--my stepmother [Nancy Jane Calhoun]--who gave scholarships.  And there was another women's, black women's club--most of them were college women--who gave scholarships.  And the news got around for me not to worry.  So it ended up that--oh, and my friends were going to Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] and Purdue [University, West Lafayette, Indiana].  And they were talking to me about, "Well, let's go."  And I said, "I'm not going to Indiana University," 'cause you can't live in the dorm; and I didn't know about Purdue.  I said, "I'm going to a black college like my mother [Nellie Roberta Cossey Daniels] went."  I told you my mother went to Tuskegee [University, Tuskegee, Alabama].  And my brother-in-law was at A and T [North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State University, Greensboro, North Carolina].  By this time, my oldest sister had married, and he was at A and T.  And he had heard about it, and he said, "I'll help you to select a college," because he played basketball and made the whole circuit of the black colleges.
Speaker 2: That's North Carolina A and T.
Speaker 1: Yes.  North Carolina A and T.  And he helped me.  He recommended some, and I wanted--because I'd always--I was good in language 'cause I was excellent in Latin.  And I wanted a foreign language and science.  Those were the two criteria that I was looking at.  And I was not going to go to Tuskegee, 'cause it was too close to my grandparents (laughs).  And I had heard how my grandfather visits the college and whatnot and he was very strict.  So I chose West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia].  That's how I got there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: 'Cause it had a good science department and a good foreign language department.
Story_ID: 188260
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was West Virginia State like?  I mean, who were some of the teachers and personalities that you met there?
Speaker 2: Well, West Virginia State College [West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] is a--on its sign it says, a liberal education, and I always knew from my mother that that was the best kind of education one could get.  And when I went there, the dean of the college was Dr. Harrison Ferrell, who was from Chicago [Illinois] and had finished his doctorate at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  And he greeted me right away, because you had to send in your picture with your application.  And when I walked into the administration building, he said, "Hi, Gerri [HM Geraldine D. Brownlee]," the first day when I registered.  And my psychology teacher was Dr. Herman Canady, who had received his doctorate at Northwestern.  And I really have never regretted that decision.  My whole life changed.  I just felt as if I were just liberated from all of the racism, whether it was subtle or not, that I could go--belong to any organization I wanted to belong to.  I wasn't afraid of failing, because I knew I had the ability to learn.  And then it would put me in contact with my own people, because I was very limited in East Chicago [Indiana] in knowing people, black people--we were colored then--except for church and the limited number who went to school with me, 'cause there were only twenty-six in my graduation class out of over three hundred blacks.  And so it was--I was very impressed with the faculty.  I was impressed with the students.  I didn't like the dorm.  I thought the dorms were crummy.  But it just made a different person out of me in my life.
Speaker 1: Were there a lot of restrictions on students at West Virginia, West Virginia State at that point (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, yeah.  Yes.  In those days you couldn't get in a car.  One could not leave campus without written permission from your parents.  We had to be in the dorm at certain hours of night.  You know, yes.  There were a lot of restrictions.  But I didn't mind that because I had restrictions at home.  And then we--as we learned, we could do everything we wanted to do within a certain--anyway, within a certain time.
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Once you figured out the system.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: But then, I also didn't know, until I got to West Virginia State, and Dr. Canady gave everyone--now that I look back on it, it may have been the Stanford Binet test [Stanford Binet Intelligence Scales]; it was an I.Q. test, and then told us, you know, who did well and who did this.  And I was the highest one in the class, and it was a very high I.Q.  And he said--told them that.  And I was so pleased, because I knew I had a good I.Q., but I didn't know how high it was or how good it was, because they never told me in high school.  So with Dean--Dr. Canady and Dr. Ferrell, I could take as many--you know, how a load could be, like, sixteen hours?  I was permitted to take twenty, twenty-two, twenty-four.  You know, I could--they gave me a lot of privileges, because they said I could do it.  And that's how I got the double major, 'cause with a double major, one has to have a double minor, which means you have to have certain courses in two dif- four areas.  I had to do it.
Story_ID: 188261
Speaker 1: Well, you--it sounds like you were pretty serious as a student.  I mean--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you--did you take part in campus activities [at West Virginia State College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], like, student government or--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I was president of my class in my sophomore year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was editor-in-chief of the newspaper, the campus newspaper [The Yellow Jacket].  I joined the debating team.  I made varsity basketball.  And in those days, we traveled.  I traveled the black college circuit, and I was co-captain of the basketball team.  And--oh, I did a lot of--oh, I joined the sorority.
Speaker 1: Which one?
Speaker 2: Alpha Kappa Alpha [AKA].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was blackballed (laughs) because--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You're blackballed?  Now what was the problem--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: --because I had biology lab, and I had chemistry lab.  And they would tell us to come by their rooms at certain times to wash the walls and sweep the floors and scrub the floors.  And I said, "I don't have time to do that.  I've got to go to the library.  I've got to go to the lab."  And I didn't have time, 'cause I had two lab periods, and they kept saying, "Well, you're being insubordinate."  I said, "Well, can't do it.  My work comes first.  My schoolwork comes first."  And so I was blackballed.
Speaker 1: So that's just for one, after--
Speaker 2: Also, I was not permitted to go for the first line.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So after that--(unclear)--
Speaker 2: But after that, but they held me up.  I was leaving, except the English--my English professor was an AKA, and she said--and she was advisor of the chapter, and she said, "Just stay, Gerri [HM Geraldine D. Brownlee].  They don't--don't be discouraged.  You're going in if you will stay."  And so I said, "I don't even know whether I want to be with these people."  You know (laughs).  So I guess I was a little difficult as a personality, I guess.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of friends?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Still have them.
Speaker 1: It may not have been that difficult.  I don't know.  Just maybe--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: But I think I had them because I was always a leader, you know.  No matter what it was: sports, class.  And then I could do so many different things.  And I think I was a lot of fun, but there was--I would draw the line on certain things.
Speaker 1: So you probably didn't drink and hang around (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: So you did?
Speaker 2: --that's where I learned to drink and smoke.
Speaker 1: Oh, you learned all that there (laughs)?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I certainly did, although we never had anything in my house of alcohol.  My father [Jerry Daniels] smoked, but he did not permit it.  But that's where I learned.  But I didn't do it when I went home [East Chicago, Indiana].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughs).  But I learned.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I enjoyed it (laughs).  And then I stopped, you know.  I've always been able to stop whatever I need to stop.
Story_ID: 188262
Speaker 1: Now, was your major education or English or?
Speaker 2: My major was biology and Spanish.
Speaker 1: Oh, biology and Spanish--
Speaker 2: Undergraduate.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: All right.  So you had--so that's right.  You had the labs to go to and all that to go to--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and all that.  Yeah.  Right.  Right.  Okay--
Speaker 2: And I was a biology assistant, which was unusual, because there weren't very many women in biology.  As a matter of fact, most of the students were pre-med and they were all males.  I was always the only female.  And I was a biology assistant beginning my sophomore year.  That's how I worked my way to help with my tuition.
Story_ID: 188423
Speaker 1: All right. So you're at West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia], and it's a better experience than high school [George Washington High School, later East Chicago Central High School, East Chicago, Inidiana] by far.  You're--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: --active and you're able to make a--
Speaker 2: And, you know, to develop myself and to meet my potentials and whatnot.  And it was a joyful time in my life, really.
Speaker 1: Okay--(unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: And some of the friends I made there, we're still friends.
Speaker 1: And did I ask you--now, we talked about the president briefly.
Speaker 2: At West Virginia State?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: John W. Davis?
Speaker 1: Yeah (unclear)--
Speaker 2: John W. Davis was the roommate of Mordecai [Wyatt] Johnson, who was president of Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].  And I thought he was an unusual man, because at our assemblies, he would talk about racism and what was going on in [U.S.] Congress and what we would do when we got home.  And so it was constantly--and who we are as a people.  So he was a--both of them were Morehouse [College, Atlanta, Georgia] people.  They finished Morehouse.  So I really liked that.
Story_ID: 188424
Speaker 1: And, as a matter of fact, it's very interesting.  It was that time in my life that I became interested in the Quakers and made contact with the Quakers, and they invited me to join them in certain activities in the country.  But then my Baptist background (laughs)--my father [Jerry Daniels] was saying, "No," you know.  "You don't need to leave home to be a Quaker," and that sort of thing.  But I liked them because they were peace-loving people.  And it seemed to me that they did not discriminate.
Speaker 2: How did you get interested in the Quakers in the--
Speaker 1: A Quaker came to speak to us at West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] in one of our assemblies about what they stood for and whatnot.
Story_ID: 188425
Speaker 1: As a matter of fact, that's when we met renowned people, like, Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.] and--
Speaker 2: Was there a speaker series, or--
Speaker 1: A speaker series.  Every chapel every month or every two or three weeks, we had renowned blacks coming.  I just really, really enjoyed that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Who else besides Adam Clayton Powell?
Speaker 1: Mary McLeod Bethune.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Who is this tenor?  Lawrence [ph.]--there's a black male tenor who came.  I don't remember his name now.
Speaker 2: Roland Hayes?  Or--
Speaker 1: I wonder if it was.  He is a tenor.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: The owner of the Pittsburgh Courier.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Robert [Lee] Vann?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Robert L. Vann, yeah.
Speaker 1: Presidents of other black colleges came.  Trying to think.  It just widen my horizon so to understand the possibilities that we had that I just didn't feel that I had growing up as a child.
Story_ID: 188426
Speaker 1: In East Chicago [Indiana], you know, you said you lived in a mostly white neighborhood.
Speaker 2: Yes.  Predominantly white.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Is there--did you--did anyone in your family or any of the friends you knew at church talk about black history much?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My favorite pastor at church was Reverend John Allen [ph.], who finished the University of Denver [Denver, Colorado] or [University of] Colorado [Boulder, Colorado].  And when I was growing up, he was older than my father [Jerry Daniels].  And he used to--and his wife was a graduate of Spelman [College, Atlanta, Georgia].  So I would listen to them, and that was another reason I went to a black college, because she wanted me to go to Spelman.  She talked to me about it would be a different experience for me if I went to a black college.  And he agreed, because he had not been to a black college, you know, been to college in Colorado.  So to have people talk to you about it is good, but then experience it, oneself, is indelible, I think.
Story_ID: 188427
Speaker 1: Now, you were in school during World War II [WWII]--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and was the population of your school sort of thinned out as a result of the war or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  But the ASTP [Army Specialized Training Program] was there.  Are you familiar with that?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: That's a part of the [U.S.] Army.  They were all black, but they had college backgrounds.  And they were on campus when I first got there.
Speaker 1: ASTP?
Speaker 2: ASTP.  That's it.
Speaker 1: What did it stand for?  Do you--
Speaker 2: I'm trying to figure out what that acronym was.
Speaker 1: Army Special Training something, or that?
Speaker 2: It doesn't--
Speaker 1: Oh.  Army Special Training Program, I think.  Armed--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because a lot of them were officers--
Speaker 1: --Service Training Program.  Armed Service Training Program?
Speaker 2: A lot--
Speaker 1: I think I interviewed someone about two weeks ago that was involved--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --with them.  Were they--they're--
Speaker 2: And they came from--
Speaker 1: --were they trainers basically, for other soldiers--
Speaker 2: They were in training.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They were in training.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But they all had college background--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --before they were drafted in--
Speaker 1: Were they training to be trainers in some field or something?
Speaker 2: I just don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think that's what it was.  I think 'cause they did some of that, I think in--
Speaker 2: Although I do remember one of them, because we would--I dated one of them.  And he had gone to Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee] and I lost contact with him.  But the last I heard he's a physicist back east.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But most of them, you know, were college trained--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --or educated.
Story_ID: 188428
Speaker 1: Any other recollections about college before--about West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] before we move on?
Speaker 2: (Pause.)  I think not.  I may come up with something as I proceed.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But at that time, were you--when you were on the verge of graduation, did you know what you were going to do next?  Were you going to pursue biology as a career or were--
Speaker 2: Oh, I think that's a good--
Speaker 1: --you--
Speaker 2: --I think that's a good question, because my Spanish teacher had arranged for me to go to med[ical] school in Mexico because he knew that I was biology and whatnot, and then because he had connections there.  But at the time, I thought I thought I'd better come out and work, because there were five of us.  And at one time, three of us were in college at the same time.  And so I didn't go.  I didn't take--follow up on that, and I often think of what would have happened if I had gone to medical school in Mexico.
Speaker 1: So you were always--
Speaker 2: But I came to Chicago [Illinois] and applied for work at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] labs and the University of Illinois Hospital [and Health Sciences System, Chicago, Illinois] labs and was not hired.
Speaker 1: Now why did you come to Chicago?
Speaker 2: Because I had relatives here, and I couldn't find a job at home.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So nothing was going on in East Chicago [Indiana]-- No.
Speaker 2: --so you just came on to Chicago?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then I got hung up.  You know how you--I started doing social work here, and I was given--I've been very fortunate about that--a fellowship by the Lions Club [International] to go to the University of Michigan Rackham [Graduate School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], School of Social Work for special training in administering to the blind.
Speaker 2: Now, how did that take place?  The Lions Club is a club that doesn't--
Speaker 1: The--
Speaker 2: --have much black--at least didn't--
Speaker 1: --the head of the office--it was through the head of the office.
Speaker 2: Now, who did you work for as a social worker?
Speaker 1: Cook County Welfare Department [later Department of Human Services, DHS, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: And you know, in working, what she explained to me when she asked me, she had looked into my background--she was a Jewish woman, and she'd looked at my record and she had watched me in my performance on the job.  And she thought that this would be a good direction for me to take.
Story_ID: 188429
Speaker 1: So I did go up to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], and it was a good--it was a very good experience in terms of learning and my grades.  I was straight A there and had a problem up there really, because I went with a group of whites to--it was a tavern and they had hamburgers and whatnot and a beer, and they wouldn't serve me.
Speaker 2: This is in Ann Arbor [Michigan]?
Speaker 1: In Ann Arbor, Michigan.  They would not serve me.  And so the whole group got up and left.  And I won't forget that.  It just seems every now and then it pops up its head.
Speaker 2: Now in those days in the North--
Speaker 1: Now this was in 1950.
Speaker 2: Right.  But in those days in the North, was one ever certain where one could go to be served?  It seems like there are a lot of places are popping up that are not serving black people for one reason or another.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean--
Speaker 1: Well, my husband [Brady Brownlee] raises that question.  But you know what I would do?  I would go where I wanted to go and just suffer the consequences of what happens after I get there or decide what I'm going to do.  But I never hesitated to go.  But he would not want to go if he had heard of certain places.  And there're people who won't go.  But I will go.
Speaker 2: And this is also a time-you--just verify this if it isn't--from what I've--all I've heard that that's the time when very few black folks were out front in a service of occupations as clerks and salespeople and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: That was true.  That's true.
Speaker 2: And, you know, cashiers--
Speaker 1: That's true, because I remember--
Speaker 2: --bank tellers--
Speaker 1: --very, very clearly where they would serve the whites.  If you were standing there first, and if a white came up after you, they would serve the white, and I'd say, "Excuse me."  I've always spoken up.  I've always spoken up for myself.  And I would say to the person, I wouldn't say it to the clerk, I'd say "Excuse me, but I was here when you walked up."  And I will do that now because sometimes they are not aware, because we are invisible sometimes of what they've done.  But I will speak up.  I've always--I told you my father [Jerry Daniels] said I have a fast tongue.  But it's not as fast as it used to be (laughs).
Speaker 2: Okay.  Probably doesn't need to be quite as fast as it used to be (laughs).  But that's a good quality, I think, in those circumstances, so.  So you would speak up for yourself (unclear)--
Speaker 1: Oh, yes--
Story_ID: 188430
Speaker 1: How did you find Ann Arbor [Michigan] overall?  Was it better than Indiana or was it--did you like it as well as West Virginia [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I wasn't there that long.  It was a summer fellowship, so I was there one summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the experience was good except for that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And it was a fellowship to do what?
Speaker 2: To study giving service to the blind.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So what did you do next after that summer was over?
Speaker 2: I declined an offer that was made to me to establish the W.C. Handy Foundation--not establish, but to be the chief executive officer for the W.C. Handy Foundation in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, why was that position offered to you, and what was--
Speaker 2: Because they thought--
Speaker 1: --W.C. Handy?
Speaker 2: --they thought I had the ability to do it.
Speaker 1: Did you apply for it or?
Speaker 2: No.  I was--one of the professors knew about it and asked me if I would accept this.  And I declined because at that time, 1950, I was not ready to go down to Birmingham, Alabama--
Speaker 1: Now, this is--
Speaker 2: --to do this.
Speaker 1: --a professor at--
Speaker 2: At University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Speaker 1: University of Michigan.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That summer.  That very (unclear) summer.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  And what was the W.C. Handy Foundation?
Speaker 2: You know who W.C. Handy [William Christopher Handy] from W.C. Handy is?
Speaker 1: I know who he is.  Yes.
Speaker 2: And this was a fellowship to serve the blind.  W.C. Handy was blind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And it was a foundation set up to offer services for the visually handicapped.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't think very many people are going to be watching this, and this is--most people will know who he was.  He was a great musician; a trumpet player--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know.  Of course his statue is on Beale Street in Memphis [Tennessee].  And he was born in Birmingham [Alabama].
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: But, you know, very few people, I think, realize that he was blind.  I didn't know that until now (laughs).  I never read a bio of it.
Speaker 2: Oh.
Speaker 1: But it's not necessarily well-known that he was blind, but.
Speaker 2: Well, he was visually handicapped, we'll put it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know medically that he was totally blind or anything like that.  But he was visually handicapped.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So they had established this foundation to assist visually-handicapped people in Birmingham?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So you weren't ready to go to Birmingham--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --in those days?
Speaker 2: And I declined and came back to the agency where I got the fellowship.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this is about 1950.
Speaker 2: Nineteen fifty.
Story_ID: 188431
Speaker 1: So what did you do when you came back?
Speaker 2: I started setting up certain services that I was permitted to do for the blind people here in Chicago [Illinois].  And, as a matter of fact, one of my clients used to have the newsstand at 83rd [Street] and Cottage Grove [Avenue].  And for years, sometimes I would not go by there for years, and I'd say, "Hi," and he would say, "You recognize my voice."  And he'd say, "Oh, I've been waiting for you to come by here."  That was one instance, but I wanted to do so many things that I was not permitted to do, because there were not the funds, there were not the provisions.  And so I felt that I was not using what I had learned to use.  And as a matter of fact, I knew how to speak with both hands, one or two hands to the blind, because there was a D&B [deaf and blind school]--do you know what D&B means?
Speaker 1: I know.
Speaker 2: D&B School.  Off West Virginia State College [later West Virginia University, Institute, West Virginia] campus was a D&B School; deaf and blind.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Was a school for the deaf and blind.  And they used to come through our campus.  And I became friendly with one I would see all the time on campus.  And he taught me how to sign language.  And that was another reason.  I thought it's interesting about fate; how I was able to work the sign language when I went up to [the University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].  Because we had blind--deaf and blind students in our class.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Speaker 2: But, then I just left when I found out that I could not use what I know and what I was paid to learn with this agency.  Eventually I left.
Story_ID: 188432
Speaker 1: And where did you go?
Speaker 2: I went--I started teaching in Chicago Public Schools [CPS, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Did you teach grade school at first?
Speaker 2: I taught--I started out teaching elementary school in Chinatown [Chicago, Illinois].  And then I decided--and it was a good experience for me--but I decided that I wanted to teach my own people, which was, you know, in--on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois].  So I then got--no.  I got married while I was in Chinatown.  And after that, I got pregnant, full term, and--oh, no.  I transferred to a South Side elementary school, and that's when I got--became pregnant.  And when my leave was over, I went to teach in a predominantly black school in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And I found out that I wasn't really doing what I wanted to do, because there were so many interruptions; there were so many other things that teachers were expected to do; and there were so many needs of the children that were not being met, and I became pretty frustrated and I started taking--I said, "I'm going to take a course at U of C [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] just to see what am I doing--or what do I need to do.
Story_ID: 188433
Speaker 1: And I took one course there [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and after that, they started sending students teachers to my classroom there in--it was at Kozminski School [Kozminski Community Academy, Chicago, Illinois] in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois].  And I then said I kinda liked what I learned, and I think I'm gonna see if I can go there full time.  Because my husband [Brady Brownlee] was always saying, "You're always taking courses, you're always doing this, you know.  Why don't you work toward a degree."  So I applied and I was accepted at the University of Chicago.  And before I got started that fall, I was offered a scholarship.  And I thought, "Oh, that was very nice, because I was going to have to pay for my--you know, for my work.  And it was a very, very--it was a very, very fruitful year for me.  My eyes continued, you know, to be opened.  And I continued to study.  At that time, it was very popular and fashionable to study about the disadvantaged.  I don't know whether you are familiar with that term.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Or the deprived.  And I had problems with that, because I didn't think it was disadvantagement as it was in absence of opportunity that our children could learn if given the opportunity to do so.  They had everything to work with, was my position.  So I--
Speaker 2: So, let me--just to get this straight on that, you're saying that the black community was characterized as being disadvantaged in the sense that the black students or the black people in the community didn't have certain necessaries to do what they needed to do or--
Speaker 1: Well, the children were underachievers.
Speaker 2: --didn't have the--yeah.
Speaker 1: The children were underachievers, and I've always worked with the parents when I taught. And that's when I realized that they're not underachievers.  They just need the opportunity and the parents need to know how to enhance their learning.  So that was one of my primary focus was to address that.  So I also recognized that there were teachers who needed help to understand how to do a better job.  And having always been perceived as a leader, I wrote my master's paper on leadership--teacher leadership or urban teacher.  No--it was urban teachers, because many of them were screaming and yelling, and they, you know, they didn't know how to work with the children.  And evidently, they liked my work at the University of Chicago because they offered me a staff--no.  They offered me--they encouraged me to stay for the doctorate [degree], and offered me a staff position with a national competition of people for these staff positions.  So that's how I started working on my doctorate there.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Did--
Speaker 1: Which was a marvelous experience for me because I had the freedom to learn and to read and to do what I thought I could do to help to improve, and to change urban systems.
Speaker 2: Now, what was your major for your Ph.D?
Speaker 1: My--for my doctorate [degree]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  For your doctorate.
Speaker 1: My major--my discipline--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Or your discipline.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was philosophy--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and education.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was in the social science division, but my discipline was philosophy as it relates to education, and specifically to planning and implementing curriculums.
Story_ID: 188434
Speaker 1: (Unclear)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But, may I go back to my master's?
Speaker 1: Sure.  Okay.
Speaker 2: My master's [program] was wonderful, because it was an interdisciplinary program.  I was in class with people who were in economics, political science, sociology, law, education; all of it.  And that's when I really came to understand urban systems, and, you know, just how the problems interacted with each other and related to each other in urban systems, particularly in education.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  But in terms of your Ph.D., what philosophies--what curriculum models did you study, you know, if I understand what you were saying correctly, I guess (laughs)?  Am I stating this right?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Or did you compare--
Speaker 2: --a plan for learning or a curriculum should be grounded in a philosophy.  It is what ought to be or what do you see truth to be.  And then from there one grows and develops how to reach this through educational courses.  And when we say a course of study, we mean--I'm not talking about a course, I mean the race.  What race do we run to get there; what are the obstacles; how, what mission do we have in mind, what goals, what objectives do we have in mind to attain the changes that we need to make to get a better job done.  And my focus has always been in the urban scene, because that's where my people were and are.
Story_ID: 188435
Speaker 1: What does work best in that setting?  I mean, you got a setting I guess increasingly where a lot of family structure is broken down, there's no job opportunities or few; educational level is low.  Now with the criminal justice system works against the community; to be a homeowner, you have to pay more money; to buy a car you have to pay more money; you're subject to die from illnesses that other people don't die from 'cause you can't afford the medical care.  I mean, there's so many, you can go on and on.  Infant mortality rate is high, you know, has the same factors, you know, and all these things keep compounding each other, you know.  You get over one hurdle, there's another one, and so.  Since teachers, you know, that we hear today who discuss these problems, you know, seem to be befuddled and baffled.  And they blame the parents.  They say they've got to try to be a parent in school, you know--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and you can't even get to learning because the kids got a problem that could be solved by a parent at home, but often there's no home.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Nobody at home, you know.  I mean, so all these--how do you--what's your philosophy of how to deal with that or is there any one philosophy to try to deal with that?
Speaker 2: I'm not really, really sure that there is a philosophy, like, currently we hear "no child left behind."
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That to me is--doesn't make good sense.
Speaker 1: Well, it's kind of like "just say no," to drugs, or--
Speaker 2: Yes.  And it's not attainable as far as I'm concerned.  I think that what the questions you had posed are serious ones.  I am not going to sit here to say that I have the answers.  But I do know that one has to start somewhere, and I do know that it is very complicated.  As far as--and, by the way, teachers are human beings.  They have some of these children who are in the schools.  Right?  They're parents.  The model that I have become attached to most, and I'm saying this because he happens to be my cousin, it is the James Comer model [Comer School Development Program].  I don't know whether you--are you familiar with that model out of Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut]?
Speaker 1: Yes.  I have a close friend who works for [HM Dr.] James Comer.
Speaker 2: Well that--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: He works for the Chicago model--what's--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Kier [ph.].
Speaker 1: Yeah.  (Unclear).  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.  That comes closer to answer your question in my head.  And as I said to James, whom we call Jimmy, "I thought about that before you wrote it."   You know (laughs).
Speaker 1: --Okay--
Story_ID: 188276
Speaker 1: We were talking about the work of [HM] [Dr.] James [Comer]--
Speaker 2: Jim Comer.
Speaker 1: James Comer.  Jim Comer, who's an educator, who teaches at Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut].
Speaker 2: He's a psychiatrist.
Speaker 1: Psychiatrist.  Okay.
Speaker 2: He's a psychiatrist--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --for the Chair at Yale.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he's been there since the late '60s [1960s], frankly.  But I didn't--I'm not begging your question.
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about him, 'cause this is important, and this is a good day to get this on the interview.  Tell us about what he's--you know, what his philosophy is and how it works--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, it's holistic.  I would call it a more holistic approach that it--he has the psychological aspect; the counseling aspect; the education aspect; the economic.  It's all interrelated like I was saying.  And he brings that to bear through his program.  It's strong in teacher training and understanding to whom we are teaching or with whom, rather, we are teaching and learning.  And it is not simple.  It's not to me.  But it covers so many bases that normal systems do not cover, because it covers the parents, it covers, it covers the counselors, it covers the administrators; everyone who works with children need to understand the child.
Speaker 1: Okay.  There was a play back in the '70s [1970s] called The System [ph.].  It was actually produced in Dayton [unable to verify] (laughs), where there's a line in the play, and the educator said, he says, "I've taught this child everything he needs to know about being white except you're black."  You know.  So James Comer is actually saying you got to, like, look at who you're teaching in that situation, you know.
Speaker 2: And who you are.
Speaker 1: And yes.  Okay.
Speaker 2: As well as who you are teaching.  And where did you come from.  Where did they come from.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay.  So it's getting little bit--it's getting beneath the surface of these relationships.
Speaker 2: Right.  Right.  Right.  And it's working.  It's been working.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What kinds of things--what kinds of programs do they run in schools?
Speaker 2: I really can't go into detail.  I know they work with teachers.  I know they work with administrators and with support staff.  That I know, because I've been with him when he has met with them and talked, you know, to them about what they need to know, and how to approach things.  But I have not been in the actual classroom.  I've read his work and I agree with it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think it's Youth Guidance is what they call it.  It's Youth Guidance--
Speaker 2: I think you're right.
Speaker 1: Youth Guidance--
Speaker 2: I think you're right.
Speaker 1: --is the name--
Speaker 2: I think you're right.
Speaker 1: --of the project that Chicago [Illinois] has.  Youth Guidance, right.
Speaker 2: I think you're right.  It does have certain aspects.  That's not the only aspect.  But that is the Chicago--I think that is the Chicago name.
Speaker 1: All right.  It's--
Speaker 2: Oh, her name is [Vivian] Loseth, the director that--
Speaker 1: Of Youth Guidance here?
Speaker 2: --that I used to work with.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 188277
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, when you were in school working on your Ph.D. [degree], were you influenced by your cousin's [HM Dr. James Comer] ideas at that time or had you come across them at that point?
Speaker 2: When I was in school, he--I had not come across this.  I was more influenced by all of the forces that come to bear.  I was more inter- or multidisciplinary focused on problems.  And I did a lot of reading and a lot of research, and ended up narrowing my focus down to leadership.  See, if you listen to what I'm saying, I usually come back to leadership, because leadership is very, very important in bringing about change.  As a matter of fact, my dissertation is on teacher leadership and organizational change.  But I use leadership across other professions and other work in other arenas because a leader is a person who has followers and who can, through his followers, bring about change.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So it's not just a great person, the smartest person--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: --the most talented person--
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: It's not your--
Speaker 2: And it's not because you're endowed because your father was that you are.  It's not that.
Speaker 1: Having a lot of money doesn't make you a leader necessarily-
Speaker 2: It makes--it could make a difference and it could make no difference.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But how do you get followers?  How does a leader get followers?
Speaker 2: That's--
Speaker 1: Or a potential leader get followers?
Speaker 2: I was going to say, because you're not a leader if you don't have followers.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: I've--you know what, we learned in the research the greatest--one of the greatest leaders in the world was Jesus Christ.  They followed him wherever he went, because they felt or knew that he had something to say.  It--that's how one gets followers.  And that's why a lot of people don't have followers, but they're put in leadership positions.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you have to have something to say that attracts people to you in order to be a leader.
Speaker 2: And you've done something.  Not only do you--does one say it, but one has a track record and is believable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I take it that we're--when we talk about leadership development, we're talking about developing certain kinds of leaders.  It's not just a mere--leaders always emerge, especially in the black community, and some are not even positive, but they--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --just like in the--just in the rest of the world, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And there're always positive and believable leaders 'cause they're people that address some basic need that other people had--
Speaker 2: Had.
Speaker 1: --I guess.
Speaker 2: It's true.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what were some of your observations on leadership?
Speaker 2: I think we've covered some of them that--I'll speak personally--that leadership is rare, because leadership should bring about an improvement, not just a change.  And very few leaders historically have brought about more good through leadership.  They brought about change.  And philosophy seeks what is good, and good comes from the word many of us believe, God-like.  Truth is good.  And many leaders don't really understand that, and they are not able to do it, even though they have been given or have accepted leadership roles.  Does that make--?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  That's an opinion about leadership.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 188278
Speaker 1: I was just trying to get--I guess I was asking you who so you could--well, to maybe give us a gist of what your Ph.D. dissertation was about and if that--
Speaker 2: Well, my Ph.D. dissertation had to do with teacher leadership.  And the bottom line with that was, that teachers, as demonstrated through the research, have been able to make some changes, but they have been at an insignificant level.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So should we try to rectify that in some sort of way and how?
Speaker 2: Of course, we never give up.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We never give up.  We still--and that's another thing I like about philosophy.  You're still searching.  We are always searching for improvement.  Always.  We just keep building, and we just keep hunting and realizing what is the good.  That's why a lot of people don't talk to philosophers, because we--they say we're always searching, always hunting, always looking, never finished.  It is a lifetime search.
Story_ID: 188279
Speaker 1: Did you want to say anything else about your Ph.D. dissertation or am I asking the right questions?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: Well, I kind of like what I have been able to use from my work in organizations like the Chicago Urban League, where I chaired the education committee for some years; and the Metropolitan [YWCA Metropolitan Chicago]; the Chicago Urban League Board of Directors; and the Metropolitan Chicago YWCA Board of Directors, where I served, I guess, about seven or eight years and made some very good changes, I think, because we learned--formerly, we had to go through racism training.  And we learned that minority people in America are not racists because we don't have the power to be.  Racism is a power-driven position.  And we may be bigots, but we're not in the position to be racists.  We learned how to evaluate.  I influenced them to do evaluations of the leadership; that is evaluations of the board members, evaluations of the CEO [chief executive officer].  And that I learned from my research in my dissertation of how to understand one's strengths and one's weakness, and whether missions are being accomplished; if not, why not.  I was president of an international honor association for professionals in education and education-related professions.  I brought--took the same message there.  And it just is very gratifying to be able to work at a board of directors or top official level with people to get them to review and evaluate their organizations, where they are, where they ought to be, where they can be.  And that has been very gratifying for me in terms of using what I have learned, because the organizations that I have chosen to affiliate myself with are those which do address children, and they address minorities, and particularly, African Americans.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So in addition to the Urban League, what are some other organizations?
Speaker 2: The YWCA [Metropolitan Chicago].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This professional organization right now--well, I have been working with my sorority [Alpha Kappa Alpha], and I have worked with--there's a group, the Society for the Arts for Youth [ph.], and I'm trying to work with and improve the conditions of youth through the arts, because our young people are gifted.  They are talented and they need all the support they can get, you know, to reach their potential in the arts.  And we're doing it with urban--in urban settings, by the way, right here in Chicago [Illinois].  I've been an officer and the head of the programs of the Links.  I don't know whether you're familiar with--well, I'm a member of the Chicago chapter of Links; and they were--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Just for the record, what does Links attempt to do now?
Speaker 2: It's a social service organization.  They have programs that address education for the children; programs that address more of the societal issues, international issues; give scholarships, and give moneys to other agencies, like, the Urban League, the NAACP [the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; we work with AIDS [Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome] in the black community.  I chaired some very exciting work with the National [Black] Leadership Initiative Against Cancer with--in the black community with men and women, and cancer prevention and whatnot.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I've kind of spread my wings in different directions with what I profess to know, which is what I've been about.
Story_ID: 188280
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, speaking of professing, you've been a professor at University of Illinois of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] for a number of years.  Right?  And you're now professor emeritus.  Right, or--?
Speaker 2: From the University of Illinois.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: University of Illinois at Chicago.
Speaker 2: At Chicago.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.
Speaker 2: That was an experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was truly an experience (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, I can, you know, I see a balloon above your head, but you got to fill in the blanks.  Now, what happened at the University of Illinois at Chicago?
Speaker 2: Well, because it is a large institution.  And to leave a college like West Virginia State [College; West Virginia University, Institute, West Virginia] and to go to a university like the University of Chicago, where there are small populations and to go into a public urban university, where there are thousands and thousands of faculty and student is quite a challenge--students.  It's quite a challenge.  And it was an eyeopener because I went there because I've always been committed to urban education.  And I got there and found that they were still searching for their urban mission.  And it was very difficult because there's such a mix there of Hispanics, blacks, Indians, and whites of different origins.  And there are very relatively speaking, very few tenured black faculty, which puts the burden on those of us who are tenured to meet the needs of the black students, and I--which even though there may not be more than 15 percent, to meet their needs.  Because if one is there, one is likely to come to a person who is of, you know, of the same origin.  And it was very, very difficult for white faculty to understand the demands made on black faculty in terms of publications and research and funding, when we have these other issues that have to do with race and our students.  That was one eyeopener for, you know, for me.  The fact that it's a revolving door for black professors was another issue.  As a matter of fact, the chancellor asked me to serve as a--to chair his committee on the status of blacks at UIC, which I did for a couple of years before I left, and it was most challenging.  I don't--but, I did get in to know a couple of other black faculties from what we call the other campus, the west campus, the medical science campus, who were most supportive, for example, [HM] Dr. [Maurice F.] Rabb, I don't know whether you know him.
Speaker 1: Maurice Rabb?
Speaker 2: Maur- that's how I got to know him.  When I was president he was very, very supportive.  There were other faculties I would not have gotten to know if I had not had that post.  But it was--it also was at the expense of getting my own work done.  I was not given off--you know, time off to do this.  But that's, that's what happens to us when we are in certain positions.  We have to take on certain responsibilities, because--not only because we're needed, but because we have a commitment to do so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So it was--there were--I guess I've touched on the primary problems, trying to serve and support minority students while doing what professors are expected to do was a real problem.
Story_ID: 188281
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in the black studies movement on campus [the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] at all or in any of the black student formations or advisor to any of those?
Speaker 2: I was--I did work when I was there with the director of black studies, which they changed the name from time to time, but I know what you--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I don't know what the exact name is at UIC, but I know at one time Abdul Alkalimat was there; I think Mjololoni Makalani [ph.]? and--
Speaker 2: Well, Grace Holt was one of the first, and she was there for years until her death.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I don't know whether you know about her.
Speaker 1: No.  I didn't know her.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  She was the first.
Speaker 1: Grace Hope?
Speaker 2: Holt.  H-O-L-T.
Speaker 1: Oh.  Holt.  H-O-L-T.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Grace Holt.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: But they've made a number of changes.  I did meet one of the more recent ones, but he's now at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois].  I can't remember his name now.
Speaker 1: [P.] Sterling Stuckey by any chance?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  Sterling is an old--
Speaker 1: Oh.  Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --experienced--this was a younger professor--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --who was the head.  Sterling Stuckey was at Northwestern, wasn't he?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Right.  Right.  I think of that.
Speaker 2: No.  I meant UIC.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The one who was at UIC now is at Northwestern.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He stayed about a year or two.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah.  But--so were you advising any of the black student organizations or working with them?
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Or just black students in general?
Speaker 2: --I was working with faculty, staff and administrators.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I would work with students.  You know, I went there as a dean of students.  So naturally I was working with the students and with the support administrators for students.  But, frankly, do you know I had very few black students in my class when I was teaching.
Story_ID: 188282
Speaker 1: But I did work, as a matter of fact, the last years of my career at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] as a principal evaluator for the dropout program for twenty-six high schools in the city.   I was the principle evaluator because I was still concerned about my people and their education.  And that was--I also did the Hispanic truant program evaluation.  So that was a very rewarding experience for me.
Speaker 2: Well, what did you find?  You know, why are children missing school?
Speaker 1: (Laughs)  Why don't they get there?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Why are they missing school?
Speaker 1: They're not motivated to be there.  In general they're just not motivated.  There are many reasons why they aren't motivated.  It could be the home, it could be economics, it could be the children, it could be teenage mothers.  You know, there--it's to me, and that's really very, very interesting.  It's almost obvious.  There are societal programs that are obvious for our children.
Speaker 2: That's the thing that's struck quite a few people that, you know--
Speaker 1: They're not motivated the way schools are set up to continue.
Speaker 2: Outside of academia and you look at some of the studies that are being done, I've heard community organizers often complain about people coming in--to being funded to come into the community study why they're not doing this and that, and they always say this.  It's fairly obvious why, and this is just as you say.  I mean, it's self evident why they're not, you know, why the people are dropping out of school--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --or why they can't--you know, all these problems--I mean, it's--but I guess somebody has to study and codify it and write it down and to--
Speaker 1: Well--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --tell us what we already know about it.
Speaker 1: --what I did as part of evaluation is, I would just go in school and stop the students in the hallway and say, you know, "Why are you here today?  Where do you think the other students are who are not here?"  Do you know, they'll tell you.  You can get firsthand information from the firsthand source.
Speaker 2: The primary source.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Gee, I had a question that--oh, I wanted to ask you--
Speaker 1: But it's what you do, what one does with the information that's very important too, I think.  I can evaluate and evaluate until I'm gray.  But what happens to the reports is very important.
Speaker 2: Have you been pleased with the results of some of the researches you've done in terms of response that the Board of Education has made or have you been able to make changes, you know, with the information (unclear) were given?
Speaker 1: I don't know of any changes, because I retired shortly after my reports were completed.  And no one from the Board has contacted me.  And the Board has changed too, of course, you know.
Speaker 2: Right.  I knew--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: But I'm willing.  I'm willing to talk, you know, about it.  And maybe they need new people.  Maybe they need new thinking.  I don't know.  But no one has contacted me.
Story_ID: 188283
Speaker 1: Now you were the director of Title VII Program, a desegregation program?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now that was--now, I really felt that--that was in Park Forest [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I really felt that I--my leadership made a difference, because I was in charge of the people who--I had something to say about the people who were hired to teach the students, and from the very beginning we worked on expectations and how to meet them.  And--ever--right along the way, I had sessions on, you haven't met this one, what are you going to do; you met this one, fine, can I help you to continue it.  And it worked out.  It really worked out beautifully, and it was very satisfying for me because basically, the ones who could not meet what the expectations were--I'm talking about teachers--what do you think they did?
Speaker 1: What did they do?
Speaker 2: They left on their own.  And they left knowing, I just can't do that.  And they left saying, "I know you tried to help me, but I'm not prepared to do it."
Story_ID: 188436
Speaker 1: We were talking about, during the--changing tape, the expectations of students and parents, and you had some profound things to say about that.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I was talking about my experience at the elementary school with--in many of my classes had the better students.  But every now and then, I would get students who were poorer students or poor students.  And what really thrilled me was the parents of poor students--because remember, I said early on I always work with parents--would come and talk to me about how well the student was doing at home; what they were saying at home about school; and "I know that "X" is going to be all right because he or she is in your class, and that is the class of the better students."  It was not the class of the better students.  It was that by--you know, by reputation, but not by reality.  And the students really did do much better.  They did a year for a year, is what I'm telling you about progress.  The same has happened to me at the university [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], where there are elective courses.  You know, a student can take a course that is not required for graduation, but is an elected course.  I designed a couple of elected courses, and guess who took my elective courses?  The best students.  And we had a wonderful time, which told me I had a reputation here that I must be very concerned about.  And my reputation has to do with toughness, expectations.  There's that word expectations again.  But the students who were comfortable and felt they could do the work were the ones that took my elected courses.  And they did it.  And it was interesting to me about the students who took the required courses that I took.  They evidently shaped up, because there was a natural Bell curve at the end.  I do believe that leadership matters.  I'm getting back to that again.
Story_ID: 188437
Speaker 1: Now, the area of Indiana you come from [East Chicago, Indiana] has a strong organizing tradition in the unions and so forth.  So a lot of what you say kinda is reminiscent of hearing the union talk about leadership, and you know, you've been helping leaders in the community, organizing people and that sort of thing.  So does that inform your philosophy in any way, you think?
Speaker 2: Well, I told you I thought my father [Jerry Daniels] was a natural leader.  And I gained his qualities.  Ironically, my father was not pro-union.  Isn't that ironic?
Speaker 1: (Laughs.)
Speaker 2: No.  He thought everybody ought to go in there and do their job and do it well.  He was not pro-union (laughs).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So I didn't come up in a household pro-union.  I came up in a household where my parents only voted Republican.  [President] Abraham Lincoln Republican or they did not vote at all.  And there was always discussion about that 'til the day they passed.  Because I'm independent.  You know, I look at all sides.  But they really believed in the Republican Party or they didn't vote at all if they didn't like the Republican who was running.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So there is some deviation when one is permitted to think for oneself and is given the opportunity to learn to think things through.
Story_ID: 188438
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: I'm very concerned, but I'm hopeful.  I am very concerned about our leadership.  But I'm hopeful.  I'm hopeful when I think of people such as [HM later President Barack Hussein] Obama.  I'm being local now.
Speaker 1: Barack Obama?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: (Unclear.)  Okay.
Speaker 2: And I've listened to and I've watched and I've come to talk to him in times personally, because he is a politician, but I think he is cut of a different cloth.  And I don't think he is alone.  I don't think he is alone.  And that's why I have hope, and if I really have hope for my people, because, for example, he has collected a lot of following among people who have hope and who think like he does, and who are supportive, and who are trying to influence other people.  When I lose--I'm trying to think of what else gives me hope.  Oh, other--see, I'm back to leadership again (laughs)--other black people that give me hope, I met [HM Reverend] Jeremiah [A.] Wright [Jr.], for example.  We were both given an award.  I don't even know whether it's in my record for working on this cancer project.  That's when I first met him.  But I listened to him very carefully and I follow him.  And he gives me hope because he has--I think he is very scholarly, very knowledgeable, very sincere, concerned; and I think he's a leader.  And I continue to look for, you know, leadership.  I also had worked with--on committees with other leaders; for example, I don't know whether you knew William Farrell [ph.].  Bill Farrell who worked for Common Ed [ph.], and I didn't know, we've been going in and out of the city [Chicago, Illinois], but I found--I got a call that he had died recently.  But he is a man that I had worked with on committees, and working with him has always given me hope.  The background of the pastor at Good Shepherd [ph.] is solid--I think David Chambers [ph.]--and to know people from that background gives me hope.  I'm just naming a few who come to mind, which encourages me that things can happen if we just keep on the path.
Story_ID: 188439
Speaker 1: At this juncture, what would you consider as your legacy?
Speaker 2: My legacy I consider to be, never stop research.  Never stop research for truth, which I describe as change for the good.  Always have high expectations.  Don't lower your expectations under any circumstances, and live the kind of life that represents what I've just said.
Story_ID: 188440
Speaker 1: Is there anything that you would do differently when you look back?
Speaker 2: Probably.  But I don't know whether it would have been the thing to do.  For example, I got a call during my career when there was a top level vacancy at Spelman [college, Atlanta, Georgia] and I didn't--I declined to go for the interview.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: I often think, what if, like you were saying.  Well, my husband [Brady Brownlee] got a--my husband's business has been in Harvey [Illinois] and Homewood [Illinois], and he was doing very well.  And I've seen myself as a commuting wife.  Now maybe that's kind of like old-fashioned, so maybe that would be something that I would do differently.  I've often, also, wondered how my life may have been if I had accepted that offer I told you about down in Birmingham [Alabama].  That's another kind of like, what if?  Or, I was approached to be a professor at Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio].
Story_ID: 188441
Speaker 1: A lot of this had to do with my mentors.  I was almost about to get a doctorate before I ever had a black mentor.  But my mentors have been very, very supportive, and they really, really knew me well.  And they have been white males.  My first black mentor was Edgar Epps, who came to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] about the time I had completed all of my graduate work and was entering for dissertation.  And--but the mentor that I really loved the most, and the only black woman mentor I had, was Dr. Ann Julian.  I don't know--do you know who she is?
Speaker 2: No.  Tell us.
Speaker 1: She's the wife of Percy--Dr. Percy Julian.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And she was just marvelous for me as I moved along the way.  And I would talk to her.  And with this Oberlin [College, Oberlin, Ohio] thing, she understood.  She said, "I can understand why you would have gotten a call there."  And I think about what if.  And I do because it was not urban.  It would have taken me away from my people, you know, from the blacks in the city [Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Although I think I may not have made a direct impact on that.  But I certainly feel that I've made an indirect impact--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --as a legacy.  That was your question.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: I've made an impact through others who have come in contact with me, whom I have worked with.
Story_ID: 188442
Speaker 1: So there are many paths you could have taken at various stages in your life.
Speaker 2: Thank you.  Yes.  Including when I was an ACE [American Council on Education] Fellow, which you haven't mentioned, and I haven't mentioned, which was a real opportunity to be an American Council on Education Fellow.  It was a real honor, and I was very happy about it, very happy with the experience until at the very end of it.  The position that I was offered--now, the American Council on Education prepares one for high positions at a university like the president, the chancellor, the chief financial officer; are you following me?
Speaker 1: Uh-hm.
Speaker 2: And I was in--oh, I was at Indiana University [Bloomington, Indiana] at a resident for one year, but traveling all over the country under the Chancellor there and the Dean of Faculties when I was offered a job in Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] to be in charge of the Affirmative Action.  And my mentors there and the university said, "Never accept that job.  That is a dead end job and it is not serious.  You will not be able"--and that's true.  Do you understand that?
Speaker 1: Explain what they mean by that.
Speaker 2: For example, there are jobs that are designated in certain occupations for blacks only.  Hispanics only.  Can you think of high-level jobs that only blacks have?
Speaker 1: That's human relations jobs, usually; and, yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.  And my mentors said, "With your background, your capacity, you deserve more than that."  And of my knowledge of what happens, and I am pro-Affirmative Action--don't get me wrong--but it has not succeeded for obvious reasons, and it has made a lot of enemies.  And I think it has to do with the leadership and the purpose and the mission of those who appoint the leaders of Affirmation Action.  It has worked against people who deserve the opportunity.  So my mentors knew that.  And they said, "You are not prepared for that dead end position."
Speaker 1: What you're saying is--needs to be, I guess, focused on a little bit more even, that often institutions hire minority people to be--black folks--to be head of Affirmative Action or human relations--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: --offices and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: It's the same thing in the corporate world.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And usually they're not the kind of people that are going to shake things up or they hide under the condition that they won't shake things up.
Speaker 2: But it's systemically impossible--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to shake them up.  Right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Oh, yeah.  Or they can't shake them up and then they're paid a handsome salary and wages to occupy a job which--
Speaker 2: Uh-hm.
Speaker 1: --they get very comfortable in without doing anything.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so nothing's changed--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --and they can point to them as the Colored expert or the person in charge of Negro Affairs, or black community affairs(laughs)
Speaker 2: This is where the buck stops.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah.  Right (laughs).  Right.  It's something that people know in these institutions as well.  It's a well-known dance.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: But it doesn't mean that Affirmative Action cannot be good, cannot be effective; and it needs to be in place.  That's--I firmly believe that.  But it needs to be taken seriously.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Story_ID: 188443
Speaker 1: I guess the last question we have is:  How would you--it's similar to legacy, but it's:  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: That I did the best I could.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I did the best I could.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, thank you very much for sharing with us.
Speaker 2: Sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Story_ID: 188444
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my natural mother's [Nellie Roberta Cossey Daniels] family.  On it is my grandmother, my grandfather [Moses Cossey], and my mother is in the upper left-hand corner; and her siblings are in the rest of the picture.
Speaker 2: So she would be here.
Speaker 1: Right there.  Yes.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  Great.  Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me in the chair and my older sister, who is standing; my older sister Julia [ph.], who was born in 1923.  So this--I guess she was about four or five years old when this was taken.
Speaker 1: Next.  All right.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my father, Jerry Daniels.  And it was taken in 1986.  Is that what it says on the back?
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: This is another picture of me, only I'm standing there in the forefront with my older sister Julia, who is standing; and my youngest sister at that time, Nellie Grace [Daniels] Smith, who is almost two years younger than I am.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  (Unclear.)
Speaker 2: This is a picture of me on August 4, 1957, putting on my wedding hairpiece--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --with my mother [Nancy Jane Calhoun] on the left and her sister on the right of me.  My mother, my stepmother and her sister Ruth.
Speaker 1: Very good.  Next.
Speaker 2: Oh, here my husband and I are cutting the wedding cake at our wedding.  That's Brady [Brownlee] and Geri [HM Geraldine D. Brownlee] on August 4, 1957.
Speaker 1: Great.  Next.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's the name of--that's a picture of our business store, "Brady's Bootery," which was in Harvey [Illinois] and in Homewood [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: That's my picture on the day of my graduation from high school [George Washington High School, later East Chicago Central High School, East Chicago, Indiana] which was in June 1943, and standing in the yard next door to my house.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: And there's my picture when I was on what they call Sorority Probation before I was initiated into Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority.  It's taken on West Virginia State [College, later West Virginia State University, Institute, West Virginia] campus in the spring of 1945.
Speaker 1: Next.
Speaker 2: Oh.  And this is a good sequence to that picture, because it's a picture of me and one of closest friends at a banquet for Alpha Kappa Alpha women who are Golden Sorors.  So you see we have on our Golden Soror crown.  And it was in--taken in Baltimore [Maryland] in 1996.
Speaker 1: Next.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of a group of our Link [the Links]--my Link sisters.  I'm on the left.  When the one on the far right was initiated, that's Karen Ashley [ph.] and her mother is standing next to her.  Thelma Smith [ph.] is in the center and her sister is next to her.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Oh.  Three of us originated the Education Network for people--women in higher education.  That's Dr. Gwendolyn LaRoche; I'm in the center; and the one who's absent from the picture is being honored that day, Dr. Diana Slaughter-Defoe, at her engagement announcement.
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I'm here with Edith Melton [ph.], who was my closest friend here and who died in--on New Year's Day 2003.
Speaker 1: And when was this photo (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Show me the back of the picture, so I'll know the back.
Speaker 1: 1993.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 1: These are my college friends from all the years, and they all live here in Chicago [Illinois], even though they are from different parts of the country.  It was at the birthday party of Cleo [ph.], who was next to the male, and Cleo is from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And this one--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: What is the year?
Speaker 2: (Unclear.)  '85 [1985].
Speaker 1: Next card.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This was taken in 1995 of my husband, me and my goddaughter and her parents, Louise and Calvin Bunch [ph.] in 1995.
Speaker 2: Go ahead.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1989 of the platform guests at the biennial council of Pi Lambda Theta International Honor Association for professionals in education and it--
Speaker 2: (Unclear.)
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my mother, who is--not my--my stepmother Janie--Nancy Jane Daniels.  And that was taken in the middle '80s [1980s].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the officers of Pi Lambda Theta International Honor Association that I just spoke to you about; the president and vice president and another faculty member from the University of California, San Diego [La Jolla, California], and me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This picture was taken in 1981 of my family.  The first one--man to the left is my father; then my husband Brady; then my mother, and my sister Julia; my aunt Jessie [ph.]; and then I am on the far right.  At the bottom are my cousins Pat [ph.] and her daughter Kim [ph.]; and my two sisters, Rorice [ph.] and Nellie.
Speaker 2: Next.  Did we get a year?  Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: I thought I gave the year.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This one.
Speaker 1: This is my--a photo taken in 1996.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: And this is another photo of me taken in 1993.
Speaker 2: '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: '83 [1983].  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: All right.  Go ahead.
Speaker 1: And this photo was taken in 2000, and it is of me.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This is a photo of me taken in 1993 at the International House of the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] at a special installation, and I was introducing the speaker.
Speaker 2: Next.  Okay.
Speaker 1: Another photo of me, 1996.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This was taken June of '89 [1989] after I and Dr. June Mayco [ph.], who has on the corsage, installed a new Chapter of the International Honor Society at the University of Illinois at Chicago [Chicago, Illinois].  On the far right are two faculty members, and next to me is a graduate student.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: This was taken in 1988 in Boston [Massachusetts] when my graduate student, who was Dr. Georgiana Zissis, who is at this point a doctor; and Dr. [William] Shubert, a faculty member at UIC [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  Georgiana won the dissertation of the year at the annual meeting of the ASCD [Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development].
Speaker 2: Next.
Speaker 1: New Zealand '97 [1997].
Speaker 2: Oh, it speaks for itself.  Brady and I were boarding the Marco Polo in New Zealand in 1997.  Brady's my husband.
Story_ID: 188445
Speaker 1: We're at the Pyramids in Egypt in the mid-'90s [1990s]--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay.  Great.  Next.
Speaker 1: --with the native guide.
Speaker 2: This is Swaziland.
Speaker 1: We are in Swaziland in the late-'90s [1990s].  I'm there with in the white with the Swazi women.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 1: Beijing [China].
Speaker 2: We are at the Tiananmen Square in Beijing in the late '90s' [1990s].  Beijing, China.
Speaker 1: Hold on one second, please.  Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: South Africa, '98 [1998].
Speaker 1: Go ahead.
Speaker 2: Okay.  We are in South America in 1998.
Speaker 1: Yes.  South Africa, '98 [1998].  No.  South America.  You're right (laughs).
Speaker 2: Victoria Falls.  I'm there with a native Nigerian in Swazi--Swaziland.
Speaker 1: In what's the year?
Speaker 2: Late '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Next.
Speaker 2: Sorry.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead, please.
Speaker 2: We are at the Taj Mahal in India, in the middle '90s [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay. (Unclear).
Speaker 2: In 1994, we were at several formal affairs on a cruise of Alaska.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Go ahead.
Speaker 2: I'm here with friends in front of the Grand Hotel in Mackinac Island [Michigan], and this was in 2000.
