Story_ID: 139028
Speaker 1: This particular image is of Ted Turner and myself.  In the background you will also see Leo Hindery.
Speaker 2: Spell Leo Hindery's last name.
Speaker 1: Leo Hindery, H-I-N-D-E-R-Y; and in that picture, two of 'em are billionaires and one of 'em's not; I'm not (laughter), so (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-- (Inaudible response).
Speaker 1: This was at a cable convention, a NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] breakfast in 1998.
Speaker 2: All right, I'll do the best I can with this.  This is 1997 and this is an image--a picture of myself; Johnnie Cochran is in this photo, and Reese Booker [ph.].  This was at a national conference for NAMIC, National Association of Minorities in Cable at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, and this is just what we need; we'll just roll through these and--
Speaker 2: This is a picture taken in 2005, and it's a picture of myself with Clyde Williams who is a domestic policy advisor to President [William] Bill Clinton; [HM Douglas] Doug Holloway and other--including my wife is in this picture, Susan Banks, and so we were taking this at a gala for the New York Chapter of NAMIC.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my father, William Banks, Jr., and he took that photo as part of his own portfolio, and he took that picture in the year 2003.
Speaker 2: Here's a family photo for the year 2007--myself, my wife and my son [Joshua Banks] havin' fun at home waitin' the-- for Christmas.
Speaker 1: Why don't we do the rest of the smaller group, leaving the one in the family frame (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Okay, sure; okay, sure.
Speaker 1: This image is, again, 1997; it's with Henry Cisneros, formerly part of the Clinton Cabinet, and we were at a cable dinner.
Speaker 2: This is an image from 2005 where I was featured in Black--in TechWatch for Black Enterprise, and speaking about one of the products that I brought to America called the DigiCard.
Speaker 1: There's the DigiCard right there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are--but we did that one.
Speaker 1: Here is an image from 2006 where it's myself and former President Bill Clinton, and my wife Susan Banks, where we were celebrating in his office on 125thth Street [Harlem, New York, New York].
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: 2006.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is an image of my mother [Georgia Banks], who took this image in 1990, and it was a shot that my brother took and we love it (laughter).
Speaker 2: Did you say your mother's name?
Speaker 1: Georgia, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: Okay, Georgia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--my mother's name is Georgia Banks.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here is my profile image that I use for social media and other publications.  This is my head shot--from 2009; I gotta take another one (laughter).
Speaker 2: This picture is of my brothers and sisters from 2004, and it features my brother William, my brother Charles, my sister Thelma, my other sister Roxanne, and my father in the middle.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself in Dubai [United Arab Emirates], and I had lunch with one of the sheikhs there; I was there to talk about Ember Media and what we could do for them on multi-media.  This was 2001.
Speaker 2: This is featuring Gregory Hines and myself, Geoffrey Canada; this was a NAMIC night, sort of a gala, and it was the year, again, 2002.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and my wife; we were much younger then--1999 in Hawaii.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] launching a tech center with [Earvin] Magic Johnson and the NAMIC Philadelphia Chapter--2002.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself and my wife at the 1996 [Summer] Olympics in Atlanta [Georgia].  I love the Olympics; I go to the Olympics almost every--well, almost every one that I've been able to go.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself in 1992 with Bill Giorgio, where we were at a Showtime holiday party.  God, I didn't know I'd have to remember all this stuff.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  This is the hardest part.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  This is a picture of myself and Bill [Kurtis] from A&E, who is the commentator and host, and we were together in Philadelphia at that time, and he--I think the year was 2004.
Speaker 1: This picture is from 1999 when myself and, and my wife were married.
Speaker 2: Susan.
Speaker 1: Susan--Susan and I were married on (unclear)--
Speaker 2: This is an image of my father and myself; he also joined me at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You didn't go to [Sochi] Russia [2014 Winter Olympics]?
Speaker 2: No, I don't go to the Winter Olympics; I do the Summer Olympics (laughter), but I wouldn't go there anyway.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my brothers and sisters--another photo of my brothers and sisters; this is at my wedding, so that's my brother William, my sister Thelma, myself, Roxanne my, my younger sister and, and my middle brother Charles.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Here's a picture from the late '90s [1990s]--I'm sorry, from the mid-'90s [1990s]--1994, with myself and Larry King of CNN [Cable News Network].
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself in 1990, and I was preparing for a Christmas party.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a picture where a lotta people said, "Oh, man, look, that's Michael Jackson."  (Laughter)--not really.  But anyway (laughter), that's from a--my father took us on a country ride, a sort of travel, and here we are at the--I believe that was--somewhere in the South, and I think that was 1972.
Speaker 1: This is a picture of myself in 1990 vacationing in the Bahamas.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself and my son when he was first born in 1992--
Speaker 1: Now did we do this one?
Speaker 2: --and his name is Joshua, sorry--Joshua Banks.
Speaker 1: Did we do this?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, I was not sure.
Speaker 2: This is a picture of myself and the late Senator [Daniel] Inouyhe from Hawaii--
Speaker 1: Will you spell (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--in 2008.
Speaker 1: Can you spell (unclear)
Speaker 2: I-N-O-H-E [sic, I-N-O-U-Y-E], but we may have to double-check that (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, that's okay.
Speaker 2: Here are images of the DigiCard.  We were the company that introduced DigiCard and had a great run in the '90s [1990s] and little bit of the 2000s obviously, and one of 'em is from American Express, which we did in 1999; the other one is a self-developed DigiCard that we did for the company in 1999 as well.  Can we separate those two?
Speaker 1: Oh, sure.
Speaker 2: So the--we're also known for our multi-media production; particularly for CD-ROMs in our early phases.  The one on the left is a CD-ROM that we developed for university to help recruit high school students; it was wildly successful.  That took place in 2005.  The other one is a CD-ROM that we did with President Clinton, and we created what we called a series called The Key, and The Key had information on it helping kids get to college, whether it was financial aid or how to fill out an application or study for SATs; and that original one came out in 2003 which featured HBCUs [historically black colleges and universities], and then the bilingual Hispanic version came out in 2004.
Story_ID: 139029
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson.  I'm the interviewer, and Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Hal Dean is the observer.  I'd like to start out by slating the interview.  Can you tell us your name, including your middle name, tell it-- and spell it, and your date of birth.
Speaker 2: My name is Clay-- you or are they looking at me?
Speaker 1: (Unclear) me--
Speaker 2: My name is Clayton Alexander Banks, C-L-A-Y-T-O-N, A-L-E-X-A-N-D-E-R, B-A-N-K-S.  And my birthday is August 5thth, 1960; I'm a Leo.
Speaker 1: Okay; birth place.
Speaker 2: I was born in San Diego, California.
Speaker 1: And today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is January 14thth, 2014.
Speaker 1: Okay, and our location?
Speaker 2: Our location is New York, New York, 100 Park Avenue, right outside of Grand Central [Station].
Speaker 1: And your occupation?
Speaker 2: Executive producer for Ember Media, a small business that does multi-media development.
Speaker 1: But are you--would you describe yourself as a marketing executive or marketing--or entrepreneur?
Speaker 2: I'm an entrepreneur and focused on developing digital strategies for corporations.
Story_ID: 139030
Speaker 1: We ask five People magazine-ish questions--short answers.  Can I have your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Spaghetti.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Favorite color.
Speaker 2: Orange.
Speaker 1: Okay (laughter) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Orange is the new black (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  That's cute; favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: Summer.
Speaker 1: Favorite place to vacation.
Speaker 2: Dominican Republic.
Speaker 1: And favorite phrase or saying.
Speaker 2: "Education is the key to open the golden doors of freedom," by George Washington Carver.
Story_ID: 139031
Speaker 1: So we're gonna start out--and let's start out by asking you about your father--if you could state his name and his year of birth and what you know about his, you know, family background.
Speaker 2: My father's name is William Augustus Banks, Jr., and he was born July 10thth, 1925, and he passed away on June 9thth, 2009 at eighty-three years old, and he was--he served in the [U.S.] Military for thirty years so he considered himself a [U.S.] Marine, and that's how I grew up--with a very disciplined background.  He, he was born in Chattanooga, Tennessee and his father was a pastor of a church and his father, William Banks, Sr., was my grandfather--was born in Georgia so that's far as back as I can really go (laughter).  But my father grew up in Chattanooga, Tennessee, joined the military at eighteen, and served in World War II [WWII], served in the Korean War, and did two terms of Vietnam [War], so he was very dedicated to the service and worked on base even when he retired from the service; he worked as a civil servant on base in doing bookkeeping.  He was a giant of a man, a really smart and capable guy, and loved the military and had five kids, me being the fourth child, and lived by, you know, simple principles which was, you know, the similar things he learned through the military--being honest, being trustworthy, straight-forward and, you know, following through.  So he was a great man.
Speaker 1: Did he describe growing up as a preacher's kid?  Did he describe any of that?
Speaker 2: He did a little bit; he wasn't one to belabor the past but he did talk about the fact that, you know, he had the sort of discipline that pastors give their kids.  He loved church; my father did love church, but the first opportunity he got to get outta the house, he did (laughter), so he left pretty quickly when he got of age.  My grandfather, as a pastor, loved to be married, so he had five different wives, so there was a little bit of identity issues that my father had as a result of the pastor (laughter).  Not at the same time; at different times he had five different wives, so my father had a little bit of identity issues when it came to that, but his last wife was--it was a very steady person in my grandfather's life and ultimately my father's life.
Speaker 1: So was your grandfather a Bap--I mean what denomination (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yeah, he was a Baptist preacher and served a church in Chattanooga, Tennessee for many, many years, and passed away in the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you remember ever hearing your grandfather preach?
Speaker 2: I don't because I grew up in California; I didn't have that exposure to him in Chattanooga [Tennessee], but I do remember vividly him visiting to California when I was in elementary school, and he always had a Bible with him and he would recite passages and, and, and various parts of the Bible to me and I, I found that to be quite comforting and special.
Speaker 1: So your father, as you said, was an only child.
Speaker 2: He had a sister that passed away, you know, sort of early in life, yes.
Story_ID: 139032
Speaker 1: My mother's name is Georgia Corinthian [ph.] Banks, and she was born in Kinston, North Carolina on February 14th, 1926, Valentine's Day, so that's why I tell all the women in my life I only have one valentine, that's my mother.  And she grew up basically as an only child as well; she had lots of uncles and aunts but she grew up in Kinston, North Carolina which was, at that time, pretty agriculture driven, and sort of a farm--farmy type life, and she was--her mother's name was Geneva, and her father's name was Alvin King--her maiden name is King, so a pretty good life she had growing up, you know, just having some privileges, and at the same time working hard to, you know, to be successful in her own right.
Speaker 2: Did she share any stories with you about her growing up in Kingston [sic, Kinston]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, she did; most of them were about her uncles and the fact that they were real animated characters.  She had an Uncle Willie [ph.] who, of the uncles, was someone who stayed single but always had money so he spoiled her quite a bit and, you know, kept sort of the lightness in the family and just the comedic part of the family.  She had her own father, Alvin, who was a bit of a rolling stone but just a fun person to be around, and I spent a little bit of time with my grandfather on that side of the family.  So she talked about just having a really good, fun sort of childhood where the uncles were the center of attention, and she was able--well, she became the center of attention but the uncles were sort of the supporting cast that, that helped shape her point of view.
Speaker 2: How would you describe your mother?
Speaker 1: My mother once won Mother of the Year in Oceanside, California (laughter), so we considered her sort of--we shared our mother with the, the whole neighborhood; I mean she was just one of those loving people that had a warm persona, so people gravitated towards her.  She spent most of her time doting on her children, you know, having five kids, so she spent a lotta time, you know, just making sure each one felt special.  She was, you know, certainly smart and capable and, and, and helpful.  She can burn--she could cook chicken like no one else I've ever met (laughter), she could make banana bread pudding, you know, all that kinda stuff that you continue to think about as, as, as your life goes on.  She was really quite the mother of the family, and just really was, I think, constantly thinking about how to improve the family, you know; she just was always thinking about the best ways to make the family work.
Story_ID: 139033
Speaker 1: How did your parents meet? Sorry.
Speaker 2: You know, it's funny because I don't--I'm finding this is maybe a more familiar story than I thought originally, but my mother [Georgia Banks]--growing up in North Carolina, my father [William Banks, Jr.] enlisted in the [U.S.] Military; he was based in Camp Lejeune [Jacksonville, North Carolina].  Camp Lejeune is a very popular base in North Carolina, and the women met the men at Camp Lejeune and that's exactly how my mother met my father, was at Camp Lejeune, and they just started from there and ultimately married and moved to California and had five kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: So your father [William Banks, Jr.], he then ended up being stationed in California too.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at Edwards Air Force Base [Southern California] he was stationed; that's where my first three siblings were born, on Edwards Air Force Base, and then got relocated to Camp Pendleton area [San Diego County, California], and I was born and my sister, my youngest sister, were born in San Diego, California.
Speaker 1: So the first camp, Camp--where your--
Speaker 2: Edwards Air Force Base (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Edwards is located where?
Speaker 2: That's sort of in the--San Bernardino [California]--sort of inland area of California; inland of California.
Story_ID: 139034
Speaker 1: Now, tell me your siblings' names, you know, and birth order.
Speaker 2: My eldest is my sister Thelma--Thelma Johnson, who was born March 2nd, 1955. My brother after her is William Banks III, and he was born March 11th, 1956, and then my middle brother, Charles Banks, was born August 27th, 1957, and then I was born August 5th, 1960, so that three years is when my father [William Banks, Jr.] went off to war [Vietnam War].  And then my youngest sister was born October 8th, 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there are three girls (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --two girls and three boys (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --three boys, okay.
Speaker 2: The girls are on the book-end, and I think there's a total of seven years between all of us.
Story_ID: 139035
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: I have a lot of them.  The environment that I grew up in is always forefront of my mind; the fact that--
Speaker 1: Did you grow up on base?
Speaker 2: I grew up on base--at least up until fourth grade, so those are vivid memories.  What I realize later in life and is still, you know, very much memorable, is how--I felt that everyone was sort of on the same level that--I never saw disparities, so to speak, growing up, until I sort of matriculated into civilian life.  But on base, you basically live with--wherever your father is ranked, it's sort of the neighborhood you live in, and there's people from all different walks of life as a result of that, and that sort of, you know, put my social sort of profile together as I look at the world and as I look at people.  And so I just can remember it, even from a youngest age, as having a diverse amount of friends and people, and I was always encouraged--having older brothers and sisters, you know, it peaked my curiosity which has led me to where I am today as just being curious about things.  And when I was--my first memory is--my father [William Banks, Jr.] was based in Barstow, California, which is a desert, and I can remember running around on, you know, rocks and cactus and chasing snakes and all that kinda stuff and, and, and, and just causing, you know, trouble at two and three years old, and then finally getting old enough to hit kindergarten, and I went to kindergarten in Barstow [California], and then we moved to Camp Pendleton [San Diego County, California] when I went to first grade.
Story_ID: 139036
Speaker 1: When you think about that time period at Camp Pendleton [San Diego County, California], can you tell me what sights, smells, and sounds remind you of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah. Number one, it all is one thing actually, which is the ocean. I've always lived near water and so growing up, Camp Pendleton--the, the, the, the, the city--Camp Pendleton is right on the water, you know, the Atlantic Ocean, so--I'm sorry, the Pacific Ocean, so for me--and my father [William Banks, Jr.] loved the beach, so he would take us to the beach, you know, throughout the summers, and so for me, sand and the smell of the ocean and being in the water and hanging out and just, you know, running through the sands of Oceanside, California were, and still today, is my, you know, favorite thing to do.  Growing up surfing and just loving the beach is what I'm all about.  I'm an excellent swimmer (laughter).
Speaker 1: So you grew up swimming then or--
Speaker 2: I did; I grew up swimming, I have no--you can drop me in the middle of the ocean right now and I'd be happy.
Story_ID: 139037
Speaker 1: What was your place within the family?
Speaker 2: Well, I was the youngest son so there's a--I like to think that I was the apple of my father's [William Banks, Jr.] eye but he was pretty good at spreading his love.  And my brothers and sisters would say I was pretty mischievous; I liked to pull pranks and things of that nature so I was a little bit of the--at that younger age, a little bit of a bratty kid just wanting to get that attention, but I think they would also say that, you know, I was constructive, you know, always trying to build something or do something; create an organization, create a club, create a group.  I was always trying to get my friends to, you know, get together and try to do some things in the neighborhood so--somebody who was always active, very--probably hyperactive in a lotta ways.
Story_ID: 139038
Speaker 1: And what about family times together?  Can you share memories?  I know you talk about the beach being sort of central, you know, in summer, but what other memories do you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, in 1972, my father [William Banks, Jr.] decided to take us on a cross-country road trip, and so we piled into a station wagon, five kids and our parents [Georgia Banks and William Banks, Jr.], and we traveled from California to North Carolina, and I can remember we stayed in Holiday Inns all the way across the country, which put my parents in tremendous debt (laughter) because we would order room service and everything else as kids (laughter).  And back in 1972 it wasn't really that--there wasn't that many places to stay for a black family; you had to really pick your spots, and so Holiday Inns were one of the places that were pretty, you know, cordial towards blacks, so we stayed in those across the country, and I just remember--you know, your parents don't talk about it a lot, but I remember how things were a strain after that trip.  But that was a big memory because, you know, you had the kids in the car, everyone was--you know, my sister was eleven, I was twelve, so from there we were all sort of able to enjoy and really take in what we were experiencing.  I can remember when we went down to Florida and the opening of Disney World [Orlando, Florida], and of course (unclear) to California we had been to Disney Land [Anaheim, California] many, many times, so this Disney World thing was such a big deal, and we were down there--one of the first families to be able to experience that.  Being able to visit where my father was from, Chattanooga, Tennessee, being able to go to where my mother was from, Kinston, North Carolina, so it was a great way for the family to bond--just to travel across the country, you know, all these different places and see things we had never seen before, and experience a variety of interactions with people across the country.  It was really a rewarding experience.
Speaker 1: Now, you know, the other thing about Holiday Inns is they have pools typically.
Speaker 2: That's right; and so we enjoyed--I mean that, that was one of the great, you know, parts of this--that trip; and we did another trip in 1976 which I'll talk about, but the 1972 one, it was really fun, you know.  So we, we, we--all of us, my brothers and sisters, all of us are big time swimmers 'cause we grew up, like I said, on the beach, so being at a hotel with a pool was ideal for young kids.  We were just goin' crazy, it was a lotta fun.
Story_ID: 139039
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-six [1976], my father [William Banks, Jr.] did it again; he said, "We're gonna go across country."  This time we were headed to Montreal [Quebec], Canada.  The reason was my brother [William Banks, III], in 1976, was an alternate for the United States Olympic Team, and so prior to him becoming the alternate, my father and the family just thought he was gonna make the team 'cause he was really, really a good triple jumper.  So we had already made plans to go to the [1976 Summer] Olympics.  My brother became an alternate, which means he doesn't get all of the perks of bein' on the team but if somebody fell out, he would be on the team.  Needless to say, we decided to just go anyway.  We went to 1976 Montreal Olympics and so again, a road trip all the way across country.  Everyone's a little older now, teenagers, and my brother was twenty (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)----now are you sixteen at that time?
Speaker 1: I'm sixteen, he's twenty, my sister's [Thelma Johnson] twenty-one and my brother's [Charles Banks] nineteen and I'm sixteen and my sister's [Roxane Banks] fifteen.  So this time, my parents [Georgia Banks and William Banks, Jr.] decided we're not stayin' at Holiday Inns, and my father bought a trailer (laughter), and he hooked it up to the car and we went across country and stayed in the trailer, so it was a little bit more financially viable for him, and so--yeah, we went across country, and at sixteen, I was much more curious about a lotta things and so I would--once we got to Montreal [Canada], I would get out and explore myself and see what the city was all about, and we just loved it.  That was the Bruce Jenner [later, Caitlin Jenner] Olympics where he won the decathlon, and we were right there for that; it was just a phenomenal experience, and I got hooked on the Olympics from that point on.
Speaker 2: So, with the camper, were you staying at camp sites or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--yes, we were; we would pull the trailer over to a camp site, hook it up with water, and sewage and all that, and everyone crammed in there and found a place to lay down (laughter) and shower, and my father used to say, "All right, everyone's gonna take a military shower; that's five minutes" (laughter).  So--it was a lotta fun, though. We really--again, another bonding experience.
Story_ID: 139040
Speaker 1: Now did your--so your brother [William Banks, III], he always remained an alternate--he didn't get--
Speaker 2: In '76 [1976], yes (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--'76 [1976].
Speaker 2: In 1980, he made the team.  Unfortunately, in 1980, we [United States] boycotted the [1980 Summer] Olympics as a country 'cause they were in Russia [sic, Moscow, Soviet Union] and we were having problems with Russia. Nineteen eighty-four [1984], he made the team again, and this time it was in L.A. [Los Angeles, California], and so he was on the team but he ruptured his Achilles [tendon], and so he wasn't able to do anything; I think he came in fourth, his biggest jump.  And then 1988 was his last Olympics [1988 Summer Olympics, Seoul, South Korea]; he was on the team again, but didn't get a medal, so he spent his career not getting a medal, but in 1985, he broke the world record and he held the world record for ten years--from '85 [1985] to '95 [1995].
Speaker 1: What was the world record in, in, in what?
Speaker 2: In triple jump--
Speaker 1: In triple jump (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--so his world record jump was fifty-eight [feet] eleven and three-quarters [inches].
Speaker 1: So how did he establish that?  I mean in 1985, what was happening?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it just all came together for him; it was, it was a--an international track meet at Indianapolis, Indiana; it was an off Olympic year, but nevertheless, it was a competitive track meet, and it all came together for him on that day and he jumped further than any other man on the planet at that day, and no other man jumped that far for ten straight years, so--yeah.
Story_ID: 139041
Speaker 1: So what is the different personalities between the three of you?
Speaker 2: That's a great question, and between the five of us, frankly; I mean the, the, the--it's a competitive sibling rivalry sort of thing because we're all so close in age, so the teachers he had, I had; the coaches he had, I had; the--you know, people he knew, I knew, so there was a lot of competitive nature within our family.  Everyone's very accomplished, everyone's really smart, and everyone's really capable, so there's a lot of sort of sibling competition that goes on there.  My brother [William Banks, III] represents sort of the athletic, you know, accomplished part of the family; he's also, you know, got his law degree and, you know, he's a very successful man, but has spent his life around, you know, sports and the Olympics, and even once he was out of competition, he still worked for the Olympic Committee, and so he's pretty well-known for that.  My sister [Thelma Johnson] is a--is (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --your oldest sister--
Speaker 2: My oldest sister is sort of the matriarch of the family at this point, whereas she has taken that role of, you know, not only raising her own child, but raising the rest of our children (laughter), so she's really active in the children's lives and, and, you know, just loves to parent, you know; she's a loving person that way.  Although all the kids think she's mean, she's also (laughter)--they also love the heck out of her.  And then my middle brother [Charles Banks] is the salt of the earth; he would be called the, you know, the most relatable person--no judgment, you know, he's--he spent his life (unclear) a truck driver so he was really focused on just being, you know, a team player.  Everyone would, you know, say nothing but positive things about him.  And my younger sister [Roxane Banks]--again, she's also very competitive; she ran track, she is, you know, worked for corporate America for many, many years and is successful in her own right-UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angles, California] grad, and now she's become a--like my grandfather [William Banks, Sr.], she's become a preacher, so she went on to get her master's in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --seminary--
Speaker 2: --theological studies, and now she's a minister.
Story_ID: 139042
Speaker 1: So sports played a role in the house then, I mean, and so--who were--what--I mean I hear a lot of track and field, but was there interest in basketball, baseball, football?  I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yes, I played football and basketball; that was--those were the sports I played, and I also ran track.  And my brother [William Banks, III] played a little bit of basketball in high school but received his scholarships for track, and he was not only a triple jumper but a long jumper as well as a high jumper.  So he received a full ride scholarship to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] where he pursued that.  And my sister Thelma [Johnson] ran a little bit of track, and my brother Charles played a little bit of football but, you know, he just liked being around the game.  And my younger sister [Roxane Banks], she ran track and played softball in high school and, and, and she's very athletic.  Myself, I played basketball and football.
Story_ID: 139043
Speaker 1: Were there traditions in the family around dinner table conversations or chores or, you know, things like that?  I wanna just have on the average day of, you know, on the life of the family.
Speaker 2: Well, we had--definitely had chores. Mine consisted of mowing the lawn and edging the lawn, and cleaning up outside and, and that type of thing, but we all had--that was a word we used in our home, was chores, you know; you have to go do your chores.  Someone had to vacuum, someone had to dust, and someone also had to do the garbage and, you know, we were fortunate enough to have a really nice home in Oceanside, California--a four bedroom home where everyone pretty much had their own--you know, me and my brother [William Banks, III] stayed--my oldest brother [Charles Banks], stayed in the same room; my middle brother stayed in his own room 'cause he was a snorer, and then my sister and-sisters [Thelma Johnson and Roxane Banks] stayed in the same room, and then my parents [Georgia Banks and William Banks, Jr.], so--but we had a really nice family room where the big TV was.  And probably another big tradition in our family is we had a grape vine; so we had a grape vine, and my father made wine out of it.  So we, as a family, would pick the grapes and smash 'em with our feet, and he would ultimately, you know, ferment these grapes into different types of wines that, you know, were our own brand, so that was a really, really cool family thing that we did.
Story_ID: 139044
Speaker 1: Did you--can you--what was your address at their house?  Did you stay--I mean once you moved off-base, right?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Yes, and the address was 125 Mayfair in Oceanside, California, 92054.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so what was your neighborhood like?
Speaker 2: The neighborhood was, again, other military people that were moving off-base to civilian life and, again, the neighborhood was made up of people with similar rank to my father, so there was no--there was no sense of disparity; it was, it was, it was a diverse community--Samoans, Mexicans--you can just think of it--different people--different European backgrounds, African American; I mean every sort of walk of life was in our neighborhood, and as a very young child, I took on bein' a paper boy, so I got a chance to meet just about everybody in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, there was never any racial strife?  Did you experience that at all?
Speaker 2: Not on a large scale; we had--bein' down in that San Diego County [California] area, there was a large contingent of Ku Klux Klan, and we did learn about that, you know.  Particularly, there's a city called Fallbrook [California] that some of the Klan were, were, were known for stayin' in that--some of the outskirts of that area, and so we were made aware that that existed, but within the confines of our neighborhood or the confines of, of the city itself, it was much less of an issue.
Story_ID: 139045
Speaker 1: So, I went to an elementary school called San Luis Rey [Elementary School], in Oceanside, California--wonderful school. My favorite thing at that school was the monkey bars (laughter). I used to run up and down those monkey bars.  I went to junior high school at a school called Jefferson Junior High School [later, Jefferson Middle School, Oceanside, California]; again, in Oceanside, California, where I met one of my idols who came and visited our school, [HM Robert] Bob Beamon, who was the long jump world record-holder for a long time; so that was a phenomenal experience, and then I went to high school at Oceanside High School [Oceanside, California].  Oceanside High School was a mile away from the beach, so if you ever talk about cutting class, it was real easy to find where the students were goin' (laughter), so--as a matter of fact, our graduation was on the beach, so yeah, I grew up--I went to high school at Oceanside High School--the Pirates!
Speaker 2: So what was the demographics of that high school?
Speaker 1: Well, the demographics, again, reflected sort of the military; it was people from all walks of life.  I never saw--I mean there was definitely people with more money than others, but it was not that evident; it just really was much more based on, you know, sort of where your father came from; and so for me, I always felt like, you know, I was in a very diverse community that, you know, cared for each other.  I mean there were certainly times when differences do sort of raise their ugly head, but for the most part, I felt it was a diverse environment with all types of cultural nuances that we learned from each other.  I can remember in high school roasting pig with my Hawaiian and Samoan friends and, you know, just learning about that and, and how important that was in their culture, and visiting with my Vietnamese friends and seein' sort of the food and traditions that they went through, so it just gave me a good background and appreciation for what, you know, various cultures could bring to the table.
Story_ID: 139046
Speaker 1: And what were some of the discus--what were the things that, in your teen years are--you know, besides maybe girls, what are the things that--and sports--that are occupying your thoughts, you know, or events that may have been, you know, important to you?
Speaker 2: Well, that's a good question.  When you eliminate girls and sports, it's pretty much I'm a zombie (laughter), but--no, I think the other thing--I was very active in high school; I was part of student government, I was interested in science, so I worked very hard with, you know, with my teachers on various projects.  I loved oceanography, you know; I was into that type of stuff, so I kept my--I had chemistry sets at home so, you know, I messed around with all types of chemicals and, and see if I could burn the house down type of thing, and so it was a lot of stayin' active; I was always tryin' to stay active.  I also loved to sing, so I sang in the school choir, so it was all types of--I just kept myself busy and I tried not to be overly macho where--I can't do that 'cause that's gonna look funny, you know.  I was not afraid of doin' things that most guys may not have done; like I said, singin' in the choir wasn't very macho, but it was at the same time somethin' I liked to do.
Speaker 1: So you were in student government the whole time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much; from freshman year all the way through senior year I, you know, used to--I was the president of the freshman class, in my senior year I did not become president but I think I was vice president and, you know, our responsibilities were, you know, obviously to keep the school, you know, fun, and at the same time, you know, we used to navigate the floats for the various sports, and things of that nature, so yeah, it was a lotta fun.  I loved student government.
Story_ID: 139047
Speaker 1: Now did you or your brothers [William Banks, III and Charles Banks] ever think about going into the service since your father [William Banks, Jr.] was a career [U.S.] Marine?
Speaker 2: That's a great question.  Well, it may have been considered, but never seriously (laughter) because--you know, it was a couple of things.  My father loved the corps [U.S. Marine Corps], but he also was very aware of the sort of the--the shortcomings of the corps, and he was--later in life, he would tell us that, you know, he got overlooked for promotion; he felt the racism when he went in.  You know, he used to be in an all-black platoon, and things of that nature and, you know, he saw sort of the challenges that the military had, and he just didn't want his sons to have to deal with that.  Even though it was changing, he still felt like, "Maybe it's not the best thing for you guys.  It was the best thing for me"--him, but for us, he thought pursue education; that was his key to all of us, was pursue your education, and then you can make a decision after that.  But, you know, there was definitely for me, and I had a little bit of consideration only because, you know, it was sort of like, "Oh, maybe I should do what my father did."  But it was fleeting; I was definitely focused much more on getting my education.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 139048
Speaker 1: How do you decide what school you're going to when it comes time?
Speaker 2: Well, it took me a little while, actually; I was working in high school [Oceanside High School, Oceanside, California]; I started a job with the theaters--working in theaters, and I was really comfortable.  I was like, wow, I mean the whole idea of goin' to college was to make money, right?  Well I'm makin' money so what's the point?  I was sort of thinkin' that way at the same time I was--my mother [Georgia Banks] was like ready for me to go to college.
Speaker 1: Is this 1978?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and my brother [William Banks, III] was, again, training for the Olympics--for the 1980 [Summer] Olympics [Moscow, Soviet Union], and so I sort of took a year off and, and just was sort of working around home, but when my brother said, "Hey, listen, there's a nice sort of track in Fullerton, California that I'm gonna work out at," and I had been accepted to the various schools around California and the country, and Fullerton [California State University-Fullerton, Fullerton, California] was one of them, and so when he said that, I said, "Wow, this would be a good opportunity for me to live with him as I get acclimated to living on my own," and so that school became the school of choice (laughter), really because of my brother.  And as it turns out, he decided not to work out in Fullerton and he went back to L.A. [Los Angeles, California], worked out in UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], and I was already committed, so my mother arranged for me to stay in the dorms, and so that's sort of how it all began.
Speaker 1: This is Cal State (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Cal State Fullerton [California State University-Fullerton, Fullerton, California].
Speaker 1: Okay, so how large is the school at this point, and this is 1979?
Speaker 2: Yeah, so the school is very large at this point; it's twenty-five thousand kids at Cal State Fullerton, and twenty-five thousand kids mostly coming from the Orange County [California] and L.A. [Los Angeles] County [California] area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So this was not--it's not that the minority kids are very small, right?
Speaker 2: Less than one percent.
Speaker 1: I was gonna say, yeah.
Speaker 2: So that was a big difference for  me, having come from a very diverse background and a very diverse neighborhood and diverse high school went to this college which had virtually no diversity, and that threw me into a whole different mindset about race relations.
Speaker 1: And what do you mean by that?
Speaker 2: When I went away to college, the--all of those lessons that I didn't learn as a youngster about racism, about classism, the difference between people, how differences can be more important than similarities came rushing at me.  I can remember bein' at the university and picking up a flyer, and that flyer was advertising the Ku Klux Klan comin' to do a speech on our campus (laughter), and it sort of--I was thinking was--is anybody else like mad about this?  (Laughter) but I gotta remember the school was only one percent, you know, minority; it's improved since then, but for me, I threw myself into student government again and, and really trying to figure out ways to impact that campus, bring about diversity, or show the power of diversity, show how everyone can contribute and, you know, it kinda grew from there.  That's--but those were some serious lessons when I got to that university.
Story_ID: 139049
Speaker 1: So what were you deciding to major in [at California State University-Fullerton, Fullerton, California]?
Speaker 2: Once I figured out a little bit of what I liked, I took several classes in a variety of subjects, and the one that struck out the most for me was the area of communications, and particularly speech communications because what it allowed me to do--it was preparin' me for law school, which I never went, but it was preparin' me for law school, and ultimately it prepared me for how to deal with people on a professional level.  Speech com [communications] teaches you everything from not only your oral capabilities, but human behavior, and that sort of transcends a variety of careers, so I was really happy with that.  I also received a, you know, minor in business administration because I always felt like you should have some business in your life, so that helped out as well.
Story_ID: 139050
Speaker 1: So are you--you're living on campus [California State University-Fullerton, Fullerton, California].  Now how often are you going back to Oceanside [California]?
Speaker 2: Well that, that's a good question.  The commute from Fullerton [California] to Oceanside was via Amtrak, and the Amtrak Station was right in Fullerton, and the Amtrak Station was right in Oceanside, so it was a one-hour train ride home.  But, you know, after my first year of college, I rarely went home; I was very embedded in Fullerton and Orange County [California] and really sort of striking out on my own, so much more focused on that versus, you know, running home to mom [Georgia Banks], but obviously the holidays in that I would go home to get some home cookin'.
Speaker 1: This is the early '80s [1980s] too, as you progress through, and these are the [President Ronald] Reagan years, you know, and inflation is high, and I think--what--I don't know when the proposition started in California (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --that was a little bit after my time, but it was--it was a period of high anxiety; I had just, you know, in the mid-'70s [1970s], we had done the, you know, sort of the oil embargos so you had the, you know, odd and even license plates getting gas, you know, all throughout, you know, Southern California, so--and of course Reagan was also our governor, so he came out of--I had been under his administration for many, many years so when he became president, it was also, just a time of high anxiety, you know, where the country was going.  On campus, probably the biggest movement on campus that I sort of was involved in was the--and tried to lead, was--we were also focused on South Africa.  [Nelson] Mandela had just--was still jailed essentially, but we were fighting to get him released, as well as to lift apartheid, so we were, you know, in the early '80s [1980s] that was a big topic, you know, just--the sort of race issues.
Speaker 1: So you continued to play a role there then, right?  Your role in student leadership, did it continue the whole time?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yes, it continued throughout my college career.
Speaker 1: So how else were you affected?  Do you think you grew or, you know, were impacted by, you know, your college experience at Cal State [California State University-Fullerton, Fullerton, California]?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it certainly put me in a position to deal with difficult situations.  I remember one of my professors told me, you know, "You know what college is all about, Clayton?"  I said, "What is it?"  He said, "It's the ability to ask good questions and the ability to find the answers."  And that stuck with me; it made me always feel like, you know, I wanna be curious enough to ask great questions, and I wanna be diligent enough to find the answers so that I can, you know, continue to improve my own intellect.  But Fullerton was a great school; I mean it was a great school because there were so many people there, and so many opportunities, and very student-focused that we, we, we really, you know, can take those lessons and pull 'em into professional life.  For me, I thought, you know, the relationships that I formed at Cal State Fullerton are life-long friendships.
Speaker 1: So what were those relationships?
Speaker 2: I remember one of my--well, still my--one of my best friends, you know; we met through an organization on campus.  We were both student leaders and he was the president of the Young Democrats, and I was president of the Black Student Union, and somehow together, we came together and he, you know, this Armenian kid and me, this, you know, African American kid from Oceanside, and we came together and we've been best friends ever since and--Kenny Lamb [ph.] and--and others, you know.  Hugh--Quinton Kelly [ph.], the great basketball player; he and I dominated the intramural basketball games for years at Cal State Fullerton.  These are life-long friends that, you know, you meet in college and change your life, and continue to impact your life.
Story_ID: 139051
Speaker 1: So when you graduate [from California State University-Fullerton in Fullerton, California], what are you deciding?  'Cause you graduated in 1985--right?  So where do you look for a job?
Speaker 2: Well, you know it's funny.  I was comin' outta speech com [communications] and business, and so I had talked to all my professors about, you know, "Where do I go from here?"  A lotta people who had my degree were consultants; they were serving various corporations, maybe helpin' CEOs [chief executive officers] become better at presentations or about this or that, and what my instructors would tell me is, "You know, Clayton, you have to have years of experience in Corporate America before you could become a consultant," 'cause I was tellin' them, "Well, I guess that's what I'll have to do;" I said, "I'm gonna go consult and help these CEOs" (laughter), and they were like, "You're just comin' outta college; you're not experienced."  So I was a little bit--and I had offers from Carnation Company, Mobile, all these companies wanted to offer me a job, but they were all in sales; it was all entry-level sales, and I was not that encouraged by that.  I was sort of like, aaahh, I really wanna get into my own field.  So I turned down every job offer that came my way.  And I remember callin' my father [William Banks, Jr.] that summer I graduated and sayin'--you know, 'cause he had heard about all these offers; I showed him these letters and things of that nature and, and, and when I told him I'm not gonna take any of these jobs (laughter), he was really upset, you know; not in a--in a literal way, but he was just kinda like, "Wow, man, you have these great opportunities; what are you doing?"  And I explained to him, "I'm gonna try to get a job in my profession, in my degree."  And surely enough, I went to go live with my brother in L.A. [Los Angeles, California]; he was livin' in, you know, Santa Monica [California] area, and I'm walking down the street and I find this free newspaper on the ground, and it was advertising for a telemarketer for a consulting firm.  I said, "Wow, this might be an opportunity for me to at least get in the door."  And it turned out to be a communications consulting firm in Santa Monica, California, one block away from the beach, and I got the job, and my job was to call people up and make appointments to have us go in and pitch them on us consulting for them.  And as time went, the owner allowed me to start writing some curriculum and coming up with some ideas, and I felt like--I called everyone on my professor's list and I'm consulting at this firm; I'm working in the field, and I was excited about it.  Unfortunately, the owner got married and moved the company (laughter), and I had to go find a job.
Story_ID: 139052
Speaker 1: I ended up at Xerox, doing entry-level sales (laughter), so it was a pretty fun time.
Speaker 2: Well Xerox was also known for its training program, so were you selling copiers?
Speaker 1: I was, I was selling copiers.  They have a great training facility in Leesburg, Virginia, and when I got hired, I (unclear) a number of them saying, "Hey, you're gonna be sent to Leesburg, Virginia for a week, and you're gonna go through training," and I thought, 'Wow, I'm gonna--'cause I hadn't traveled a whole lot at that point, so I was like, 'Whoa, this is gonna be a lotta fun.'  So I went to Leesburg, Virginia and we just had a blast 'cause it's all young people that are just, you know, goin' through this experience.  And Xerox was a mature company, so they had already been fifty years old when I got there, so it was, it was already dealing with diversity and already knowing how to, you know--success in planning, and how to move people along on their careers, so I learned some really valuable corporate chops bein' at Xerox, bein' able to take that into, you know, other positions--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--so how long were you there?
Speaker 1: I was at Xerox for four years.
Story_ID: 139053
Speaker 1: Okay, and so then where did you go next?
Speaker 2: I went to Showtime Networks.
Speaker 1: You did; so how the transition into Showtime?
Speaker 2: One of my brothers' friends, who went to UCLA [University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] with him, was working for HBO [Home Box Office], Matt Berman [ph.], and he used to say to me, "Hey, man, you really oughta check out this business."  Now the cable industry was really young at that point.  The whole industry wasn't as large as Xerox at that point, and I used to think that's such a small little thing, man, why would I go to work for such a small little company when I'm working at like this huge behemoth?  But he said, "Well, listen, man, it's a lotta fun" (laughter), and I said, "Really?"  Xerox wasn't necessarily fun; it was good job and longevity and, you know, really help you with your life.
Speaker 1: Well, where were you working with--working there, you did the training in Leesburg, Virginia but where you working?
Speaker 2: I was working outta California at a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: -- you were, okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Out of Woodland Hills--Woodland Hills, California.  So, so, so Berman was tellin' me, "Hey, you really need to take a look at this cable industry; I'm working for HBO, I got an expense account and I get to go take clients out, and I"--this started sounding really good, and he said, "And I got some friends over at Showtime," and that used to really--that surprised me.  I was like, how would a--your competitor recommend you to --you know what I mean?  It just didn't make sense comin' from Xerox who--we would never talk about our competitors like that.  So I thought, Wow, I'll give it a shot.  And I went over to Showtime and met with Carol Mechanic, and it was history from there; it was one of the best--best moves I've ever made.
Speaker 1: So you came and you were hired at that point to do what?
Speaker 2: So I was a--an affiliate representative.
Speaker 1: In California?
Speaker 2: In California; I was workin' out of the Valley and Universal City [California] at that time; they've since moved to Santa Monica [California], but it was Universal City.  And so I had a territory where--in parts of Southern California as far out as Palm Springs [California] and Palm Desert [California], and I would call on cable companies-M.S.O.s, Mobile [sic, Multiple] System Operators, to encourage them to promote our network, Showtime, and launch the Movie Channel.  So I was, you know, I was Mr. Showtime when I walked through the doors.
Speaker 1: So was (unclear) is that term referred to as affiliates (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --affiliate reps, yeah; or affiliate sales--correct.
Speaker 1: So you did that how long?
Speaker 2: I did that from '88 [1988] to '92 [1992], but I was still at Showtime but they then promoted me to move to New York [New York], and in New York, I became what was called a major accounts rep.  So I was dealin' with the corporate offices of these MSOs; Time-Warner was one of--well, at that time was called Warner Communications--was one of my accounts.  TCI, which is now Comcast--TeleCable is now Comcast, so I had a variety of national accounts that I would call on to negotiate our agreements.
Story_ID: 139054
Speaker 1: So what were you learning about the industry in these early years?  Because around this time, the--I mean the cities have come online.  By the time you've come in, you know, New York [New York] and Chicago [Illinois] and [Washington] D.C. and L.A. [Los Angeles, California], you know, they've come online; they were the last ones, so what is this period in the industry, and what is, you know, who are you competing with, and what is the pricing structure and all of that?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you, the larger issue at that time was mergers, and one of the largest mergers at that time was Time, Inc. merging with Warner Communications, and those were my accounts.  So there was a lotta stress in the industry because when they announced that they wanted to merge, we, as Viacom, decided to sue, and that lawsuit tied up the industry for years--for three years, essentially, where no one wanted to do business with each other because there was this lawsuit goin' on, and everyone was getting deposed, and it was just a lot of crazy activity goin' on and I was right in the middle of all of that.  And we ultimately settled that lawsuit and they did merge to become Time Warner.  The lawsuit settlement was around fifty million dollars and a guarantee of launches for some of our product.  So I launched The Movie Channel [TMC] here in New York City as a result of that, which was a lot of fun to do; I had a big budget and we drove a big audience.  So the tenor of the industry at that time was, you know, people trying to figure out how to become stronger so they were looking at these types of mergers.  Channels were watching, and at the same time, you know, where was the leverage going to go?  Was it gonna be on the MSOs' [Multiple-Systems Operators] side?  Was it gonna be on the network's side?  How were we going to sort of shape this industry moving forward?  It was still very young and, you know--so I was right in the middle of that sort of turmoil.  But it all has come out on, you know, a better side.
Story_ID: 139055
Speaker 1: So, who was at Showtime at the time?  Who was head of Showtime, and then, you know, can you talk about the launch of the Movie Channel, too?
Speaker 2: Well, at the time, [Winston H. Cox] Tony Cox was our CEO [chief executive officer], former HBO [Home Box Office] guy, but Tony Cox was our CEO and Matt Blank was the COO [chief operating officer].  Matt Blank is the CEO today, and Tony Cox was a phenomenal leader, very people-driven; he was one of my mentors, he took me under his wing, we did a lotta things together.  We both loved the [New York] Knicks so we used to go to the Knick games together and--just a great leader; really innovative, you know.  He was one of the people that, you know, thought about on-demand programming and things of that nature, so I, I credit him with a pioneering spirit.  When we settled the lawsuit and I was able to get launches within the Time Warner [Cable] footprint--of course New York City [New York] was Time Warner, so I took a couple of million dollar budget and put together a campaign around launching The Movie Channel [TMC], and the campaign's theme was "For The City That Never Sleeps," and it became, you know, something that was posted all around train stations and, at that time, phone booths, and it was, it was plastered all over the place, and we got a good lift outta that from our launch.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who came up with that campaign?  Do you remember?
Speaker 2: Well, it's a combination of people, but I think I drove it; I mean if we wanna sort of--this is HistoryMakers, so I drove that--I drove that slogan.  But it was definitely a team effort with the marketing team.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 139056
Speaker 1: So, can you talk about the nature of the industry at that time and, you know, the launch of the channels, and how much money, you know, would go into a launch and, you know, Showtime's positioning versus HBO's?  I just wanna--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a, it was a, it was an interesting time because it was all about--and still is in a lotta ways, all about the share of audience, so we were still fighting over subscriptions, still fighting over, you know, license fees and things of that nature when it came down to the business side of it, but the idea that people were becoming more and more interested in television in general was a good time for, for, for networks like mine.  Being able to start bundling, which is what started to occur in the early '90s [1990s] is the bundling of services, so we would bundle Showtime with Movie Channel, so you could get them both for one price; it was very helpful as we moved forward.  HBO did that same thing with Cinemax, so you started having these bundles and packages that the industry accepted and the consumer benefited from.  So it helped out on several ways; since then, the industry has gone on and continue to bundle, but they bundle across.  You can get a bundle with HBO and Showtime.  So it was an important time; I think probably the most important thing about that time was, you know, we figured out ways to--for everyone to benefit from, from the revenue stream.  What we did at Showtime when we were, again, dealing with the lawsuit, is we came up with sort of a formula on how we could, you know, better, you know, pay for this process.  What we did is we took a weighted average of license fees across our entire network and we came up with one license fee that we could then charge, and have increases over a period of time; that was sort of revolutionary at the time.  At the time, each contract was just negotiated one by one, and sometimes you had these--the famous F.M.U. [ph.], you know, where you get the favorite clauses and all these other types of things which gives you favorite rates.  But we (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Most Favorite (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Most Favorite [sic, Favored] Nations, MVNs; you remember that, right?  Most Favorite--MFNs.  So we, we sort of blew that model up and became sort of this weighted average, and it really worked out for everybody.
Speaker 1: So just explain to people who don't know that basically, the cable operators--those like, you know, Time Warner, TCI, Jones Intercable or whoever was around, Cablevision, they had to pay you for your programming, right?  And then they charge a fee to the subscribers.
Speaker 2: That's exactly how it works.  So when we do a deal with one of the cable operators to distribute our network, what they're doin' is they are paying us a license fee on a per-subscriber basis; so each time someone--at least in the pay television business, each time someone subscribes to our network, that creates a license fee to our network.  The cable operator themselves, charges a retail fee to that customer, and they make a pretty decent cash flow sort of margin on that.
Story_ID: 139057
Speaker 1: And so--you know the other thing is that isn't Showtime sort of real--in real competition with HBO [Home Box Office]?  HBO is at the top, and Showtime is the respected but sort of second-tier, tier brother--I mean--or sister, or something.
Speaker 2: It depend--it sort of depends on how you look at it.  The other break-through in the cable industry was, for Showtime anyway, was called exclusivity.  In the late '80s [1980s] or, you know, when we were in our first two or three years of business, we decided to do deals with studios directly and be able to get exclusive content from those studios.  Before that, you would see a movie on HBO and see the same movie on Showtime, so when we went to exclusivity, it, it, it separated us from that and provided us a competitive sort of edge, if you will.  Ultimately, HBO had to do the same thing, so they started getting their exclusive deals in place, so now you had this separation of the studios doing business with these two companies so that you could have a diversity in the programming, but also it made Showtime survive 'cause it could have easily been eaten up, as you somewhat suggested.  Bein' second fiddle, if you will, and it certainly was in the '80s [1980s] and '90s [1990s] but, you know, you look at some of the programming now; if you judge it by programming, Showtime is on par with HBO.  When you judge it by how many subscribers?  Yes, HBO has more subscribers than Showtime; it's a lot of factors that go into that.  But I think when you look at the personnel and you look at the programming, and you look at the, you know, sort of special events like boxing and things of that nature, Showtime is competing very strongly.  Even when you look at the award show, they win awards for a lot of their programming.  Don Cheadle and 'House of Lies' was up for a lot of awards and, you know, you're seein' a lotta stuff come from these, from these networks.
Story_ID: 139058
Speaker 1: --He [Dennis Johnson] ultimately became president of NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] in '94 [1994], and then I became president of NAMIC in '96 [1996].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--(Inaudible response).
Speaker 2: So you were talking about Dennis Johnson, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So NAMIC has played a tremendous role in my career.  When I joined Showtime in '88 [1988], '89 [1989], one of the first people I met at Showtime was a gentleman by the name of Dennis Johnson, and Dennis Johnson was essentially the highest-ranking African American at Showtime at that time, and was head of programming, you know, part of the programming team.  He had a long, distinguished career even before he joined Showtime, and he had worked on the 'Tonight Show' and all types of other activities.  So he was a, a, a, a smart, capable guy that took me under his wing, and he was one of the people that introduced me to NAMIC, National Association of Multi-Ethnicity In Cable.  And he encouraged me in my career, and was vital to me moving from California to New York; he was a well-respected man.  Unfortunately, he just passed December 23rdrd in 2013, and--but, but he became president of NAMIC National in the mid-'90s [1990s], and I ultimately joined his board.  Once I, you know, moved to New York and got involved, you know, even deeper, I joined his board and then I became the national president in 1996.  So NAMIC has played an essential role in my career because I've met great people in, in my tenure as president. I was speaking at Penn State [Pennsylvania State University, State College, Pennsylvania] to a group around a NAMIC event, and I met a gentleman on the panel named Bob Gerrard [Robert J. Gerrard, Jr.] and Bob Gerard, general counsel of HBO [Home Box Office], had been partnering with a guy named Stan Thomas [Stanley B. Thomas, Jr.], who was starting a network called Sega Channel, and Bob and I hit it off at Penn State and he said, "You oughta talk to us about joining us for Sega Channel."  And at that time, I thought I'd never leave Showtime, but the opportunity to work for an African American chairperson, and I saw--I was already a video game nut, so the idea of bein' able to merge all that together was, was quite attractive, and I actually left a great career at Showtime for a start-up called Sega Channel.
Story_ID: 139059
Speaker 1: Now I wanna, I wanna take you back a little bit just to talk about NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] and what it is, and the history of it, you know, which you would have a lot of information and, you know, the founders and that type of thing.
Speaker 2: Well NAMIC was founded in 1980 by a group of young cable professionals that saw this industry becoming a very large industry, and the opportunities were limited for minorities, so it--typically in that case, you wanna formulate, you know, sort of a trade association, which NAMIC became, to encourage diversity in the industry.  And a lotta great--one of the great founders is a guy named [L.] Patrick Mellon, who passed away, but he was an executive at TeleCable, and he became a mentor for many of us that, that came behind him, but he saw a vision, along with, you know, some of the other founders, that we could make a difference, and that difference is diversity, and we're seeing, you know, people like [Robert L.] Bob Johnson and, and [HM] Debra Lee and others that are, are, are able to succeed as a result of some of the efforts that NAMIC has put in, everything from doing studies around, you know, minority penetration in various places to being able to provide training for executives on, on, on how to, you know, how to run organizations, and things of that nature.  We have--NAMIC has great programs across the board from all types of people.  Now one of the things that we find is that a majority of the people of color are working in lower-end jobs, so we have to--we have to train those people to become mid-managers, and those people to become managers, and those people to become presidents.  And so NAMIC plays a vital role in all of that.
Speaker 1: So who were some of the early people that you met, you know, in the industry, you know--you mentioned, and where are they located?
Speaker 2: Well, I first joined NAMIC in California, and so again, Dennis Johnson was a key person.  We had a sort of an executive director that worked out of California, and her name was Reesa Booker [ph.]; she's still around, but Reesa Booker took me under her wing as well, and saw me as a, you know, an up-and-comer, and so she really helped me to, to see the potential in myself, but also in, in my leadership at NAMIC.  Joe Lawson was another sort of good role model; he had been in the industry as well, and was working on the MSO [multiple-systems operator] side, and so when we put the Southern California Chapter together, we were all part of that.  Kathy Johnson, who ended up running--bein' the president of NAMIC as well, all of us did--become president of NAMIC (laughter) at some point, but she was also very influential.  She was working at Time Warner and I was her rep [representative], so we would always talk about NAMIC.  And so in Southern California, these people were the--were shaping me, you know, helping me to understand how important it was to be involved in NAMIC and how important NAMIC, you know, what role that NAMIC would play in my career, which it did.  I always tell the story that NAMIC made me a vice president before corporate America did.  NAMIC made me a president before corporate America did, and yet I had the same sort of duties, as a vice president or a president, as I would in corporate America, so I always tell people, you know, "Don't underestimate what you can do in an organization."  So these people were important in shaping who I was, and when I moved to New York [New York], then I met the whole New York sort of style of leadership, and people like Eric Lilly, who had become the president of NAMIC, New York, and this is when the, the great, you know, Nate Garner and [HM Douglas] Doug Holloway took me under their wing; they were both at USA networks and, you know, veterans of NAMIC, founders of NAMIC, so they were key in my development as well, and encouraged me to join the board, and ultimately I was one of the youngest presidents in the history of NAMIC.
Story_ID: 139060
Speaker 1: What about--was Don Anderson--was he around still or (rustling papers), had he sort of moved on?  He had played a role (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Don Anderson was key in all of NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications], but he's also just a key business person in the business.  But he had sort of got involved in other things by the time I was, you know, that active; I mean he was still around, and he came to some of the cable conventions and some of the NAMIC events, and--nothing but respect for Don Anderson and, you know, he was--everybody knew Don; I mean it was just one of those (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --can you tell a little bit about him?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, he had the HBO [Home Box Office] career and he was a pioneer in the business; he had been in it a long time--one of the few African Americans that had an executive role in a major network, you know.  He made a--I think he was really famous for helpin' HBO increase their footprint across the board.  He was a founder of NAMIC, you know; he had been very active in helpin' people of color become executives in the business, he also was a strong marketing mind so, you know, I wasn't personal friends with him for a long time, but he was certainly an idol for me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--but [HM Douglas] Doug Hollowell [sic, Holloway]; you've got Holloway, I'm sorry--you got to know much better, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Doug Holloway had took me under his wing, we became really tight friends, we both (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --now where was he when you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --when I first met him, he was at USA networks and--
Speaker 1: He had a long career?
Speaker 2: He had a long career there; we all knew Doug and Nate [Garner], you know?  They worked together so well, and it was somethin' that I always envisioned myself in, in that role of having, you know, like someone I can always like, you know, turn to and, and have as a partner in movin' through things, and so they always showed a good face, you know.  Like here's two brothers that could work together and work well together; so Nate Garner and Doug Holloway were sort of role models for me and, and, and now we're all really good friends and, and tryin' to make a difference out there, so yeah.  Doug served on my board, you know, when I became president of NAMIC and, you know, he continues to be, you know, a very moving force in the business.
Story_ID: 139061
Speaker 1: So when you became president [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications], you said it's in 1990--
Speaker 2: Six [1996].
Speaker 1: Six [1996].  Okay, so you're at that point--are you twenty?  How old are you?
Speaker 2: Twenty--oh, no, I'm thirty-six.
Speaker 1: Thirty-six, okay.  And so can you talk about the state of the organization when, when you come in, and how the organization is funded and, you know, what are your initiatives?
Speaker 2: Well, when I came in, we did not have a staff, we did not have an office, we did not have an executive director.  So all of the work was being done by people with full-time jobs, and that was inefficient and a little bit difficult; we had Reesa Booker [ph.] as our consultant, and she was really good, but it required all of the board members and myself, and the rest of the executive committee to actually do a lot of the work--find speakers, and talk to the, you know, corporations, and there was a lot of work--extra work that you had to do.  The organization (background noise)--so anyway--so, yeah, we had a lotta extra work to do, and the organization was sort of top-heavy, meaning that we didn't focus a lot on the chapters when I came in the office; we were very much focused just on a national viewpoint, and the chapters were wavering; they were really in bad shape, and there wasn't a lotta programs that we offered as well.  It was just a lot of, you know, sort of policing the corporations, but not enough value ad.  And so when I came into office, I wanted to flip that model around and go, how can we get the chapters strong because we need to have those strong; they're country-wide, and make national something that can add value to the industry, whether that's training people to become better executives within their companies, or providing information on a--in a conference that increases the education levels, or providing research that talks about diversity and things of that nature that these corporations could use within their own diversity initiatives.  So--and, and probably one of the first things I did with Ann Carlsen and a few other executives, we started a leadership forum, and that leadership forum was based around bringin' leaders from all the chapters around the country, getting them all on the same page, having one mission, one vision, and one talking-point track, so to speak.  And that worked; it really strengthened the organization, we grew the base.  When I got there, it was about seven hundred members; when I left, it was almost two thousand.  And so it was really important for us to grow; that membership base still needs to grow, and we made a difference.  We heard from our corporations that stepped up with the money, and ultimately we were able to create an office and a staff.  A year after I left, we had an office and a staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, and who was--where was the office located and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --the office is located in New York [New York]; the first president was Kathy Johnson, and she remained president for over ten years--yeah.
Story_ID: 139062
Speaker 1: Explain, though, what the need for--was, you know, how diverse or not diverse was the cable industry?  And then was Women in Cable [Telecommunications] a model for you, or were you--I mean I'm just trying to get (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --no, it's, it's a good question.  Women in Cable and NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] sort of started around the same time, and has very similar missions.  We focus on diversity in terms of people of color and background and cultures, they focus on diversity in terms of women in various roles around the industry; so it was a lotta synergy there that, that we've played off of each other.  But NAMIC has a clear mission; I mean the NAMIC goal is to see this industry diversify because the best and the brightest come from all different backgrounds, and we're competing with other entertainment sectors, so we don't want all the best and the brightest to go to broadcast television; we don't all the best and the brightest to go to, you know, Internet companies, we want the best and the brightest to be right here within, you know, the traditional cable and entertainment industry, and to do that, you have to embrace diversity, and NAMIC is one of the organizations that helps these corporations do that.  Like I said, we have a great program called the E.L.D.P., Executive Leadership Development Program, a major program taking place at a major university that helps senior executives with sort of the, the, the leadership skill-building that they need to become the next CEO [chief executive officer] of their company.  This is important because part of your question--what are you looking at?  What are you trying to address?  Well, this business, as, as, as some in your audience may know, has been a family-oriented business; this is a family-oriented business--Comcast, you know, started with a family; it still is--a Roberts family.  Cablevision, the Dolan family.  You know, you look at the--down the board, it's a very family-driven business and, and as a result of that, you know, we wanna be able to make sure that those--they--you know, when you're--when somebody comes in your household, you don't necessarily give 'em the keys to everything in your household; you wanna make sure they're vetted, and make sure they're ready and prepared to handle whatever's happening in your household, and that's how these people feel about their companies.  Before I hand you over a multi-billion dollar industry, I wanna make sure that you're ready, so NAMIC plays a role in fillin' that gap, to make sure that we find the right people, we attract the right people, we make sure they have the skills to take over a multi-billion dollar business.
Speaker 1: But what was the fight on the employment side to get people hired, and to get them, you know, to make sure there was retention?  Was NAMIC--did you feel that it has had success for all there (ph.)?
Speaker 2: I do; I feel NAMIC has played a very successful role there, I think their--their sort of reputation speaks for itself and, you know, there are several people of color that you'll talk to in executive positions that'll say, yes, NAMIC was very helpful in my career, including myself.  You know, part of the, part of the--one of the things that really kicked some of the corporations into action was putting together diversity strategies (background noise), you know.  A lot of these corporations realize that, you know, they're gonna need diversity in order to grow as a company.  In order to get diversity, they gotta put together a strategic plan; so many of 'em will put together a committee or some sorta group within the organization to figure out how do we best, you know, increase our diversity?  And they call on NAMIC for (background noise), you know, consultation, advice, and help, and NAMIC has now a job board, they have career advancement programs; they offer so much value to these corporations that they fund them annually to make sure that they continue with their work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 139063
Speaker 1: So what was your--what did you grow the annual budget to be then?  And was it fees that each of the cable systems contribute?
Speaker 2: When I was president [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications], it was a hit and miss issue.  We did not have annual funding; we do now, and I'm not completely clear on what the budget is now, so it's hard for me to tell, but we do now have annual funding from the corporations that has been--that's turned the whole organization around from a fiscal perspective.
Speaker 1: Who came behind--okay.  You talk about strengthening the, the regions, so who were significant people on--you know, where were the regional--I mean the branches, and who was in charge of those?
Speaker 2: Well, when it came to the chapters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --chapters, I'm sorry--sorry.
Speaker 2: At the time when I was president, I think we had fifteen chapters, and they were spread from Southern California to New York [New York], you know; Chicago [Illinois] Chapter, Dallas [Texas]--you know, we had 'em in a lot of the cable hubs--Denver [Colorado], where we always had penetration and--with, with cable corporations 'cause we wanted to make sure that those companies, you know, would embrace diversity.  I believe it's up to about sixteen chapters now, maybe seventeen, and--but again, you know, my presidency was largely based on that.  We also--following me was Joe Lawson; Joe Lawson became the president after my tenure was up and, you know, I think after Joe was--either Allison Williamson [ph.] or--her name escapes me right now.
Story_ID: 139064
Speaker 1: Now, I want to--you know, we were starting to talk--you had mentioned the Sega Channel--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and how that even came about, so can you talk about the Sega Channel, what it was and, you know, at the time that you joined, because I was looking and saw that it was this--you were there from 1994 to 1997.  Nineteen ninety-eight [1998], it was discontinued, so can you talk about the significant--what the Sega Channel was, and it's significance.
Speaker 2: So Sega Channel has played a significant role in the cable industry.  We were the first company and network to do a one hundred percent digital network from, from satellite to home, and that was a precursor to the cable modem.  I can remember TCI creating @Home, and their engineers coming to us to find out how we did this so that they could start to put together their own sort of modems, 'cause we built a modem, essentially, that received a signal and play--and, and built a cartridge as a part of that modem that plugged into the Sega Genesis Machine.  So it did all the sort of translation of the digital signal, and you could play that game locally as a result.  So Sega Channel played an important role in the digital development that John Malone had talked about many years about the five hundred channels in the, in the, in the sky, which is, I'll say, now thousands of channels in the sky, but when we built out the technology for Sega Channel, it really changed the way we looked at the industry--digital transformation (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So, so, so Sega was--Time Warner Cable, and TCI were both involved with that, right, but the technology came out of Japan?
Speaker 2: It was a three-way partnership--Sega, Time Warner, and TCI, and the technology came from Japan but also from California and, and some of our labs out there, and the three partners--at that time--you have to remember, I mean, the Internet wasn't even commercialized at that time; it was pretty--you know, AOL was comin' on, but no one was really payin' attention to it, so we were really the only digital play that these three companies had.  As AOL came on, and those companies had been goin', what is the Internet, and why are these guys sending out these disks and people are signing up, and what is (unclear).  They all had to ultimately come up with their own digital strategies, and that was part of our, of our challenge as a company.
Story_ID: 139065
Speaker 1: And then--the other thing--you know--but there were issues with, with the launch, you know, so there was this concept--it was based on the Sega games, right?  And it was a gaming technology.
Speaker 2: It was definitely a gaming technology.  There were a couple of things that were real challenges; and again, this is just history-making, you know, activity.  One was we asked the cable operators to spend a lotta money to carry our network because it required that modem; the modem cost three hundred dollars, so for every household that wanted to get Sega Channel, they were payin' us three hundred dollars for the modem.  They had to put in racks at their head-ins in order to receive a digital signal; they had to find out how to measure the signal, so that meant to create new spectralizers.  Spectralizers back in the day were only dealin' with analog signal, so when they tried to use spectralizers on our signal, it wouldn't work, so we had to retrofit that.  So there was a lot of up-front cost and expense that was very, you know, hard for the operator to agree to, but we certainly got some of them to agree to, especially the ones that were our partners.  And then the other challenge was the game machine itself; the household had to have the game machine, which was the Sega Genesis, and that Sega Genesis was built on what we call sixteen-bit technology.  Sixteen-bit technology we had in our vision was going to become obsolete, and within six or seven months of launch, the Sony folks were comin' out with a thirty-two-bit machine, so we were starting already to look, you know, like we were old, and that was a problem; so you had complications with both the, the platform as, as, as a sixteen-bit technology, and you had the issue with--you know, you had the issue with the cost up front.  Nevertheless, we had launches; we did get out there and we had subscribers.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So I read that you had twenty-one cable companies that actually signed up to participate.  Now what were the subscription fees?  I mean what was the cost?
Speaker 2: Well, it varied from operator to operator, but the average cost was $12.95 a month, and for that, you got fifty--you got access to fifty games a month--fifty different games a month to do whatever you want with, play as long as you want, and that was really, we thought, a very good deal.
Story_ID: 139066
Speaker 1: The whole theory was that your audience was families, kids--I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Our direct target was boys twelve to sixteen; that was our direct hit, and it was--you know, I was every boy's hero; every town I walked into, they just--I mean--those days, video games, as they are today were, you know, a young teenage boy's dream.  But--we also offered games that were very family-oriented; bein' able to put up fifty to sixty games a month allowed us to put together a diverse sort of line-up of entertainment, and we did find that, you know, families were playin', girls were playin', adults were playin'; I mean it was just a phenomenal sort of, you know, network.
Speaker 1: So how many, how many subscribers were you based on--were you aiming for as (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--at our peak, we were at two hundred fifty thousand subscribers; we were passing about twenty-five million homes, so we were on our way to bein' a mid-level sort of network, but we were pay network so, you know, when you compare ourselves to like an HBO [Home Box Office] or a Showtime, there was no comparison but, you know, if we could have migrated to technology and improved as we had in our plan, we would have probably been able to--we never really were in the red; we were actually fairly profitable, but the fact that our owners didn't wanna continue to invest because they had to invest in their own digital strategies really sort of slowed us up and we couldn't keep it goin'.
Speaker 1: Okay, because I had read that, you know, the target was a million subs [subscribers] and you had, you know, at your height, two hundred fifty thousand--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --So basically, the technology was outdate --I mean but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --well it was a, it was a, it was a, it was a--
Speaker 1: Confluence.
Speaker 2: It was a confluence; I mean 'cause you had--you know, AOL was really makin' some serious strides, and the fact that they didn't have digital strategies, our partners, was a big thing, and Time Warner was thinking--We're sort of content-oriented, so we're gonna go down as road-runner--road runner track,' you know, offering, you know, content online, and things of that nature, and TCI was like, well, we're sort of operations driven, so we wanna work on this hardware side, so we wanna create this @Home thing, and Sega was like, 'Well we don't know what we're gonna do; we gotta start lookin' at thirty-two-bit and sixty-four-bit technology.'  So they all had three different ways of lookin' at the world, and we were their only digital strategy at that time.  Why keep investing in that when we need to go these directions?  So that, combined with all those other struggles of, you know, not hittin' a million right away, and the cost to the MSOs [multiple-system operators] was really one of those things that just, you know--we had a lotta fun doing it, but it just didn't last.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that--so you--in 1997--
Speaker 2: Mmm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --is when you leave, and it folds a year--a little later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 139067
Speaker 1: So did you know Jamie Howard?
Speaker 2: Of course.
Speaker 1: Okay, 'cause he, he was at @Home--
Speaker 2: --He was one of the engineers we talked to--a lot, yeah; yeah, and he's a dear friend of mine.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Jamie Howard is a good friend of mine, and he was in the right place at the right time; he was at, you know, TCI workin' on the @Home--you know, I think he was employee seven, or something like that; I mean he was right there in the middle of it and, you know, they ultimately sort of set the pace for cable modems, which are driving communications to this very day.
Story_ID: 139068
Speaker 1: So let's talk about Comedy Central and how that opportunity came to be.
Speaker 2: Well, in 1997, as we were winding down with Sega Channel, I was dreading the idea of goin' back to an analog network, but it happened to be what I know, and an opportunity came up around Comedy Central; and what I liked about the opportunity was that I hadn't worked in basic networks before; I had always been on the pay side, so having--bein' on the pay side with Showtime, bein' on the pay side with Sega Channel, it was a great chance for me to try my chops out on, on the basic side.  Basic cable, obviously, means that it's commercial financed.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --you need to explain the difference (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --yeah, so pay television, there are no commercials; you, as a subscriber, are paying not to have commercials, so you get to see your programming commercial-free.  On the basic side, basic television, or networks like ESPN and Comedy Central and A&E, which have commercials; it's part of your basic package so you're not payin' on a per-channel basis, and it's commercially supported.  So Comedy Central is one of those networks, and it took--the learning curve on that was how do you work with advertisers, you know, being able to get those advertisers to give you money for your shows.  So that's where the phrase up-fronts come from, where we have an up-front, which is basically an event where we are able to show our upcoming programming, invite advertisers to see it, and see if they wanna invest.  So I was hired to run--I was a vice president of the Eastern Region, and hired to run, from Chicago [Illinois] to New York [New York], our distribution, and when I got there, we, we, we were just getting the script for 'South Park,' and it was just a phenomenal time that--the show hit when I hit, and it blew up; and I can remember the sort of negotiation change from when I used to--prior to 'South Park' and negotiating with Comcast, and post 'South Park' negotiating with Comcast was a big difference; the point being is that they were getting the calls from college campuses saying, "We want Comedy Central," all over the place and so it was a good time to be there at Comedy Central.  We had, we had a lotta fun, we got to work with--directly with developers Matt [Stone] and Trey [Parker] and--very creative guys that, you know, sort of set the pace for the show, and we just kinda moved from there.
Story_ID: 139069
Speaker 1: Talk about the significance of the--first of all, talk about who's in charge of Comedy Central and who Comedy Central is owned by, and who its competitors were at the time, and then talk about the, the concept behind 'South Park' and why it historically sort of was a change agent in and of itself.
Speaker 2: Well, Comedy Central, at the time, was headed up by a guy named Doug Herzog, and Doug Herzog was just a television nut; I mean he is just a talented television guy; he recognizes a good script when he sees it and, and just a phenomenal talent evaluator.  So he was largely responsible for getting the 'South Park' show on, on, on air in the first place.  The--the 'South Park' itself was originally just cut out paper of characters that Matt [Stone] and Trey [Parker] created, animated and, and sent around a pilot to various broadcast and cable organizations with the amount of foul language and, and irreverent sort of behavior within the script.  Almost every network turned it down; it was just too much.  And Dough Herzog was the one executive who said, "You know what?  I think we can work with this; we can figure out how to make this work."  And when we put on 'South Park,' the, the, the, the nervous part of it was, you know, should we advertise this, you know, or should we just put it on air and see what happens, and that what we did; we put it on air and we let it create its own buzz, and it did.  And I, up to that point, had never been associated with a hit, and I can tell you there's a--Doug Herzog used to say, in our meetings, "This is a game of hits, and if you can get one, it is great."  And we had one with 'South Park' and, and part of the reason was it targeted that audience of young twenty-something year-olds that were in college that were experiencing a lotta things for the first time, and having this sorta irreverent television animated cartoonist stuff was right up their alley, and that became a huge change agent for the network; it allowed us to create new programming, we were no longer looked at as a mid-level, mid-size network; we were now looked at as a high network.  I remember when we put on 'South Park,' the thirty-second ad you could get for ten dollar; thirty-second ad you could get for ten dollar.  A local car dealership could get a ten dollar ad on South Park, especially if they had been grandfathered.  So you had people--when 'South Park' became a hit in October--'cause we put on our very first special in October and became huge hit, those thirty-second spots could easily go for thirty thousand [dollars].  So you had one person payin' thirty thousand and another person payin' ten dollars--it's the same show--'cause they grandfathered in.  The point is, that's the difference in what a show can do; you can go from a ten dollar spot to a thirty thousand dollar spot overnight, and it changes your own network; it allowed us to create new programming like I said, including beefing up 'The Daily Show.'  Craig Kilborn was the host at that time, he had, you know, garnered a large audience and decided to go to broadcast, went to CBS, we needed a new host, we did a huge search, went all parts of the country--all different types of comedians, found Jon Stewart; the rest is history on that network, I mean on that show.  So yeah, it turned the whole network around, 'South Park.'
Story_ID: 139070
Speaker 1: So vision and chance and creativity were all the key ingredients there [at Comedy Central].
Speaker 2: And a little bit of luck; I mean there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --and a little bit of luck (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I mean there was, there was certainly that; I mean but--yes, the vision of Doug Herzog was phenomenal--execution, hanging in there and takin' some risks; all of that came into play--and a little bit of luck, and that we, we partnered with a couple of new creatives out there that, you know, had the secret sauce that seemed to work.  They did all the voices, they wrote all the scripts--it was amazing talent.
Speaker 1: You know the other thing you're not mentioning is that it sort of re-made the career of somewhat iconic black figure, and that's [HM] Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 2: Isaac Hayes was the man--by far, and when we did our Christmas party in 1997, Isaac Hayes came and he performed, and I got on stage with him; I mean it was an amazing moment in my life to have not only met him, but to be up on--you know, this guy was Chef, but he also was Isaac Hayes, and he was vital to the success of, of the early years of 'South Park' by far, and we miss him greatly now.
Speaker 1: Yeah, you know, because we actually did An Evening With [HM] B.B. King with Isaac Hayes as the interviewer back around that time, and it was just phenomenal 'cause all the young people knew him as Chef on, you know, on 'South Park,' so that was, you know (laughter), so that was a whole thing because before that, he had had the whole thing with Scientology, you know, in his career; you know, he had gone through bankruptcy and it dipped, but it brought him back in new identity, so--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he ended up having the, this, this sort of two audiences.  You know, you had people comin' to hear him sing, and then you had people comin' to hear him talk (laughter); they wanted to--"Say somethin' like Chef."  So, you know, he was enjoying that, I mean he really loved it.
Story_ID: 139071
Speaker 1: Why did you leave Comedy Channel [sic, Comedy Central] then?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --well that was (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Because you're part of a success, you know, you like the--you know, you love the cable industry, so why do you leave then?  'Cause you were there how long?
Speaker 2: Great question.  It was one year.
Speaker 1: One year.
Speaker 2: The, the, the reason why is there was--there was a couple of things happening.  One was I--the entire time I was Comedy Central, I was pining for getting back into digital; I wanted to be in the digital space, and I had a vision that digital was gonna be where everybody needed to be, so at some point I needed to get back to digital.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --Can I ask you--I'm sorry, I don't mean to cut you off, and you can give the two reasons, digital--
Speaker 2: Mmm-hmm.
Speaker 1: --but can you explain what digital, in your--how do you define digital 'cause it's a oft-used term right now, and so--
Speaker 2: Well, for me, the, the, the, the defining moment was when you compare analog-delivered signal versus a digital-delivered signal, so an analog--it, it, it gets real wonky if I, if I get into the engineering of it, but the analog signal is sort of quam-based, which means that the entire signal is being sent to you through these mega-hertz, and your box de-scrambles that signal.  With digital, if you go back to the very basics of computers, it's made up of ones and zeroes, so you're able to, to take an analog signal and, and, and there's ten analogs can sit inside of a digital signal because you're now breaking it up into ones and zeroes that something can interpret.  The other part of that is that it's, it's--you could make anything out of digital, you know?  You could make all types of different content out of digital; analog, there are limitations to that.  So you can not only send out a television signal, but you can send out an Internet signal, you can send out a telephone signal; there's a lotta things you can do with digital.  So that's sort of how I help to define what I mean by that, and at Comedy Central, we were analog signal, and I wanted to--I was pushing Comedy Central.  "Let's create Internet, let's do all this," and, you know, it's, it's, it's one of those things that, you know, people have to get used to and I had already been in that and, you know, so I was a little bit ahead of the game.  So I always was pinning to get back into the digital world, and 'South Park,' you know, made a lotta money for the network and did a lotta good for a lotta people, including myself.  And Doug Herzog, I knew, was contemplating leaving himself 'cause, you know, he had--got this high profile now; he was the man, no question about it; he ended up goin' to broadcast television, you know, Fox, and he's back now to, to Viacom, but we all started thinkin', you know, what's the next move?  I mean literally, what's the next move?  And for me, that was the year my mother [Georgia Banks] passed, so I also was lookin' for, you know, I was searching a little bit in my own self about that, as it was a tough--tough loss, so it was time to start my own company; it was really time to start my own company, and I came across, you know, with a group of friends, we came across a technology that we thought, man, this would be cool.  And, and I had never done necessarily a hard product before, so we found this thing and we created this brand called the DigiCard, and a DigiCard was a, you know, a business card-sized CD-ROM, and I knew that if I had that product, I would be able to develop content for that product; that content would be what?  Digital content. And Ember Media was born.
Story_ID: 139072
Speaker 1: So talk about what you saw as the market for it.  Who are you, you know, how are you financing it?  Who your customers were gonna be--
Speaker 2: Well, havin', like you said, served a significant amount of my career in the cable business, I--my first customers were cable companies, so my very first content that I did for the DigiCard was with HBO [Home Box Office], and the content was launching 'The Sopranos.'  It was sort of the, the first look at some of the 'Soprano' episodes; you know, some it was even b-roll footage, but they were using it to promote the network, so--you know--and then from there, you know, working with Discovery Networks and Showtime, and just really focusing on entertainment; that's what I knew, so being able to put together, you know, sort of these DigiCards that they used to promote their various programming was very successful.  From there, we started branching out into the other industries and say, hey, maybe this'll work for Prudential or maybe it'll work for Scholastic.  And we started to find that everybody was getting into digital content.  How do we--how can we maximize these platforms?  The Internet was starting to come on, so that was helpful; it wasn't quite where it is today, but at that time, people were startin' to think about their Internet strategies, and so for us being in the business and understanding how to put together digital content, how to distribute it on various platforms, we became a part of their digital strategies.
Speaker 1: Yep, 'cause I remember seeing an article on you in Black Enterprise, and the thing about the DigiCard is it was almost a--it was much smaller than a CD-ROM or, you know, DVD, but it fit content on there.  How much content, video content?  How--what was the length or the--I mean the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Well, we did--we measured it by megabytes, but the very first DigiCard came out at sixteen megabytes, and so in today's world, that wouldn't do anything, but we were able to increase that capacity through compression, et cetera, and we would have, you know, sixty-four megabyte DigiCards up to, you know, two hundred-fifty megabyte DigiCards, but it--you know, the more megabytes, the bigger your disk is, so we kept it pretty small because we wanted those digital content to be impactful; not long and lengthy or anything like that nature, but just strong, impactful, get the message across and, you know, the customers loved it that way.
Speaker 1: It was also branding technology; I mean you were using for brand and content (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes, not only us, but also our clients; yeah, it was definitely one of those things where you as a, you know, as the author, can really brand yourself, brand your products, brand the service; we loved it because we created the whole DigiCard brand itself, and became quite popular around the country.
Speaker 1: So how long did you--how long was the time frame for the DigiCard?  I mean 'cause technology start changing; this is--we're talking about what?  Nineteen ninety-- [1990]--
Speaker 2: Eight [1998].
Speaker 1: Eight [1998], to what period of time?  To like 2000 and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would say probably around 2001 or two [2002] that DigiCard sort of ran its course, but CD-ROMs were still out--around, so people then started just getting into the round CD-ROMs (laugher), and that was perfectly fine with us; it was still developing great digital content.  Now, we could do more; now, you're talkin' six hundred megabytes of information could be put on there, so now video is being introduced, and audio, and larger file types can be introduced onto the CD-ROM, so it became--sort of transitioned into that, and the DigiCard became that novelty.
Story_ID: 139073
Speaker 1: And so what were you learning about the space?  Because--you know--and, and what did you maybe not anticipate, you know, in terms of, you know, technological developments?
Speaker 2: What we were learning was the, the, the real sort of seemingly unlimited potential of digital development.  We were learning that it wasn't just us, but everyone was finding out that putting together digital content was a lucrative business as well as a necessary business; I mean it was one of those things that you couldn't deny.  It was definitely takin' over.  And, you know, for us, we saw how the Internet was starting to grow and get commercialized, and offering more and more potential for multi-media 'cause we really wanted to continue to focus on multi-media and make sure that we're using our skills to help get a message across or, you know, a product or a service--like you said, branded, through multi-media.  Internet at that time, in the late '90s [1990s], was not necessarily conducive to that until a technology came out called Flash.  And Flash, which we began working on at Flash 1.0, allowed for us to do much more animation on the Web, and that was encouraging.  We also used it for CD-ROM, but certainly being able to use animation on the Web was revolutionizing.  What we did not see happening as clearly, or as fast as I would have, would have hoped, is the power of video that was emerging.  At that time, you know, we didn't have the sort of streaming capabilities and compression capabilities that we have today, but I did know that video was gonna be very important.  We were the first--one of the first ones to do, you know video on CD-ROM with green screen, so you had people walkin' across the screen and things of that nature.  So I knew that it was gonna be important, but I had no idea that, you know, Mark Cuban would be able to sell a streaming technology for a billion dollars (laughter), you know.  I mean that was an amazing transaction for him, and we were right there to be able to do something like that.
Story_ID: 139074
Speaker 1: So where are you now with Ember Media, and--I mean because this is, this is--as you say, this has been a time of tremendous change; the Internet has busted--I mean it's become a competitor with cable television; you're not clear whether it's gonna be the computer or the modem, you know, and it's--and lots of things have, you know, come into play.  Netflix--I mean, there--you know, a lot of things that people would--and Netflix giving the cable industry a run for its money.
Speaker 2: Well, you look at the Golden Globes; Netflix won a Golden Globe (laughter).  I was crackin' up.  I mean, over traditional cable companies and networks, here you had these Netflix people with a Golden Globe.  So (laughter) I mean that is definitely a sign of change.  We look at ourselves today because we've done so much development; I probably have produced over seven hundred-fifty different types of productions when it comes to multi-media, and what we've sort of evolved into is a development company; it's really a company that, you know--we sometimes call ourselves a software development company because people--our clients will come to us and have an idea or may not have an idea, but want to be able to, to, to create something that will drive their business.  And a lotta times, that can be done on the Web.  Sometimes it's off-line with, with just an enterprise piece of software, but oftentimes, it's on-line.  You're hearin' more and more about crowd-sourcing platforms; we can develop those for our clients and we have; we've developed 'em for our clients.  So we look at ourselves as programmers, coders, you know, designers, developers, digital strategy consultants; that's how we have evolved.  It's not just develop multi-media for a CD-ROM or not just create a website for someone, it's really a three hundred-sixty degree ecosystem where you may have to have a website but you want your mobile app as well; we develop those for you.  So you have your web, your mobile app, and you may actually need to re-invent your brand; we help you with that.  So you come up with your strategy--your whole social media platform.  You know, we're--we've evolved into that, so we're helpin' people with their Facebook strategies and are developing Facebook applications--doin' one for the Super Bowl right now.  You know, your Twitter strategy, your LinkedIn, and all your social media outreach is also something that we help; we did it with the Essence Music Festival; we've done it with several large corporations, so that's how we've evolved.
Speaker 1: You know what's amazing in many ways, is that you've become very technology driven, you know; really, since your Sega [Channel] days.  Before, you know, you were PR and, you know, and communications and marketing and sales.  So you're focused a lot more on the, the technology-based (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, you know, and it, it's rounded me out.  I mean one of the things that--one of the reasons why I think companies find comfort in doin' business with us is I can speak the marketing and sales language and sort of their leadership in management that they have to deal with on a day-to-day basis, and at the same time, I can sit with their engineers and their developers and we can talk about all the things that go into building something, you know, using the various code and, and programming languages that need to be used, and I think that's helpful, even in my own company, to be able to talk to people within my own company that are specializing in various things, to be able to talk that language and, and, and so we are able to deliver what the client really needs and what they really want.  So yeah, I think it's helped me out a lot, and it's mostly self-taught, you know, in terms of the technical-- technology, and learning sort of the ins and outs and seeing some things.  One of the things I, I pride myself is having vision and, and, and tryin' to anticipate what's gonna happen next, and so we've been very lucky that we've made some good calls on that.
Story_ID: 139075
Speaker 1: We were talking about the cable industry and how it's become a mature industry.  As you look forward, you know, the next ten, fifteen, twenty years, what are your predictions about where things are going to be?
Speaker 2: The number one prediction is the industry has to transform from a quam-delivered business to an Internet protocol-delivered business.  They're gonna have to transition from coax [coaxial] cable to fiber.  These are major issues; they all are contemplating these strategies, but it's costly.  So they don't have the luxury of, of, of a start-up where they can just start out with an all-fiber network and, and, you know, have all the things in place of today's technology; they have to retro-fit, and that's why it's so slow; they have to retro-fit.  Now the, the, the, the third thing is that we need these companies to throttle up the through-put to gigabit speed; once they get the fiber in place, transition into an IP-delivered system, they need to be delivering at gigabit speed because that's going to not only grow the base of customers, but it will grow the base of business customers.  The number one change that businesses are lookin' for is speed; the number one feature they lookin' for is speed, so when Google comes out and says, "We're gonna offer a gigabit city to any cities that wanna apply for it," companies start locating regional offices there because that's what they need, the highest speed; why?  To be competitive in the world.  So cable companies have to, have to really start puttin' in their strategies over the next fifteen, twenty years.
Story_ID: 139076
Speaker 1: What do you think is gonna happen on the programming front?  You've been involved in an industry that has brought, you know, new programming into the marketplace; it sort of changed the whole landscape of television as we knew it, so what do you think is gonna happen on that regard?
Speaker 2: I think it's--becomes a data-driven business, to be honest with you; I think the, the Netflix of the world--when you hear the story--if you see the clip that Kevin Spacey does about why he did a series on Netflix, one of the great stories he tells is, they didn't ask for a pilot (laughter), you know?  Every other network will say, "Well, put together the pilot and we'll let you know how it goes."  Netflix goes, "Well, we looked at the data, and it tells us that these people will watch it, these people will watch it, these people will watch it; we don't need a pilot, let's go--let's get it on."  And so data's gonna drive content.  And like we like to say, content without data is clutter.  So what we're tryin' to do content-wise is transition content from being clutter to being relevant to a person, and that relevancy will come from data, so I think the future of content relies heavily on who can create the data and who can analyze the data and actually, you know, implement that.
Story_ID: 139077
Speaker 1: National Association of Multi-Ethnics in Communications [NAMIC] [sic, National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications, formerly National Association of Minorities in Cable].
Speaker 2: Okay.  You know--because I was looking at--just googling it this morning and I saw the, the, the picture of, you know, who was on there, and there were not as many black faces, and--I mean it's a diverse--it looks--it looked diverse, like the community you grew up in in Cal--you know, in Oceanside [California], and on the base, but it didn't--I saw fewer--way fewer black faces.  And so I want you to speak to the African American side of the industry and the telecom business, and where--you know, and I know you had spoken out about the 1990--I think it's six [1996] Telecom [Telecommunications] Act--
Speaker 1: Mmm-hmm.
Speaker 2: --but where do you see the black experience and--as we go forward whether, you know, it's--you know, whether it's on the data side--you know, the--whatever side it's on; the programming side--
Speaker 1: No, I think, you know, when it comes to African Americans in entertainment and communications, there's still a long way to go; I mean I look at it on several platforms.  One is you look at the technology side where you have these companies that are communication entertainment companies driven by the Internet--Netflix, Vudu, Roku, all these different platforms that deliver content, you don't see the diversity.  There's some, but there's not nearly where we wanna, where we wanna see it, and so even in the start-up community of these businesses, we're not seein' the sort of African American penetration that we wanna see, so I think there's a lotta room there.  I, I look at it on the network side, on channels that are out there.  There are some start-up channels that are being head up by people like Sean Puffy Combs and Magic Johnson, and things of that nature, but it's still very limited, and we need to figure out how to, how to not only help these type of networks become successful, but even with the sort of current, you know lot of channels that we have, that they become more diversified at the upper levels with--especially in the boardroom.  And then you look at it on the operation side and those people that are delivering all of this to our homes.  I think you still look at those board of directors, you look at their senior management, and there's room to grow.  So for me, I'm still beatin' the drum, not only for African Americans, but for all, you know, people of color, to be attracted to this business and be attracted to alternative careers like, you know, you can be somebody that codes within a network, you can be someone that, you know, is a legal person within these areas, so it's important for us to get our African American talent in all of these platforms and doin' all different types of jobs and getting into leadership.
Story_ID: 139078
Speaker 1: So when you look at the last--you've been in the industry thirty?  Thirty, thirty--almost--
Speaker 2: Twenty-five years.
Speaker 1: Twenty-five years.  So what do you think those twenty-five years have meant?
Speaker 2: It's been, it's--you know, it's one of those industry that changes on a regular basis.  I mean when I entered the industry, there weren't half the number of channels that there are now.  You know, the growth of, of, of, of communications in general, the transition from analog to digital; you don't see antennas on homes anymore.  I mean you're seeing sort of an evolving, you know, business which also, in a lotta ways, has evolved our humanity.  I mean there's just a lot of opportunity, both positive and negative, when it comes to twenty-five years of watching this business.  And twenty-five years of just bein' a professional has also shown me that, you know, what it really boils down to is communication.  How well do you communicate with others, is what really-twenty-five years of experience has really shown me.  It's still about relationships, it's still about how, how you, how you talk and treat people, it's still about bein', you know, innovative and, and curious, you know.  These fundamental things are what, you know, shape a career.
Story_ID: 139079
Speaker 1: You have a son [Joshua Banks].
Speaker 2: I do.
Speaker 1: Okay, and my question is--and he's, he's only a child like your, your parents [Georgia Banks and William Banks, Jr.] were only children.  But what hopes--when you look at your son, what hopes and concerns do you have for the black community?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a great question.  For--my son's name is Joshua, and I, you know, I live vicariously through him in a lotta ways (laughter), 'cause he's, he's hitting college right now, and those were some of the funnest years of my life, so I know he's havin' a fun time, too.  You know, my hope is that he finds a passion and, and pursues it, you know; that's really what it boils down to.  I mean there's only a short time on this planet, when you really think about it.  So if you can find your passion and pursue it, then I'm gonna, I'm gonna do everything I can to help him.  My fear is that we lose a sense of history, you know.  I think my son saw 'Roots' when he was nineteen, you know?  So he had been on the earth nineteen years before he even knew 'Roots' existed, and when he saw the movie, it really turned him around; he was just like--he had no idea.  So I think there is some, some, some challenge that I hope we, we defeat, which is sort of not thinking about history and not--when you don't think about it, you're susceptible to repeating it so, you know, I have a lot more hope than I have fear, but I do fear that, you know, sometimes our kids are, you know, mesmerized by what we're putting on television and, and convinced that reality TV is reality TV, which it's not, and, and, and living through those type of fantasies, and it's much more important for them to find a passion and pursue that, and that's, that's what I try to teach my son.
Story_ID: 139080
Speaker 1: Now your son [Joshua Banks] is where?
Speaker 2: He's at University of Purchase [State University of New York at Purchase, Purchase, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  So if you were starting out like he was, would you--how would--what different changes would you make?  Would you have the same path, or would you change some part of your path?
Speaker 2: That's a very difficult question; I mean he's growin' up--the way he's growin' up and the way I grew up are two different ways, right?  So I--if I was starting out where he is right now, I would probably be 'bout the same as he is (laughter), which is goofy and tryin' to figure it out, but (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --but like I say, if you had, if you had to--let me put it this way.  If you had to live--would you make different choices about your career?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I mean I've enjoyed doin' what I've done.  I don't know what I've missed, and maybe I've missed a lot, but I--bein' in this business I've been all over the world, you know?  I've been in--everywhere from Europe to Saudi Arabia; I mean I've been all over the world bein' in communications 'cause it's a universal issue.  Everyone's dealing with it.  I've been in Brazil, you know.  Joel Austin [ph.] and myself tried to buy networks down in Brazil; I've been all over the world with this business.  So I, I'm not sure what I've missed if I would have been a lawyer, or if I would have been a doctor, or if I would have, you know, worked for, you know, Xerox the rest of my life.  I, you know, actually I do know in some ways 'cause I have friends that are still there (laughter), but I, I, I love the career that I'm livin'.  I've always used to say when I was first Showtime--when I was first Showtime, I was an affiliate rep [representative] and I'd visit these MSOs [multiple-system operators], and it hit me really clearly that one of the great things about network television or Showtime or programming, it can brighten up someone's day; it could also make them cry.  It, it's one of those things that can move emotions, and I just found that fascinating.  It always made me happy to know that I could--I'm a part of somethin' that can do that.  And when I was associated with a hit, 'South Park,' you know, I realized what one show could do and, you know, that just made me happy to see what it could do for people.  I mean I, I would walk into any bar that would be showing 'South Park,' and be everyone's hero, you know?  It was just a--or Sega Channel, you know.  I--to this day, if I mention Sega Channel, inevitably, somebody in the audience will say, "I had Sega Channel."  And I feel real old when they say that 'cause that means they were a kid when I was hustling.  So these type of things are hard to, you know, think of anything, but that's just part of my life, you know?  And NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications] and all of that has made me who I am, so I, you know, I think I would probably do it the same way.
Story_ID: 139081
Speaker 1: In the--in the cable television industry, did you have any idols or people who you thought really contributed in groundbreaking ways to the industry, and who were they?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --Well, I mentioned a few of them, but Stan Thomas [Stanley B. Thomas, Jr.], who was the CEO [chief executive officer] of Sega Channel was clearly a pioneer.  He was a former HBO [Home Box Office] executive, but when he started Sega Channel, it was unheard of; no--most people didn't think it was gonna even work.  He unfortunately died within our first year of business, but he was the visionary by far, and a big idol for me.  Dennis Johnson, who I mentioned, was a break-through; he broke through the glass ceiling and became an African American executive in programming; it's not that often that that happens--still, to this day.  So he was a big influence on me.  My father [William Banks, Jr.], obviously; his work ethic and his, you know, commitment to do the right thing had a large influence on me, you know, and my brothers [William Banks, III and Charles Banks] and sisters [Thelma Johnson and Roxane Banks] the same way.  In the business, still, Leo Hindery played a big role in my career; he was very supportive of me when I was president of NAMIC [National Association of Minorities in Cable, later National Association for Multi-Ethnicity in Communications], so that gave a lot of legitimacy to my presidency so I always credit him with that.  Tom Hayden--Tom Hayden was my first supervisor when I moved to New York [New York], and is still at, you know, in the Showtime family and, and, and one of the smartest guys I had ever met when I, when I first moved to New York, and so he taught me a lot of my management chops, showed me how to, you know, work with people and work with executives, how to think through problems; he was really influential on me.  You know, President [William "Bill"] Clinton--clearly the smartest man I ever did meet, and that's in every room I've ever met with him in.  He's--and whoever is in the room is just a bit dumber than him; he is a very smart guy, and I just loved the fact that we got a chance to work together and, and, and, you know, he's a very big influence on me.  And, you know, there's been some great women in my life.  My mother [Georgia Banks], to start, and certainly Hillary Clinton; I got a chance to work with her a little bit, you know, so that was very influential on me.  A woman named Karen Proctor was at Scholastic who taught me how to work with kids and really understand how to, you know, do good; you can make money doin' good--that was one of the things that--I, I, I, I really appreciated her stewardship on that.  A woman named Carol Mechanic who hired me at Showtime.  You know, she and her husband were very generous in givin' me 1988 [Los Angeles] Dodger tickets (laughter), and so I always remember that; that was the year the Dodgers won.  So lots of people have, you know, been influential on me.  Matt Blank, Tony Cox [Winston H. Cox] --you know, I can go on and on, you know-[Robert J.] Bob Gerard, Mark Hess, who's at Comcast now, hired me into Sega Channel ultimately, and he was and still is a really good friend of mine and I look up to him.  Yeah, lotta great people in my life.
Speaker 1: So you've been well-mentored.
Speaker 2: I have, I have, and I've tried to, you know, pay it forward as a result.
Story_ID: 139082
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Well, I hope that it's in the vein of innovation, meaning that I hope people will see me as someone who, who tried to bring some new things to the table.  You know, certainly I want to be remembered as, you know, a good person and things of that nature and, and, and someone who, you know, not only was mentored but mentored others.  But I love the idea of, of a legacy where, you know, someone can say, you know what?  That guy was part of something special throughout his career.  And--well, on the professional side.  And then, you know, on the personal side, that he was a good husband and a good father and, you know, a good friend.
