Story_ID: 261229
Speaker 1: Okay great so we're gonna get started by me slating the tape saying my name is Racine Tucker-Hamilton, and I am the interviewer, Matthew Hickey is the videographer.  Today's date is Tuesday, February 1, 2005, and this interview is taking place in the Bronx, New York [New York].  Now, if you would, please for the record, tell us your full name including your middle name--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --And spell it.
Speaker 2: David Medgar Bodrick, Jr.  D-A-V-I-D, M-E-D-G-A-R, Bodrick, B-O-D-R-I-C-K, Jr., J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and would you please tell us the date and location of your birth?
Speaker 2: Seven thirty-first, 1963 [July 31, 1963], Brooklyn, New York [New York].
Speaker 1: Your occupation?
Speaker 2: CEO and founder of DMBJ Productions [New York, New York].
Story_ID: 261230
Speaker 1: Now the next couple of questions are some People magazine-ish type questions just to help us get to know you a little bit better, so I ask you to give me short answers to these questions.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Would you please share with us your favorite food?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Favorite food, chitlins.
Speaker 1: Your favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Black (laughter).
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: That's hard, that's hard.  I'm just, St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands].
Speaker 1: Okay, and your favorite phrase or saying, do you have one?
Speaker 2: No I don't, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, not a problem.
Story_ID: 261231
Speaker 1: Let's begin talking about your mother, starting with your mother's name and where your mother was born and where she grew up as a girl?
Speaker 2: Well my mother's maiden name is Marie Moore, and she grew up in North Carolina, a town called Kinston [North Carolina].  And, yeah, yeah she, when she left Kinston, she went to Shaw University [Raleigh, North Carolina] and she stayed there for, she studied there for, I think two years, and she always wanted to come to New York [New York], so she moved to New York to pursue whatever she, teaching--
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: --at that time, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did she ever share any stories with you about what life was like growing up in North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's always that saying that, you know, they, they were, you know, they had to walk for miles and my father [David Bodrick, Sr.] always jokes about how she had to ride a mule because her family was so poor that they didn't have, you know, that they couldn't afford like, you know, a car at that time so (laughter).
Speaker 1: And did she ever talk about, like did she grow up in a farming community, was it a farming community or?
Speaker 2: No, no.  It was more of a little town.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, a little town, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you all ever go--
Speaker 2: It was like a factory, I, 'cause a factory town at that ti--yeah.
Speaker 1: --okay.  And what kind of--so your mother was a teacher here in New York?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how did she and your father meet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's a very romantic story.  My uncle had owned a restaurant in Bedford Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York, New York], and my mother lived in a rooming house for women and she, she would have dinner at my uncle's restaurant and she got to knew my uncle and my, my, my aunt and my aunt would always say that, you should meet my brother-in-law because, you know, I think you two would be a good match.  So, one day my mother saw my father from afar and you know, he thought he was like Big Willie, and she didn't, you know, she, it, wou--she didn't think he was the type of man that woul--you know was interested in.  And one day by chance they were in the restaurant at the same time and her earring fell, fell off and he picked it up and then they started a conversation and after that they, you know, been together.
Speaker 1: Oh wow, that is very romantic.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it is, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your mother?
Speaker 2: Very soft spoken, but very, very soft spoken and exterior very feminine, but she's a very strong and tough woman, you know?  I mean like inside. You know?
Story_ID: 261232
Speaker 1: Let's talk now a little bit about your father starting with his name and where he grew up as a boy?
Speaker 2: Well his name is David Bodrick, Sr. and he grew up in a small town called Lone Star, South Carolina, and it's a really small town, it's, it's still not on the map, and he grew up with six brothers and two sisters in a farming town, yeah.
Speaker 1: And did he ever talk about life on the farm and just like what his daily routine was like and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean like, he would always say that his gr--my grandfather [Johnny Bodrick] was of like, he--the, the joke is that he never worked a day in his life but his pockets were always filled and his whole process was to basically, he knew a lot of people and he knew at that time that, you know he would speak a lot to the, to the white man that were looking for people to work and he knew people, family and friends that needed work, so he was a broker.  So, he basically got them work, but took a percentage of their earnings so, you know, I mean like, which is a good thing, you know, I mean like now, you know, I guess he would be ca--you know, be considered a headhunter, you know?  So, yeah that's what his story was. Yeah.
Speaker 1: And what kind of work did your father do when you were growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a contractor here in New York [New York].  So--
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about h--how he ended up coming to New York?
Speaker 2: Well, his brothers came to New York and both his brothers owned restaurants, one in, in Brooklyn [New York, New York], one in Bedford Stuyvesant [Brooklyn, New York, New York], and then one is in Brooklyn Heights [Brooklyn, New York, New York] and when he came here he ba--he stayed with his brothers and he came here, you know, to, to work and to make money because, you know, you know, you really couldn't make money in the South, you know?  So, they came to New York and that's how he started, you know, he started as a labor, laborer and worked his way up to basically doing, you know, at the end of his career, doing like having contracts with different people to restore houses and you know, interior and exterior.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe your father?
Speaker 2: Very, very, how would I--very forward, a forward thinker, yeah.
Speaker 1: Why do you saying a forward thinker?
Speaker 2: Because he always, 'till this day, I mean like, he sees, he s--I, I mean like he'll see something in a different way, you know?  I mean like some people would look at an area or object as being like ugly or, you know, discard it and he'll, he'll see--he'll bring life to it, you know?  And, he all--I mean like he would always, I mean like, I grew up living in a brownstone and it was always constantly under renovation because he always saw something that needed to, you know, to be improved and, you know, I mean like, just very modern and forward and, you know, I, I just, I, that's one thing I love about him.
Story_ID: 261233
Speaker 1: And did you spend a lot time with your grandparents?  Did you know your grandparents well?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my--
Speaker 1: Can, what--tell us about your maternal grandparents first starting with their names?
Speaker 2: My, I knew my maternal grandmother, my maternal grandfather [Pearlie Moore] was deceased before I, before I was born, so my maternal grandmother was named Maggie Moore and she was, she was a strong woman because, I mean like, you know, she had to, to raise, how many?  Eight kids, without a husband and that had to be hard at that time, so she was very religious and just very, very strong, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did you spend a lot of time with her?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we spent the summers with her.
Speaker 1: What were the summers like and kn--going from New York [New York], to North Carolina?
Speaker 2: I used to enjoy it because, I mean like, we, we used to take the bus, I mean like, you know, school would end, school would end like June 16th and June 17th we're like on the bus going to South Caroli--to North Carolina and we basically, you know, have on flip flops and, you know, bare feet in the sand and in the pond all day, you know, and playing with the chickens and the pigs, so it was good.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: It was good, coming from the city.
Speaker 1: Um-hum, what about your paternal grandparents, did you know them?
Speaker 2: Well, my paternal grandmother was named Angie Bodrick and my paternal grandfather was named Johnny Bodrick and my grandmother, she lived with us for a long time, she was separated from my grandfather because, you know, as I said, he was, he was more of a, you know, he was a hu--he was a hustler and he was never, you know, I mean like, he traveled a lot and, you know, so my--she lived, she lived with us, my, my grandmother, so I was very close to her.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And how would you describe her?
Speaker 2: Quiet.  She was very quiet and very, as I said, I, I, ke--it, it's redundant but very strong, you know, you know raising, you know, number, a lot of kids with, you know, without the support of a man so she, she was strong and just quiet, just very quiet, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she ever tell you stories about her life growing up and her life as a girl, just like what growing up was like during that time period?  Did she ever talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, she never, she never, she never talked about that.  She, she was just very, very quiet, ye--years later I, you know, I heard stories, you know like, I mean like cousins and aunts would tell me stories about her that, you know, she wasn't a girlie girl, you know, (laughter) she never, yeah she wasn't a girlie girl, she basically was quiet and she kept to herself because she had more sons than daughters, so she was very, more, more male friendly--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in a way.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know.  Not, not, not sexually or anything like that, but just, you know--
Speaker 1: Just related to men a little bit more--
Speaker 2: Yeah, just related to men more, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  Do you know a lot about your ancestry, like do you know if you came from free people, slaves, do you know a lot about that?
Speaker 2: Well, just because like the majority of my family has relocated back to South Carolina, so the town that we're from, what I hear about like my, my grandfather and my great-grandfather were that there were, they're, I mean like they had, you know, big shoes so, I mean, I re--I'm, I'm really not sure.
Story_ID: 261234
Speaker 1: What's your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: Earliest memory of growing up?  I don't understand the question.
Speaker 1: Like what's one of the very first things that you remember?  Like your earliest memory.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)  Almost setting the house on fire with my brother [Johnathan Bodrick] and that's what, I mean like, I really remember, I mean like, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what happened?
Speaker 2: As I said, I, you know, like my father [David Bodrick, Sr.] was always the forward person and the house was always under renovation, so he was basically knocking, knocking down a wall, so it was an opening and my grandmother [Angie Bodrick] lived with us, so she was in the, in the living room watching probably a soap opera or something and we were downstairs, my, my younger brother and we had newspaper and matches.  So we stuffed the newspaper in like this cavity of the wall that was getting ready to be knocked down and we would take and stuff the newspaper and take the match and throw it in there and the fire would come, then we would run back into the kitchen and get a cup of water and pour it into, you know to put it out.  But this one time it got out of control and it started to smoke and then my grandmother realized that the place was on fire and we lived like down the block from a fire station so they came, you know they responded really quickly and I remember my father coming home and seeing this like whole wall just burnt up and, you know, I, I, you know, I know he was pissed but, you know, as I said, he probably looked at it and said, ooh, you know, (laughter) I could do this, you know what I'm saying (laughter)?
Story_ID: 261235
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about what holidays were like in your house and like growing up, were like birthdays and Christmas and Thanksgiving and?
Speaker 2: Well, I grew up, later, later on in life we, I grew up Jehovah's Witness, so we didn't celebrate--
Speaker 1: Oh, right.
Speaker 2: --birthdays and Christmas and so forth, but early, I do remember celebrating Christmas and getting, you know like, the train sets and race car sets and so forth, you know, and having a birthday party in school, you know, in the class, you know, in the classroom, you know, just one time, but I was, you know, you know, I had to be in first grade [at P.S. 155; Nicholas Herkimer Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] or something like that.  But that's, that's far and few between that, but--
Speaker 1: Did the whole family grow up Jehovah's Witness?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Who (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, my mother [Marie Moore Bodrick], my mother was a J--Jehovah's Witness and my father [David Bodrick, Sr.] basically observed it, you know, because, you know, I mean like, that's his wife and, you know, you want a happy home, so you keep your wife happy and so that's what that was about.  But, we, the only holiday that we observed was the Passover, so, you know, in April, we basically, you know, would go to church and, not, not church but to Kingdom Hall [of Jehovah's Witnesses] and have a dinner afterwards.
Speaker 1: And what was it like growing up Jehovah's Witness?  Did you ever feel different from the other kids 'cause kids were talking about Christmas and birthday parties and Easter and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  Because, I mean like, you like, people, people ask me that before, but no because, you know, I--I-j--we just had a really close family and no not really.
Speaker 1: So you didn't really miss it?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I mean like, no.  I mean like one thing that, that, that growing up as a Jehovah's Witness, I mean like a lot of things you, you know, as far as like TV and so forth and radio, we, we couldn't listen to or participate in so we, we had an imagination.  We basically would create a lot of different, you know, games and, and so forth so--
Speaker 1: You know, I mean like that, it just you, you know, we had to use our imagination which was a, a good thing, thinking about it now in retrospect, yeah.
Story_ID: 261236
Speaker 1: And what was your daily routine?  Like you'd wake up in the morning and then what would you do next?
Speaker 2: Wake up, take a shower, go to school, come home and--
Speaker 1: Did you walk to school, or did you catch a bus?
Speaker 2: Walked to school.  Earlier we would walk, it was because I'm closer age to my brother, so we would walk to school up until the fourth grade [at P.S. 193; The Gil Hodges School, Brooklyn, New York, New York], but then after that we started taking the bus because, in the '70s [1970s], it was this whole big thing that, that, you know, they felt that busing children of color to other schools was a good idea, so yeah, yeah we would catch a bus my brother and I which, I don't know, in which I don't think was a good thing, you know, now thinking about it.
Speaker 1: We'll talk about that a little bit later.  So you'd go to school, come home--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --and then what?
Speaker 2: Probably wa--you know, watch cartoons, you know?
Speaker 1: So you could watch cartoons?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.  We would watch cartoons and we had, my brother and, my brother and sister and I had a game that we made called, we would call, we, we had a game called paper people and we would basically take cardboard boxes and like I said, my father [David Bodrick, Sr.] was always, the house was always under renovation and he would always take, so we had an imagination that we took cardboard boxes and created houses and put people in it and made furniture and it basic--I mean like it really, I mean opened up our imagination to you know, different shapes and people and, you know, we would color the people different colors and, you know, this whole might--multicultural world and, you know, we, we, it was just, it was just fun.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and we would play together and that was one thing that we always, we did, daily, you know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Would you please give us your sibling's names and their birth order including yourself?
Speaker 2: My oldest sister, Vanessa Maria Bodrick Davis, her birthday is July 3rd, I think 1952?  My, then it's me, David M. Bodrick, Jr. [HistoryMaker David Bodrick].  Seven, thirty-first '63 [July 31st, 1963], and my younger brother, Jonathan Roosevelt Bodrick and his birthday is March 9th, 1965.
Speaker 1: So, a pretty big age difference between your sister and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you and your brother.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But you, you all still played together though?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  Yeah, my, my, y--you know my sister was, since she was older, she would basically initiate the whole structure of everything, you know?  Which, as far as like music and the way we dressed and so forth, and which was a good thing because she, you know, she had a good eye and, you know, we weren't unhappy with what we were wearing and the direction of how, you know, our playdate would go, but, you know it was good, it was good, yeah.
Speaker 1: She was the major of the, the--
Speaker 2: Yeah she w--
Speaker 1: --paper people town.
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.  (Laughter) You know?  She always had, she always had the best lot and the best house and, you know, so yeah, she was the mayor, yeah.
Story_ID: 261237
Speaker 1: Tell me what sights, sounds and smells, remind you of growing up and remind you of your childhood?
Speaker 2: Sight would be a row of houses, because, you know, we grew up with like, growing up on a block with all attached houses in Brooklyn [New York, New York] so that would be the sight.  Smell would be, what would the smell be?  Paint, paint, as I said, always, you know, constant renovation, but yeah, paint because it always smelled of like paint or paint thinner? And what was the second one?
Speaker 1: And sounds.
Speaker 2: Sound, either barking dogs 'cause we always had dogs or kids, you know, just the whole block was full of, you know, kids.
Story_ID: 261238
Speaker 1: What was the name of the street that you lived on growing up?
Speaker 2: Dean Street.
Speaker 1: And can you kind of describe your block for us a little bit?  You said it was a row of houses?
Speaker 2: Yeah it was a row of houses, I mean like, yeah, when you see like, like shows, like now, like sitcoms that say if like, the neighborhood would be Brooklyn [New York, New York] and it was like a row of like attached houses, so that's, that's how the block was, you know, with like a front yard and all attached houses with, you know, a backyard in the back, yeah.
Speaker 1: And you said there was a firehouse nearby?
Speaker 2: It was a firehouse down the block, it was a gas station on the corner, yeah.
Speaker 1: And, what was the name of the elementary school you attended?
Speaker 2: P.S. 155 [Nicholas Herkimer Elementary School, Brooklyn, New York, New York], from kindergarten to third grade and P.S. 193 [The Gil Hodges School, Brooklyn, New York, New York], from fourth grade until sixth.
Speaker 1: And do you remember so of your teachers who may have had an influence on you?
Speaker 2: In the?
Speaker 1: In elementary school.
Speaker 2: Elementary school, yeah, Ms., Mr. Thorton [ph.], I think he was my second or third grade teacher and Ms. Goldstein [ph.], she was my--had to be fifth, four--yeah fifth, firth grade teacher, yeah.
Story_ID: 261239
Speaker 1: So you said in the fourth grade [at P.S. 193; The Gil Hodges School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] you were, you and your brother [Johnathan Bodrick] were bused--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --to a different school but you didn't really think it, in retrospect, you didn't think it was a good idea and why not?
Speaker 2: Because, I mean like, it, it, we, it exposed us to racism at an early age and we weren't ready for it.  I mean like, I, speaking for myself I wasn't ready for it because my brother was more academically smarter than I was, so, I mean like, I was always more creative--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and so I didn't do well in school and my brother was more, he was more of a people person and I, you know, I've always been like, you know, very shy, and so, I didn't make friends easy and I didn't--so, I mean like so, you know, I was, you know, picked on a lot and just, I mean like, you know, called nigger and so forth, so, I mean like I, I just wasn't ready for it. Yeah.
Speaker 1: And do you remember any other specific incidents, any specific racial incidents?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, you know, I just was, it, it was a whole, it was a constant thing, I mean like with--because the kids came from an environment and an area where they're taught that people of color are less, you know, less than them so they come to school with that same, you know, approach where, you know, I mean like, it's easier to pick on, you know, the, the black or the Asian kid than to pick on, you know, their, their, their white friends so, you know, and, you know, it's three or four of us, you know what I'm saying?  So, I mean like, you know, we tried to huddle together and, you know, it's, you know, a hundred of them--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --so, it's, it's, just, you know, it puts a lot of stress.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  What--
Speaker 2: Or--
Speaker 1: --about the teachers?  What are some of your thoughts about the teachers?  At that, did they try to make it a nurturing environment?
Speaker 2: It was one, it was one teacher that I really, Ms. Goldstein [ph.], that I really remember wh--because she, she was more cosmopolitan than some of the other teachers.  And she made, made the world seem like it was different, you know what I'm saying?  I mean like, she made the world seem like it was a place where I wanted to live, you know, and thinking about, you know, coming from, you know, living in Brooklyn [New York, New York], you know, you know I, you know, always, you know, you see, you know, you know, you would, like my parents [Marie Moore Bodrick and David Bodrick, Sr.] would take us to, you know, Manhattan [New York, New York] and, you know, you see all the big buildings and so forth and, you know, thinking about it she lived it, you know, you probably lived in Manhattan and she was more, you know, cosmopolitan so, that, that, that always intrigued me--Yeah.
Story_ID: 261240
Speaker 1: And you said that you were always more creative.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Like what kinds of things did you like to do during the elementary school years that were creative during that time in your life?
Speaker 2: Well in elementary school it's, it was all about, you know, math, spelling, and reading and I, you know, I mean like I, I didn't, I, I didn't get it, you know?  So, I was always in, what do you call it?  Like the, the special classes, you know, special reading classes, you know, and, you know, I mean like, 'cause, because I, you know, everything was just faster, you know, kids got, you know, one plus one and I had to think about it because I was, I wasn't there, you know, so it just took me a long, you know, a longer time to, to get it.  And as far as like, I used to like to paint you know, and I remember winning like, you know, my picture winning, you know, a prize at the art fair and so forth and, like if they had, like a talent show, I was like really into Johnny Mathis and [HistoryMaker] Dionne Warwick and Frank Sinatra and you know, older artists, you know?  I mean like I, you know, I mean like kids would just think that I was weird because I, I liked more, you know, classic type thing, yeah.
Speaker 1: And what kind of child were you during the elementary school years?  You mentioned that you were a little shy, what else?
Speaker 2: Oh, I was a, I mean like I, at home, I mean like I, at home, like it's a, it's a joke like, at, you know, during like Thanksgiving, and stuff like that, that, you know, if I was a kid now?  They would have me on Ritalin (laughter) because, because I just, I mean like I, you know, I just always wanted to be around my mother [Marie Moore Bodrick], you know, and I just, you know, I mean, I, you know, I, I tell my mother if it was, you know, up to, up to me, I would just stayed home and been with you, you know?  But it, yeah, I was never, you know, outgoing or anything like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: Do you think as a child you may have suffered from ADHD [attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I, think--thinking about it, yeah, I did, yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  And what kinds of things did you like to do during your spare time?
Speaker 2: When I was younger, play with my friends, you know, I mean like we would be--
Speaker 1: Who were some of your friends?
Speaker 2: --like the, we had people that lived upstairs from us, we had a apartment that we, my father [David Bodrick, Sr.] would rent upstairs and it was two younger kids Tony [ph.] and Michael [ph.] and then we had next door neighbors, Tony, Michelle [ph.], Shena [ph.], and Cynthia [ph.].  So we would go and play, you know, including my brother [Jonathan Bodrick] and sister [Vanessa Bodrick Davis].
Speaker 1: What kinds of things would you guys play?
Speaker 2: Red light green light, 1, 2, 3, Skully.
Speaker 1: What's Skully?
Speaker 2: Skully--
Speaker 1: Is that?--
Speaker 2: Yeah it's a--
Speaker 1: --the bottle cap?
Speaker 2: You know you would draw a, it was sort of like, you would draw like a board on the street, it's played in the street and you would put numbers and then you would have this like soda--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --a soda bottle top and you would go from like starting at one, one until like twelve?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And the ob--whole object was to get to I think twelve and knock the other people away so it would take them longer to, you know, ah, I really don't remember.  Also, handball, what else did we play?  Football a little bit, we never played basketball, which is weird, you know?  Thinking about it, we never played basketball, and swim, yeah, that's about it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Go to the pool in the summer, yeah.
Speaker 1: During the elementary school years did you have dreams and aspirations, like what did you want to be when you grew up?
Speaker 2: A long distance bus driver.  Yeah, that's what I wanted to be a long distance bus driver.
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because I thought it was so glamorous especially like, like I said, when, you know, in, in the summers we would take the Greyhound [Lines] bus to North Carolina and I would sit in the front in back of the bus driver and, you know, being a little kid, you know, he would talk, la-la-la, and you know, they would talk, you know, I would listen and, I just thought it was like, you know, it was real exotic to go from state to state to state, (laughter), so yeah, yeah.
Story_ID: 261241
Speaker 1: And you said you grew up Jehovah's Witness?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, what were your family's experiences like in the Kingdom Hall [of Jehovah's Witnesses], can you kind of tell us a little bit about that?
Speaker 2: Well, that environment was very, as far as, it was a lot of studying because they would encourage you to like read different chapters of the Bible and different publications and so forth and it was more of a, more of a discussion type thing, you know?  Whereas they would discuss, you know, different chapters of the Bible and different publications and you know, you would have to, you know, do different, like, readings and talks and so forth, which, I mean like, which I felt like an outsider coming, you know, being like not really academic, you know what I'm saying?  I mean like so.
Speaker 1: And a little shy.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a little shy, so it was always, you know, oh God it's time for me to read, it's like, oh God!  You know, it just felt like, you know, like real, like an outsider.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm, and did you make the decision once you b--became an adult to, are you still a Jehovah's Witness?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not.
Speaker 1: When, when did you make that decision?  When you became an adult?
Speaker 2: No, after, I mean like, like, because my, my father [David Bodrick, Sr.] wasn't a witness, a Jehovah's Witness, so I, you know, when I became a teenager, you know, I just started to, you know, I mean like, they realized that, I just didn't fit in, so.
Story_ID: 261242
Speaker 1: Where did you go to junior high school?
Speaker 2: Marine Park Junior High School [J.H.S. 278 Marine Park, Brooklyn, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And, do you remember some of your teachers who made have had an influence on you in junior high school?  Were there any?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Not, not really.  I mean like, the, all I remember is that the racism got worse because now coming from our elementary school [P.S. 193; The Gil Hodges School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] th--where kids were racist, going to a junior high school where it was older kids that are racist.  So, what I remember is that, just being, you know, scared to death every day, you know, being shy, not doing well in school and then on top of it, you know, dealing with racism so--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --yeah it was, it was challenging.
Speaker 1: And were things getting better for you academically or staying about the same, or getting worse?
Speaker 2: Worse.  I mean like, you know?  It, you know, I, I did what I can do, you know, to get through, you know, the grades, you know, and pass but, you know, it was, if I got a B, it w--I was lucky, you know what I'm saying?  I mean like it was C and Ds.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: And who was influencing you at this particular time in your life during the junior high school years who were you most influenced by?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like, women, wel--I mean like, you know, you're a teenage boy, and it, I was just influenced by women, you know, and I had a girlfriend at that time so, yeah.
Speaker 1: During junior school you did?
Speaker 2: During junior, yeah, during, yeah.
Speaker 1: Did she go to your school or was she from the neighborhood?
Speaker 2: No, she was actually from the Kingdom Hall [of Jehovah's Witnesses], from the, yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, at that time, yeah, at that time yeah.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and--
Speaker 1: So socially you weren't doing too bad, you had a girlfriend?
Speaker 2: No, I mean like, you know, I mean, I don't know, I guess, you know, you know, I just grew into, I grew--you know, I was growing into myself--
Speaker 1: And what--
Speaker 2: --you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: --kind of young man were you starting to become?
Speaker 2: At that time, I mean like, I wasn't, I mean like, towards the end of junior high school, I was more of, you know, I started smoking cigarettes, experimenting with drugs and alcohol and you know, cutting school, you know, and having a girlfriend so, but I was in, I mean like I, I wasn't, you know, robbing or stealing or anything like that so.
Story_ID: 261243
Speaker 1: What about your dreams and aspirations in junior high school [J.H.S. 278 Marine Park, Brooklyn, New York, New York]?  What were you thinking you wanted to be when you grew up and became an adult?
Speaker 2: I just knew I wanted to, I wanted to work on Wall Street and I knew I wanted to work on Wall Street and live in Manhattan [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Why?
Speaker 2: Because I just thought that bankers, not--see not, I, I wasn't even thinking banking, I was thinking Wall Street because when you think of Wall Street, you think of, you know, a gentleman in a suit and a tie, you know and very, like I said, you know, like very classic and, you know financially secure--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So that, yeah, that's what I, that's what I wanted to do, yeah--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --yeah, at that time yeah.
Speaker 1: But just not quite sure of what kind of job you'd have on Wall Street?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Story_ID: 261244
Speaker 1: So what high school did you attend?
Speaker 2: James Madison High School [Brooklyn, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: And what were your experiences like at James Madison?
Speaker 2: It got better, but the racism, was still there but I was more, I was now, not as shy, and still academically challenged but, you know, I was better at mixing with other cultures better because I smoked cigarettes, I cut school, I, you know, drink beer and smoked marijuana, so that basically bridged the gap with the, the cultures--
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: --were you cool?  Was it, were you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I became--
Speaker 1: --kinda cool?
Speaker 2: --I became very cool, yeah, yeah.  And I had another girlfriend who was older and she had a job, so, so, you know, I had more, you know, cooler clothes, and more, you know, I would, you know, go to clubs in Manhattan [New York, New York], you know what I'm saying?  So, I was more, in--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --in, yeah.
Speaker 1: And were you still finding like creative outlets, or what was happening with your, the creative side of you?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I started to hang out more in Manhattan and with more of like a bohemian type crowd in the, in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York] and, you know, we would listen to music and dance and go to clubs and stuff like that.  So, I just thought, I mean like, I created, I was more creative with the way I dressed, you know, as far as like, you know, I started seeing a girl in high school, I had two girlfriends, one in, in high school and then another in the Kingdom Hall [of Jehovah's Witnesses] and so I was, you know, be more creative with the way I dressed--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and you know, cutting my hair and stuff like that so, that was more of my creative outlet at that time.
Speaker 1: And did your parents [Marie Moore Bodrick and David Bodrick, Sr.] know about some of your activity of cutting school or were you pretty good at hiding that from them?
Speaker 2: They, they, they knew.  I mean like they, sh--you know, they knew, yeah, because, you know, yeah you get the, you know, the calls, you know, oh he hasn't been to school in a week or, you know, come home and your eyes are red and, yeah, they knew.  I mean like, you know, and, you know, they would, they weren't encouraging of it, but they weren't like, you know, my, you know, I was, you know, getting, you know, good grades, I was maintaining that C average so, it, it was, it was good, it was good, it was good.
Speaker 1: And, do you wish that they would have cracked down on you, or?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Because I think I had to, yo--you, I, I think you have to experiment in order to get to where you're going.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know, and I always knew that it was just phases, you know?
Speaker 1: And when you cut school, what kinds of things would you do?  What would you do with your day?
Speaker 2: Go to a friend's house or a girlfriend's house and, you know, I mean like drink, smoke, have sex, you know?  So--
Speaker 1: The usual.
Speaker 2: --the usual, right.  (Laughter) Teenage stuff, you know.  It, was, it was the '70s [1970s], you know, you, that's what you did, you know.
Story_ID: 261245
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers in high school [James Madison High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] who had a particular influence on you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was, two, I don't remember their names because it was that, you know, that pot smoking, but it was two teachers that really influenced me, one, because at -- my, my girlfriend, when I was in the tenth grade, tenth grade?  My girlfriend got pregnant so she--
Speaker 1: What grade was she in?  Is this--
Speaker 2: --she was outta of school.
Speaker 1: --the older girl?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, she was outta school and we decided to, to keep the baby and that influenced my, my life tremendously as far as getting a grip with, you know, the education thing.  So, I started writing a lot and it was one teacher that really paid attention and she, in my writing I would write a lot about my, my, my, the whole pregnancy thing and wanting to be a good father and she would, would want me to read it and I started, you know, reading my stuff and then they started, you know, giving me good grades and I got into like, you know, real--you know, from eleventh to--eleventh through the twelfth grade, I got really good grades, you know, and I started focusing, you know, once my son [David Bodrick III] was born, you know, on that whole experience of being a father and, you know.
Speaker 1: What kind of father were you at that age?
Speaker 2: Really, one I had a lot of time on my hand because, in the, I worked part time and she worked full time and I would take care of my son in the day.
Speaker 1: Why weren't you in school?
Speaker 2: I would go to school, but my, my schedule was from like, I would go to school from like eight in the morning and I was out by twelve.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So, and then, like I worked like three or four days a week or something like that as a messenger and, and then the rest of time I would spend with my son and we became, I mean like, it was really rewarding because I had a lot of time to spend with him and we were close, you know?
Story_ID: 261246
Speaker 1: And what was your parents' [Marie Moore Bodrick and David Bodrick, Sr.] reaction when they found out your girlfriend was pregnant?
Speaker 2: They were supportive.  I mean like, I've never spoke to them about how they felt about how, were they disappointed, blah, blah, blah, but, I mean like it was their first grandchild and, you know he was a good kid and they, they were very supportive, I mean financially and mentally and so forth so, yeah, I mean.
Speaker 1: And what happened with your social life once your son [David Bodrick III] was born?  Were you still able to do some of the things that you were doing before?  Just, you know?  Going out with your friends and hanging out with your friends and that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean like that became, because the relationship with the girl, my son's mother, my baby's momma, nah, (laughter), you know--
Speaker 1: Say it right (laughter).
Speaker 2: --got to be, we were too young to have, you know, to think of long term, I mean like, you know, we were just growing a part, you know, my goals were different from hers and, and so forth.  So, we started growing apart and so it became a thing where she started to leave like the, my son, you know, because she started dating and she would leave my son with either her mother or my mother and, or me and we just came from, I mean like both of us had really supportive families.  So, you know, it takes a village, you know, when they use that saying and it does, you know, and it made it a lot easier that we, we can have a life and stuff like that and we had like a support group where, you know, you know, they would take care, you know, of my son and so forth, so, you know, we knew he was safe.  So, you know--
Speaker 1: Were--
Speaker 2: --I can have my social life, she can have her social life so, it was good.
Speaker 1: So you still enjoyed like those teenage years?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, I did and, you know, I mean like, yeah, still, I mean like, you know.
Story_ID: 261247
Speaker 1: After, you know, after I graduated high school [James Madison High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York]--
Speaker 2: What year did you graduate from high school?
Speaker 1: Eighty-two [1982], '82 [1982]?  Eighty-two [1982], yeah and after I graduated high school I started working, because I was a messenger at a brokerage firm and that fi--I figured out that I wanted to work on Wall Street, it confirmed my thing that I wanted to work on Wall Street and, but I, I had the whole experience of working as a messenger and stuff like, you know, stuff like that and I started to know what firm did what--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --you know, from, you know, securities, from brokerage, some, you know and what the stock exchange did, you know, what they, you know, traded.  And, you know, just by listening, you know, like delivering like bonds and you know, all these financial papers and so forth and talking to, to brokers, you know, I mean like, you know, when you're, you know, when you're sitting down and you don't have a delivery and stuff like that, talk to, you know, I would like always talk to brokers and so forth and, you know, they, you know, one, one older guy he, he told me that I should leave this job and start doing temp work, I'm like temp work?  I don't, I don't get it and he's like, you know, yeah you should do temp work because you get to know different companies and if you want to stay there.  Because at that company I was working for Lehman Brothers at that time and before they merged with, you know, Shearson and American Express [Shearson/American Express] and stuff, it was just Lehman Brothers, a small brokerage firm and he knew that, you know, you know, a black, a black young man wasn't gonna get a job working at Lehman Brothers, you know, 'cause, you know, all the desk were occupied by white, white men.
Story_ID: 261248
Speaker 1: What were your thoughts about college?
Speaker 2: You know?  I really never thought about it.  I, I knew that I wanted to do something creative, you know?  But I, I wanted to work on Wall Street because financially, you know, I just thought it was more rewarding, you know?  But, I really, I mean like, I, I never really thought about, you know, I knew that I, I lo--I loved television and I loved, you know--you know, film.  So, I knew I wanted to do, do something like that, but it wasn't, I knew I didn't wanna be an actor, I knew I wanted to create--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --more, you know, on the creat--but I didn't, you know, I mean like, you know, coming from an environment that wasn't encouraging of, you know, you know, of the arts, you know what I'm say--?  I, I mean so, it was you, you get your nine to five and--you know, you do that.  So, that's why, you know, I thought working on Wall Street would do that, you know, financially and stuff like that.  But, you know, dream wise, I, you know, I wanted to do more, you know, film--video type stuff.  Yeah.
Story_ID: 261249
Speaker 1: So, you worked as a messenger for Lehman Brothers from 1982, full time after graduation [from James Madison High School, Brooklyn, New York, New York] for about how long?
Speaker 2: From, like from 1980 to '82 [1982], I was--I worked as a messenger and also I did security too, you know, like watching like, an office when they closed and stuff, you know, while I was in high school at night.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: And then once I got out of high school, I, like I said, the gentleman said, you know, you, I should work temp, so that's what I did.  I went to a temp agency and I started to work at different companies--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and see how companies worked.
Speaker 1: And what was that experience like for you?
Speaker 2: I liked it, it was rewarding because I got a chance to meet different people and just see what I wanted to do and I didn't want to do.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: You know?
Speaker 1: And what kinds of things were you exposed to working as a temp?  Like what different kinds of companies did you see and experience?
Speaker 2: Well I worked for a coffee commodity place called Shields [Model Roland; Bache Halsey Stuart Shields] on Wall Street and I, it was interesting that, that I found out how, you know, coffee is traded on the market, you know, so--
Speaker 1: How is coffee traded on the market?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like, you know, you basically have different brokers sit and cup coffee from around the world and, you know, I didn't know, I didn't know, you know, that people did that, you know?  You have to know the product before you get out there--
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: --and physically trade it, you know?  And, I didn't know that.  So I mean, like that, you know, taught me that you need to know your product in order to, you know, to trade it our have, you know, people buy, you know, the bean or whatever, you know?  So, that was interesting.  But, sin- after that, I knew I just didn't wanna drink coffee--
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: --because smelling coffee the whole time, until this day, I don't drink coffee, you know?  And, then I worked at a printing company that produced, what was it?  Like brochures for different corporate annual reports and, that was a total nightmare working, you know, in the printing press and, total nightmare, I just worked there for like a month or so and then I worked at, then I started working at a Japanese bank called Nippon [Nippon Credit Bank; Aozora Bank, Ltd.] and it was a small bank and they had like ten, fifteen employees and it was very family oriented and they taught me a lot in different aspects of business and I liked it there and I, I knew that I wanted to work for a small company and I worked there for a year and that assignment was over and after that I worked at, you know, different other things and they called me back to work at Nippon, full time and I stayed there for twelve years.
Speaker 1: And what did you, they called you back to work full time as what?
Speaker 2: As, all right, I started out as, like administrative assistant, you know, basically doing crap that brokers didn't want to do, you know, what I'm saying?  So, so yeah and as the company grew, you know, my position grew and, you know, I went to school in the evenings (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) What school did you go to?
Speaker 2: School of Visual Arts [New York, New York].  He--
Speaker 1: And what were you studying there?
Speaker 2: Film.
Story_ID: 261250
Speaker 1: Like I said, I always was interested in, you know, film and video, and it, in between that time too, you know, I would take vacations and, I--you know, now I was, you know, going to Europe, you know, like with friends and that like opened my mind up more, you know, seeing like, you know, like different parts of the world and so forth and at that time, like in the '80s [1980s], independent films were like the whole, you know, like becoming a big thing and, like with directors like Spike Lee, and so forth, you know, it just, I, I mean like, I wasn't familiar, I mean like I was familiar with like Martin Scorsese, and Woody Allen and you know, people like that and I mean like you didn't see, you know, men of color behind the camera, and I just thought, you know, like hey, you know, I mean like this is, you know, something I should pursue.  And I did, you know?  So, I did it.
Speaker 2: And how did you enjoy film school [School of Visual Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: A lot.  I li- I enjoyed it a lot.  It exposed me to, you know, different people in the technique of filmmaking and I just knew that I wa- I, I wanted to do that at some point in my life.  But, you know, of course having, you know, a child to support, you know, working nine to five was bringing in the money.
Speaker 2: And, were you and your son [David Bodrick III], did you still have a close relationship--
Speaker 1: Um-hm, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: --during that time?
Speaker 1: During that time, yeah, yeah.  His mother and I, my son's mother, my baby's momma, we, we didn't, I mean like, at that time we didn't have a really close relationship.  But, she never, I mean like, it never hindered the relationship I had with my son, you know?
Speaker 2: And so were you kind of torn, because here you are in film school and just, you know, really finding your niche and once again doing something creative, but knowing that, you know, you needed that nine to five in order to support your son?  Or wa- were you, or were you starting to think, maybe I can make a living doing something creative.  What were your thoughts?
Speaker 1: Well, I mean like, you know, going to film school, I knew, all right, that you had to start at the bottom and, you know, talking to other students and so forth, that worked with, like with different production companies, doing internships and so forth, I knew I wasn't going to make any money, you know?  And, unless I did my own thing, you know and, you know, and I, I wasn't--I wasn't into the starving artist thing, you know what I'm saying?  I mean like even if I didn't have a son, that wasn't me, you know?  So, and like other, you know, like other, you know, students and stuff like that they, they like you know, I would come, you know, to school, like, you know, in the evening with a suit and tie, take it off and so forth.  But, you know, I was, you know, would hang out on weekends and so forth and so they, they didn't get it, they just thought of me as, like, you know, just Wall Street had just, you know, you know, exper--
Speaker 2: Dabbling, yeah.
Speaker 1: --dabbling in what, you know, film and, you know, film and, you know, so forth.  But, you know, I, you know, I made some friends and, you know, they understood what I was doing so.
Story_ID: 261251
Speaker 1: What were you starting to think career wise?  Here you are in film school [School of Visual Arts, New York, New York]. What were you thinking you were gonna do with this degree once you earned it career wise?
Speaker 2: Well, I gave myself a timeframe and, you know, to save money and also to leave the Japanese bank [Nippon Credit Bank; Aozora Bank, Ltd.], but that's hard to do when, like I said, when you have, you know, when you have a son [David Bodrick III].  But unfortunately, it was getting to a point where I started doing my own, I started producing a thirty minute show for a lease access channel.
Speaker 1: What year was this?
Speaker 2: All right, this had to be in '92 [1992]?  Ninety-two [1992], '92 [1992].  And with, you know, some friends, and--
Speaker 1: What was the show about?
Speaker 2: I--it was an--more of like a fashion, music, and what's happening in New York [New York], type of show. And it was called 'Avant Garde' [ph.] and we basically had like different deejays and we would go to different restaurants and clubs and, you know, interview designers and musicians and, you know, different recording artist and so forth.  And record labels started to take notice because they liked, you know, the exposure that their artist, you know, received and so it evolved into more of like a music type show and went like, you know, some like spotlights on different, you know, up and coming designers.  And that started taking a lot of my, you know, energy and time, that should have been dedicated to, you know, the bank.
Story_ID: 261252
Speaker 1: So, what I did was, I took a leave of absence from the bank [Nippon Credit Bank; Aozora Bank, Ltd.] for six months and I started doing production work with MTV [Music Television], which was interesting because I knew that I didn't wanna be a starving artist, all right?  And, I knew once you've worked, you know, it came back to that whole thing that I didn't wanna work for a big company and, but that exposure to know what they did--
Speaker 2: So this was in the early '90s [1990s]?
Speaker 1: Early '90s [1990s], exactly.
Speaker 2: What was the culture like at MTV during the early '90s [1990s]?  Had it really caught on yet?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah it did.  I mean like, you, know, every household's didn't have it yet, but yeah it did catch on and it was, they started to do more, be more eclectic with their rotations of videos, more like, you know, urban music would start, like with the Michael Jacksons and the Whitney Houstons and stuff like that and with the Run-D.M.C.s so--you know they had like a bit of--a little bit more urban feel, but they weren't producing their own programing yet so they set me in like searching for, like locations for Nickelodeon and, you know, it was basically taking a Polaroid camera, going around shooting different, you know, locations to do, you know, different stand ups an and so forth.  And I, you know, I realize that, you know, they really didn't treat people well, you know what I'm say--?  I mean like, and especially, you know, getting back to, you know, a person of color, you know, it, it really didn't treat, you know, you know, the PAs [production assistant] well and so forth -- and they didn't pay you well, so I just knew that I didn't wanna do that
Story_ID: 261253
Speaker 1: And I met someone that worked at, Todd Oldham, the designer, he was a really hot designer at that time and we got to be good friends and she invited me to a fashion show and I went and the energy was there and I, I liked the energy and I'm like, all right, how can I make a living being here?  So, I, I decided that, you know, hey I didn't wanna go back to the bank [Nippon Credit Bank; Aozora Bank, Ltd.] but, you know, m--that six months was running out and I had to go back to the bank and I went back there and at that time my, I, I wasn't there, you know, and the relationship that I had with my manager at that time wasn't good.  So they decided to fire me, all right?  Which I didn't agree with and it became like this whole legal thing and they, we did an arbitration type thing and they decided that they would pay me a lump sum of money and they would pay me money to start my own company, which they, they didn't they just wanted to pay me, but I'm like, you know what?  All right, you can pay me but I really want--I knew I wanted to start my own production company, but I needed some money, all right?  So, my lawyer basically said, all right we can go, you know, here with, you know, make a certain term, all right that they would pay me a lump sum and they would also give me some money to start my company.  And we agreed to a figure and that's how I started my company and--
Speaker 2: Why did the bank agree to that?  They just wanted to--it to be over with?
Speaker 1: Because I mean like, they fired me--the way that they fired me was illegal and Japanese companies don't like litigation.  So, I said hey, you know, it was totally unfair and, you know, this is my, this is what I'm gonna agree to and they agreed to it.
Story_ID: 261254
Speaker 1: I-I'm jumping a little ahead of the game but, prior to that, after I met, went to the Todd Oldham fashion show, I met someone that shot for a Canadian company, that pro--
Speaker 2: That shot still photographs?
Speaker 1: No, video--
Speaker 2: Video.
Speaker 1: --for a Canadian company that produced a show called 'Videofashion' and I--they needed someone to shoot b-roll at some of the fashion shows.
Speaker 2: And explain what b-roll is, it's video--
Speaker 1: It's video of like say, like backstage of like models getting makeup and hair or like b-roll of like people that sit in the front row, you know at, you know a fashion show.
Speaker 2: And I'm sorry.  What year did you graduate from film school [School of Visual Arts, New York, New York]?
Speaker 1: Eighty-six [1986]?  Eighty-six [1986], '86 [1986]--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --yeah.
Speaker 2: And you got a B.A.--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --degree?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: In film?
Speaker 1: In film, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay, I'm sorry.
Speaker 1: And so, I would shoot b-roll for them and I, I got to keep some of the b-roll because I had, you know, I had my own video camera that, you know, like when I wasn't shooting b-roll backstage, I would shoot like b-roll of celebrities and so forth and, you know, I just had like, you know, b-roll of different celebrities but I had to go back to, you know, Nippon [Credit Bank; Aozora Bank, Ltd.] after that six months break and when I went there as I said, you know, they fired me and so forth.  And so, I decided to start my own company and I bought a video, you know, an upgraded video camera and a computer and I--
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: Ninety-five [1995]?  Ninety-five [1995]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, '95 [1995], and I got in contact with 'Video Fashion' and they wanted me to shoot b-roll for them just in New York [New York], during like [New York] Fashion Week which wasn't good, you know, because I would only work two weeks out of the year, you know?  No, actually four weeks out of the year and but, you know, I agreed to it, I needed, you know, income, but in that, in that time when I was shooting, I met someone else that shot for another show called, 'Fashion File' and they needed someone to basically shoot b-roll for them but they wanted me to travel with them and I'm like, oh this is great.  So, now I get to, you know, you know shoot fashion shows in New York and--London [England], Milan [Italy] and Paris [France].  So I did that which was great and, you know, in, in between, you know, when I wasn't shooting b-roll for them, I would use my camera and I would shoot celebrities at fashion shows.
Story_ID: 261255
Speaker 1: A show called 'A Current Affair,' contacted 'Fashion File' and they wanted some b-roll of a model Naomi Campbell with her boyfriend at that time, who was like some Italian businessman and so forth, because they were doing a story on her.  So, 'Fashion File,' couldn't release their video, but I had video of her and th--they, you know, they're like, do you wanna sell it to them?  So, I'm like, you know, I'll speak to them, I, you know, I didn't know anything about, you know, selling, you know, I just knew I just wanted to shoot, you know?  So, he, a producer at 'A Current Affair,' contacted me and she wanted to know how much I wanted for it, and I just threw out this ballpark figure and they agreed to it.  So, I said, oh, I'm like wow!  That was interesting, you know?  And she said, you know, if you get any more footage of celebrities at fashion shows, contact us.  So that whole time, you know, that whole week, I'm like getting, you know, Julia Roberts, you know, Susan Sarandon, all these people backstage at these fashion shows and I'll call 'em up and they're like how much would you, you know, do you want for it?  I throw out a ballpark figure and they agree to it.  So I'm like, hmmm, this, this is interesting so, I decided that I should pursue that whole celebrity aspect instead of like, you know, working with a show, all right, pursue, like shooting, getting a stock of, you know, celebrity b-roll, and that's what I started doing and shows started, you know, from, you know, 'A Current Affair' they, you know, would give my name to different other shows and, you know, they started contacting me and that's how my company--
Speaker 2: And what was the name of your production company?
Speaker 1: DMBJ Productions [New York, New York].
Speaker 2: And so were you, so basically you were starting to develop a reputation as a go-to man for celebrity video?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: How did you transition, if it is a transition into like celebrity still shots?  How did that happen?
Speaker 1: Well, a friend of mine's started shooting, when I went to video, he started shooting photos and he wan--needed an agent to get his stuff out there and I said, you know, well since I sell video I can contact different magazines in the same way that I sell the video and I started contacting different magazines and they started, oh, okay and they started buying photos so, you know, it, it was, you know, how my life is, you know, trial and error, it caught on and it started becoming, you know, photos and video and it went from like, predominately shooting celebrities backstage at fashion shows to shooting celebrities at premiers, at parties, at, you know, different film festivals, at concerts, so it just grew.
Story_ID: 261256
Speaker 1: And it was also a time when, like the, some of the tabloid television shows were really starting to become very popular.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: How much did that help in terms of you developing your business?
Speaker 2: Oh, I mean like it helped a lot.  I mean like every network, every network in America had a tabloid show and now like, like London [England] and Paris [France] and all these other countries started to develop shows part--you know, with entertainment news.  So, it became a large demand and then you had more, you know, magazines like you know, People and Us and all these other tabloid magazines, so, you know, it became a, you know, a demand.
Speaker 1: And have you ever had any bad experiences with celebrities not wanting to be photo--photograph or video, videotaped?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, quite a--
Speaker 1: Can you tell us about some of them?
Speaker 2: --few, I mean, I mean like I've had like, I, I don't like to mention names, but, you know, some, sometime, you know, celebrities feel that you can pay to see my movie or buy my, you know, or a recording artist feels that you can buy my CD, but don't take my picture coming out of a restaurant or out of a club or so forth.  And, you know, I mean like, it, it's just an open domain, you know once you, once your name and your image are out there for public use, you know, you might get, becomes open domain to, you know, get published, you know, syndicated video or photo even at, on your leisure time so.  I mean like and, I don't know, I mean like I'm, my company [DMBJ Productions, New York, New York] just supplies that, those images so.
Story_ID: 261257
Speaker 1: So can you tell us a little bit about the process?  What happens, you get a call from the magazine or from a television program saying, hey we need some video of so-and-so, they're gonna be here at such-and-such a time, how does it work?  How does the process work?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like it's, it's weird, I mean like, talent usually has, all right, what you call a PR person, a public relations person and if they're promoting say it's a show or CD or a movie or film, you know, they, they call you or they'll send you a media alert or tip sheet that, you know, the, they, their client is gonna be, you know, doing press, you know, for a certain product or what have you, film or CD.  And they would basically tell you where they're gonna be at, if they're gonna be, you know shopping or on Madison Avenue [New York, New York] or shopping on Rodeo Drive [Beverly Hills, California], they'll call you and tell you.  And that, or a magazine or television show would, you know, tell you that they're doing a story on Britney Spears or Halle Barry, you know, or any images that you get on them, they're interested in so.
Speaker 1: But how does, so for example you get a call from a magazine saying, we want some pictures of Halle Barry with her new boyfriend.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What do you do next?
Speaker 2: Well, what, what, what I do is, I, you know, find out where Halle Barry is, if she's on the set of a film, you know, we'll have a photographer there.  If she's in California, we'll have like a photographer like, you know, at some place where she eats or where she shops, you know, occasionally, you know?  So, I mean like and whoever gets the shot, gets the shot.
Story_ID: 261258
Speaker 1: And so you don't feel like it's somewhat of an invasion of privacy for celebrities when they are on their own time?  When they're not actually out promoting the movie or the CD, that kind of thing?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like the way that the industry works is that your whole thing is to promote be it yourself or your film or your product and they would like to think, all right, they would like to make the public think that it's an invasion of their privacy, but in a lot of ways they're always promoting themselves, all right?  Say if it's an actress that's making $10 million a picture, all right?  If she's attached to an actor that's making $20 million a picture, now they've become a power couple, all right, so that makes her stock go--if--if a photographer takes a photo of them out shopping, them going to clubs, all right, that makes casting directors look at more wow, maybe we should, you know, see her for this part, all right?  So now, all right from making $10 million she goes up from making to $15 million just by having a photograph of her taken with say an A-list actor, you know?  Because now, I mean like it sells the film, it sells the CD, it sell, you know, I mean, it sells everything.
Speaker 1: What do you consider crossing the line?  Where do you draw the line?
Speaker 2: Well what we usually don't do is take photos of kids, I mean like we, that's where, that's where I cross the line.  I mean like I know other agencies and production companies do that, but we don't, I mean, because I, I wouldn't do it to my kid [David Bodrick III], you know, or I wouldn't want someone to do it to my kid, so I try to avoid that.  But if a celebrity has a kid at say like a party or a premier and they're on the red carpet, you know, it's, it's open domain but, you know, if they have their kid at, you know, at a park or the beach or something like that, we, we stay away from that, you know?
Speaker 1: Do you think now a days that the paparazzi so--well first tell us what is the paparazzi?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like, I, I don't, I mean like, I try to stay away from that, that word paparazzi, I mean like I, you know, usually, you know, we refer to ourselves as, you know, celebrity photographers [at DMBJ Productions, New York, New York].  But, you know, the, I--it's just a, a title, you know, that I, you know, the media likes to put upon, you know photographers that shoot celebrities.  I mean like it, it sells papers, it's, you know, the paparazzi shoots, you know, Halle Barry or they shoot Britney Spears or they shoot Whitney Houston, you know, or, you know, it's just a se--sensationalize the whole thing to sale papers to sell, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you think that in recent years that some photographers, celebrity photographers have gotten way too aggressive at, you know, we, we hear about altercations all the time--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --with celebrities and photographers.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Yeah, yeah, I mean like if--I've seen photographers, in order to get a good shot, they would say something nasty, you know, to the celebrity to get a reaction, you know, and we, we, that's not our motto, you know, we let the video or the photo speak for itself, you know?  So, I mean, but yeah, some, some photographers do cross the line because it's a demand out there for the image, so they feel that, you know, they have to do these things but, we, you know, I don't encourage our shooters to do that.
Story_ID: 261259
Speaker 1: Right now today in 2005, who are the most sought after?  What celebrities are most sought after, what photographs of celebrities are most sought after?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like, it's just, the market is always dominated by white actors and actresses.  So you'll have your, like, you know, like your Britney Spears or, you know, Nicole Kidman, or Tom Cruise and so forth.  But, you know, as the market is, I mean like it's, you know, like with Will Smith and Halle Barry and Whitney Houston and Jamie Foxx, I mean like it's, it's getting more and more demand for, you know, people of color, you know?  And, which is a good thing, you know, because the more images that you see out there, you know, kids know that, you know, they can do it too.
Speaker 1: Well what's, what's happening behind the scenes in terms of people of color?  We're seeing those same kinds of advancements behind the scenes?
Speaker 2: No.  Not, not at all, I mean like, I've been doing this since ninety-- '94 [1994], wait '95 [1995]?  Ninety-four [1994], '95 [1995], and it's 2005 and I'm the only person of color that has, or an agency on the level, that's dealing, you know, syndicated worldwide, you know, which is not a good thing, you know?  And then as far as like, shooters go, you rarely find other shooters that are of color and sometimes it just makes it challenging, you know?  Because, the--they, you know, I mean like, they feel that, you know, they can, you know, push you or say things to you that's unacceptable which, you know, which is not.  You know, I mean like if, you know, I tell my shooters [for DMBJ Productions, New York, New York] if, you know, somebody pushes you or hits you or whatever and stuff like that, you know, hey, I mean like if it gets physical now, you have to, you know, call a cop, you know?
Speaker 1: And what, what kinds of change, where do you think we should be in 2005 in terms of representation of people of color behind the scenes?  Are we still of the mindset that one is enough in various industries and jobs?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean like I, I, I grew up thinking that you, you know, I mean like you get your nine to five, all right and I know like a lot of, a lot of people grow up thinking that, you know, I'm gonna get a city job or you know, I'm, I'm gonna get a job working at a bank and so forth, you know?  That's safe, you know and we don't teach our kids to pursue their dreams, you know?  And which, I think it's getting better, you know, but once we encourage our kids to pursue their dreams, then you'll see more people of color behind the scenes.
Speaker 1: And do you think sometimes that celebrity photographers of color are treated different than their white counterparts?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, I know so.
Speaker 1: How so?
Speaker 2: Because, like because it's not as many when PR [public relations] firms that's handling like say different, different premiers or parties and so forth, they'll assign say a white photographer a better spot than a black photographer because, I mean like, they don't think, you know, they just think that we still just shoot for Ebony and Jet, you know, where we shoot for People and Us and Vogue and Glamour, the whole gambit, you know.  So, we're just as, you know, international as they are and sometimes, I mean like, you know, a few times, you know, I, I've had to let quite a few PR people know that, hey, you know, I, you know, we shoot for 'Entertainment Tonight,' for 'Extra,' for 'The Insider,' you know, we have photographers for People, Us, and all these magazines and it's just not, you know, a black thing, you know?  It's a global thing.  So, once, I mean like, once you inform them and you give them your credentials, you know, they open the door, you know but, it shouldn't be like that, you know, once you say that you're with a media outlet, it should be, you know, first come, first serve.  But all the time it's not like that.
Story_ID: 261260
Speaker 1: Personally, on a personal level, do you have like a favorite celebrity that you enjoy working with, and who is easy to work with and that you've enjoyed shooting?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's quite a few.  Like recently it's Jennifer Lopez, I mean like she always makes it, you know, very easy, you know she's very nice, so I mean like it, it makes it a lot easier when, you know the talent is not difficult.
Speaker 1: And sometimes are they difficult when they're going through like a difficult situation?  Like was Jennifer Lopez still very nice when her break up with Ben Affleck was starting to become very public?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Was she still nice?
Speaker 2: Still nice, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah?
Speaker 2: She's very consistent.  And I think that, a lot comes from, I mean like she wasn't an overnight success, she worked at it, you know, another one, Oprah Winfrey is always very nice to the media, you know, and because they work for where they are now, you know, and it's not, I mean like it's not, it's not difficult for them, it's, it's all about working and, you know, for people like that, you know, you never get a bad picture.  It's always a good picture, you know?  And you never get them, you know, coming out of a bar drunk, you know because they know that, all right, this is a business, all right, so they enjoy what they do. You know.
Story_ID: 261261
Speaker 1: Do you ever feel bad when you get a bad picture of somebody and it's published?  When you get a less than flattering photo of someone?
Speaker 2: A video, I mean like, no, like I said, I mean like we, we let the image speak for itself and if, if it's not flattering, it's not because, you know, the photographer or videographer didn't know what he was doing, it's just because of the situation, you know, I mean like sometimes, you know, someone went and made, made the situation difficult whereas, you know, their image comes out very unflattering but whereas, you know, if the situation was changed, you know, there's a good picture.  You can always get a good picture, you know, like I said it's some people that you always get a pic--good picture because they always make the environment, all right, flattering to what's happening, you know, they never have a, a body guard in front of them, they never have, you know, a coat over their face, you know what I'm saying?  I mean like, so, it's--
Speaker 1: Well what about somebody who doesn't have on makeup and who's running out to grocery store, or running a quick errand, I mean, what about those kinds of situations?
Speaker 2: Well, I mean like sometime if, all right, like I said I, I mean like, like I said, sometimes these women are just, I, we've had, we have photos of Oprah Winfrey coming out of a hotel going to an event with rollers in her hair, all right?  But she's got this smile on her face, all right that's like, I mean like beyond, I mean like, and she has no makeup on, and she looks beautiful because the, I mean--
Speaker 1: With rollers in her hair?
Speaker 2: With the rollers in her hair.  Yeah, she looks beautiful, I mean like the photo is just, I mean like it's, it's just, it's unconventional because you always see her with the makeup on and the hair done, you know, with the full drag.  But if she doesn't have makeup on with rollers, all right, she's still the same person, and that inner beauty comes out, you know?  Jennifer Lopez, I mean like we have her, you know, just looking natural, you know?  And it's a thing where, I mean like these, they know that it's not about the, it's not about, I mean like, it's all about their, the image and selling, they're the product, they're the product and what not, and it's about selling their product, all right?  So her coming out ju- Oprah Winfrey coming out of a hotel with rollers in her hair and no makeup, it's not gonna flaw her product because what she's selling is her inner beauty, you know?  And it, it's just weird, I mean, Sharon Stone is another one, you always get a good photograph, you know?  I mean like candid or on the red carpet, it's always a good photo.
Story_ID: 261262
Speaker 1: Have you ever taken a photograph of someone and decided not to sell it to one of your clients because it was just too unflattering?
Speaker 2: No, I mean like, it's, no, I mean like it's not because I--our job [at DMBJ Productions, New York, New York] is to put images out there, all right?  So, we supply images to magazines, if it's the back of someone's head, all right, a lot of times I think, oh, this is not gonna sell, you know?  And it does.
Speaker 1: Well what about like, Kirstie Alley for example--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --and I know that she's using it to her advantage now but, just a lot of the recent photographs of her, you know, that she's too fat, she's overweight and I know that she's using it to her advantage now--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --but, what about some of those photographs, do you think those are fair game?  Do you think that's fair game?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean like, yeah, because it's, it's a thing that, all right, say if it's an actress and she was slim at one point all right and she's gained some weight, all right?  You have to know all right, if you are your product, okay, you have to know how to market your product, all right?  If you're slim, okay you market your product, oh I'm slim, all right?  And you go to casting agents, okay, I can play this role, okay?  Or, if you gained some weight, all right?  You, you go after a different market, you know what I'm saying?  Because your product has changed, you know?  And I, a lot of, a lot of people don't, don't see, I mean like, once, once, once, me, me, myself, if I'm accepting $20 million from say, a Sony, all right, from, or a [The] Coca-Cola, [Company, Atlanta, Georgia] all right?  I become a product, all right to endorse their product, all right?  So the whole thing is that now, all right?  I'm just like, you know, I'm just like, if you go to a grocery store and see a can of coke, ok, you associate, all right, hey, that's [HistoryMaker] David Bodrick there, you know, associate Coke with David Bodrick and that's how they want you to see it.  All right so now, all right, you have to think that, all right, before you sign on the dotted line, okay, you become a can of soda on a- you know, you associate yourself with a can of soda.  And if somebody sees you on the street, they're gonna say, oh, that's Beyonce, oh that's Jennifer Lopez, or oh that's Oprah Winfrey because now you've accepted yourself as being a product, you know, and I mean like, you know, I'm not, I mean like, I'm not, I'm just there to provide the image of that product to place it at different publications to sell there, their product, to sale their ads of Coke in that magazine or to sell that commercial you know?  Because everything revolves around who buys ads, or commercials.
Speaker 1: But what happens when it has the opposite effect--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --when you know it's an unflattering photograph or unflattering video that could impact the product the other way?  When people see it they say, oh, I'm not gonna buy that anymore?
Speaker 2: Well, as I said you know, I mean like sometime, if you don't want your product to be tainted, you don't put yourself in those unflattering situations, you know?  I mean like, it's, it's just the old saying, you know, I mean like, if the contract says, hey, all right, we don't want you going to bars, all right, coming out drunk, okay, you don't do it.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: So don't, don't hate the photographer if he catches you staggering out of a bar, you know, I mean like and, it's, it's, I mean like it's not, it's not the photographers fault, you know?
Story_ID: 261263
Speaker 1: Have you ever regretted a photograph that you, you know, given, sold to a client [of DMBJ Productions, New York, New York] that was published?
Speaker 2: I, I'm--I kind of hesitated, no not really, because I mean, I--maybe it, not because of the, not because of the celebrity, maybe because I saw a better image, all right that they could have used, all right than the image that they used.  That's, that's the only thing I may have regretted, you know, that, why did they pick that photo or vide- or clip of video and not this one, you know?  Because I think that one was a much better, as far as like you know, just a lot sharper, just a lot, you know, the colors were better, you know what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I mean like that's the only thing I may regret beca- you know, just critical of the, the whole style of it, you know?
Speaker 1: Then we talked about some celebrities that you really enjoyed shooting, are there some who are a little bit more difficult than others that you prefer, like when you get the call you're just like, uh--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --God.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah like Whitney Houston, she's challenging, yeah, it's, it's a few, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: So, when you look back at your life, what stands out the most to you and why?
Speaker 2: The, the choices that I've made.  I mean like, just, just being able to be secure enough to say I can do it, you know and making that choice and following it through and you know, succeeding at it.
Speaker 1: Do you ever wish you would have chosen a different career path?
Speaker 2: No, not really.  No.
Speaker 1: Do you ever regret like staying at the bank for so long and not pursuing what you're doing now?  Do you think that everything just kind of fell into place?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean like I, I wish I would have done this a lot earlier in my life but, I don't think I would have been mentally ready for it at that age.  You know, I think things happen for a reason and I think what I learned working with the Japanese [Nippon Credit Bank; Aozora Bank, Ltd.] has a really good impact on the way I do my business now, you know, so it's all, I mean like it's all a classroom, you know, it's just a open book, you know?  I mean like every stage, you know, you just, you know take a little bit out and you just learn from it.
Story_ID: 261264
Speaker 1: And what advice do you have for people who might be interested in a career as a celebrity photographer or videographer?
Speaker 2: To, just, I mean like, just not being a photographer or videographer, I just and, I just tell people, whatever you want to do, just do your homework, you know, a lot of people don't do their homework, they just think, oh, you know, it's, it's easy, you know, it's exciting, it's glamorous, but you have to just do your homework.  Anything that you do in life, just do your homework because if you don't know what you're getting into or if you don't know your product, you can't sell it.
Story_ID: 261265
Speaker 1: I know that you're still very young but, how would you like to be remembered?  When you're no longer here, what is it about you that you hope that people will say?
Speaker 2: That, he was a nice guy, yeah, that, that's it, that he was a nice guy.
Story_ID: 261266
Speaker 1: And like what message or lesson do you have for your son [David Bodrick III] about, you know, survival on the planet?
Speaker 2: Take chances, follow your dreams, and do your homework.  You know?  Just, just know what your, what you're selling.  Because if, if you don't, if you don't know your product or if you don't know yourself, you know, it, it's not gonna happen.
Speaker 1: And why do you think history is important?
Speaker 2: Because if you don't--the older I get, I just see that history keeps repeating itself and that the day and year may change but the situation is still there and certain portions of our history have to be remembered or we can regress and go back to a time where was not flattering to us.
Story_ID: 261052
Speaker 1: Well it had to be in the late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s] and in the photograph it's my Uncle Bill [ph.], my Uncle Zeke [Ezekiel Bodrick], and my cousins, one of my cousins I always called him Mr. Jenkins [ph.], Nat [ph.], Bobby [ph.], I forget the other one's name.  But yeah, it was in, probably at a family reunion.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's me--
Speaker 2: How old were you?
Speaker 1: --as a kid.  I had to be, I would say, probably like, eight or nine?  Or may--seven or eight?
Speaker 2: All right so, early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, I would say that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Can we do them separately?
Speaker 1: We, we capture them from the video to [Adobe] Photoshop, so this way it will fit the screen better and we get more of the image.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the top one, is that a school photo?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's the early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's, yeah, that's '70s [1970s] also, and that's my cousin Vivian--
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: --Vivian Bod--Vivian Bodrick Martin [ph.].  She's Jay Z's aunt and her son and her brother.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you know their names?
Speaker 2: Johnny, Jonathan Carter and Howard Bodrick [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, she's Jay Z's aunt by marriage?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now these look like the same, are they the same photograph?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they are.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a church group, this ha--this has to be like in the, I would imagine in the '30s [1930s], or '40s [1940s], and it's in Lone Star, South Carolina and it's my uncles and aunts and it's some church group.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Left in (unclear).
Speaker 1: That's my father.
Speaker 2: Could you just say his name?
Speaker 1: David Bodrick, Sr.
Speaker 2: About what year is that?
Speaker 1: That's in, that's in Lone Star, so it's, it's, I would imagine it's gotta be the '40s [1940s].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's my sister and that's gotta be--Vanessa Bodrick [Davis]--and that's gotta be in the '70s [1970s]. That's my uncle and I can't even think of his name, 'cause I've never met him and, but my family, my father when he, when he died, my father has a joke saying that, you know, at the funeral everybody was crying, not because he died, was because he was the good looking one and, (laughter), it's like, oh my God, why did they have to, why did they have to, why did the good looking one have to die.  (Laughter) And I can't even think of his name right now, oh God, which is bad.
Speaker 2: That's me, [HistoryMaker] David Bodrick and Jonathan Bodrick and our dog Ginger and I have a dog that looks just like that now.
Speaker 1: How about (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Wow, this had to be in the '70s [1970s] also.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: Okay, that's at my Aunt Gail's [ph.] wedding.  My Aunt Gail and uncle, I can't even think of his name, God, I'm so bad with names, Uncle Jerry [ph.] and my grandmother is on the right there.
Speaker 1: What?  Which grandmother, which grandmother was that?
Speaker 2: Angie Bodrick.
Speaker 1: And about what year do you think that was taken?
Speaker 2: It had to be the '40s [1940s] also.
Speaker 1: That's me in one of my favorite places, St. Thomas [U.S. Virgin Islands], David Bodrick.
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: Two thousand [2000]?  Two thousand one [2001]?  Maybe 2002.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: One of those years.
Speaker 2: That's me David Bodrick with Jonathan Bodrick and we're in, that's in Fort Lauderdale [Florida].
Speaker 1: About what year?
Speaker 2: Two thousand [2000].
Speaker 1: That's my son, my mother and father.  Marie [Moore Bodrick] and David Bodrick and my son's grandparents, on his mother's side, his maternal grandparents, Annabelle and Major Bunch [ph.].
Speaker 2: About what year was that?
Speaker 1: That had to be ninteen nine--1998?
Speaker 2: That good for you, can you see who that is?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  That's my mother, Marie Bodrick and my nephew Christian Davis, Christian Isaiah Davis [ph.].
Speaker 2: About what year?
Speaker 1: I would say that was 1998?  Ninety-nine [1999].
Speaker 2: That's my mother and father, Marie and David Bodrick in Lone Star that's probably nineteen--it's probably 2000.
Speaker 1: That's my son and my first and second cousins and that's in Lone Star, South Carolina and that's like in 2000.
Speaker 2: That's (unclear).
Speaker 1: Similar, yeah.  That's probably the same day, yeah.  The other one too, that's my son, David Dajuan Bodrick III with my mother and father Marie and David Bodrick.
Speaker 2: That's my brother and sister, Jonathan Bodrick and Vanessa Bodrick Davis.
Speaker 1: About what year is that?
Speaker 2: Had to be 1999.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's my father, David Bodrick, Sr. and that's gotta be like in 1999.
Speaker 1: That's me David Medgar Bodrick, Jr. and David Dajuan Bodrick III and that's gotta--at his graduation, that's gotta be 1998?
