Story_ID: 39918
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Ma'am, can you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: Yes, my full name is Mollie Marie Finch Belt.  I spell Mollie M-O-L-L-I-E, Marie M-A-R-I-E, Finch F-I-N-C-H, and my last name is Belt, B-E-L-T like a belt you wear.
Speaker 1: And ma'am, what is your--is there a story behind your name?  First of all I should ask that.
Speaker 2: No, I use--my maiden name is Finch; that's my father.  My father was Fred Finch and he started the Dallas Examiner Newspaper, so for business purposes, I use Mollie Finch Belt or Mollie F. Belt, and I don't put a hyphen between Finch and Belt.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But I do use the Finch because my parents only had one child and so that's kinda like prolonging (laughter) that name.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August the 7th, 1943 in Pinkston Clinic; it was a small clinic in North Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And what is your occupation and title?
Speaker 2: My current title is Publisher and Chief Executive Officer of The Dallas Examiner.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is January the 29th, 19--I'm sorry, 2013.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We are in the conference room of The Dallas Examiner Newspaper.
Story_ID: 39919
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions that we ask as kind of a warm-up and they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite food is the first one.
Speaker 2: Not really--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: (Laughter)--I like food period (laughter).  I have several foods that are my favorites.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: I like purple.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite time of the year.
Speaker 2: I like winter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  A favorite vacation destination.
Speaker 2: South Padre Island, Texas.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of; other people can probably tell you one that I have.
Story_ID: 39920
Speaker 1: Now I'm gonna ask about your family history, I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's side--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and then we'll put 'em together.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Mildred Newton Finch; that's M-I-L-D-R-E-D Newton, N-E-W-T-O-N Finch, F-I-N-C-H.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: You know--she was born February the 28th, 1923 I believe.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I get those mixed up.  My--one of 'em was '23' [1923], one of 'em was '22' [1922].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And where was she born?
Speaker 2: She was born in Marshall, Texas.
Speaker 1: Marshall, okay.  Now what can you tell us about the ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: My mother's father was named Andrew Newton and he was a Methodist minister--Methodist (unclear) minister.  My grandmother was a housewife--my mother's grand--mother; her name was Della Newton--her name was Della Gibson Newton.  My, my grandfather finished college and later served on the Board of Trustees at Wiley College.  My grandmother did not finish school; she could not read or write; she had to drop out of school to take care of her sisters and brothers when her--when her mother died during childbirth.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandfather was on the board of Wiley College (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--He was a Trustee at Wiley College for several years.  When he died, he was a Methodist minister, and at that time they moved around a lot; they moved the ministers around so he, he was pastoring in the Texas Conference, so he moved from Houston--he built several Methodist churches in Houston, Texas.  Mt. Vernon, I think, still bears his name on the cornerstone, and so he traveled from Port Arthur [Port Arthur, Texas], Houston [Houston, Texas], and Marshall.  They used to move him around.
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: He was known for--his expertise was to get churches built, the actual buildings.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother had--there were four girls; she was one of four.  Her oldest sister, Vivian, was a Methodist missionary, and she spent over 30 years in Liberia, Africa on a Methodist mission.
Speaker 1: That's Vivian?
Speaker 2: Vivian Gray, Vivian Newton Gray.  Her--the next sister was Verna--Verna Newton Huff (ph.); she was a mathematics professor--college professor, she taught at Bishop College.  My mother was then the next one, and then her baby sister was an administrator--public health administrator in Baltimore, Maryland.  All of them are deceased.
Story_ID: 39921
Speaker 1: They all went to Wiley College.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, were they at Wiley?  Now Wiley College has gained some fame nationally because of the movie (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The Debaters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Great Debaters (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --and were they there when Dr. Farber was the president?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He wasn't the president, he was the--but he was an instructor there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they were there.  My father went to Wiley also.
Speaker 2: Okay--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --okay.  I thought Dr. Farber was--he was not the president of Wiley?
Speaker 1: I'm not sure; don't quote me on that.
Speaker 2: Okay.  He taught at Texas Southern [University] too, I know.  A friend of mine went to school and was taught by Dr. Farber at Texas Southern at one time.
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  So do they have any stories about those days at all?
Speaker 1: Oh my goodness, lots of stories about Wiley.  It was--they felt, in their opinion, it was one of the elite black colleges (laughter).  They, they were very--a lot of the graduates there went on to, to do really great things.  It was a good educational institution and my mother always talked about how--my mother was a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, and they talked about--I'm trying to remember this president's name; I think it was Dr. Dolgin (ph.).  At that time, you know, blacks had this, this color, color line; they--sometimes blacks were treated differently depending on the complexion of your skin, and my mother was very fair-skinned, and Dr. Dolgin would put the fair girls as roommates together (laughter) and in photos, when they took the honor students, and this is true, that they would, you know, they did little things that--like that.  My mother married my father--my father was a very dark complected (ph.) man.
Speaker 2: So it seems that she didn't buy into the color (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No, she did not; she did not.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: My grandfather's mother was bi-racial and her father was a white doctor, and her mother of course was a black woman (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Okay, so this is Della Gibson (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Della; no, no, this is my--my grandfather Andrew Newton.  My grandfather's mother was named Janie (ph.) and her--she was bi-racial.  Her father was a white doctor and her mother was a black woman, and I can remember Grandma Janie saying, 'You know the meanest people in the world were doctors' because she equated that with this man who was her father, and that's what his wife had told her.  She would come over there, there was a little country town, Teague, Texas, and she'd come over and bring 'em clothes and stuff.  But my grandfather was--he had had some kind of disease; he didn't have any hair.  His hair was just--his head was completely bald.  You know how man--it's just completely bald and skin is just shiny, and he was a very fair man, and he--the day that he died, on his driver's license, for his race it said 'white.'  They--he--they lived--he was in Marshall, Texas at the time, and they refused to believe that he was a black man--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --he told 'em all the time he was, but they just refused to believe it.
Speaker 2: That's interesting (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yes, it is (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Any stories from your family that go all the way back to emancipation or slavery?
Speaker 1: No, not that I heard.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And the family seemed to be centered around Marshall--on your mother's side, around Marshall, Texas?
Speaker 1: Well, you know I say Marshall.  My grandfather was pastoring Ebenezer Methodist Church when he died of a massive heart attack in Marshall.  They lived in Marshall; my mother graduated from Pembleton (ph.), the black high school in Marshall and then, because they belonged to the Methodist church, and Wiley is a Methodist school, a lot of the, you know, life centered there, but they lived in Houston.  In fact, my grandparents are buried at Paradise Cemetery in Houston, Texas.
Story_ID: 39922
Speaker 1: Now, what did your mother say about growing up, you know?  What were her experiences growing up and what did she wanna do, you know, when she was young?
Speaker 2: She wanted to be an actuarial; she wanted to work for the insurance company; she wanted to--but at that time, African Americans--blacks were not--they called negroes then; they, they, they couldn't get jobs like that.  She was a mathematician and she was a very good student; she majored in math and she minored in physics--in chemistry.  She wanted to major in chemistry but she didn't have a lotta clothes in college and so she didn't wanna, you know, she didn't wanna mess her clothes up with the experiments and things (laughter).  But yeah, she--so she minored in, in, in, in chemistry and she, she was a very good student, and my father was a year ahead of her and so when he graduated, he asked her to marry him and she married him.  Her father did not want her to marry him; he wanted her to finish college, and my father promised him that he, you know, she would finish college and go as far as she wanted to go in education, so they got married.  They really--they didn't elope because he did ask her, but they just got married (laughter) and the war was going on then, World War II, and so they got married and then I think she became pregnant; she moved to Dallas and lived with his mother in Dallas.
Speaker 1: Now that's a good time maybe to go to his side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was trying to find out, you know, if there are any stories--specific stories that she told that you remember about growing up or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well she lived in--she loved to go to the country.  They were--her family, her, her--the family--her family on her mother's side and her father's side were from a little country town called Teague, Texas and my mother always said she was a country girl; she always loved to go to the country as a little girl.  The other sisters didn't--they were living in Houston most of the time then; they didn't like to go stay in Teague, but she liked to go to Teague.  She liked to sit around people and listen to the stories that they told, you know.
Speaker 1: Now how are we spelling Teague?
Speaker 2: T-E-A-G-U-E.
Speaker 1: Okay, Teague, Texas, okay.
Speaker 2: She, she liked to go down there and, you know, she had an--she had an uncle--her mother's--her mother had a brother.  I don't think he was--he was killed by white people; I don't remember how, I don't think he was hung but--lynched, but he was killed.
Speaker 1: Was there a story about what--something he said or did or (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Something he did, they set something on fire or something, and my grandmother had just a fear of white people; she did not want to associate with them at all--my mother's mother.  And she had--my grandmother also had a brother who played the blues on the piano and my mother said she used to love to go to, you know, down there to hear him play, play the blues and he used to--he had one song that he used to sing.  My mother's name was Mildred, and he would be--in the song, he'd talk about Mildred; my mother thought he was talking about her but he was really talking about a girlfriend that he had named Mildred and--but she, she loved to go down there just, you know, the whole country life; she loved, you know, the family and--my mother loved to go down there 'til the day she died really.  She was always trying to find somebody to take her to Teague.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of your mother's uncle that played the blues?
Speaker 2: No, I don't; I cannot remember his name.  She said it a million times too, but I can't remember his name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I never met him; I just remember her talking about him playing the piano, playing the blues.
Story_ID: 39923
Speaker 1: So--well let's go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Fred J. and the J stands for James--Finch, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And actually, his--it's Fred J. Finch, Jr.  But actually it's Frederick J. Finch--James Finch, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May the 3rd, Dallas, Texas, 1922.
Speaker 1: Dallas.  Now what can you tell us about his side of the family?  How far back, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: I don't really know as much about his side of the family.  He was an only child, his father's name was Fred J. Finch, Sr. and he was born in Dallas but his parents, his mother and his father, were from a little town north of Dallas called Pilot Point, Texas, P-I-L-O-T Point, Texas.
Speaker 1: Pilot Point, okay.
Speaker 2: And that's where they were from, but they lived in Dallas and he was born in Dallas; his father worked for the railroad as a courier.  He would deliver tickets to rich people that didn't wanna go downtown to, you know, pick up their tickets, and he would deliver them to business people--deliver the tickets.  And my grandmother was a maid; his mother was maid, domestic maid.  They belonged to Baptist church and his father was a deacon on the--at St. John Baptist Church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He went to--he was very--he always says that, 'You know there's this man,' golly I can't think of his name either; he was at the Moorland YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] here in Dallas, and my father grew up in, in, in North Dallas, and it was a black community there then; now it's--they call it Uptown, and it's completely gentrified, but he would be playing around the street because his father was at work and his mother was at work, and this man at the black YMCA, it was called Moorland YMCA, said, 'Fred, why don't you come in and join the Y?'  Because they had boys' activities at the Y; but he didn't have money to join the Y, so this man paid for him to join the Y and he really, really had an impression on him in terms of his life, his values and things.  He went to Booker T. Washington High School, and he was a very smart student; that's what I hear from--in fact, I told you about Mr. Blair who started the other paper here; they--he and my father started first grade together.  And he said that Fred was the smartest man he ever knew; he was always smart, even in the first grade (laughter), but he, he, he got a scholarship to go to Wiley; that's how he went to Wiley, on a scholarship--basketball scholarship.  He played basketball.
Speaker 1: Now was he really good?
Speaker 2: Playing basketball?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I don't know.  He played--I mean, you know, he wasn't any kinda star that went to play for the national leagues or anything, but basketball, you know, he went to--he played basketball in high school and in college.  But he was a good student; he finished college with honors, he and my mother both.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, was your father tall?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What do you think?
Speaker 2: He was about 6-1.
Speaker 1: 6-1, okay.
Speaker 2: Probably not tall when you think of it today, you know (laughter).  These guys 6-5, my daughter's boyfriend's 6-5 (laughter), so--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So any other stories about your father's growing up or anything that you--
Speaker 2: Just the, you know, the whole Y piece (ph.).  He learned how to swim at the Y; it was a very nice Y, had an indoor swimming pool.  It was the black Y; one side was for boys and one side was for men, and he learned how to swim and he played tennis and--
Speaker 1: So he came out of Booker T. Washington on a scholarship and went to Wiley?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: And--so did he--and we know he got married, you know, as he graduated, right?--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --to your mother--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --so is there a story about how they met or where they met--at Wiley?
Speaker 2: Not that I know of, other than--I never heard my mother really talk about another boyfriend but my father at Wiley.  Her sister loved--her mother--my mother's mother always sent her girls out in pairs, and so the two oldest girls--when they started dating, they always had to go out together, and the two youngest girls--my mother and her youngest sister TeeJon (ph.), they had to go out together.  And TeeJon liked to party a lot, you know, she did things that mother didn't like to do, so mother always would talk about how, 'Oh, I had to go with Thelma; you know, we had to go' and--because TeeJon changed her name later and--she was born Thelma.  And just--my mother was saying, 'I was sitting there with Thelma until she was ready to go home.'  But not really, you know, never really heard talk about anybody but my father.
Story_ID: 39924
Speaker 1: So they got married--when was it?  Around 1940--
Speaker 2: I was born in '43' [1943]; they probably got married around '41' [1941] or '42' [1942] 'cause I was born shortly after that, probably about a year or so later.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And my mother--the war was going on--World War II, and my, my father went to work--he had a cousin in Detroit, and they were hiring blacks to work up there in the Defense--for the Defense Department, and he went up there to work and my mother stayed here with his mother, and that's why I was born in Dallas.  His mother's name was Mollie and so they named me after his mother, and my mother was very fond of his mother; she died young, she was in her 40's when she died.  She had breast cancer and health care in Dallas was not very good at that time, you know.  It was a segregated society and--anyway she--he sent for her, she went to Detroit and she had surgery up there but anyway, she didn't recover from the breast cancer; she died of breast cancer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, he seems to have been in Detroit the year that they had the great Detroit riot over on Belle Isle (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--What year was that in?
Speaker 1: Forty-Three [1943].  Did he talk about that?
Speaker 2: No, he never talked about it.  He was there a very short time; he wasn't there a real long time, and what happened was the war was going on and he joined the air force and went--and they sent him to Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So they sent him to Tuskegee [Tuskegee, Alabama] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--But he wasn't in Detroit--I--not that long.  He really didn't talk about Tuskegee a lot; I mean Detroit.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when he went to Tuskegee, what role did he play in the air force?
Speaker 2: He was a--he reached the ranks of captain; he was a second lieutenant while he was at Tuskegee, and he was in the Personnel Department; he worked in the office.  Because when the war was over, he became the Personnel Director at the VA Hospital there at Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is a--okay.
Speaker 2: And--well they talked--my mother always talked about the stories of the Tuskegee Airmen, the ones that flew the planes because--you know how they had the social life and stuff--on the base?  Because when he went to Tuskegee, then he--my mother and I moved and lived in Tuskegee for that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So how long did you all live in Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: You know after the war was over, we stayed there--I went to the first and second grade at a Catholic school in Tuskegee.  My mother taught math at Tuskegee Institute, and my father worked at the VA Hospital.
Speaker 1: So that's at least four or five years, right?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: At least, yeah.
Speaker 2: It was a very--yeah, I, I remember Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 39925
Speaker 1: So you came back in the third--when you were in the third grade?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't come back to Dallas, my father went to law school; he went to Harvard Law School and we moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but Tuskegee, you know, it was a little--it was really--when I look back on it, I often tell people when I make speeches and things I grew up in a very segregated society, and Tuskegee was like a completely segregated city; I knew nothing about that city as a little girl except everywhere I went, there were black people in Tuskegee because we didn't go downtown Tuskegee.  The housing, the area where we lived it was all blacks, the, the college--when I went up there with my mother, I used to play in the library, stacks and sta--the college was all black, the V--the hospital was all black, you know--the VA Hospital.  I didn't know what--I, I didn't see white people very much--as a little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You had some kind of a (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The Nuns at the--the Nuns at the school were white.  I went to a Catholic school.
Speaker 1: A Catholic school in Tuskegee?
Speaker 2: Uhh Huhh.
Speaker 1: I'm surprised that they didn't send you to the Tuskegee Demonstration School.  Didn't they have something like that there?
Speaker 2: They might not have had it then because there--all my friends, we all went to--it was a Catholic school there.  And I'm sure if it had been another good school, my father would have insisted that I go to it because he really did not like me going to a Catholic school because I, you know, I just--I wanted to be a Catholic and when we would, you know, eat dinner, I would say the Rosary, and my father would be telling my mother to tell me to please stop because I would--didn't like to eat as a little girl, so I'd go through every little bead, I'm--you know, anything to prolong having to eat.  And so I don't know about another school, but everybody went to that school, the Catholic school.  And they didn't have a Methodist church there; my mother and some of her friends who--well, one of her friends whose father was also a Methodist minister in Texas, they started a Methodist church there in Tuskegee.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did your father stay a Baptist?
Speaker 2: Yes.  He died a Baptist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father was a Baptist, my mother was a Methodist.  My father's father was on Trustee Board at--it was--yeah, they call 'em the Trustees at--Bapt--at--the Deacon--at St. John Baptist Church, and my mother's father was a Methodist minister, so they never came together on that.  They would visit each other's churches.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now I grew up in the Methodist church though.  When I was 12 years old, I let my grandfather baptize me and I joined the Methodist church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: What they agreed on is that I would decide for myself what, what I wanted to do, and I joined the Methodist church probably 'cause I didn't wanna have to be baptized out--I didn't like water, and I didn't wanna be immersed in the water.
Story_ID: 39926
Speaker 1: Now, let's see.  Now when--so your father went to Harvard Law School--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and how long did you stay there?
Speaker 2: Three years, three years.
Speaker 1: Three years?  Okay.  So this takes us to about what time?  This is when he gets out of Harvard Law School.
Speaker 2: I can't remember the exact (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So you would have been (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-'54' [1954], '53' [1953] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--You would have been about eight, I guess? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)-'53' [1953], '54' [1954].  When I came to Dallas, we moved to Dallas, I was in the fourth grade.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you'd have been nine; normally that's what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, I wasn't in the fourth grade.  First, second, third, fourth, fifth--I was about in the sixth grade; yeah, the sixth grade.
Speaker 1: So you were about 11--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --so that's 1954?
Speaker 2: Around that time--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: '54' [1954], '53' [1953].  I'm not good with adding up years like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I went to school in Dallas.
Speaker 1: So your father practiced law when he came back to Dallas?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did he establish his own practice?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was in private practice.
Story_ID: 39927
Speaker 1: Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor and the way they walk, the way they talk, what they look like, who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  I don't know; I really don't.  I, I take after both of 'em.  I think the older I get, I have a lot of my mother's traits; I talk a lot, I--but some of the things I say and do are more my father; so both of 'em.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39928
Speaker 1: All right.  We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  Sights and sounds and smells.  You know, what I reflect on more now, the older I get, is the--the things I experienced as a child growing up in a segregated society.  My, my, my, my grandparents lived in Texas and we would drive from Tuskegee to Texas in the summer to visit.  My father would carry a gun under the seat of the car and, you know, we couldn't stop anywhere; you know how kids--nowadays you need to stop and use the restroom, dah, dah, dah; we couldn't stop and use the restroom anywhere.  And I, I reflect back on things like that.  When we went to Cambridge, we drove up there and I remember--it was a place--my father had not been there, my mother had not been there, and you know I hadn't been there, and we drove and it was supposed to be some kind of a toll bridge, and when we got there--no, it was supposed to be--it was supposed to be something that was gone' make the trip shorter, and when we got to that point it wasn't there so it was--I just remember it being a long, long drive from Tuskegee to Cambridge.  My--
Speaker 1: Now did the rules change any on that drive once you got above the Mason-Dixon Line?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.  I just--as a child, I just remember that long drive and--in the car.  My mother was an educator; she loved books.  My father did too, but my mother probably loved them more than he did, and she made me read even as a little girl in the third grade.  My mother made me read all the books about famous black people--the children's editions.  And she would--and, and, and we had a big chair that she could sit in and I could sit in it too, and I remember sitting there having to read those stories about Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver.  And when we got to Phillis Wheatley--my mother would always tell me what the other books--they would be sad, you know, and I'd say, "Momma I don't wanna read this; I don't wanna read 'em."  And she'd say, "This is life."  And then she'd say, "It's gonna get better; just keep on readin' it's gonna get better."  And most of them, they did end better except Phillis Wheatley--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --I never will forget that.
Story_ID: 39929
Speaker 1: How did that end?
Speaker 2: It ended sad, you know.  Phillis Wheatley ended--she was poor, she was, you know, just a horrible--and, and my mother told me, "This is life."  She said, "This is life."  And I was a little girl.  She said, "This is life."  But she made me read a lot, and when we moved to Cambridge, she would--she didn't work when we moved to Cambridge.  She had a scholarship to go to Radcliffe and get her Master's but they couldn't afford for her to go to school and for my father to go to school.  She didn't have a--you know, he went on the GI Bill and he didn't have money to send her, so--but she was accepted, so she stayed home and we would go to the library every Saturday and I'd check out books, and we would walk home from the library--from Harvardsville (ph.).  We'd walk home to the, to the, to the park, and we read those books, and then the next Saturday we'd take 'em back and get some more books.  So, you know I--she would let me read other books like it was a series of books about some little girl and her family, but she made me read a lot and, and I guess after a while, it--I, I enjoy reading today.  I don't have place for all the books in my house.  You know every time I get a book, I have--hear of a book I get it and some of 'em I skim, I read 'em through.  But--and when we were in Cambridge [Cambridge, Massachusetts], we would drive back to Texas in the summer and the--well, the first year that we--my father was at Harvard, he took a leave of absence because he wasn't sure that, you know, he would do well or what would happen, whether he'd like it and all that, so he did well.  So after first year, we drove back and he worked that summer at Tuskegee and then he, he resigned.  And I remember we lived with this lady, Miss Campbell; she was--lived by herself.  Her husband had died and her grandson in fact was the first black that went to University of Georgia--Hamilton Holmes?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was there, and we would play cops and robbers; I liked to play little boys' games.  All my friends seemed to be boys, you know?  And boys always wanna play boys' games, you know, so we would play, you know, different stuff--cops and robbers and, you know, cowboys and stuff.  I liked cowboy boots and stuff.  Then after we left there that summer, my father resigned; I never went back to Tuskegee--not as a child.  When we went back to Cambridge the next summer, we drove back to Texas and I remember that my mother sent in to Ebony Magazine; they would send you a tour then of a safe way for blacks to travel.  So they sent her the map, you know, which way to go from Cambridge to Texas, and where we could stop.  I think we stopped in Columbus, Ohio--where we could stop, and what place we could spend the night.  And came back to Texas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--So there were motels and hotels that you could stop--you could spend the night at on the way down (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--There was a hotel in, I think it was Columbus, Ohio; it was a black-owned hotel.  There were two hotels we stayed in, and--yeah, they tell you--they would give you the route and tell you where you could stay.  These were black hotels.
Speaker 1: But otherwise, say when you made the trip from Tuskegee [Tuskegee, Alabama] back to Texas (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I didn't--we didn't stop.
Speaker 1: You didn't stop at all?  Just one straight shot?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: So did both your parents drive, or your father drive all the way?  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--no, my father--my mother drove; my mother and my father drove, but I think he drove most of the way.
Speaker 1: That's a long--that's a long trip (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, it's a long drive.
Speaker 1: That's gotta be what?
Speaker 2: It's a long way.
Speaker 1: Twenty hours maybe?  I don't know.
Speaker 2: I just remember as a child it was a long drive.  Then we drove from Cambridge to Texas and then when he--emm hmm.  I remember I had a little goldfish; I never had any pets as a child except I had a goldfish I called Big Kate, and I brought the goldfish and we had it in the--then, the cars had like a little indenture in the back, you know behind the win--you know, the back seat, and my mother fixed it in the (unclear), so the fish bowl was back there with Big Kate; Big Kate made it all the way to Texas.  But it was so hot in Texas; Big Kate didn't live in Texas, so my cousin and I buried Big Kate when Big Kate died in Marshall.  We had a ceremony and everything, you know.  Children mimic things; see, we would mimic church, you know, and stuff, and I had one cousin--my mother's sister had a, had a daughter.
Story_ID: 39930
Speaker 1: Well--okay, so you went to school several places so let me just kind of recount school.  Now what was your first school?
Speaker 2: That Catholic school in Tuskegee [Tuskegee, Alabama] and I can't remember the name of it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Catholic school, and--
Speaker 2: I don't even know if it's still there.
Speaker 1: --and you seemed to have taken it very seriously with the rosaries and everything?
Speaker 2: Oh, I did.  Well you know, children are very impress--you know how--children that age are very impressionable.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you were there from--did you have kindergarten there?
Speaker 2: I don't remember ever going to kindergarten--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but I remember the first grade and the second grade.  Then I went to Cambridge, Massachusetts and I went to three--third, fourth and fifth grade.  Then I moved to Dallas.
Speaker 1: Now what was the name of your schools in Cambridge?
Speaker 2: I don't remember.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Third, fourth and fifth grade.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Were there any teachers that stand out as important--as mentors (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No.  Only thing that I remember about the schools in Cambridge was the--I had one black friend who went to my school; her father was a policeman in Cambridge and we would visit each other's houses on the weekend and play.  Other than that, my friends in Cambridge were white kids whose fathers were working on PhDs and graduate school at Harvard.  We lived in Harvard Housing for Graduate Students.
Story_ID: 39931
Speaker 1: So as you were saying earlier, you and your mother would go to the library every Saturday.
Speaker 2: Every Saturday, we went to the library; that was our recreation.  We didn't go to the movies, we went to the library and--now she would let me check out other books; it was some kinda Betsy series.  You know how they have those series you read about somebody and it's like a lotta stories about Betsy and so-and-so, and Betsy and this.  So we read--I'd read those stories and read books and that was--that was our recreation because my father was--well, sometimes on the, on the weekends--he had a friend who lived in Boston; he was going to graduate school.  He was a doctor and he was getting a fellowship in Boston and he had a family.  We would go over there and visit them sometimes on weekends and, and I would play with them, and I remember they lived in a wooooo, big high-rise building and--but there was a park across the street, and we would go over to the park and play.  And then sometimes like Christmas--on Christmas, we went--his, his roommate in Wiley worked for the Roosevelts in Hyde Park, so one Christmas we went to visit them; his name was Mack--what was his first name?  We would go--we went to visit them and I remember that was the first time I went to New York City [New York City, New York]; we stayed with them in Hyde Park.  They had a little cottage on this estate there that the Roosevelts had; they had started a little theater and I met Eleanor Roosevelt.  I remember she was a real tall lady.  We went into the city of New York and we went to Radio City, and I remember it was so cold; I've never been so cold in my life, and we--the line to get in was around the block and we went to see that, you know, that famous--they have it every year.
Speaker 1: Oh, the Rockettes?
Speaker 2: Yes, we went to see that.  And then we went to visit some friends of theirs who lived in New York in Harlem, and the lady is the one who taught me how to knit; she was knitting a sweater and she taught my mother and I how to knit, and--went on back to Hyde Park.
Speaker 1: So, you know, Eleanor Roosevelt was alive then, but I guess--yeah, Franklin had died (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, she was there by herself.  They had started a little theater.  They lived in Hyde Park and she didn't live there by--their--the house--the little cottage they were almost like right next door, almost to this theater that they had started in Hyde Park.  Lynette (ph.) Mack, that's his name; he had been--it's really interesting.  The other day, I was listening to NPR and I said, "You know, this makes sense."  This guy wrote this book recently called The Double V, you know--piece?  And he was talking about the integration of the military, and he, he, he mentioned how the army, when blacks went in the army, they went in as cooks or to clean up, and my father's roommate's name was Lynette Mack at Wiley.  He joined the navy, so he was a cook in the navy and I remembered that because he went to Hyde Park, he loved to cook, and he did all the cooking and his wife didn't cook, but he was a cook.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, the navy is where they--you always were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Always (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--a cook.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yes.
Speaker 1: --or clean up the kitchen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, and he was a cook; here he was a college graduate, and I'm sure he was smart like my father, but he was a--he had been a cook in the navy, I remembered that.
Speaker 1: I know people say that the navy had the hardest segregation of any of the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, see, the air force was new; army--at first, you know, it was the air force--the Army Air Corps--that's what it was at first.  But the air force was relatively new compared to the navy, and they were the hardest to integrate with those older branches.
Story_ID: 39932
Speaker 1: You left Cambridge in the fifth grade, came back to Dallas in the sixth grade--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and where did you go to school then?
Speaker 2: George Washington Carver.  I--My mother got on teaching, she had to go get some special classes but she got a special permit so she could teach in, you know, secondary schools 'cause her teaching had been at a college level, and she taught at George Washington Carver High School in Dallas [Dallas, Texas]--this was in West Dallas--and I went to school with her, and I went to school out there with her.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Did your mother teach math?
Speaker 2: (NODDING YES) Math.  Until we moved, my father bought a house in South Dallas and then I went to Lincoln High School in the seventh grade because they didn't have junior highs for black students in Dallas.  So there were so many kids in the elementary schools, they moved the eighth graders to high schools.  We only had at that time three black high schools in Dallas--Lincoln, Madison and Booker T.  And then my mother got on teaching at Madison 'cause when she first started teaching, it was at the elementary school, and so she was glad when she got a position in a high school level.  And as soon as El Centro, the community colleges opened in Dallas, she was the first teacher--she got on teaching math at El Centro College--Community College.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, in the--back in Dallas, were there any special teachers or mentors?
Speaker 2: Mrs. Mayo, my English teacher at Lincoln High School--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --had a lasting impression.
Speaker 1: Is this M-A-Y-O?
Speaker 2: M-A-Y-O, Gladys Mayo.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: She taught English; she loved grammar.  You know how some teachers like the literature part and some like the grammar?  Well she liked the, the grammar part and she was my homeroom teacher, so she always scheduled me--I took English from her the whole time I was at Lincoln, whether I was supposed to be taking literature--I'm very weak in literature, you know, classics and stuff because she always put me in her class.  I had another friend who--my best friend, she's a vice president at Tech Southern, and she--we both always had to go to Miss Mayo's English classes.  She taught diagraming, that is just--ohh.  I diagram in my head now, you know (laughter) (unclear), and she taught us to write with an ink pen; she didn't allow us to write with a pencil.  You couldn't make mistakes, couldn't erase, you had to think and write it with an ink pen; to this day, I cannot write with a pencil.   I never use a pencil.  She would put--the, the classroom door had, had windows to the door and she would tape paper over the windows so that when the people came from the--downtown from the Administration Building, you know she, she kept her door locked.  You had to get there on time else you were locked out.  They couldn't see what she was doing in there.  And she--she did more, you know?  When you reflect down and you wonder what's wrong with these kids, she did more than teach grammar.  I can remember the boys in the class; one little boy, his family didn't have a car and all he could think about was, you know, getting a job so he could get a car--buy a car.  And she would sometimes spend a whole class period telling him, "Why do you wanna get at car?  When you get a car, then you have to, you know, pay for the gas, pay for the repairs," she said, "you're gonna be working part-time, you're not gonna have time to study at night," you know.  She, she did more than just teach English grammar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So she was concerned with the development of the children?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Story_ID: 39933
Speaker 1: Now was that typical of the schools--the segregated schools in Dallas in those days?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --yeah, it's typical.  You know, when I think about it, they--and I heard this at one of my, my math teacher's husband's funeral several years ago, and someone was talking about him and, you know, it was very true.  They taught us--because see we were on the verge of integration, and so they taught us to live; they were preparing us to live in a place that they had never lived before.  Most of them, with the exception of a few--we had some teachers who had gotten graduate degrees, you know, in colleges and universities in the north--and incidentally, my mother did go on to--she went to University of Wisconsin at Reed College in Oregon, and she did get her Master's in math.  But, you know, unless they had gone to a--you know, to get graduate work or something, for the most part, most of them had never been in a non-segregated environment; they did not know what it was gonna be like, and we were right there on the verge of integration.  So they were preparing us to live and function in a society that they never been in.  So they imagined things like, 'you gotta write with a ink pen all the time.  You have to do this, you have to do that.'  Everything, you know, preparing us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they were trying to make sure that you all were ready for this integrated world, I guess.
Speaker 2: Even when they didn't really know what it was like.
Speaker 1: But they assumed it was more perfect than the world they were already in--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --or more rigorous.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Story_ID: 39934
Speaker 1: Now--so did you finish high school at Lincoln High School?
Speaker 2: Yes.  I graduated in 1961 from Lincoln.
Speaker 1: Now were you involved in high school activities in school?
Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES).
Speaker 1: So what kinds of things did you do?
Speaker 2: I was very active in the Girl Scouts, the Student Council, I was a class secretary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I wasn't in the choir; they always tried to get me to sing in a choir but I didn't join a choir.
Speaker 1: Now did you write for the student newspaper?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Didn't do that?
Speaker 2: We didn't have a student newspaper.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.  Now did you like to write when you were growing up at all?
Speaker 2: You know, I guess I did like to write to a certain degree because my husband, when we went to my class--high school class reunion (laughter) and, and he looked on some of the pictures they had in the offices, he said, "Mollie, you were a secretary in high school," you know?  And I was secretary for NNPA (ph.) and everywhere I go I'm secretary (laughter), you know.  No, I'm not a journalist; I publish a newspaper but I am not a journalist.
Speaker 1: But you can correct--you can edit (laughter), I suppose (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I really, you know, I don't know what's--we use AP Style, and I don't know AP Style that well.  I hire journalists to work here--professional journalists.
Speaker 1: Now did your father start the paper--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --while you were in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, no.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's after you came out of school you started the paper.
Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES).
Speaker 1: So he's basically practicing law, your mother is teaching--
Speaker 2: And I went to school, and I graduated from Lincoln, I went to Spelman for a year; didn't like Spelman and I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, I didn't wanna get you to Spelman yet.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: --I was trying to cover (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You wanna get me to the high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  You're in Lincoln High School, right?  And so you're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--My father's practicing--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --my mother's teaching math--
Speaker 1: And you say you were in Girl Scouts, you were a secretary of a class--
Speaker 2: And I was a good student; I graduated number three in a class.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is that--is number two (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--The Salutatorian (ph.).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Three; that makes you--
Speaker 2: Nothing (laughter).
Speaker 1: You don't get--now who's the Salutatorian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You got the Valedictorian as number one and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Valedictorian, Salutatorian (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: The Salutatorian is number two.
Speaker 1: And then three doesn't get anything?
Speaker 2: No. Okay.
Story_ID: 39935
Speaker 1: But did you get--now did you have good counseling about--well, your parents probably were counseling you too, in terms of college, right?
Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES).
Speaker 1: So what influenced you to go to Spelman [Spelman College] the most?
Speaker 2: Because I looked at that as, you know, I said, "Look at all the black colleges and universities they have; they must be having a lotta fun."  And, and, and that's why I wanted to go to Spelman.  My father did not want me to go to Spelman; he believed that if you were educated in the south, that you needed to go to college in the north, and vise-versa; he felt very strongly about that.  And I had a scholarship to go to Spelman, but the main thing, I wanted to go to Spelman because I thought it was--'oh, it'd be great;' you know, you got Morehouse [Morehouse College] there, Clark [Clark College], and Morris Brown [Morris Brown College], and AU [Atlanta University], and I just wanted to go to, to, to Atlanta--I wanted to go there.  And see, something I didn't tell you when I was going up in Tuskegee.  You didn't ask me, but we had--see, remember I told you that I lived only in that little segregated community?  Well, when we went grocery shopping, we would not go grocery shopping at Tuskegee; there was not a black grocery store.  We would go grocery shopping once a month, and we went to Columbus, Georgia to go grocery shopping.  And then we would go clothes shopping at the beginning of every season, so we would go to Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia].  So I had been to Atlanta before, and I just thought it was the greatest place--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I had been there before.  So I wanted to go to Spelman and my mother said, "Let her go where she wants to go."  So my father was the happiest person in the world when I called home and told him, "I don't wanna come back to Spelman; I wanna go somewhere else to school."
Story_ID: 39936
Speaker 1: Well, what happened at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Ooh, it was horrible; that was a horrible experience.  You know, Spelman has--and when I went to Spelman [Spelman College], they had (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Now this is--I'm sorry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--three, three dormitories for freshmen.
Speaker 1: Now this is what year?  This is--you graduated from high school (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Sixty-One [1961].
Speaker 1: --in '61' [1961], okay.  (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Spelman had three dormitories for freshman, one dormitory for sophomores, and one dormitory for juniors and seniors.  That just goes to show you the fall-out (unclear).
Speaker 1: Okay, so there were three times as many freshmen (unclear).
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  It was--academically, there are things about my experience at Spelman.  We had fireside chats with--people like Howard Thurman would come sit down and talk to you about religion and philosophy, and we had--we had to go to chapel every morning, but we had speakers; people would come who were successful and they would tell us all about what they did, you know.  And we had--but I didn't like--at the time, I didn't like going to chapel 'cause we--even if you didn't have an 8:00 or 9:00 class-- you might not have a class until 11, but you had to get up and be in chapel at 8:00 and the Dean would set up in the balcony and you had an assigned seat, and check row to be sure you were there, and clean up your room before you went to chapel.  We did not have a library; we had a reading room, and you had to get special permission to go to the library over at AU [Atlanta University] and, you know, Morehouse [Morehouse College] used the same library; you had to get special permission to go over there.
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: I thought, you know, I had friends at Clark [Clark College] but I never got to see 'em.  You could have visitors two hours in the afternoon--male visitors that come over, see you, sign in, go--you could not go off campus with a male.  If you went to the movies, and it was down the street, you had to have an adult chaperone from the univ--from the college go with you, and even with an adult chaperone, I never will forget we went to see that movie--what was it?  With Paul Newman in the, you know, the pool thing but I can't think of the name (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--The Hustler.
Speaker 2: The Hust--at--was it the Hustler?  One of 'em.  And we couldn't see the end of it because it was time to go back.  And so even though we had a chaperone, we had to walk back to campus, and now I think that was the night I said, "This is it."  But I, I, couldn't fault--I mean I was--they selected me to be a counselor for the sophomores the next year, but I didn't go back; I transferred to University of Denver.
Speaker 1: So you thought it was just too rigorous, too little freedom? (Simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They would meet you at the train station.  When you came back, you had to tell 'em when you, when your train got there, and they had people to go down there and meet you at the train station and bring you to the campus, you had to--your parents had to write and give to the Dean--giving you permission to come home for Christmas, and I never will forget, my father had not written and, and, and the house mother called me downstairs, she said, "Mollie," she said, "We don't have your permission slip to go home for Christmas."  I said, "Well I have my ticket."  She said, "Well we don't have your permission slip."  And my father was so mad, he thought that was just so ridiculous.  He said, "Well, she better come home, she has her ticket."  But it was just very--it's like you went backwards, you know.
Speaker 1: In time?
Speaker 2: Yes, you know.  I expected something else.  When I went to the University [University of Denver], it was completely different; I got a bank account, you know, we could come and go as we pleased, you know?  We'd go skiing for the weekend, we could just do anything we wanted to do.
Speaker 1: Okay, so University of Denver now.  How did you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's a Methodist school too.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They wanted me to go to SMU [Southern Methodist University].  I did not wanna integrate anybody's school.  And my father say, "You don't have to go if you don't want to.  At that time, blacks were not going to universe--to SMU--Southern Methodist University.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I did not know that University of Denver was a ME school--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --Methodist, okay.
Speaker 2: It's just like--Boston University is another one.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, we have--yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there any special teachers over at Spelman, or any personalities that you remember--
Speaker 2: Spelman?
Speaker 1: --yeah, that--you mentioned Howard Thurman, you know, and the fireside chats.
Speaker 2: He would just come--they had people like that that would come, you know, and talk to you and stuff, I mean you really have an opportunity to think about the world, the people, what people were doing, what was available, what you had to go through to get somewhere, you know; it was just a--that was good about it--the school; that was probably the most--the thing that I think most about when I think of Spelman.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Would you say you had more freedom at home than you had at Spelman?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 39937
Speaker 1: Yeah, you were saying a difference in how the, I guess--I guess we can't say paternalism; it's maternalism, I guess, I don't know.  It may be pater--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You know, let me tell you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--was the president of Spelman a man in those days?
Speaker 2: Dr. [Albert E.]Manley, yeah--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --he's a man.  But you know, let me tell you this.  Spelman [Spelman College]--and when I think about it now, as an adult, some of the things they did to protect us because it wasn't safe then; it wasn't safe for us just to go downtown to the movies, you know, alone.  It was not safe.  See, that was during the time of the Civil Rights Movement and, and the marches and stuff, and Spelman--we would go over to AU's [Atlanta University] campus and all the students would get together and they'd talk to us, 'Okay, we're gonna go sit in and we're gonna do this,' you know.  And I marched, but the day I marched, they didn't arrest the students; and I really regret that today I didn't get arrested, but I did not get arrested the day that I--but Spelman would not let you go; they would not let you skip class to go.  You would get in serious trouble, so the day I went, they didn't arrest us but the next day the girls went, they got arrested.  Spelman immediately got their girls out; they didn't wait on anybody, they put their own money down and went and got 'em outta jail.  They didn't want their girls in jail.  So it was a very protective thing, you know?  They met us at the train station and took us to the campus, but it was a protective kinda thing; it was dangerous then.  And I guess I really--see, the Civil Rights Movement was young people, and they didn't realize the fears.  It was the older people that were like, 'No, no, don't do that.'  It was A.G. Gaston, you know, at Alabama, that told the kids, 'You all go back to school; don't follow Martin Luther King down there.'  So, you know, the young people--we didn't really know the fears and we resented a lot of the rules and things but Spelman did it because they were doing it to protect us.  We would have exchange students at Spelman, white girls from Vassar [Vassar College] and Radcliffe [Radcliff College] and places like that.  When they came, they didn't have to abide by the same rules that we did; they treated them differently.  They could go places, they could do things that they wouldn't let us do, but I think that it was probably protecting us because they felt like something could happen, you know.  It was a very, very protective environment.  And I know when we left Dallas and we would go, we would go to Spelman to go to school, there was some guys who were going to Morehouse [Morehouse College] and some more girls that went to Spelman, well we would all get together, it was about seven or eight of us, and our mothers would go down to the ticket office downtown to get our train tickets because we had to have reserved seating on the Southerner from New Orleans to Atlanta, so they would get our seats together.  Well sometimes, see, we had an odd number so sometimes somebody may be sitting where there was a white person that was gone' sit on the other side, and I can remember times that, you know, the white person if they had to sit next to us, they'd get up and go stand in the lounge car and stay in there the whole time from New Orleans up to Atlanta.  So I mean, you know, you have to remember the times, so Spelman was being very protective of us.  But at the time it was going on, I did not see it that way.  I didn't--I just didn't see it that way.
Story_ID: 39938
Speaker 1: So--University at Denver.  Now what was your major?
Speaker 2: Sociology, and my minor psychology.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sociology and--well what did you--I mean it was a freer environment but were there any special teachers, or mentors, or anybody (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't even remember a teacher that made an impression on me.  Even though the University at Denver [University of Denver] had small classes, we--I may be 20-something in a class.  What I remember about the University at Denver it was a relatively--very few black students, very few; probably was five black girls when I went.  Our social life was in the city; we would all get together, it would be college students but it would be college students from, from Greeley, from Boulder, from--you know, all the schools would come and say, 'Okay, we're gonna have something,' you know, 'such-and-such a thing weekend,' and so everybody would come; it would be a college party but it wasn't just the University at Denver.  We didn't have enough to have a party.  Even when I joined the sorority, I joined the--it was called a mixed chapter--Delta Sigma Theta; it was alumni, it was adults and students.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay.  So where would you all go?  Would you all go to the--what, the Five Points neighborhood over there where the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We would go to different--somebody would have, you know, they have basements in their houses in, in Denver, and so somebody's house, you know, they would have a party there and the students would all go.  They'd come from everywhere; guys would come from the Air Force Academy, you know.  We'd just all get together and do things together.  We go up to the ski resorts, you know, go up to Central City and different places, it was just different; but I don't remember not one professor (laughter).
Speaker 1: Not a single one?  (Laughter)
Speaker 2: (SHAKING HER HEAD NO).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it wasn't--they were not, you know, I don't remember any discrimination; I mean we were not treated any differently than anybody else, we would do what we wanted to do, go where we wanted to go.
Speaker 1: Okay, so when did you come out, in '65 [1965]?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Graduated in June '65 [1965].
Story_ID: 39939
Speaker 1: And what were your plans when you graduated?
Speaker 2: To get a job.  My father wanted me to go to graduate school--but to get a job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so your father wanted you to go to graduate school.
Speaker 2: My mother wanted me to do what I wanted to do.  I wanted to work, and--but I came home and I applied to work with the--they called it then Public Welfare and--'cause you know I was a sociology major, and they didn't have anything open and--they never had any blacks working in the Texas Employment Commission and that was, you know, during the War on Poverty, so they had the new program that came out, CEA [Comprehensive Employment and Training Act], Comprehensive Training--Comprehensive Employment and Training Act Funds that provided for counselors to be employed in the employment offices throughout the United States.  And these were new positions, and they paid considerably more than your interviewer-level positions with the Employment Commission.  And my father had a friend who--she worked downtown and she did--they did have some blacks working but they did not have many blacks working in employment positions.  And she was working down there and she told him, 'Fred, tell your daughter to come down here and get an application; we're gonna be hiring these counselors.'  So he told me that's how I took--got the (unclear) down there from her--got the test--the application.  I applied for and I took the test and they accepted me in that program, and I was--I checked on the block that I would work in any city in Texas, and they sent me to Harlingen, Texas; I didn't even know where it was.  I had to get the map when I got my assignment (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--To where?
Speaker 2: Harlingen, Texas--
Speaker 1: Harlingen, okay.
Speaker 2: H-A-R-L-I-N-G-E-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and not Arlington but Harlingen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Harlingen.  But part of that program, once you're accepted, they sent us to Tulane [Tulane University] for the summer to train to be employment counselors, so I went to Tulane that summer to train to be an employment counselor.  In the end, I went on to Harlingen.
Story_ID: 39940
Speaker 1: Okay.  How was that experience?
Speaker 2: When I walked in the door, this, this white lady--an older white lady said, 'This will not work at all.'  They didn't have any blacks, and the Hispanics that worked in the office worked over in the service department where they placed the maids and laborers only; they didn't have any minorities working in the professional services area at all, so--I was sent there and then there was another older white man that was sent, the two of us, as counselors.  But when I left, they liked me, you know--once they got to know me and everything.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you worked there despite the fact that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --I did.
Speaker 1: All right.  So did you have to live out there, or was it within driving distance of Dallas?
Speaker 2: Oh no, Harlingen is--it's not Arlington, it's Harlingen, H-A-R-L-I-N-G-E-N; it's at the very tip of Texas.  You know how Texas has that little tip that goes down by Mexico?  That's where Harlingen is--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --down there but right--in fact, we drive across to the border to Mexico.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you had to live down there (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, I lived there; that was a--it's a nine-hour drive.  I took the train, and I flew down there, and then I would fly back and forth.
Speaker 1: So what was that experience like?  Were there any other African Americans (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's where I met my husband.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: No, there were few African Americans down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I joined the Methodist church; it was a very small church, they probably had about 15 members, the black Methodist church.  And that's during the time when they were getting ready to combine the Methodist church with those other churches to become the United Methodist Church, and the minister at the white church--Methodist church, he wanted me to join there; his wife and I became friends but I wanted to stay over there with the black Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  What was the name of the black Methodist church?
Speaker 2: St. Paul.
Speaker 1: St. Paul, okay.
Speaker 2: It no longer exists.
Speaker 1: All right.  And you met your husband in the church?
Speaker 2: My husband was attending Texas A and I, and his mother went to the church and she said, 'Well my son comes home on the weekends,' and that's how I met him.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  So did you go together a long time, or did you get married right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, we went together about three years or something like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you lived down there around--in Harlingen (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I lived in Harlingen actually for nine and a-half years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Now we got married and we had our first son--we had our son down there, and then he decided--my husband decided he wanted to go to law school, so we moved to Houston [Houston, Texas] and he went to Thurgood Marshall Law School.
Story_ID: 39941
Speaker 1: And your husband's name is--
Speaker 2: James C. Belt, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay.  James C. Belt, okay.  So he went to Houston [Houston, Texas]--
Speaker 2: He went to Thurgood Marshall and we moved to Houston--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's where I worked as Assistant Director of the Manpower Program.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now is this in the '70s [1970s] by now--right?  I guess.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Thurgood Marshall Law School at Southern--I mean at Texas Southern.  Okay, all right.  All right, so--now had your father started the newspaper by this time?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well when did he start it? (Laughter).  So I'll know when it's coming up (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--(Laughter).  When you gone' get to the newspaper?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: My father started this newspaper about--well, it took him a year to plan for the newspaper, but he started the newspaper maybe two months before he and my mother were murdered.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Is this '86 [1986]?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well I don't wanna speed you to that point yet, but I just--but you're in--in the '70s [1970s] you're in Houston and are you still working for the State of Texas?
Speaker 2: No, I got--I couldn't--they, they, they said that they would not transfer me to an office in Houston as an employment counselor.  See, employment counselors were like the top-level positions, and they used--they had started by that time to use them to promote their Interviewer One, Two and Three's to employment counselor, so they would not let me transfer as an employment--they said they didn't have an opening in Houston.  So I tried it, I said, 'Oooh, this is really good, I'm gone' get a job in private sector, you know, this'll be different.'  And I tried and I couldn't get a job.  You know, once you work for the government, it's very difficult to move to private sector work, the corporate--you know, they don't want you.  A lotta people--they look at government employees as being lazy, you know.  Anyway, I didn't get a job.  So I went to this one employment agency and the man said, 'Well you have worked for the state for nine and a-half years, why don't you go apply for a government job?'  I went to apply for a government job and I was hired that same day; I was hired as a--Employment Director, they called it--of these employment centers that they were opening in Houston.  And I was a--they called it Center Director, and I was Center Director for about a half a-year, and then they had an election and a new county judge was elected and he, of course, took all the top-level people, you know, and he put his people in.  So he changed the director of the Manpower Program for the county, and when he changed--when he appointed a new director, there was an opening and I applied for it as Assistant Manpower Director because the person he appointed didn't know anything about the Manpower Program.  I knew about the Manpower Program because that was the same program that I worked for nine and a-half years with, with the employment office in Harlingen.  Because what they did, you know, they took the funds and they put 'em in different, you know, the--some funds were in the Urban League and different places, and so the county--Harris County had funds for training programs and stuff, so they had a manpower open (ph.) so I worked there as Assistant Manpower Director until my husband--my husband finished law school, we moved to Dallas.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So--now why did he move to Dallas?
Speaker 2: Well, and my--the director of the Manpower Program, he begged me not to move to Dallas.  He said, 'Mollie,' he said, 'If you and James stay here,' he said, 'James'll make plenty of money because' he said, 'you know all the judges.'  Because see, all the judges in Harris County we gave them position slots for clerical assistants and all that through the Manpower Program.  He say, 'You know all of 'em and they're the ones that'll point blah, blah, blah.'  But my father was in private practice here and so James--we moved up here and James, my husband, went to work with my father in my father's office; kinda like a mentoring program, you know.  He-
Story_ID: 39942
Speaker 1: So we moved up here and I could not get on with the--there were no openings with the Manpower Program in Dallas [Dallas, Texas].  In Dallas, the county didn't run the program, the city did--the City of Dallas; however, I got on as the Manager of the Title Six Program for the City of Dallas.  I worked there for six months, and then I got on with the federal government--U.S. Department of Health and Human Services as a branch chief over investigations for a five-state area.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now how is Dallas changing since--how did it change from the time you left for college to when you came back here to live?
Speaker 1: Oh, it changed a lot.  I remember you know--well, we would always come back to--you know, we always came to visit.
Speaker 2: So--what?  You didn't see any radical (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No, I didn't see anything (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Was Dallas itself, you know, really segregated when you went to school?  When you went off to the University at Denver?
Speaker 1: It was getting a little better.  When I first moved--when we first came back to--not when we first came back to Dallas, I guess we--after my father finished law school, I guess we had been here about, I don't know, maybe a year; maybe a year and a-half, two years.  I hadn't gone to high school yet, I was at George Washington Carver.  And I remember my father had settled this case and he was gonna, you know, take us--it was--buy my mother and I, you know, special clothes.  And we went downtown to--it was a store, a big department store called Tights (ph.) and Gettinger (ph.), and they said that we could not try on clothes in the store, and my father said, 'Well, I'm not gone' buy any clothes in this store if my wife and my daughter can't try on clothes.'  So we got in the car and drove over to Fort Worth [Fort Worth, Texas] and there was a store, a big department store, over there--I think it was called the Fair, because you know there'd been so many mergers and things, and he went up to the executive offices and he told the lady he was gone' buy some clothes for his wife and his daughter, he was gone' pay cash, and he--but he wanted us to be able to try clothes on.  She said, 'Oh, sure, sure, they can try on anything they want.'  See, you know you had places that were open and places that were closed.  When I left Dallas, obviously the schools were still segregated; Dallas fought segregation, oooh--integration--for a long time.  See, my husband--when I went--when I came--got outta college and went to Harvard [Harvard University]--well my husband and I are the same age just about; he's about a year younger than I am, and in Harlingen, just as soon as, you know, Brown versus, you know, when they said integrate the schools well, they immediately closed their black school; they didn't have but a hand-full of students there, and my husband went to a white high school--white and Mexicans but primarily white.  So even though we're in the same--you know--you see what I'm saying?  It's, it's different, you know.  Some things opened gradually--public housing, hotels, you know, it was a gradual kinda thing in terms of--public accommodations were open then, when I came back from the University of Denver, but there were some areas--you know, I told you how I had to get the job with the Employment Commission.  The lady had to sneak me the application, I mean it wasn't like they were openly--I had been down there to fill out an application to get a job, and they didn't give it to me.  So it was, it was, it was different.
Speaker 2: Okay, okay.  So gradually it opened up.
Speaker 1: Yeah, gradually.
Speaker 2: So you all come back in '78 [1978]?  Is that about right?
Speaker 1: Oh, no, we came back in '70--ooh, what was it?  Yeah, about '77 [1977].
Speaker 2: '77 [1977], okay, all right, okay.  Now this is around the time that a lot of people around the country see Atlanta [Atlanta, Georgia] and Dallas and Houston [Houston, Texas] as the Sun Belt, and people from the north start coming--black people started--you know, college grads--moving back down south to get a job.
Speaker 1: That's true.  I remember--well even before then, I remember before I married my husband and when I was working in Harlingen, I'd go to Houston.  I remember a guy I was dating he, he carried a pocket--a letter around with him, you know, bragging because Exxon had offered him a job, you know.  Companies were--yes, they were opening up and they were hiring blacks.  They had Affirmative Action; they had to put blacks in, in, in certain positions.
Speaker 2: Okay, so was it like a little boom period?
Speaker 1: You know, when we moved back to Dallas, I remember we start looking for a house and we came out to Oak Cliff, that's a little--we're in Oak Cliff now, but the southern sector--and we were driving around, you know, we'd drive out in the suburbs (ph.) looking for a house, and every other yard would have a 'For Sale,' 'For Sale,' 'For Sale' sign; very nice neighborhoods for sale.  And my husband and I said, 'You're talking about white flight;' you could see it, you know.  All the white people were moving out of Oak Cliff (laughter) because black people were moving in.  So black people would move in, white people would move out.
Speaker 2: Okay (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--But the jobs in terms of, you know, some jobs--yes, because of Affirmative Action, and they had to have so many in place, yes.
Story_ID: 39943
Speaker 1: Okay, and from your vantage point as an employment, you were working in--
Speaker 2: In Dallas I was working for the federal government.
Speaker 1: Federal government, okay.
Speaker 2: I was doing--I worked in the Office for Civil Rights, and I was in charge of investigations of discrimination--of non-compliance, of entities that received federal financial assistance from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  So I--we investigate hospitals, clinics, physicians, social service agencies, you know, like with the state welfare; anything that received assistance--federal financial assistance from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.  We had jurisdiction; we did Texas, Louisiana, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and Arkansas--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --so it was a lot of things still going on; I mean we would go in hospitals in Louisiana and they still had blacks in one section of the hospital and whites in the other.  You know, we would come--they switch 'em up; sometimes found people with the--all the clothes still on, you know where they'd put 'em in the beds, trying to make us think they had, you know--it was subtle but it existed.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So what's the most egregious violation of federal law that you saw?
Speaker 2: I can't even think, we saw so many.  It's just--you know--because we, we investigate everything.  We investigated, you know, hiring in employment prac--anything that received federal financial assistance, so you know you had a lot of employment violations, you had services, we did compliance reviews to determine accessibility of health care services, you know, to minorities, and then I investigated some of the first AIDS complaints in Texas--
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: --in this region.
Speaker 1: This is in the '80s [1980s], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I worked there for almost 20 years and I, I left early to come to this paper.
Story_ID: 39944
Speaker 1: So tell us about how your father came up with the idea to start the paper.
Speaker 2: Okay.  My father all--and you will historically find that a lot of black attorneys became involved in black newspapers because, of course they, they feel--they know that there is a need to, to, to, to inform not just the African American community, but just the community in general, about things that are going on.  There is that need, you know.  And so (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well, maybe before I get the specific story about the paper, just tell me like how is--what are the demographics of black Dallas [Dallas, Texas] in terms of, you know, where do the people live historically, you know, and how has it changed, and what were the early black newspapers?  What was the oldest one here?
Speaker 2: We used to have a paper called the Dallas Express when I was growing up.  And then we had the paper--the one I told you about, The Dallas Weekly?  It was called The Weekly--that was owned by Tony Davis.  He had a little column in that paper; it was a little tabloid paper and he had a column in there that, that, that really made the paper.  He wrote it every week, and it was called This and That, and he talked about different gossip kinda stuff but it was gossip about--more about political issues and things--educational issues like you know, guess who's getting ready to get promoted as a principal at DISD--stuff like that.  So when it came off the press, people would just rush to get--my mother couldn't wait for my father to bring the paper home so she could read that column because it was like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--This was The Dallas Weekly, right?
Speaker 2: It's The Weekly; it was called The Weekly then, and Tony Davis had this column and so it was like, you know, what's goin' on in Dallas?  But it was more--wasn't like who's datin' who?  It wasn't that kinda column, it's like who's being promoted?  Who's being demoted?  Who's over--you know; who's doing this, who's doing that?  And then the Dallas Express.  The Weeklies were--the papers though--except for that column--you know they carried news about who's marrying who, who killed who, that kinda news.  And my father wanted to see a different kinda paper.  When we were at Tuskegee, he took the Pittsburgh Courier; I remember that paper in the house with the salmon colored cover on the top, you know, and we read that paper.  And he wanted a quality newspaper in Dallas so he, he helped the Post Tribune get corporated (ph.) and all that stuff, and that's how he led up into getting a part--a third of the Post Tribune.  But he could not influence them to do the kinds of things that he felt like a black newspaper should be doing in Dallas.  And that's why he started--he and the other--his partners at the Post Tribune had a big fallen out, so he said, 'I'll just start my own paper.'
Speaker 1: Now this is the--the person he fell out with was the fellow he went to grade school with, right?
Speaker 2: No, no.  Bill Blair is the Elite News.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: He's--Bill Blair is with the Elite News.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this is--
Speaker 2: The Post Tribune.
Speaker 1: Post Tribune.  And who is the (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Dr. Theodore Lee.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Dr. Theodore Lee.  And were you saying that the Post Tribune may be the oldest?  That's not (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's publishing today.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The Express isn't.
Speaker 1: Okay.  The Express was an older paper way back in the day, right?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: It's no longer here?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So Post Tribune, and Post Tribune starts up within your father's lifetime then, right?  Because he was one of the founders?
Speaker 2: No, he wasn't a founder of it (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Okay, he just has a part-owner?
Speaker 2: There are several owners, and then--I don't know the whole history of it--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --but he was not a founder; I think it started actually before he got here--
Speaker 1: Okay.  But Dr. Theodore Lee (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--before he moved back.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--is in charge of it now.  What kinds of things did--so your father--you said he liked the Pittsburgh Courier, Robert L. Vann's paper, and what was it that he liked about the Courier and what was he trying to do with the new paper?
Speaker 2: Well he like the Courier because at that time the Pittsburgh Courier gave, you know, really good news about black people--news that black people had perspectives on, you know.  If you wanted to be informed about what was going on with black people in America, you read the Pittsburgh Courier at that time--
Speaker 1: You had nationwide distribution--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--so I always remembered the Pittsburgh Courier in my home--for years.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I think the Courier started the Double V Campaign and all that?  Yeah.
Speaker 2: So he started The Dallas Examiner and that, that (POINTING)--over there standing, that's the, that's the first issue that's standing over there.  He started it with full color with an Apple Computer, and he was a charter member of Newsfinder.
Story_ID: 39945
Speaker 1: All right.  Now we were talking about some the motivation--you know, of your father, for starting The Dallas Examiner.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: You said the paper he was part-owner of, the--
Speaker 2: He couldn't get them to change the editorial content; it just--you know, on the front page would be who shot who, who married who, who was presented, you know--not really what he called would be the relevant news that African Americans in this community needed.  So he had hired a young man by the name of Charles O'Neal (ph.) who was a trained journalist and who worked at the--as the editor at the Post Tribune, and they fired him.  And so he, he got with Charles and I guess they worked for about a year, planning The Dallas Examiner; they did research and everything.  Charles would go over to daddy's law office and they would do research and all, and that's when direct mailing was coming in, and so the marketing strategy was to mail directly to zip--homes in zip codes with predominantly black--with predominantly black population.  And he was a charter member of Newsfinder, that's Associated Press Wire for Weekly Newspapers.  He used professional journalists to--for, you know, original stories.  It was definitely a hard news-storied paper; didn't really have a religion section, didn't have a sports section.
Speaker 1: No religion and no sports--in the black community?
Speaker 2: Not to start, not to start.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, he talked about, you know, they were getting ready with the Dallas Area Rapid Transit System and just, you know, other news.  So the--he--I know he was so proud when they printed that first--well they printed--he printed--he, he--all the money was his personal money that he used to start that paper.  His, his thinking was that once people started reading the paper, he was to--he paid for 64,000 copies to be printed and directly mailed to homes in predominantly African American zip codes.
Speaker 1: Now did he--so these papers were mailed out gratis, at first?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --he didn't, he didn't have a loan; didn't get a loan from the bank.
Speaker 1: No, but he didn't have subscriptions; that's what I'm getting at.
Speaker 2: Oh no.
Speaker 1: So nobody--so that's how he introduced it; he just mailed it out direct.
Speaker 2: He introduced it, he mailed it to 60--he mailed 64,000 copies out, and it was printed by one of the Cadillac printing companies here; they really are not known for printing newspapers--Dallas Offset.  And then they would take the papers over to this mailing house and they would mail 'em out so every week--64,000 papers.  Initially when they were murdered, they thought it was in connection with the papers but it wasn't.  So he felt like when people started reading it and all and then, you know, they would move to paid subscriptions; 'course paid subscriptions don't pay for a newspaper.  He--at the Post Tribune, he was a member of course of Amalgamated Publishers; that no longer exists, but that was a national advertising arm for black newspapers and they had most of the national accounts.  Well just--they--like most of the income for the Post Tribune came from Amalgamated Publishers Incorporated.
Speaker 1: Okay, this is for ads that were (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--like--oh, but see, most of the ads were like your liquor ads, your cigarette ads, you know?
Speaker 1: So these were acquired by Amalgamated Publishers, and then the revenue is shared collectively by the papers, right?  How did that (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, no; what they did was it was an ad agency so they would go out and sell the ads, and then they would place the ads in black newspapers and the companies--like say they get an ad from R.J. Reynolds--
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --then they would pay them, and then they would pay the newspapers for the advertising.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So--that was right around the time when it really, you know the, the cigarette ads and the tobacco ads, all that just dried up.  And that was the beginning of the end of API [Amalgamated Publishers Incorporated] in terms of national advertising.  So--
Speaker 1: Now API that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's what you call Amalgamated Publishers (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Publishers Incorporated, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: So my father--what happened was, okay so he died almost--I've forgotten exactly how many papers were distributed but not many--before he died.
Speaker 1: So how many editions came out before your father (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--That's what I say, not very many; I can't tell you now exactly how many, but probably about three, four, so-
Story_ID: 39946
Speaker 1: Now what happened to your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--They were murdered in their home burglary.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And they--so I took a year's leave of absence from work and I went over--came to the paper.  The paper then was located--little house down the street that he had rented, and--'course I couldn't afford to continue to pay for the distribution costs, so we went to another kind.  We had--we still--'cause they had done this study for direct home delivery, so what we went to (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Well I just wanna go back for a minute because this must have been--I mean this not only disrupted the flow of the paper I guess; probably some issues were missed coming out, but this kind of tragedy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--No, it wasn't any (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--No?  It just kept on going on anyway?
Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES)--because my father--Charles O'Neal, the journalist, was at the paper all day; my father was at his law office.  So Charles continued to put the paper out.  The people who were putting the paper out continued.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And did they find out who did it?
Speaker 2: Yeah--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --they're on death row.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: One of 'em's life and the other one's on death row.
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: The one that got life, I think he must have told on the other one or something, so he got life and the one, this one--but he has not been executed yet.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And as you were saying earlier, people think it had something to do with (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, initially everybody--it was such a shock; it was such a shock that they even had a write-up in the New York Times about it.  I mean, you know, and of course then they didn't know why.  My--both my parents, you know, I mean they just didn't know.  My mother had taught I don't know how many kids in the school system, and she was teaching then at the, you know, junior college level and my father was active in the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and by then he was a deacon at the church; I mean it's like why?  They lived a very modest life--lived in just a regular house.  In fact, it was a frame house in South Dallas.  I had--we had gone to church--my family.  I had talked to 'em the night before; went to church, and my husband stayed for Sunday school and my daughter and my son--I would say, 'Come on let's go by and see Gan (ph.) and granddaddy.'  We went by, and the--it looked like somebody had broken in the house.  So my cousin was there, he had been there cutting the yard.  He said, 'Something's wrong, they're not answering the door.'  So I called my husband and he came over from church and he found 'em in the house dead.
Speaker 1: They had been shot?
Speaker 2: Stabbed 11 times.
Speaker 1: Emm.
Speaker 2: They were sleep; it happened at night.
Speaker 1: Emm.
Speaker 2: So, yeah, it was--
Speaker 1: Was anything missing (unclear)?
Speaker 2: (NODDING HER HEAD YES) Jewelry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My father's shirts--he had white shirts with his monogram; that's how they found the guy, wearing his shirts around with the monogram with JF on 'em.
Speaker 1: So--I mean it just doesn't seem--I mean it did seem like they took that, you know, enough to warrant doing, you know, something like that.
Speaker 2: The reason a guy has not been executed is he's claiming mental illness--probably, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it sounds crazy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--It's kinda--some kinda mental--yeah (simultaneous)-
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--It sounds crazy.
Story_ID: 39947
Speaker 1: So you're working at this time and you (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I'm working at the federal government.
Speaker 1: So you could have, you know, kept working and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I did for a while; I did continue working for a while and I'd come over here to the office at night and we'd--well, no.  When that happened, you remember, I took a year's leave of absence, so I was over at the paper every day; that was kinda like my therapy.  My whole thing was my father's vision, he'd worked so hard to start this paper that I just had to see it continue, and so it was at it's very infant stages.  In order to join like NNPA [National Newspapers Publishers Association] or API [Amalgamated Publishers Incorporated], you had to join--you had to print 52 issues, so I had to make sure that 50--that--and it's hard printing 52 issues.  I know advertising.  And it was hard then and it's hard today to get advertising in black newspapers.  So I stayed there at the office, I wasn't a publi--I wasn't a publisher that was going out; I didn't even put my name on the pa--on the (unclear) of the paper.  I owned the paper but I didn't--Charles was the editor.  And so I sat there and we worked, made sure we joined API, NNPA and, you know, I would help assign stories and things.  We had freelance writers and, you know, stuff like that, but I did not go out to events and things; I just kinda stayed locked up in that building like--go there to--so after--I guess I took a leave maybe a year, a year and a half, may have been two years and--that I went back to work, and it was just--my son was here, you know, going to college, and he was like distributing the paper part time; you know, distribution's a part-time job, and he would run over there to my office downtown and, you know, I'd have--to get me to sign stuff and do stuff.  And I loved the work that I was doing; I'm very interested in health care but I just could not continue to do the paper and that job.  And because I supervised people, it's very difficult when you supervise people for the federal government; you can't fire 'em (laughter).  You know, you can't fire them, so you know, you have to develop them.  And, and, and I guess they thought I was a good manager because they always gave me some really hard employee to deal with, so that meant you gotta work--do the employment development plans and all that kinda stuff, you know?  They don't have satisfactory evaluation; it just was a--so that stress plus, you know--my supervisor would say things to me like, 'Well Mollie, do you realize that you want off just about every Friday?'  'So-what?  I'm the highest performer in the office; so-what if I take off every Friday, I have the leave.'  At that time, when I was taking off every Friday, my kids were in college and so my, my, my husband and I--he--I had a good friend and a little boy got him put out of his home; he was a high school student at Desota (ph.) High School, so she called me and asked me did I know of some family that could take him in and he could live with 'cause he was living with the coach and his coach's wife was pregnant and he was sleeping on the sofa in the living room and that just wasn't good.  And I told my husband, I said, 'Do you know somebody?'  And he said, 'Well how come he can't come stay with us?'  Well, I guess he could, you know.  We had plenty of room, so we took him in and he ran track, so we'd go to track meets every Friday, you know.  But I just got tired of that, you know, that, that structure of having to ask somebody can I be off on Friday.  And I just decided that, you know, the best thing for me to do is just to work at the paper full-time, so I took an early retirement and started working at the paper.  My husband and I had contributed just--I don't even wanna add up the money that we put into the paper from the time my father died because the paper, it just--it was not sustaining itself.
Speaker 1: Now was your husband a partner with your father before?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Well, no--yeah, a law partner--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --in the law office, but not with the paper.
Story_ID: 39948
Speaker 1: So--you know, it was difficult; we tried, you know, it just--advertising, you hire employees and they say they gone' do one thing, you know.  We would have meetings at night with the, with the managing editor and--trying to make this thing work and, you know, it just was not working.  So I took an early retirement; that's when I came full-time.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now was it a--did you have a decent pool of writers in the Dallas area to draw from?
Speaker 1: Well, what happened was--we had--Charles, when the paper first started, he and my father they used freelance writers; we had freelance writers, and we probably used freelance writers, let me see--then we moved over at--I was still working for the government.  I hired a young lady to--after I got rid of that one managing editor, then I got another lady just as an editor and, and, and she wrote some and then I hired a reporter and she supervised the reporters so, you know, we've had--at one time, at one time, I developed a pretty good editorial staff; I can't remember the year.  It was around the year that we founded Future Speak, the youth journalism program.  So I had, you know, a pretty decent staff.  It's very difficult to keep really trained, quality journalists because you don't have the revenue to pay the salaries and the benefits--especially the benefits.  At one time, I had an editor who was--Starita Smith, who had worked for the Austin Statesman Newspaper in Austin, and she moved up here.  She was taking some graduate courses at UNT [University of North Texas] in Denton and she worked for me for a year; she was really good, but she couldn't stay, she had some health problems, you know but--and a lotta these young journalists, when you, when you hire 'em right outta college, they're just not ready.  They--you have some that are very good but most of 'em they're not ready.
Speaker 2: Now what about the older people (unclear)?
Speaker 1: Well, Starita had a health problem so she left.  I've never really had any real--well, yeah I've had some older ones; not real--the older ones, not really.  Here again, if they see an opportunity for something better, that's where they go.  I mean, you know, when you're not able to pay benefits that--I mean nobody's gonna stay anywhere a long time; they may go do something else beside journalism, you know?  Because benefits are very important, especially the older you get.  The younger kids tend to, you know, kinda would do without 'em and do their own thing for a while, but the older people they really want those benefits.
Story_ID: 39949
Speaker 1: Now, I was asking before.  What are the demographics at Dallas in terms of the black population?  Where do they live and--
Speaker 2: It's less than a third but it's at 12 percent or something like that.
Speaker 1: That was the population of Dallas?
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So that's almost like the national--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --picture, I guess with twelve percent or so over the population of Dallas--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: --and what's the population of Dallas?  I don't know (laughter) I know it's pretty big (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I don't know now, don't ask me that; I have to go in there and look it up.  I don't, I don't even wanna put that on tape (laughter).  I don't know what it is right now.
Speaker 1: All right, all right.
Speaker 2: And then--see, Dallas has a lotta suburbs.  You've got a lotta suburbs; north, south, east and west.
Speaker 1: You're talking about a huge metro area.
Speaker 2: Yes.  You know like we distrib-Duncanville [Duncanville, Texas], DeSoto [DeSoto, Texas], Lancaster [Lancaster, Texas], and then to the west we have Arlington [Arlington, Texas], you know and Irving [Irving, Texas] adjoining Fort Worth [Fort Worth, Texas]; the north you have Plano [Plano, Texas], Richardson [Richardson, Texas]; the east you have Mesquite [Mesquite, Texas], Garland [Garland, Texas], and you really don't know when you're moving from one to the other.
Speaker 1: And I would guess in excess of what, 4 million people (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--I, I, I'll look it up for you before I leave (laughter), okay, so you'll know.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Story_ID: 39950
Speaker 1: Now did you have to make any changes in terms of the general approach the paper took when you took over?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right after Charles left--when, when Charles was here, because he started with daddy, we just kinda let it continue, my husband and I did--kinda, you know.  We just put money into it but we let it go, you know, kinda what he and daddy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Did Mr. O'Neal do basic investigative reporting for the paper at that time?
Speaker 2: No, but he was--he's excellent editorial writer--opinion writer, excellent.  He left the paper; I was still working for the government and he called me one day and said, 'Let's go to lunch,' and he had written a proposal for Main Street over in South Dallas and he had an opportunity to go work as the--what they call it--assistant director of the Black Chamber of Commerce, and so I said, 'Okay,' you know.  And of course his wife wanted him to do that, this was stressful putting the paper out every week; it's stressful.  So he went--work over there.  We're still friends.  So that meant my husband and I had to try to manage that paper.  So my kids were in college, so we'd go over there every day after work, you know, meet with them.  And we did change some things.  My husband say, 'You gotta have sports in the paper 'cause the black man wanna read sports.'  So we created a sports section and then he said black people, I mean religion is the heart of the black community, so we added religion to the paper, so in that sense it, it, it changed some.
Speaker 1: So about what year is this when--when did Mr. O'Neal leave?
Speaker 2: It was still located over here.  I know my kids were in college, so it had to be the early, early '90's [1990s].
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  That's good enough, I just wanted to have some sense of (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, he, he left and--'cause my kids were in college; my daughter was at Xavier [Xavier University] and my son was at Dillard [Dillard University]; yeah, they were--'cause I remember my daughter we--my husband and I went to a national meeting and I left my daughter here at the paper and when I came back, I didn't have any managing editor; she had run the woman off.
Speaker 1: So you added a sports page--
Speaker 2: Sports and religion.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Sports and religion, okay; and--anything else?
Speaker 2: No, we, we've always covered hard news and may have had a little sprinklin' of some social news on the front, but not a lot.
Speaker 1: So the hard news was mostly local issues here in Dallas and in the county and--
Speaker 2: State.
Speaker 1: State?  Okay.
Speaker 2: And we still carry hard news and, you know, religion is something that we, we, we do it and then we come back to it, you know.  We tried everything; we--I, I started an obituary section, a whole page of obituaries 'cause they told me that would increase, increase your readership and we did that and it didn't work.  It's kinda like you're always trying something, you know?  The Dallas Examiner is very connected to the community.  We--my husband and I are both life members of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People]; we're active in the NAACP.  I partner with the Urban League, sororities and fraternities, we do Monday night politics where we have these forums that we host them and we get those non-profit organizations to sponsor 'em and they get people there, and we get the elected officials to come, and candidates for office, you know, and they talk about their platforms and things; we do it at the African American Museum--excellent attendance.  It's real good.  We have a mega church here, Friendship West, and the minister of the church--well, the minister's name is Reverend Frederick Haynes and his wife, when I was at the Democratic Convention when it was in Denver [Denver, Colorado], and she came to a reception we had and I introduced her to somebody and--no, she came over there and she was introducing me to somebody and she said, 'This is somebody--The Dallas Examiner.  They gone' print it and tell the truth, whatever it is' (laughter).  So that's kinda like what our reputation is, you know, we're gonna tell the truth.  We work very hard to be objective and to tell--just to tell it like it is.  We work real hard to do that.  We don't want biased stories.  Even though, a lotta times when I'm describing the paper, I say that we--it's almost like an advocate paper but, but we are objective in terms of news, but we care--we're a small paper and so we use the paper to--number one to, to, to educate our community about health issues, so we have a lotta--we had the first HIV/AIDS Town Hall meeting in Dallas [Dallas, Texas].  We have news about education issues, we have news about political issues,
Story_ID: 39951
Speaker 1: and this is why--because of the whole thing with education, this is why we started Future Speak, the program for young journalists that was just really an excellent program.  It will--it, it, it, it gave--we, we were not in this location, we were in a free-standing building, and the whole back room I converted into a newsroom for young people, and they had their own staff; they'd come in there every day after school, we paid 'em a stipend like their little part-time job, they had an editor, they had a photographer, they had a lay-out person, and they--you know we call it Future Speak, Tomorrow's Voices Today.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that was a very popular--they would put out a tabloid every week and I would insert it in the Examiner, and I've had people come back to me where their kids went to college on the scholarship opportunities that they found on the back of that Future Speak.  We just--we had some--just wonderful comments about that whole program.  I had to stop it when the recession started because we couldn't--it just dried up money in terms of people contributing to anything like that.
Speaker 2: That's a shame.  So what were the funding sources for--
Speaker 1: AT and T--
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Frost Bank, Coca Cola.  AT and T was our primary funder.  It was--I know one day when I thought I was gone' have to close it down, I mean I was really running out trying every day to get funds for that program, and this man pulled me aside who was kinda, you know, active in the community.  He said, 'Mollie, what are you doing?'  He say, 'You need to make sure the Examiner continues; we need the Examiner.'  And I really thought about it, you know, it really hurt me to let it go because one year we actually--my husband and I paid the students and we actually--actually, we had a point where the Examiner was paying for Future Speak; we just couldn't go any further with it.  I took those kids to the Unity Conference one year in Seattle, Washington to a Journalists of Color meeting, and I mean they, they were only--we stayed on one of the little college campuses there in a dormitory that they let people stay in during the summer for programs, and they--we would catch the bus and go down to the center every day and--oh, those kids they just thought it was--it, it was a wonderful program; it really, really, really was but--I even hired a lady once to work full-time to come in and write me grants for that program; she was a professional grant writer, she wrote grants for our Parkland Hospital Foundation and she, she, she didn't get not one grant.  She told me one day, she said, 'You know, I don't understand it.'  She said, 'I've written grants for things that people can't even see what they're gonna get from it and with this, you have product; you can see what's happening with it.'  She say, 'I guess people don't wanna teach the young people to think,' because that's what we did; we taught them to think.  They wrote about--they wrote about serious issues and things that, that affected them, you know, smoking versus non-smoking, you know--things that they wanted; it was just--it was a beautiful publication.  One time they told me, they said, 'You know,' I told 'em I said, 'You know, we have to hold our elected officials accountable.'  You know, they were talking about the problems with the school system and I said, 'You all can have a little town hall meeting and you can invite the school trustees and you can talk to them; they'll come.'  And they did, and we had it at the auditorium, the little auditorium there at Lincoln High School, and all the school trustees came except one.  And they invited journalism students from the community college and from other high schools in the area all over Dallas, and they came.  And you know what those trustees were sittin' there--some of the things they found out about they just didn't even know.  Kids were telling them how certain schools they didn't get to take the text books home, and how you gonna do homework if they didn't get to take their text books home?  Well, they didn't get to take 'em home because see they have a requirement that the school--any books missing, the school has to pay for 'em and the principal pays for it out of the school's budget.  So in some of your inner-city areas where the books may not come back to the school, the principals don't let 'em take the books home.  We had another issue where a little girl say, 'I'm scared, I don't go to the restroom the whole time I'm at school because it's dangerous in the restroom.'  They just heard all kinds of things, you know?  One guy said, 'You know I take Spanish and I wanna learn how to speak Spanish but my Spanish teacher can't even speak Spanish.'  So--it was a beautiful thing; they did a lotta good things.
Story_ID: 39952
Speaker 1: Yeah, we were just talking off-camera about the National Association of Black Journalists and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Right, right, right (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Paul Brock (ph.) and his activities with the youth and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was the--he saw it right away.  You know, some people can see things?
Speaker 1: Emm hmm.
Speaker 2: --and it's like the lady who started funding us with AT and T; she doesn't work with AT and T anymore, she works with Walmart but they don't they don't do stuff like that.  She saw it right away, you know.  I had been trying to tell this other guy who worked under her about it, you know, and he couldn't get it; he just didn't get it.  And I told her about it and she said, 'You know Mollie,' she said, 'we can fund it but we need to do it under a 501(c)(3).'  She said, 'You could go through another organization and we could route the funds.'  I said, 'No, I don't wanna do that.'  So I got a 501(c)(3) in like 30 days, and she gave us 25,000 the first year and then they upped it to 50.  And, and then we got funds from Coca Cola, Frost, you know.  What we did with the funds--and actually like I told this client, this business--the other day when they said--because I let my 501(c)(3) expire, so my CPA has asked to reinstate it.  But right now, they're giving the Sandy (ph.) people--they have preference over whatever but anyway, she said, 'When you get it back,' she said, 'you let me know,' she said, 'Because we have money for things like that in our foundation.'  But see it dried up, you know.  For a period of time during the recession, there was just no money for that program.  It's a beautiful program, but I did tell my husband, I said, 'I'm not gonna do it again unless I get enough money to run the program.'  See, I don't get a salary here; I get my little retirement from the government and a little off my husband.  So, you know, every dime that we make goes back into the paper, you know; either on-line or something--into the paper.  We're certified; we're NBE (unclear) certified, you know.  We go to conferences, we'll weigh our--it's like I tell advertisers, you know, 'You advertise in The Dallas Examiner and I take you where I go 'cause the paper's my business card.'  So I go to the Legislative Summit in Austin and you're, you're down there (laughter), you know.  So, but--and I told the landlord who I'm friends with in this building, I said, 'When the man next door gets ready to move out'--'cause I don't think he's gone' be there too much longer, but I said, 'When he--I want that space too,' you know (laughter), 'cause I--in the back of my head, I want Future Speak again, you know, but I said if I get it this time, I'll have to get enough money to really operate it because we never got enough; it worked us to death, but we did a lotta things for those kids; we took them to the regional NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] meetings, we took them to that national one, we just did, you know, we bought--I had a whole newsroom with MAC computers, and I remember when the president of the AT and T Foundation came down here--if I can think of her name, you probably know her; she's not there anymore.  That was when they say, 'Get on the super highway,' and that was the time when a lotta black newspapers just had one or two computers on the Internet.  Well, we had a whole newsroom; everybody was on the Internet and we had 'em all up on the same site, you know.  That was a beautiful site, and we bought the computers, the--everything for 'em, and my photographer, we bought him a nice camera, and that boy lost the camera, left it on the bus in Seattle.  And I looked at him at the conference and he had this little ole' click, click, and I say, 'Where is your camera?'  You know (laughter).  He had left it on the bus; you know, that's kids.  But I had a good group of students; they were excellent.  You know, kids'll do things, you give 'em an opportunity to do it.
Story_ID: 39953
Speaker 1: Now what were some of the--what have been some of the, I guess, the key issues or major issues that you've covered (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--You mean in the newspaper?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Well, let me start current and go back.  In this week's paper, we have an article about immigration, and this is a good example of what we do.  A lotta black people say they don't care about immigration, but we have a problem with immigration in this country.  And it's not just the Hispanics' problem; it's everybody's problem, especially African Americans too.  You know, it's like Martin Luther King said, 'Injustice anywhere is injustice everywhere,' you know?  But anyway, we have an article where we did a--we're doing a story on a program I See (ph.), and what they do is they help immigrants that are really in trouble, they're getting ready to be deported; and some kinda way, the Immigration Department has not necessarily done what they're supposed to do.  And there are horrible cases that they do, and so the story's about--they interviewed the immigration person in this region to find out what is it that your office does.  And of course what he does is, you know, he qu--quoted the mission, which--that's what he had to do--that they, you know, in terms of people who are criminals and are here illegally; those are the first ones they try to get out, and then--but these people that this organization helps are not criminals, you know.  It's just--and, and so the story, at the beginning, it talks about the Immigration Department, what the Immigration Department's policy is, and then it talks about this program, and it gives examples of some of the cases that they've handled; that's the kinda stuff we'll talk about.  We talked about our county commissioner, who's African American; we did an extensive story on him in terms of--you know, I'm a firm believer that we have to know what our history is; we have to know what has happened before, until we--so that we really know who we are now.  And he--our county commissioner's name is John Wiley Price, and he, he started years ago and he would picket the news outlets here every morning at 6:00, and he had a group of people with him picketing 'em, and they called 'em Warriors, and it was like 'No justice, no peace,' you know.  Because they did not have African Americans working in the newsrooms and working in certain positions, so they went from one venue to another, and eventually people got on and got jobs.  Well, a lotta people looked at him like, 'What is he doing?  What has he done?'  Because younger people didn't really know who is this man downtown?  So we did an extensive story about who he was, and all the things that he had done, you know, before.  We'd done--we'd do stories like (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--What's his name again?
Speaker 2: John Wiley Price--
Speaker 1: John Wiley Price.
Speaker 2: --that's the one I told you about the FBI is investigating.  In fact, he sent us a letter about 'Thank you for putting this much time in it,' but it was really just--we really tried to tell people a lotta times what's going--what has gone on in the past, but also what's going on today that, that they just may not be, be aware of.  But we've had lots of stories, oh my God (laughter), lots of 'em.
Story_ID: 39954
Speaker 1: And, you know, in addition to the Future Speak insert, you published something called PROBE, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, remember I told you that I have a special interest in health care, and we've always covered in the newspaper health news, news that people need to know, diseases to be aware of, accessibility services that are available that they need to take advantage of, but AIDS [Auto Immune Deficiency Syndrome] is a big problem in the African American community, so what we did was we published a supplement; the first one we did was called Battling AIDS in Our Community, and on the cover of it, it had a man and a wife in their wedding outfit, and it talked about--we had articles in there about a single mom who had HIV/AIDS, 'course the article about this married couple where the man had AIDS and his wife--her husband had died.  We had the articles in there about, you know, gay men with AIDS, we had the, the spectrum; a child with AIDS, trying to say, 'Look, AIDS is in our community and we're battling it and we need to do something about it.'  And at the time we did that, they--people just didn't wanna really talk about AIDS, and it was during the time that they had--the National NABJ [National Association of Black Journalists] meeting was here in Dallas [Dallas, Texas] and--so we published the supplement first, and then we wanted to have this Town Hall meeting.  I called--I don't know if you know Phil Wilson; he's the director of the Black AIDS Institute, and he's the founder and CEO and he's living with HIV/AIDS.  Phil say, 'Mollie, I don't have any money to give you to publish this supplement,' he said.  'But I can do this; I can bring Danny Glover there.'  So I thought, 'Danny Glover; how is he gonna help me pay for this supplement?'  (Laughter).  You know?  Anyway, I say, 'Fine, Phil.'  Well, I knew him because I'd gone out there to the Media Round Tables that he had, educating journalists about AIDS.  I say, 'Okay Phil, bring him.'  So he said, 'And I can bring Sheryl Lee Ralph too.'  I said, 'Okay.'  So he brought Danny Glover, and I had to find a venue and I had to think about where is a place that we can go where people will have free parking, you know.  And so we had done a story on this mega church here, IBOC [Inspiring the Body of Christ], Inspiring the Body of Christ, and so I went over there to ask the pastor there, Rickey Rush--that's what they called him, it's a non-denominational church, if we could have it there, and I had the supplement with me and I said, 'Rickie, we have a problem in our community,' and I showed him the supplement.  He never thought about women having AIDS, you know, and--I mean his church; he's got a lotta women.  He say, 'You know what?  This is a problem.'  I say,' Yes it is
Story_ID: 39955
Speaker 1: It's not just gay men disease.'  He say, 'Okay,' he say, 'you can have it here.'  It was on a Wednesday night.  He say, 'You can have it on one condition.'  I say, 'What's that?'  He said, 'I wanna meet Danny Glover.'  I say, 'Okay.'  I say, 'I'm supposed to go out there and meet him at the airport at 6:00.'  And I told him the morning I'm gone' meet him and--because with--I took--arranged to take him to all the radio--black radio stations so that he could go on and tell people to come to the Town Hall meeting, you know, and talk about AIDS.  So Rickie [Reverend Ricky Rush] met me out there at the hotel and he ended up riding with me to all the venues to take Danny [Glover] so he could get out and go in and talk.  And he asked me, he said, 'Well, what you gone' do about feedin' him?'  He say, 'I'll have my people at the church fix dinner.'  I say, 'Well that will be wonderful.'  He said, 'And I'll get my people to help park the cars that night.'  I said, 'That's fine.'  He said, 'Well Mollie, what do you think I oughta wear?'  I said, 'What you oughta wear?  I don't know, whatever you wanna wear.'  He's a real little man, you know.  So--then I thought; he had been wearing fatigue wear with boots, to fight drugs, you know, in the community.  And he wore the fatigue like a war on drugs.  I say, 'It's a war on AIDS so wear your fatigue tonight,' and he say, 'Okay.'  So he wore his fatigue and he stood up there in the pulpit and he told--we had about a thousand people in the church and he told them to go get tested.  We had the County Health Department; all these AIDS agents had their testing stuff, we had rooms inside the church and mobiles outside.  He say, 'Go get tested now,' and they went and got tested; we tested about 200 that night, and then a lotta people got tested after then.  I would go in a restaurant, and I'd see people and they'd say, 'I want you to know I heard it on the radio and I went and got tested,' 'cause we had it broadcast live on the black radio stations.  So then the next year we did PROBE, you know.  We did--that was another health--AIDS supplement.  You know, it's kinda like--and you know when I think about it, we never got money to publish the--to, to, to pay for the printing--The Dallas Examiner, we incurred those costs.  Because it is so hard getting advertising.  The thing that helped me with the first supplement was one company and one man I met who worked for Pfizer and he was in governmental affairs, and he got it; he called the people up in New York at Pfizer and told them to buy a full-page, full-color ad and, and, and I had that in there.  But it's--we did the supplements.  We've done other supplements, too--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --we do.
Speaker 2: So when you deal with a story, you rally the community around--you do education forums and all, you know (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, with AIDS we did; we, we had several programs with AIDS; we had one out at Paul Quinn College, with a nurse, to get--we did the same thing, had the mobile unit out there to get those students tested.  We don't do that with everything; it just depends on what the issue is--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --you know.  I don't wanna say we're known for those events.
Story_ID: 39956
Speaker 1: Now, do you cover the arts much?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we cover--we have an excellent dance theater here-Dallas [Dallas, Texas] by Dance Theater?  And they went abroad last year; we've had them in the paper several times, you know.  They bought a building, the old Moreland YMCA [Young Men's Christian Association] I told you about, and they did it over; yeah, we've had several articles about them.  We do articles--we did a special supplement, but you know what?  I cannot think of the name of it--Curtis King had, had a program here, it was a red carpet event, and (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's the--was it the Junior Black Academy?
Speaker 2: Junior Academy, yes; we did a special--it was a special signature, a thing that he had and he had a lotta artists come here, and we did a special supplement on that.  We're doing a special supplement next month of the Deltas, their hundred years, and the Torch is coming through Dallas, so we're doing--and we're not trying to get advertising for that; we're just doing it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now just picking up a copy of the paper when I came in, I've noticed you have articles by (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--National journalists (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, Marc Morial, you got Julianne Malveaux (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Oh, yeah we, we get those from NNPA [National Newspaper Publishers Association]--op-ed pieces.
Speaker 1: --George Curry (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: My local journalist who had can--he died last week of lung cancer, and he was usually the top columnist on there; his name was Claude Watson.
Speaker 1: Right, I saw his picture on the front and I said (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Yeah, he died; they funeralized him last Friday--
Speaker 1: Emm.
Speaker 2: --and from time to time, I'll get op-eds pieces from the county judge, you know, something pressing like he felt it very pressing to say something about the Affordable Care Act in terms of letting people know how the county needed that and the health care condition of the county; he sent an op-ed piece.  Every now and then we'll get 'em from our congress people.  Eddie Bernice Johnson will send in op-ed pieces but she want me to run her every week, but I can't run her every week, you know; but we do invite local people.  In fact, I talked with a young man yesterday who wrote one column and he promised me he was gonna write more; he has a lotta good ideas.  He's probably in his late 30's--African American man; he's married with two kids and he's a past president of the local NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] chapter but--good head on him, good, you know, so--because we want young voices in the paper too (laughter).
Story_ID: 39957
Speaker 1: Now 2004, you received the prestigious Community Service Award from the National Association of Black Journalists.
Speaker 2: Yes, I did.
Speaker 1: That's right, and received awards from the Urban League and other (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Legacy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--Legacy Award, right--other awards.  So when you look back on your career with the Examiner, what today would you consider to be the legacy of the Examiner and the--so far?
Speaker 2: Being the voice of the voiceless.  Letting the community--not just--and not just the African American community; there are a lot of white people who read the Examiner, but letting people know what we're thinking, what issues matter to us, and educating the community--making them more aware of things.  There are a lotta more things I'd like to do with the paper and one day I'll have advertisement and we'll have lots of sections, you know, but there's a--it's, it's, it's a lot, but telling the stories that otherwise will not be told, and we--I mean it's a void in our community and we feel very strongly about, about educating our community and solve--we can't solve the problems; we don't try to solve 'em, you know.  It's, it's like the article on immigration, we just give them the facts; this is what the department's supposed to be doing, this is what they're doing, these are the people who have suffered consequences from it.
Story_ID: 39958
Speaker 1: Now, if you could go back and change anything that's happened so far, what would you change?
Speaker 2: I would change spending some money.  I have had to learn publishing a paper by doing it; I was not trained to do it, and so some of the things that I know now, I wish I had known 'em 20 years ago.  I think that we are, you know, we've always been audited (ph.), now we're a minority business, you know BNBE (ph.) certified (unclear).  We are active in a lotta things that--I have to think also what will make us money; I can't operate the paper just on what I like to go to (laughter), you know.  Some things that we do, like what we do with health care issues, that's not gone' make us any money but I feel like that's something that, that we need to, to talk about.  You know, we like to say that we start the conversations, that things that people--and you can ask the County Health Department here, the director, he'll say anytime (ph.), 'The Dallas Examiner'll start this conversation when nobody else will talk about AIDS.'  The other thing we do, we publish a--this is the fifth year we've done it, a college guide that we, we publish; it's a tabloid and we get the statistics from the Texas Education Agency--
Speaker 1: Hmm.
Speaker 2: --and we select 50 high schools with the largest populations of African American students, and we contact the counselors at those schools and let them know that we're gonna send them 50 of these college guides, and if they want more, they can call us and get more.  Now we fund that with--we get ads from colleges and universities.  What we do is, we give--they buy a full-page ad and we give 'em a full-page to do whatever they want with; they talk about whatever it is at their school that's good or whatever, with pictures and everything.  And that has been--in fact, AT and T wants to hear--I told 'em, 'I don't need a sponsor for that' (laughter).  But anyway, that is something that has been--I mean we have, we have articles in there about, and I'll give you a copy before you leave--about young people, people who have met all these challenges but they have succeeded, and they--and, and the interview is very personal, you know.  What did you do?  We interviewed Roy Perry who was named several years ago the top engineer--number one engineer in the United States.  We interviewed--the story of the man who's over the--the Dean of the School of Engineering at Prairie View who was once a fighter pilot.  How did he get where he is?  We did a story on the man who designed one of those General Motor cars; he's a designer.  We did a story on a teacher who teaches science in the STEM Program.  This year, we did a story on two doctors; one doctor is a, is a private practice, the other one is an academician.  How did they get there?  How did they get where they are?  And the whole purpose is for the students to read the guide (ph.), to read it--these stories and say, 'You know what?  I can do this too.'  And every year, we get testimonials from counselors.  One counselor told me, 'Oh, I didn't think y'all could do a better one than last year,' you know.  So that's been--we do that--that's the fifth year we've done it this year.  But it's a college guide.
Speaker 1: Okay.  With the profiles of successful college (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Successful blacks who have--we did our black college--our black senator in Texas, Royce West, we did him.  Really interesting story because he went to college because his teacher signed for him to get a guaranteed student loan.
Story_ID: 39959
Speaker 1: Now this is--we always ask what your hopes and concerns are for the black community and so--
Speaker 2: We do a lot to try to get black people to vote.  If they vote, a lot of things'll change, and we have put on our website what we call a Voter Roll Call, and we update it regularly, and it has--you can go in there and you can type my name; you can see if I voted in November.  Not who I voted for, but if I voted.  We get the, the information from the County Elections Department.  That's why we have the Monday Night Politics, to inform the community and community leaders about the candidates, their platforms and how to meet them and have an interchange with them.  We--at one time years ago, we actually printed a voter roll call; we took a whole section, and every week we printed the disk, and let me tell you, when that paper come off the press, oooh, the distributors would go to the night club, people be grabbin' 'em to see, you know (laughter).  But it was pages and pages of black people not voting.
Speaker 1: Emm.
Speaker 2: In fact, at one of--at that time, let's see, Ann Richards was running for governor and she, she held the Examiner up and say, 'People, look at this Dallas Examiner; y'all are not voting,' you know?  So we do a lot to, to educate people; we do a lotta--we do articles on, you know, the policy--why they're running for office, what they do, we also hold 'em accountable too.  We say what they're doin', you know, when they do things that aren't--maybe not--might not be for the best interest of the total community.  We just let people know what's going on; we just let 'em know.
Speaker 1: Now in terms of the recent discussion about gun control and gun violence in the community, I know the--where does the Examiner stand on that?  I know you don't report all the shootings, but--
Speaker 2: Oh, no.  We have run op-ed pieces with people-Morial (Marc Morial), talking about gun control, various programs.  We have not done a local story on gun control, though; we haven't done that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And also, we do not endorse candidates--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --that's how I'm able to partner with these non-profit groups because they can't endorse either.  But we don't endorse--but the main reason--'cause most newspapers endorse.  The main reason that we don't endorse, we don't have the resources to endorse.  I'm not going to have a, you know, have a meeting here and bring a candidate in and you ask them--just ask 'em questions and they tell you what they're gonna do, you know.  You have to have resources to really investigate what they have done, you know; you can't just--you could sit here and tell me anything, and then I'll say, 'Oh, I'm gone' endorse him.'  I can't; I can't make a decision like that.  So we don't have resources to really have reporters really, you know, covering people to really know what people have done in the past, you know, to really even say whether I wanna endorse 'em or not.  I don't know if they've done the right thing or not all the time.  So we don't, we don't endorse because we don't have the resources to do it.  And there are a lotta things that we would like to do if we--the size of the paper depends on the ads.
Story_ID: 39960
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and where are most of your ads coming from now?
Speaker 2: National and small business.  Oh well, we get--I take that--we get quite a few ads from the City of Dallas, the state--State Health and Human Services; those state agencies, mom and--some small businesses, CPA [Certified Public Accountant], and people that feel like they need advertising.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--And most of our ads are national.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you see as a future of the printed version of your paper?  You think you're still valuable (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--We're in the process; we're--yeah, because a lotta people don't, don't do online and print is permanent.  But we are getting ready to revamp our website; in fact, I have a meeting tomorrow.  And we are getting ready to go more digital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Not the whole paper, but--we were probably the first paper to have the whole paper on the Internet, but I haven't changed it since then; costs money, and we haven't had problems, it's never down.  And I'm able to--we are able to upload it ourselves from this office, so--but we're getting ready to revamp, and my son has convinced me that we've gotta--and I know it's something we need to do, and do the mobile apps and all that.  You could subscribe to it for a dollar ninety-nine a month (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So you think the future of the paper is strong?
Speaker 2: I think so; the future of print?  Especially African American weekly papers, because we are a trusted vehicle in the community.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have--other than your own paper, what African American weekly would you consider the best paper, or do you have a favorite?
Speaker 2: You mean nationally?
Speaker 1: Yeah, any--yeah.
Speaker 2: I have a lotta respect for reading the Afro American.
Story_ID: 39961
Speaker 1: Yeah, go ahead.
Speaker 2: Print is important--I do believe in mixed media, and one time we had a radio show in the mornings, and we'd talk about the news that was in the paper that week called Dallas Examiner Live.  But I believe in mixed media; it's important, but print is permanent.  If you see an ad in the paper, in a newspaper, you can go back to it; you can get the name, you can get the telephone number, you can get the address and, you know.  If you hear something on the radio, you might get it and you might not get it in terms of, you know, contact information.  And then it's--you can't go back to the radio station and think about later, 'Oh, I meant to go to that hairdresser; what was her name?  I Can't remember.'  The print's permanent, you can go back to it.  A lot of editions that we do are what we call Coffee Table editions, especially our supplements.  We say that--when we're advertising, we say it's a Coffee Top--Coffee Table edition; people tend to put it on their coffee table and, you know, go back to it and refer to it.  We do another one too, we started last year at Black History; we'll do it the end of February called Dallas Then and Now, and basically, it talks about Dallas years before, you know, in certain areas, and then it talks about Dallas today--what it's like today.  This year, the emphasis is going to be on the health services--health care, Dallas then; we had one hospital, Pinkston Clinic, you know.  Doctors had limited hospitals they could practice out of, dah, dah, dah, dah, dah.  Now, the services that are available--mammograms--you know, a lotta people, women, don't know where to go to get a mammogram, you know; some things are very important.  If you don't have insurance, where do you go?  Where can you go?  A lotta men, they don't think they can get breast cancer.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's true.
Speaker 2: You know, I mean there are a lot of issues--there are so many; there are health issues, there are education issues, there are legal issues, there are just a lotta things that people need to know about.
Story_ID: 39962
Speaker 1: Now I did not ask you--you mentioned your children but can you tell us something about your children?
Speaker 2: My first born is my son; he's over there in that room, he's the advertising manager for The Dallas Examiner; he's 40-43 years old.  He went to Texas Southern his first year, that's--it didn't get along with him and he went--we transferred--put him down at Dillard in New Orleans.  They didn't get along with him, he came up here and went to Paul Quinn [Paul Quinn College].  He, he's the kinda person that learns by experience doing it.  He started out distributing the paper part-time when he was in college, you know, because it's only distributed once a week.  And then he started assisting the lady that I had; she's deceased, she died--who was my advertising manager, and he worked closely with her.  It took him a long time to overcome people telling him "No."  But he finally has overcome that; he knows how to deal with it.  So he's in advertising, he gets most of the advertising for the paper and--very outgoing; he's married and he has two children--two boys; one is three and one's five.  And his wife works and he lives in Garland, Texas, in one of those suburbs I told you about--it's down the street.  My--he's participating in--he was selected to be in what do they call it--Leadership Southwest, and that's like, you know how they have those leadership programs?  And Southwest is like the southern--Oak Cliff [Oak Cliff, Texas], DeSoto [DeSoto, Texas], Duncanville [Duncanville, Texas]--the southern--and they take 'em around, and so he's--other people in the class and like, you know, the mayors of some of the cities, and president, you know, and they take 'em around to get--familiarize them with the southern sector 'cause they're supposed to be the leaders of the future.  My daughter is an OB-GYN; she went to Xavier [Xavier University of Louisiana], she finished Kimball [Justin F. Kimball High School]--he did too, and she went to Xavier; she went to Xavier because she wanted to be a doctor (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous)--That's at Xavier University in Louisiana (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--yes, in New Orleans.  And she did research at Yale [Yale University] one summer, and she's now--she did part of her residency in New York and she finished up in Texas.  So she's a managing partner for an OB/GYN group of private doctors in Austin, and she has a little girl.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you just have the two?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 39963
Speaker 1: Now I guess I neglected to ask this, but is it tough, I mean do you find yourself--I know you don't endorse candidates and that sort of thing, but you know, Texas is, you know, since--in your lifetime, has gone from being kind of a liberal Democratic state with LBJ [President Lyndon B. Johnson] as a political leader to a very conservative, you know, state with the George Bushes [President George W. Bush] and the Rick Perrys [Governor Rick Perry] and, you know, the Tom Delays [U.S. Representative Tom Delay] and other people that have come out of Texas.  Is it--how does a black community, or how do you, I guess--do you have to--I mean what--well, how does that affect your publication--the political climate of Texas?
Speaker 2: Well, financially we do better under Republican administration government-wise than we do under Democrats.  When Alphonso Jackson [U.S. Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Alphonso Jackson], who's a black Republican, was Secretary of HUD [Housing and Urban Development], we got lots of advertising from HUD.  We didn't get it from Clinton [President Bill Clinton] or from the others.  The Republican Party tends to be more business-oriented.  Now in terms of the conservative, a lotta times the liberal--it's, it's not really liberal in terms of for the--and I'm speaking--you asked me for the newspaper, not for me in terms of, of blacks in general and what they get.  But in terms of the newspaper, it's a small business and we probably have gotten more under Republican administrations than--now we're not getting a lot, don't get me wrong, but we've gotten more because Democrats tend to be more welfare oriented, you know, things to help the community, and they come to us wanting us to give stuff, you know.  I know at one time--I'm gonna give anyway, but I remember one time I had a business consultant and she said, "One problem with you and this paper is you give too much."  But I guess, you know, in terms of--from a business standpoint though, I have to say that about the--when Bush [President George W. Bush] was president, the guy that he had who was over commerce that used to have the meetings and things in Washington, even Kay Bailey Hutchison [U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison], you know, she would have--she had those summits that she had for minorities in Washington [Washington, D.C.] to help small businesses, to help business people.  Both governors, I mean Bush [Governor George W. Bush] was accessible to us.  I am Vice President of the Texas Publishers Association and Bush, when he was governor, he was our keynote speaker at our annual meeting in Austin; he was very accessible to us, more accessible to us then than he was when he got to be president.  Governor Perry is accessible; I mean, like I told you, he called--his people called and said, "You wanna do a story, you wanna meet with him."  And he wasn't meeting with the other papers.  And we asked him the hard questions.  "Why didn't you sign to extend children's health care?  Why didn't you do that?"  He say, "Well, all the money we have now we haven't used it all.  All the children who are eligible are not signed up for children's health insurance, so why I wanna get more money?"  You know.  We have--the Texas Publishers--the black papers--we have a grant from the Health and Human Services Commission.  The guy that gave it to us was a black man that Perry [Governor Rick Perry] appointed.  Michael Williams [Texas Commissioner of Education] is a black Republican and he was just appointed by Governor Perry to be a commissioner of the Education Agency, and the first thing he said was "and I have a reporter assigned to do the story, he just hadn't turned it in yet."  He said he wants to stop rating schools by test scores; we're giving too many tests, and he wants to rate them on how well they close the education gap between black students, Hispanic students and white students.  So it's, it's just, you know, it's interesting. I just--but I find that the, the, it, it it is, you know, conservative, and I'm not talking about the Tea Party people, you know.  They're the--on the way, way, you know, I'm talking about moderates, and those are the ones right now that, you know, are in the key positions or the more moderate Republicans.
Story_ID: 39964
Speaker 1: In Texas politics?
Speaker 2: In Texas, yeah, in Texas.  I don't know how much longer that's gonna last though, 'cause Tea Party people are gettin' mad at 'em, you know?  But in terms of a business, you know?  It's, it's, it's difficult for black newspapers anyway, maybe because we do influence opinion, I don't know.  We should have grocery ads in our paper every week; we have only two papers in this state that get grocery ads every week and they're in Houston.  It's, it's what you call--in fact, the Health and Human Services Department they have a grant and they're conducting these workshops called Undoing Racism, and they invite people to participate, and they invited me and I went and--I mean it's just really interesting; it's, it's what you call institutional racism, and it still exists, you know.  And it's not necessarily who, who, who, who's--whether it's a Democrat or a Republican, it's still institutional racism.  And black newspapers, I mean we suffer from not having adequate advertising to do the things that we want to do, and I try to communicate that to the community.  They call me all the time wanting me to do things and I say, "You know what?  We could do more if you held people that you do business with accountable; you're not responsible consumers, you know.  I mean I would have a society section, a big sports section, a religious section, and everything. And before, you know, we did put money into printing like 20-25 pages but we didn't have advertising to sustain it.  And you have to put your ads down first, and then put your copy around it, so all you can do is eight pages, that's all you can do.
Story_ID: 39965
Speaker 1: Now is there anything I haven't asked about that we need to cover before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know (laughter).  You asked so much, I don't know (laughter).  I think I told you about the college guide, the health supplements, the black history, I told you I use freelance writers now; did I tell you that?
Speaker 1: Are there any full-time writers at all?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is there a full-time editor now, since--
Speaker 2: There's a full-time production manager and so she supervises the production process and the editing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Emm hmm.
Speaker 1: Okay, so photography too?  Same way--freelance?
Speaker 2: You know what?  We don't pay for photography now.  It's--the, the, the pictures that we get, the photographers don't charge us for 'em, they give it to us.
Speaker 1: Do they get a bi-line, I mean (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous)--Well, you know what they get?  Yeah, they get a bi-line but like we have a, a sports photographer; he told me the other day--I told him I had to get a sports writer; we just got a freelance sports writer so it will be more sports in the paper.  But in return, what he gets is a pass to the Mavericks games; you know how you do?  And the track meet, you know, because he takes pictures for us, and we do put some of the pictures in the paper with his bi-line.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: So it's usually people who are trying to, you know, build up whatever that is that photographers use.  At one time I had a photographer, at one time I had a full-time photographer, and then I had a part-time photographer but she was our photographer; I'd call her and give her assignments every week.  It didn't, it didn't seem to change the readership of the paper.  I mean I was looking at a paper we got in the mail the other day and they had all these pictures of people doing things, and I told my production manager, I say, "Look at all these pictures."  She say, "Ms. Belt, now you know when we had that" (laughter), you know.  It didn't really--it doesn't seem to change our readership.
Story_ID: 39966
Speaker 1: Now my last question is similar to legacy but a little different.  Ma'am, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would like to be remembered as, let me see.  I'd like to be remembered as someone who, who cared about the community and did something, through education, to try to make it a better place to live.  The vehicle that I use is The Dallas Examiner because I use The Dallas Examiner to really make Dallas a better community--total community.  The things that I can do, the stories that I can tell in the paper that will change someone's life; the status of their health, education, the political process.  I just--I guess if I really reflect back on it, I, I really daily try to do things that's gonna make this a better place to live, the Dallas community.
Story_ID: 39967
Speaker 1: We're rolling; go ahead and tell us now.
Speaker 2: That's a Teach For America program that I participate in; I go and teach a class of students; that was an elementary school, and I talked to them about the importance of reading.
Speaker 1: Okay now what year is this?
Speaker 2: That was last year, 2012.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That was oooh, about 2010, I believe, and that was during Black Press Week, and I went to the Capitol, and Harry Reid [Senator Harry Reid] had a few of the publishers in his office and he talked to us.
Speaker 1: And there I am, that was in 20--what year was that in?  It's the year that President Obama [President Barack Obama] started running for president, and he came to a reception that we had in Washington, D.C. during Black Press Week, and I gave him that copy of The Dallas Examiner that said, you know, "The Conscience of America," and he said, "I'm sure this is my copy to keep and take home to Michele," and I said, "Yes."
Speaker 2: And that's a picture--oooh my goodness, I definitely cannot tell you the year, but that's our state senator, he's an African American state senator; he's been senator for oh, about 20 years, and I had taken a group of students down to the Capitol and we took that photo.
Speaker 1: What was his name?
Speaker 2: Royce West [State Senator Royce West], R-O-Y-C-E West, W-E-S-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture that I took, and I don't remember the year, with Kay Bailey Hutchison [U.S. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison].  I went to Washington, D.C. to one of her legislative summit's that she used to have for African Americans. (OFF-CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: Kay Bailey Hutchison was our state senator--I mean not state senator, U.S. Senator.
Speaker 2: This is the original premier issue of The Dallas Examiner that my father published in 1986.
