Story_ID: 571858
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: [HistoryMaker] Charles Russell Branham; C-H-A-R-L-E-S, R-U-S-S-E-L-L, B-R-A-N-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: Now what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: May 25, 1945, Chicago, Illinois.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, sir, what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I teach at the University of Chicago Lab School [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois].  I teach African American and U.S. history.  I've been a college professor for almost forty years.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is November 3, 2008.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're at The HistoryMakers office, 1900 South Michigan [Avenue].
Story_ID: 571859
Speaker 1: Before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that management compels me to ask of everyone, and they only require a short answer.  The first question is do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Probably ice cream.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Fall.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Probably Tuscany [Italy].
Speaker 1: All right.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  I probably don't have a favorite phrase.
Story_ID: 571860
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask about your family history now; we'll start with that.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [Joseph Branham] side.  But we'll start with your mother's side first.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Charles Etta Hurd Branham Halthon [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon], and her first name is C-H-A-R-L-E-S; her middle name is E-T-T-A; her maiden name is Hurd, H-U-R-D; her first married name was Branham, B-R-A-N-H-A-M; she later remarried and her last name was H-A-L-T-H-O-N, Halthon.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: She was born July 23--July 21, 1921, in Memphis, Tennessee.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now what do you know about ancestors on your mother's side?  How far back can you trace them and what are the significant stories on that side?
Speaker 2: From my mother's side we go back probably no further than the 1840s.  There's a portion of Mississippi that was under Choctaw control, and when it opened up for white settlers, we began to find a few families named Hurd and two families that we think maybe the Hurds that are related to us.  It's not a very common name, especially with that spelling.  The origin of the term is French and it means one of sound mind, and we begin with John Hurd, who was my great-grandfather, who was born probably sometime either in the 1830s or maybe as late as 1848, and who fought in the Civil War.  He fought for the 3rd Colored regiment [3rd U.S. Colored Cavalry] out of Mississippi and after the war became a landowner and a farmer, and married a woman from Virginia and I must confess, I know the name but I can't remember the name offhand, and he would be probably the longest living of all of our relatives.  I is-- there is some some guess from my sister that he probably made it to be close to 100 years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories passed down of his service in the Civil War, or any of the--
Speaker 2: No.  We have a photograph, which we can't find, of him in uniform and, of course, photographs weren't that common so my presumption is that that photograph was taken many years after the Civil War was over, but apparently it was a source of great pride to him, and the fact that he was able to get land and to keep land in Mississippi was quite remarkable in and of itself.
Speaker 1: Yeah, it is.  It is.  Is there a story about how he obtained it (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I actually don't know how he came to acquire land.  As you know, there was a southern land policy that some African Americans were able to take advantage of, kind of a variation of the national Homestead Act [Homestead Act of 1862], so there was a Southern Homestead Act [Southern Homestead Act of 1866] that some African Americans were able to keep land, get land, but the problem is that many African Americans weren't able to keep land, especially as we get into the 1890s, early 1900s, which is really the nadir of race relations in America, and you have everything including violence being used to force African Americans off their land.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  Now, had your great-grandfather been a slave?
Speaker 2: The presumption is that he was a slave before the Civil War, but the documentation of his enslavement nor the--and/or the evidence of his ultimate freedom are not on record.
Story_ID: 571861
Speaker 1: What about your grandfather?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was William Hurd, and he was a carpenter and he actually built the home in which my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] was born, and he lived in Bartlett, Tennessee, and Bartlett, Tennessee is not that far from Memphis, Tennessee.  They later moved to Memphis, Tennessee, and that's where my mother grew up.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  Now, are there any stories passed down from that era?
Speaker 2: I don't know a great deal about my grandfather on my mother's side, except that he was a hard-working man.  Apparently he died relatively young as did my grandmother.  He was, my mother finally remembers him, but she actually has not told me a great deal about what kind of man he was.  My presumption is he wasn't a terribly tall man.  The men on most of my side, my mother's side of the family aren't particularly tall.  They're usually in the range of 5'6" or 5'7".
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did your mother talk about growing up in Memphis?
Speaker 2: Not a great deal.  She had a pretty comfortable childhood because her father was a skilled laborer and her mother was a schoolteacher, but she actually hasn't told me a great deal about her childhood except for, of course, the tragedy that took her mother's life when she was very young.
Speaker 1: Oh, what--you said your mother was a schoolteacher. What's--?
Speaker 2: My mother [sic. grandmother] was named Mamie McPherson [Mamie McPherson Hurd], and there were McPhersons in Memphis that were our cousins and her mother was a schoolteacher and she died very young from accidental poisoning.
Speaker 1: Well, how--? What happened?  What's the story?
Speaker 2: I don't know the exact story but it was, no, it wasn't actually accidental poisoning.  She accidentally caught fire.  I think it was a kerosene stove or a stove of some sort, and she accidentally got caught into a fire and that's how she died.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Your mother was very young when that happened--
Speaker 2: My mother was very young when that happened, so my assumption is that my father, my grandfather was primarily the caregiver for her growing up, but she had two older sisters and an older brother [Leon Hurd, Sr.].  My mother's the youngest in the family, and from the dynamics of my own growing up, I can tell you that her oldest sister, Willa [Willa Hurd Johnson (ph.)], was very much like the mother of the family.  My mother, her older sister and brother both pretty much obeyed Willa.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now did your mother go to high school in Memphis?
Speaker 2: My mother went to Booker T. Washington High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now at that time, was Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] operating as a high school for the black?
Speaker 2: I believe it was.  I believe Manassas had also been founded and, of course, Manassas and Booker T. Washington were the historic rivals.  They're the two oldest African American high schools in Memphis.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she have any stories about high school she shared with you?
Speaker 2: She really didn't talk a lot about high school.  What I do know, of course, is that my mother was a pianist from a very early age.  In fact, my mother is probably celebrating oh, close to eighty years of being a professional pianist, so she played piano all through high school and college.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did she get a music scholarship to college or anything like that?
Speaker 2: You know, I do not know if she got a music scholarship to college, and I wouldn't be surprised if she did, but she went to Lemoyne College [LeMoyne-Owen College, Memphis, Tennessee] and from what I can tell all through high school and all through college she was the pianist or the organist for virtually every program that they had--
Speaker 1: Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) which was her responsibility and, of course, she still does that.
Story_ID: 571862
Speaker 1: Let me go to your father's side of the family.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My father's full name was Joseph Henry Branham [Joseph Branham], and he was a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the spelling is J-O-S-E-P-H, H-E-N-R-Y, B-R-A-N-H-A-M.
Speaker 1: And, what's his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: He was born July 11, 1911, in Denison, Texas.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And, well, what are the, what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace that?
Speaker 2: You can actually trace that side of the family, thanks again to my sister, much further back.  Apparently, according to my sister whom I trust, the origins come from a group of Portuguese immigrants who came to what is now, what was now Virginia before the English arrived.  She believes they came from Galicia, that they were probably conversos, which means that they were either Jewish or they were Moor- Islamic people who had been persuaded or forced to convert to Catholicism.
Speaker 1: During the Inquisition [Spanish Inquisition], right? (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Inquisition.  And that they intermarried with Siouan people in central Virginia.  Now obviously, since my family is African American, there could have been some African people as well that they pretty early intermarried with later on, but she's been able to trace the origins of the Branhams through a man named John Evans [ph.], who is described as a Portugee because at least he was a part of Spain at the time.  He is now a part of Portugal, and apparently he was the oldest ancestor that we've been able to trace and apparently this took place before the English arrived in 1607.
Speaker 1: Okay, so John Evans lived in 1607?
Speaker 2: John Evans would have been living probably earlier than that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Wow, so that's quite a bit of research there she's got (unclear).
Speaker 2: Well--it does not, however, tell us much about the African origins which, of course, is the area I'm most concerned about.  And in reality, we don't really pick up with an African American component until the 1850s.  That's when we find John, yeah, no, William Branham, and William Branham is a minister in Georgia, around Macon, Georgia.  He's born in 1850, dies in the 1880s and when he dies, he leaves his land and money to the A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church to found a school for African Americans, which seems quite consistent from all that I know about the Branham side of the family because education has always been important to the family.  I came from five generations of ministers, so it's not surprising that he was also a minister, though I suspect he made probably most of his money as a farmer, because it'd be very difficult for a backwoods minister to sustain himself, and most importantly, it's not surprising that he would leave his money to educate, because if you lived in Georgia in the 1880s, there wasn't really much public schooling most African Americans in Georgia, and unless African Americans combined their resources, unless they went into their own pockets, unless they went out and found teachers, they weren't going to be able to get any kind of education, so education for African Americans throughout much of the South, especially throughout much of the rural South, was something we had to do for ourselves.
Speaker 1: Now, did he leave his, did he support Wilberforce [Wilberforce University, Wilberforce, Ohio], is that where his money eventually went?
Speaker 2: Not Wilberforce as far as I'm con-, as far as I know.  This is developing essentially public school for black children.
Speaker 1: Oh, an A.M.E. school in that area.  Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, an A.M.E. school in the area.  Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Not a college.  All right.  So, did they name the school after him, by any chance?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  I doubt that he would care.
Speaker 1: Okay, but--all right.  So he was A.M.E. and any other stories about him, this is, his name is William Branham, right?
Speaker 2: His name is William Branham.  He married a woman from Virginia just as my great-great-grandfather did on the Hurd side.
Story_ID: 571863
Speaker 1: His sister was the mother of John Brown Watson.  She married a man named Norwood [ph.] and her name was Crystal [Crystal Watson], and she had a child, I think, perhaps two, and then she remarried a man named Watson [Frank Watson], who was a Cherokee.  He had changed his name to Anglicize it to Watson, and she taught him to read English and sign his name and her son, one of his children, was John Brown Watson, who was the president of the University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff [Arkansas Agricultural, Mechanical and Normal College; University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, Pine Bluff, Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now that's, there's a, history keeps pointing us back to Arkansas in those days.  There seems to be quite a remarkable movement for black people there in Arkansas (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) But actually the family moved to Texas and so it's the Texas/Oklahoma territory where you find most Branhams.  My great-great-great-grandfather's son was John Branham and he was a minister in Texas and, in southern Texas, but he died very young.  He died in his thirties and actually Crystal Watson's husband, John Watson [sic.], ended up being the executor of his estate.
Speaker 2: Okay, now Crystal Watson is your--
Speaker 1: Crystal Watson was the sister of my great-great-great-great-grandfather [William Branham], so she'd be my great-great-great-great-great-grand aunt.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Now, she's the mother of John Brown Watson, or the (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, she's the mother of John Brown Watson, so we'd be distantly related.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Are there any stories about John Brown Watson as the president of the University of Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Actually, I've not followed him very much.  I know he used to ride his horse around here.  He was supposedly a great disciplinarian.  Of course, he's a pretty famous African American educator in the South in the era of Booker T. Washington.  But I don't know a lot about him.  In fact, I don't know a lot about the Texas part of the family, because although my grandfather [Joseph Branham] grew up in Texas and my grandmother [Erma Hines Branham] grew up in Texas, and my father [Joseph Branham] was born in Texas, most of what I know about them has--revolves around Chicago [Illinois].
Story_ID: 571864
Speaker 1: What other stories, now what brought the family to Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I'm not entirely sure.  My guess is that L.K. Williams [Lacey Kirk Williams], who was one of the legendary African American preachers and pastor of Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], brought my father as his assistant--my grandfather [Joseph Branham]--as his assistant, to Chicago.  L.K. Williams was from Texas.  My grandfather was from Texas.  My father's mother [Maggie Fitzgerald Branham] was from New Orleans [Louisiana], but she died when he was a baby and my father remarried my grandmother, the only one that I had ever known, Erma Hines [Erma Hines Branham], who was also from Texas.  So, they came as a family from Texas to Chicago where my grandfather served as assistant pastor of Olivet Baptist Church--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Speaker 2: --until he died.
Speaker 1: Olivet's one of the more important black churches in Chicago.
Speaker 2: It's the second oldest African American Church in Chicago.  It was started in 1850.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And Olivet was the future, I guess going forward from this to the future, and Reverend Joseph Jackson [Joseph H. Jackson], who was the president of the National Baptist Convention during the King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] years (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) He succeeded as the L.K. Williams as the pastor.  L.K. Williams presided over Olivet Baptist Church in the 1920s and '30s [1930s] when it was at its apex.  The claim was that Olivet Baptist Church was the largest religious congregation in the world.  I doubt that very seriously, but it had a very large congregation, certainly had the largest congregation in Chicago.  L.K. Williams was also pastor, I mean was also president of the National Baptist Convention, and that was a source of tremendous political power.  Jackson--I mean L.K. Williams got a lot of money and support from Republican politicians because of his influence over other African American ministers and because of his ability to use this congregation to support the Republican Party, and interestingly enough when he passed, another Chicagoan, Reverend Williams [R.A. Williams] from Pilgrim Baptist [Pilgrim Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], became head of the National Baptist Convention [sic.] and he was a Democrat, and much the same thing happened.  Now, it turns out that my grandfather on my father's [Joseph Branham] side had begun as a Pullman porter, and I suspect he continued at least for a period of time in Chicago, as both a pilgrim--Pullman porter and as a minister, and so he was able to assist L.K. Williams in getting cheap fares, because for many African Americans in those days, even as late as the 1960s, the one time of the year that you had basically a holiday, the one time of the year that you socialized, was going to a convention for your church and you could, you got on a train and you went somewhere for a week and you socialized and you had a lot of fun.  Many people would find that startling today, but for lots of people who worked very, very hard, and who were very, very committed to their church.  Their social lives and other things revolved around their church.  These summer conferences were very, very important.
Story_ID: 571865
Speaker 1: And of course, when L.K. Williams [Lacey Kirk Williams] died in 19- I believe '37 [1937], in a plane crash, my [paternal] grandfather [Joseph Branham] took over the church [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois] and what happened was, I think, no I think it was 1939 [sic. 1940], and what happened was that while they were having a funeral for L.K. Williams, the church burned down, or at least half the church burned down and so my grandfather then had to lead the fundraising effort to rebuild the church and, according to what I've been told, right after they had dedicated the newly rebuilt church, he died.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is--okay.  So A- L.K. Williams and your grandfather would have been, I guess, supporters of Oscar De Priest [Oscar Stanton De Priest], I guess, back in (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I would not be surprised, yes.
Speaker 2: He's Republican.
Speaker 1: Oscar De Priest and, maybe Ed Wright [Edward Herbert Wright], who was the African American precinct, I mean African American committeeman, and yes, I would not be surprised if my grandfather knew and supported Oscar De Priest.
Speaker 2: Okay, and then the next, the man that succeeded L.K. Williams, I mean, no that was the pastor of the other church, you mentioned--
Speaker 1: Pilgrim Baptist [Pilgrim Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pilgrim Baptist.
Speaker 1: R.A. Williams, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I guess he would have been in league with William Dawson [William L. Dawson], I guess, as the Democrats made the transition--
Speaker 1: Very, very likely.  Interestingly enough, I was doing a project for Inspired Partners, where I was actually working with young African Americans from a variety of churches, including Olivet and Quinn Chapel [Quinn Chapel A.M.E. Church, Chicago, Illinois], and Pilgrim to do the church histories, and what I discovered that Pilgrim began as an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church, but, as you know, they move A.M.E. ministers around and when he found out he was gonna be moved around, he decided to become a Baptist.  I would not be surprised if that was also true in my family.
Speaker 2: That's interesting.  I didn't know, you know, I never thought of the ch-, yeah, I suppose they, 'cause I thought--
Speaker 1: And it certainly wasn't the first time in Chicago [Illinois] that somebody began as an A.M.E. minister and became so popular and beloved by members of the congregation that they could not bear to part with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a lot of angst about that in churches all over the country.  If they have a good one or if they have a bad one, they want the bishop to move him--
Speaker 1: Well, I had a minister growing up in Memphis [Tennessee] named Reverend Miller [ph.] and I used to see Reverend Miller and his wife walking across the church grounds and they were such a model to me of wonderful, generous, loving people that yes, I have, I still have a fond memory for Reverend Miller.
Story_ID: 571866
Speaker 1: Now, are there any stories that your father [Joseph Branham] told about growing up on the South Side of Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: My father grew up with his stepmother.  My, his real mother, Maggie Fitzgerald [Maggie Fitzgerald Branham], whom we think was half white from New Orleans [Louisiana].  Her father was from Germany, but he had the name Fitzgerald which seemed kind of strange to me.  She died pretty much when he was just a tiny baby.  I don't think he ever knew her and my grandmother, Erma Hines [Erma Hines Branham] from Texas, raised my father and his brother John [John Branham], and the sister [Viola Branham], and they grew up on the South Side near Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  When I was born in my early years, I also lived within a door or two of Olivet Baptist Church, so they grew up near the church.  My father was--used to tell me stories about being a paperboy and how he would actually lose money because he would hire people to work for him and he would actually end up spending more money to--paying the people that worked for him than he did.  He talked about being a dishwasher.  I know that my father went to DuSable and that he actually was Wendell Phillips [New Wendell Phillips High School; DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] at the time, and that he made close friends with a lot of people in show business.  I know that he was close to Nat King Cole and to Mahalia Jackson, and to a number of other people of prominence.  I know that my father went to law school, 'cause I was having a conversation with St. Clair Drake, and St. Clair Drake mentioned out of the blue, "You know, I knew your father.  Your father was a student of mine in 1946, just when I came back and began to teach, and he was the smartest student I ever had," and I did not know that my father had been a student of St. Clair Drake's, nor did I know my father had gone to law school because apparently my father dropped out of law school in his third year to become a minister and nobody's ever explained that to me (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now St. Clair Drake, now he didn't teach, did he teach law?
Speaker 2: No, he didn't teach law--
Speaker 1: I didn't think--
Speaker 2: --but apparently he was teaching college.
Speaker 1: But what did he teach? Was he teaching--?
Speaker 2: Probably sociology.
Speaker 1: Sociology, I guess. Yeah, yeah, that's right.  So, you said the law school and St. Clair Drake (unclear).
Speaker 2: He probably taught my father when he was in college, or it may have been one course that my father took before or after he graduated from college.  My father went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.], so it's unlikely that it was a course while he was still in college.  It may have been a course he took after he graduated from college, but before he went to law school.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  St. Clair Drake was at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: No.  St. Clair Drake would probably have been at Roosevelt [Roosevelt College; Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] at the time--
Speaker 1: Roosevelt, okay.
Speaker 2: --but I believe that St. Clair Drake told me he was teaching at some college on the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], so this may have been a part time job before he got a full time teaching job at Roosevelt.  In any event, my father went to Howard and I remember going some papers of Congressman Arthur Mitchell [Arthur Wergs Mitchell] at the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois], and I found a letter that Alain Locke, who was the first African American Rhodes Scholar, had written to Arthur Mitchell about my father, talking about what a bright young man he was and apparently my father was applying for a job with Arthur Mitchell for the summer.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right, so what did your father end up doing? Did he--?
Speaker 2: My father became a minister.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was the pastor of South Shore Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  He later became the pastor of Shiloh Baptist Church [ph.] on Woodlawn, and then a church called Woodlawn Avenue.
Story_ID: 571867
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] and father [Joseph Branham] met?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is actually.  My mother was a schoolteacher in Memphis [Tennessee].  My mother was a schoolteacher for thirty or more years, and my father was a minister in Chicago [Illinois] and when he was down for some religious conference, he met her, fell in love, and apparently took her back to Chicago where he not only had a wife but an organist (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you have siblings, you've got two sisters who I know.
Speaker 2: I have a half-brother from my father's first marriage.  My father was married three times.  He's four years older than me.  His name is Joseph, Jr. [Joseph Branham, Jr.].  He's named after my father.  And I have three, two sisters, Cathryn [Cathryn Branham] and Carol [Carol Branham], they're two years younger than me.  Cathryn is eight minutes older than Carol, and they are brilliant women who've always intellectually intimidated me.
Speaker 1: Now, that's actually hard to believe, but that's (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, they were both National Merit Finalists, they were both on the cover of Jet when they graduated from high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee].  One went to Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania].  Carol won third place in national Atlantic Monthly essay contest when she was just a sophomore in high school.  Cathryn went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and picked up two master's degrees.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  And, we have their pictures.  Later on, we'll show them.
Speaker 2: And, they were adorable twins--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --to compound all the other tragedies (laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter) Okay.
Story_ID: 571868
Speaker 1: When you think about your parents' [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon and Joseph Branham] personalities and their dispositions, their talents--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: My mother, unquestionably.  My--I look, of course, a great deal like my father and as I get older I look even more like him and my father was very, very charming and handsome, and very, very--I'm not even in the same league as my father in terms of looks, and very popular.  People loved him and enjoyed his company.  My father was not the most studious, religious scholar, even though he was a successful minister for a period of time.  I have some of his bad temper but my mother is the eternal optimist.  My mother is a person who's never met a stranger.  My mother does not carry grudges.  I think I carry a little bit more of my mother's sunnier disposition, when my father can be a bit cynical.
Story_ID: 571869
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: I don't have an earliest childhood memory.  I guess the earliest I go back would be probably in the cradle, I mean in--yeah in the cradle watching the colored things overhead, or remember being in my parents' [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon and Joseph Branham] bed being tickled by my father, or my father riding me hobby horse on his knee. It seems to me all of my memories of being a little child were a lot of fun.  I remember taking a broomstick and putting a rope on it and running through the cobblestone allies behind a house with other kids playing cowboy.  That kind of stuff I remember very well.  I remember being in the second grade [at Stephen A. Douglas School, Chicago, Illinois] and being taken out of my class by my teacher, and taken up to the middle school and taken to an eighth grade class and being asked to spell something for the class.  Now, either I was being taken there to show up some eighth grader, who couldn't spell something which is a terrible thing, or somebody thought I was reasonably smart.  But I also remember being taken with my entire class to the boiler, which we were told was the whipping machine.  So they were trying to keep us in line by telling us that the boiler was where all bad kids went to be whipped.  I remember I had a second grade teacher who was white, who played the flute and I thought she was the most wonderful person in the world.  I also remember having the responsibility of making sure that my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham] got home.  The big brother role was very, very important to me.  I mean, I'm a kid who in the first grade cried the entire first day.  This is what I was told, that I cried the entire first day because my home life was so happy and I didn't want to go to school, but I got to enjoy school and was a pretty good student and very responsible toward my sisters except, of course, when I accidentally let them go into an area.  There was--I grew up on 31st Street, 31st and what was then South Parkway, which is now King Drive [Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive], and they were tearing things down.  Of course, they were going to later build Lake Meadows [Lake Meadows Apartments, Chicago, Illinois], so it was already in the process of urban renewal when I was a young kid in the late '40s [1940s] and early '50s [1950s], and apparently I went into the wrong area, or my sisters wandered into the wrong area--I blamed them--and we all got attacked by dogs.  And my sisters, to this day say that was pretty heroic about grabbing them and taking them away from the dogs before they got badly bit, but I was bitten and I remember being taken to the hospital and being told or explained the rabies shots I was going to have to have while just, it seemed to me, everybody in my neighborhood went searching for that dog.  The truth is that they found the dog and I escaped the rabies shots.  But that kind of community effort to find a dog is something that I've never forgotten.  I was not a perfect kid, though.  There was one week when I was in school that I played hooky for an entire week.  I would go to school, I would then leave, I would go to 31st Street Beach [Chicago, Illinois]--apparently it was in the summertime, apparently it was in May or sometime like that because apparently it was warm enough for me to take off all my clothes except for my underwear, go way underwater, lay on a rock until my underwear dried, put my clothes back on and go back, and for weeks my mother thought I had gone to school.  Ultimately, she got my report card, found that I was absent for those days and I got a spanking.  Now, what persuaded me or what got into me that I actually played hooky from second grade for an entire week?  I do not know, but I did it, and I am proud of it.
Speaker 1: Now, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I couldn't have been more than seven.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is quite a (laughter)--. Now those are the days, when you describe the dog attack I'm just reminded to think in those days a lot of dogs did roam the street, unlike now, it's hard to--
Speaker 2: Yes, and again, I have a scar over my left eye, camera right, which has never disappeared and if you look closely it's pretty visible, and I got that from a brick fight when I was a little kid.  I was one of those guys who broke his glasses.  I wore glasses since I was two.  In fact, my parents thought I was probably a little bit retarded until they finally had me tested because I wasn't seeing things very clearly as a little kid and I've been wearing glasses since I was two years old and I was very, very near-sighted.  In fact, I used to wear contact lenses as an adult until about oh, maybe ten or twelve years ago when I had eye surgery, or maybe less than ten years ago.  So anyway, I used to break my glasses and I actually was one of those kids who had the black horn-rimmed glasses with the tape right in the front, taped it up because my mother--we couldn't afford to buy any more glasses for me.  So, you know, a bit rough.
Story_ID: 571870
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Don't remember smelling a lot growing up in Chicago [Illinois].  Remember the smells more in Memphis [Tennessee] because I was older, and the kitchen was part of my world.  I remember the noise.  I remember the cars with what looked like stairs on the side.  Runway--there's a word for that, I'm trying to remember the word now.
Speaker 1: Running board?
Speaker 2: Running boards.  I remember cars with running boards.  I remember an automobile accident when I was a very young child.   Somebody got hit by a car.  I believe that they were killed.  I remember the blood.  I remember playing hooky for church and tearing my pants and my father [Joseph Branham] not being very pleased.  I know that when I was three or four, they said I used to stand on the radiator and preach.  Obviously I wasn't speaking English so either I was possessed by God and speaking in tongues, or I was talking complete gibberish, but I don't remember doing that but I am told that I did that and they were convinced from a very early age that I would become a minister, and ultimately I actually was lay minister when I was sixteen or so, but it didn't take.
Story_ID: 571871
Speaker 1: So I imagine the church was big part of life growing up then (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well, the church was a big part of life when I was a little kid, but I don't remember a great deal of it.  I remember some of the things that my father [Joseph Branham] would say in church, which I found a little shocking.  My father apparently was a pretty blunt minister.  But, I remember church much more when I, when we moved to Memphis [Tennessee] when my parents broke up.
Speaker 1: Now, what sort of thing would he say?  I had to go back to that because that's too tempting to leave alone.  What would he say in church then?
Speaker 2: I don't remember specifically, but I remember my father used the word rape once in a sermon, and I was one of those young people who was taught that language was very important and there are certain things you don't say.  I once got a spanking for saying that somebody lied.  You're not supposed to say somebody lied.  You're supposed to say they told a story.  I also got a spanking for reckless eyeballing.  So, I remember the word rape just shocked me, shocked my sensibilities as a young person.  How could my father use that word in a sermon?
Speaker 1: All right, now, you grew up in Chicago [Illinois] 'til, you were here in Chicago until--
Speaker 2: Age eight.
Speaker 1: Age eight, okay.  And your parents broke up?
Speaker 2: My parents divorced.
Speaker 1: All right.  Okay.  So, how well, how did you feel about that?
Speaker 2: Oh, I didn't like it at all.  I was the little prince of the church and I, you know, we always had guests over.  I used to hide between my daddy's legs.  I used to hate to say thank you, but there were always a lot of people.  My father talks about taking me to New York [New York] when I was a little kid and taking me out late at night and me falling asleep under the table, so apparently I just enjoyed being a kid.  Here, all of a sudden, not only do my parents break up but I've got to move out of Chicago, and I--one of the things that I remembered most is practicing a new name.  I figured if my parents were going to get divorced, I was going to change my name.  So I wasn't going to be Charles Branham [HistoryMaker Charles Russell Branham] anymore.  I was going to adopt my mother's [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] name and I was going to be Chuck Hurd, because it was short and blunt and I thought this is what a man--this is the name a man has, Chuck Hurd.  The other thing, of course, is I was just trying to persuade my mother not to leave and I would argue that you don't want to go south, because they'll make us a slave.  Now, how I knew about slavery at eight years old, or how I associated slavery with the South, I have no idea, but I know I was adamantly afraid of the South, because I thought that we'd become slaves.
Speaker 1: Okay.  You picked it up somewhere, I guess, they didn't just raise this issue, they didn't teach black history in school--
Speaker 2: I had an African American consciousness at an early age.
Speaker 1: Okay.  But they didn't teach it in public schools?
Speaker 2: No, I'm sure they didn't.  I'm sure that nobody mentioned it and I'm sure, I don't even remember my parents ever mentioning it and I thought I remember once asking if I was white or black, not being sure.  But, I was sure enough that I was black that I didn't want to go to the South because I didn't want my, didn't want to take a chance on being turned into a slave.
Speaker 1: So you're in third grade at this point, I guess, right?
Speaker 2: No, second grade [at Stephen A. Douglass School, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Second grade, okay.
Story_ID: 571872
Speaker 1: And you were going to Douglas [Stephen A. Douglass School, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I went to Douglas for the first two years and then I went to Lincoln [Lincoln Elementary School, Memphis, Tennessee] from the third grade to the fifth grade, and then I went to Manassas High School [Memphis, Tennessee].
Speaker 1: Lincoln's in Memphis [Tennessee], right?
Speaker 2: Lincoln was in Memphis.  Lincoln was right around the corner from the house where we lived, and that was the first couple of years.  Fond memories of Lincoln, because I remember at one time on the playground it seemed to be every guy in the entire class grabbed me and every girl grabbed this girl named Sylvia [ph.] and tried to push us together and make us kiss.  And I wanted very badly to do this, but I pretended to resist.
Speaker 1: The difference between the North and the South, I guess.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But okay, so well, I mean, did you, when you looked back at it, what were the differences between Chicago [Illinois] and Memphis, I mean--?
Speaker 2: Well, there are too many to describe.  First, the home life is quite, totally different.  My mother's [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] older sister, Willa [Willa Hurd Johnson (ph.)], was married to a wonderful man named Reverend Johnson [ph.], who had two churches and Reverend Johnson not only was married to my aunt, but he had another one of my aunts living with him, so this is a man who married a woman and let her sister live with him.  It's quite a man.  Now, his wife's other sister and three snot-nosed kids want to move in with him.  And he said, "Fine."  So, we moved into this wonderful house and the first thing I do is notice that there are very beautifully polished hardwood floors with little throw rugs, and so, what better for a young man to do than to jump on the throw rugs and try to slide all the way across the polished floors.  This is the first day that I got there, and I was admonished that, you know, this isn't the way we do things.  And so one of the interesting things about growing up in that house was that I spent very little time in the living room, and that I never ate in the dining room and that there was a clear demarcation between adults and children.  I was in the study.  Reverend Johnson had a study with lots of books.  I spent a good deal of time in their dictionaries, but he didn't have a lot of non-religious books so I didn't want to spend a lot of time reading those, so I would go into the closet and take a foldaway bed and I'd unfold it every night and in the morning I'd fold my bed up and so I didn't have a bed of my own until I went to college [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois].  But, Reverend Johnson built an extension to the house so that my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham] would have a bedroom.  They slept together until they went to college.  We had a peach tree and a pear tree in the backyard.  We had a one-eyed cat that we thought was a boy until it had kittens.  And then we had two dogs, Tony and Teddy.  I got to name the dogs, I got to feed the dogs.  I did everything in the house expect cook, which is something I regret, because I should've learn to cook, or at least cook better.  And, when I was twelve I decided to run away from home.  So, I had an aunt who used to pinch me and boys don't like to be pinched.  You can slug me but don't pinch me, and so one day she pinched me and just drove me a little too far.  I threw a can of dog food at her and my dog, Tony, and I decided to run away from home and so the only way I knew to escape was to take the exact same car route that my mother took to her job.  Now, my mother taught at Manassas for a couple of years and then taught at another school, but she drove my sisters and I to school until we graduated from high school.  Which is kind of embarrassing to have your parents take you to school, and so I walked halfway, pretty much the entire length of Memphis.  I walked through downtown.  As I got near downtown, my dog stopped.  My dog realized that the food was back at home and he didn't know where I was taking him, so my dog actually turned around and abandoned me, and I'm the guy who fed my dog all of his life.  He turns around and he abandons me and he goes home.  I walk all the way up to school, didn't realize it's Saturday, school's closed, I don't know where else to go.  I then go visit my cousins.  They turned me in.  My mother comes to pick me up and as I arrive home, my dog looks me as if to say, "Where you been, and don't you realize the food is here?"  So, I was betrayed by my dog at the age of twelve.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's quite a story.
Story_ID: 571873
Speaker 1: Tell me about school.  Did--was there any particular mentors in school or helpful teachers that stand out?
Speaker 2: Actually, I--this is a strange thing to say, but no.  There was some negative reinforcement that, that actually turned out to be very good.  I was crazy about my fifth grade teacher.  I was a talkative kid, but I was always did well, and I was new to school and my cousin, Ava [Ava Hurd (ph.)], was very popular.  And I was basically raised and my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham] and I were basically raised with our four cousins, my Aunt Lula's [Lula Hurd] twin brother, Leon [Leon Hurd, Sr.], who was something of a second father to me, a wonderful, wonderful man; and he had four children, Leon, Jr. [Leon Hurd, Jr.], William [William Hurd] who is a distinguished doctor and inventor and jazz musician, Ava, who was my age.  Leon was a half year older than me and a year ahead of me.  William was in the same grade as my sisters, and then the youngest child, Mildred [ph.].  So we transferred to a new school so that my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] could take us to school because this is where she was teaching for a few years, and I wanted to get to know people, so I was just talking all the time, and Ms. Golden [ph.], my fifth grade teacher, was a friend of my mother's and she was very patient, but after a while, I think just too much.  So, she moved my desk next to hers facing all the other kids so that I couldn't talk to them so that the poor decent lady could teach.  I, of course, paid absolutely no attention to what she said, but there happened to be a bookcase next to where I'm sitting and so while I was in the fifth grade, I read 'The Iliad' [Homer] and 'The Odyssey' [Homer], because I could, and it partly stimulated a lifetime love of reading and of learning (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That's not easy.
Speaker 2: And it was that kind of patience, she knew I'd get hundreds on all the tests and papers--
Speaker 1: That's not an easy thing for a fifth grader to do, to read 'The Iliad' and 'The Odyssey.'
Speaker 2: Well, I'm sure that they were in a very popular translation.  I'm sure that was not the original, but I mean, it's pretty good long reading.  Now remember, my mother was raising three kids and she was doing it pretty much on her own, but with the help of her sisters and, so, I spent a good deal of time in the library.  I spent a good deal of time--my sisters and I, my mother would drop us off sometimes and we would spend three and four hours being babysat at a library, so I had a chance to spend a lot of time reading.  You see, my mother had to earn extra money and so my mother would play piano at various places.  She'd play piano on riverboats.  I remember after I went to college, she played on the radio, on radio programs.  She always earned extra money doing extra work.
Story_ID: 571874
Speaker 1: Tell us about high school.  Now you--you went to Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], right (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I went to Manassas.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The, the--living in the house that I lived in was wonderful.  I was, I guess, twelve or thirteen years old when I decided to become a really religious person.  I felt the calling and I remember deciding that I was going to stop watching TV, because TV was from the devil, and Reverend Johnson [ph.] was patient but he knew it was killing me because I actually was, I loved the TV.  There was actually a TV in my room.
Speaker 1: Now is that a notion that came from the Reverend from church that the TV was of the devil (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, no.  It was just my own, it was something of my own invention.  The TV was devil and that in order to be really religious I should stop watching TV, and so at one point after about a week, we sat down.  He basically patiently, because he knew.  He basically said, you know, "I think God would understand if you watched a little TV." Of course, I was addicted to John Wayne movies and I was addicted to Roy Rogers and I was addicted to all the cowboy movies, and Gabby Hayes [George "Gabby" Hayes].  I remember this was a little teeny, tiny black and white TV, but it was my joy and so I'll always remember him fondly for that.  I mean, you remember the moral lessons of growing up and the period of just before high school, twelve, thirteen, and fourteen, was really, really formative growing up because it was also the only time I ever saw my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] cry.  My mother and her sisters [Willa Hurd Johnson (ph.) and Lula Hurd] went to carnival and there was a shell game and the guy before them won, and so my mother started putting a dollar down and her sisters put a dollar and ultimately they lost a hundred dollars.  Now, this is a woman that never made more than five thousand dollars in her life, and she was a schoolteacher with a college degree.  Of course, in Memphis [Tennessee] and in most of Tennessee, African American teachers were paid less than white teachers in the 1950s and '60s [1960s], even into the '70s [1970s].  So, I remember that drive back from that county fair, and my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham] crying--and my aunts and my mother crying because they had lost a hundred dollars (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, to put it in perspective, yeah.
Speaker 2: --which was a fortune for them.
Speaker 1: You could buy a used car for that amount.
Speaker 2: I guess that's one reason why I never gambled in my life.  Yeah used--that was one of those events that really had an effect on me. Now, a different kind of thing that had an effect on me growing up in high school, well not so much high school but eighth grade, was Mr. Barber [ph.].  You were talking about mentors and negative mentors.  He was my geography teacher in seventh grade and I learned a lot of geography.  Mr. Barber's rule was if you missed five questions on his quiz, you got five licks on the hand.  We had corporal punishment, and Mr. Barber was also a football coach, and he had broad shoulders and he always wore a sports jacket and he always wore a leather strap, which was about that wide (demonstrates) and about that thick on (demonstrates) his shoulder, on his left shoulder, under his sports jacket every day, and so I would remember many times when I was the only person sitting and everybody in the room including my cousin stood in line for five licks on the hand.  They did not like it if you held your hand out and then pulled it away, because that was wasted effort from the person who was whipping you and, of course, sometimes they'd be generous.  They'd say, "You can get it on the backside or you can get it in your hand," but I grew up in an atmosphere of corporal punishment where, on more than one occasion, my hand would swell up the size of a baseball mitten because even I got caught once or twice, usually for conduct, once for a fight, where you were punished.  I think I got whipped twice in high school, and that's one of the things about growing up in that high school that I'm not too fond of.
Story_ID: 571875
Speaker 1: Now at Manassas [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], now, were you in a college prep course at this point?
Speaker 2: Yes.  We were tracked.  I was in the top track.  I remember--there are several things to think about when I think about Manassas.  One, of course, is I have great fondness because I was a geek and that was before the term was even invented.  I weighed about 118 pounds when I graduated.  I had my hair all slicked back.  I wore big thick glasses.  I couldn't get a date.  I actually was head of the March of Dimes [National Foundation; March of Dimes Foundation] campaign in my sophomore year and we raised more money than any other school in the city.  Now, how I got to be chosen, I don't know, but probably because I was in a play the year before that was kind of successful and that was my opportunity to be an actor and to sing.  This was when my voice was very, very high, and also probably because some of the teachers knew me and therefore, I think there was a little favoritism involved because they knew my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon].  So I led this campaign and we had a whole bunch of volunteers, it was on a Saturday, and I felt like a big man, and I was wandering around the neighborhood, collecting money for the March of Dimes and I apparently wandered too far.  I wandered into a neighborhood that was white, and an individual, I'll never forget this, told me that I didn't belong in this neighborhood and to get--that I better get out.  That won't be the last time somebody has told me to get out of the neighborhood, and then he spit on me.  And so, my picture was in the paper, we raised more money than any other high school.  I even got a card from Howard Baker [Howard H. Baker, Jr.], who was the senator from Tennessee, with my picture, congratulating me on my role, but it never got rid of that bad taste from that experience.  Now a positive thing that occurred was that I got to be probably the next to the last African American governor of Boys State [American Legion Boys State] and, again, it was partly because of the high school I went to.  It was one of the bigger African American high schools in the state.
Speaker 1: Explain what Boys State is.
Speaker 2: Boys State is a week-long event that is held in Nashville, Tennessee, and they send juniors, between your junior and your senior year, they send you to have a mock convention to learn patriotism.  Bill Clinton [President William Jefferson "Bill" Clinton], for example, had that famous incident where he met John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] because he was sent as a representative from Boys State to Boys Nation.  Now, Memphis [Tennessee], at that time I'm sure that there were two Boys States.  I don't think that the Boys State in Arkansas was integrated.  I know because that was the year before, that there were two Boys States in Tennessee.  There was one for whites and one for blacks.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And we had ours on Tennessee State's [Tennessee Agricultural and Industrial State University; Tennessee State University, Nashville, Tennessee] campus and, actually, I was not the guy that people were going to select as the governor.  I was--I was the best friend of the governor.  I was a buddy of the guy that people said that they wanted, but the reality was is that he was a very popular guy with the ladies, and a lot of the guys didn't really like him that much and the advisor kind of pushed him on us.  I just made friends with people.  I wasn't even trying to run for anything, and a guy that I don't even know from another city, one of the smaller towns, nominated me and the guy that was supposed to be our candidate whom I actually voted for in the first round didn't make the runoff and I got to be, and in fact you can go on a website and find my name, I got to be the next to the last African American governor of Boys State and we have a dance and at the end of it they carry me on their shoulders up and down the streets of Nashville and every young person, male and female, should have the experience once of being hoisted on other peoples' shoulders and carried up and down the street.  It's one of the great moments of my life.
Story_ID: 571876
Speaker 1: Tell us the story about Boys State [American Legion Boys State].
Speaker 2: Yeah, the, the interesting thing was that they called the black governor and the white governor back to Nashville [Tennessee] to give an address before the entire American Legion and of course there are Legionnaires and there are white Legionnaires and they're sitting in different parts of the hall, but it's a big assemblage and a couple of things that I noticed, of course, is that you get to see a little bit of white Legionnaires.  Remember, I grew up in Memphis [Tennessee].  I grew up in a very segregated environment, and I did not know a white person until I really got to college [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois], but I'm sitting there watching these guys chase women and drink whiskey and play roulette.  I mean, they had a Ferris wheel and everything.  I'm going, "Okay, this is, this is patriotism in action."  But I get on the stage and I address this huge audience and I'm one of those guys who would spend hours and hours by myself walking in a park memorizing my speech.  I mean, if you were--if you come from a family of five generations of ministers, public speaking is part of what you know how to do, and I've always been relatively good at public speaking, or comfortable at public speaking, so I gave a speech in which I condemned creeping socialism and communism and talked about the American way of life, and I will tell you right now that I thought it was a brilliant speech.  And then the white governor got up and he didn't prepare anything.  He talked about people not mowing their lawns and I felt sorry for the guy, the poor schlep, and I got a five hundred dollar scholarship to go to any school in Tennessee which, of course, I never used.  He got to go to Boys Nation, because only the white governor was sent to Boys Nation.  You send one representative per state, it's gonna be the white guy, so he got a chance to see John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy].  He got a chance to go to Boys Nation.
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This is 1962.
Speaker 1: Sixty-two [1962], okay.
Speaker 2: I was a junior in high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee].  I was a cub reporter at a newspaper, I was, I had just been elected class president for my senior class and editor of the yearbook.  I was a, a hotshot on campus, or at least I thought I was.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 571877
Speaker 1: We were talking before the interview started, and you said that one of your classmates was I- the late [HistoryMaker] Isaac Hayes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know when--you forget what high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] is like.  I was the guy that everybody liked, but I was the best friend, and I think because I live on the opposite side of town and didn't have these people in my lives on the weekend as close friends, actually my whole life revolved around my family.  I tried to be a Boy Scout, but my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] said we couldn't afford the uniform, so I never got to even be a Boy Scout.  I was one of those kids who had to be on the front porch, so I really threw myself into school and, you know, being a guy, being a friend.  So, school gives you all kinds of esteem.  I was a lieutenant colonel and battalion commander of ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] and on the rifle team.  So, I thought I might go to Vietnam.  I was the emcee of the annual shows and Isaac Hayes was the lead singer; in fact, he sounded like Brook Benton.  I don't know if anybody'd remember Brook Benton.
Speaker 1: Right, right, I remember (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We both wore tuxedos.  We wore matching tuxedos, and, of course, Isaac sat behind me in speech class, Bebe Fingles' [ph.] class, and I could not have been happier when many, many years later I bought his first recording, but I remember Isaac being thrown out of band class, because he wasn't attentive enough and then, Emerson Able [Emerson Able, Jr.], who used to throw him out of band class, ends up being a sideman, being hired by Isaac as a sideman on one of his albums.  I mean, you know, what sweet revenge.  But, yeah, being the class president and being the battalion commander and being the--on the rifle team and being governor of Boys State [American Legion Boys State], all this was a lot of fun.  It was a lot of honor and status for a guy who was basically a geek.  I wasn't a jock.  I didn't play basketball.  I didn't play football or run track.  I didn't have any particular talents.  I was in the band for one semester.  No, I was in the band for one year, so I got to be in a marching band that played in Nashville [Tennessee], but I wasn't really that good as a musician.  I was just a smart guy that made friends.
Story_ID: 571878
Speaker 1: I did have the added advantage of putting my friends' names in the newspapers because I started work when I was about fourteen, pulling a paycheck.  Everybody mows the lawns at twelve, but I worked for a newspaper called the Memphis World, and the Memphis World was the second black newspaper.  The other was the Chicago Defender.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And I'm not exactly sure if I remember how I got the job.  Somebody mentioned that they needed somebody and I walked down there and got the job, but I think part of the reason I got the job was because I was light-skinned.  I looked around the office, and this is something that Robert Ratcliffe [ph.], who was a reporter there and a guy I loved and admired, later told me.  He said, "What you didn't know, kid, is that this is a place where we only hire light-skinned black people."  And my job was to do everything.  I swept up, I would get up at 4:00 in the morning and deliver papers to the paper boys.  I would then come back in the evening and try to collect money for the papers that they sold.  I hauled papers to the compound- compost and sold them for scrap.  I did everything that, and they knew I was a cub reporter.  I remember once going to a--now I don't know how my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] let me get away with this--but I remember going to a concert on Beale Street at night, and I couldn't have been more than seven--sixteen or seventeen years old.  And, interviewing Chubby Checker and Dee Dee Sharp and Arthur Alexander and The Marvelettes, and I remember once asking Chubby, I said, "Do you think the Twist will ever die?"  And he says, "I don't give a damn."  (Laughter) And so, I would do that.  I wrote a story about pawn shops on Beale Street.  Now, I'm sixteen or seventeen years old, but I also wrote a little gossip column and I would put the names of people in various schools in my column, and then they would, of course, buy the paper to see their names and I got to be part of this city-wide club called the Counts and so, again, you have all these ways.  Now remember, this is a guy who can't drive, my mother told me that we didn't have enough money for me to have insurance, so therefore there was no need for me to learn to drive.  I didn't learn to drive until I was in graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I didn't have a car.  I couldn't drive.  I lived on the wrong side of town, and yet I got a chance to do all of these things, but there was a very important lesson that I learned, working for the Negro world.  And that's about self-loathing.  J.A. Beecham [ph.], who was the editor, was a very, very fair-skinned African American.  He was black only by an act of imagination.  You'd look at him and you thought he was white, and he was the editor of a black newspaper, and he genuinely hated being black.  And I remember riding with him, and he talked constantly and basically he was talking about black people, "And I gotta do this and I gotta do that, and I gotta make money."  And he would emphasize his point by hitting me on the leg.  He wasn't coming on to me.  He just emphatic.  He was driving, talking to this fifteen or sixteen-year-old kid and imparting his wisdom and he was terrible angry about his minister because his minister was talking about civil rights.  "I don't wanna hear about this civil rights stuff.  I just wanna tell people how to make money.  You need to tell people how to make money."  And he would tell me these gruesome horror stories of young people misbehaving and getting their heads blown up, and I began to realize this is a guy who could have passed for white easily, but then he wouldn't have had his status, and so he was confined to being the editor of the second--not the first, but the second, and I'm sure just barely breaking even--African American newspaper, and he really hated being black, and I've never forgotten how tragic that was in a person.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the--so the major newspaper out of Memphis [Tennessee] was the Tri (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) The major newspaper was The Tri-State Defender.
Speaker 2: Right. Did you know the photographer, [HistoryMaker] Ernest Withers?
Speaker 1: I did know Ernest Withers.  Ernest Withers' sons were friends of mine.  One of them was a classmate of mine; in fact, one of them still owes me money because I was a member of the Old Timers, which was the in social club, and I got to be in it as a sophomore rather than coming in as a junior, so that my cousin who is older than me, actually came in because I got him in to the elite social club.  So we wore these red blazers, and when you graduate there's no reason to keep a red blazer, so quite often you sell them to somebody who's coming into the club and Perry Withers, who was a youn- who was a year behind me, bought my blazer but he never gave me all the money (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 571879
Speaker 1: Now were there any particular mentors in high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], or people that, that took an interest in you?
Speaker 2: Well, all the teachers were pretty nice except for Ms. Perkins [ph.].  Ms. Perkins was our senior English teacher and just about everybody had to take her.  She hated kids.  She was a chaperone on our sophomore trip to Washington [D.C.].  She put the girls in the front of the bus, the boys in the back of the bus, she sat in the middle of the buss, she put her leg, which must have been the size of a small tree, over the barrier onto the next set of seats, and proceeded to go to sleep.  My buddy, Roderick [ph.], tried to sneak over her leg to get to the girls in the front of the bus and woke her up and she called him, and it was amazing what profanity was allowed to use against sophomores in those days.  I'll never forget it because you not only got to run to the top of the Washington Monument [Washington, D.C.], but I also met Sam Cooke.  We were staying in the same motel and we snuck out, and there were about three or four of us and we found his room and we knocked on his door and he answered and he stood in the doorway and he must have spoken to us fifteen or twenty minutes, very, very polite and accommodating and, of course, this would have been just before he went to Los Angeles [California] and got killed.  But, no, I did not have a particular teacher that I viewed as a mentor.  My sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham] did, but I had teachers who I liked. I remember one teacher, Ms. Fultz [ph.].  She was my English teacher, very, very smart.  She's still alive.  I remember going down the hallway at the end, we used to have teachers who basically formed human lines--human barriers in the halls, so the one side of the students had to walk on the right and the other side had to walk on the left going in the opposite direction, and I was on the wrong side of the teacher and she reproached me and I said, "Well, I'm going to English."  Now, I said it very innocently, but she assumed that I knew that the English drove on the left side of the road and that this indicated I was a superior intelligence and therefore she should endorse me for college (laughter).
Speaker 1: That's, that's interesting.
Speaker 2: I think because I wore thick glasses, I think people thought I was smarter than I was.
Story_ID: 571880
Speaker 1: Now I didn't ask you about high school, but did--was there any black history taught in high school in Memphis [Tennessee] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No.  I'm glad you asked that because, Johnny Johnson [John Johnson, Jr.] was the coach, a wonderful guy, showed a lot of newsreels, because we had to reel--the reel thing.  We had one day when they mentioned black history and it was virtually all about Booker T. Washington, and he didn't know anything about Booker T. Washington. He just mentioned him.  So there really wasn't any teaching of black history.  Black history was displayed in ironic ways.  For example, of course, when I grew up you had the black and white signs.  There was the Malco Theatre [Memphis, Tennessee], which was the most prominent theater downtown, and African Americans and whites, of course, sat separately and you did not know from the sign where the colored entrance was.  What you did was you went to the side, and when you went in, there was a picture of Booker T. Washington and you knew from that picture this is where black people were supposed to go, so we would go up to the balcony.  I remember watching 'The Ten Commandments' at the Malco Theatre in the balcony, which probably was better seats than on the main level, but that was your way of knowing African American history.  I mean, there were stores in Memphis when I was growing up where African Americans could buy clothing, but they couldn't try it on, and so you learned your African American history through reality.  I remember coming back from college [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois] my freshman year and I had a button, "Goldwater [Barry Goldwater] in 1864," and I remember my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] ripping that button off of me and screaming at me.  I thought I was a wise guy, Barry Goldwater, 1864.  I was obviously making fun of what I considered his retrograde ideas.  My mother saw it quite differently.  You see, my mother remembers when African Americans were run out of Memphis for practicing with whites, like Jimmie Lunceford, who was run out of Memphis.  My mother knew that I was only a few years older than Emmett Till, and she remembered Emmett Till and so she was not gonna, she said that she screamed at me.  She said, "Those white people will kill you.  Take that thing off your--those white people will kill you."  And, my mother was being cautious.  She was being protective.  She was afraid that I would say something or do something or wear a button in front of the wrong white person and that I could be killed and, of course, she had enough practical history to support that.  I mean, I remember my first civil rights demonstration in Memphis and not telling my mother.  My mother had been very--had made it very clear.  "I am a school teacher.  If you're arrested in a civil rights demonstration and your name gets in the paper, they can fire me for being your mother."  Whether or not they could, I'm sure they had in the past, and so I actually was arrested but never printed or fingerprinted or anything.  They just brought us all in and let us all go.  Probably because there were too many of us and also probably because we weren't doing anything really but just walking up and down the street.
Speaker 1: What was the issue?
Speaker 2: Well, Memphis was a completely segregated city in 19--in the late 1960s.  As I said before, the first whites I met I met in the summer after I graduated from high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee].  There was a white lady who actually put together a little group of blacks and whites.  We would meet at her home and we read 'Lord of the Flies' [William Golding] and we read a number of other books and we would discuss it and there were four African Americans, all of us going to white schools; one was going to Yale [Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut], he flunked out.  He had an eight hundred out of eight hundred--no a sixteen hundred out of sixteen hundred on the SATs and he was very, very smart.  He bought a smoking jacket and just got too popular and just didn't do any work, but I don't remember any of us, after having been introduced to the whites at this group, ever speaking to them and I don't remember any of us ever saying anything when the book discussion was going on.  We just listened to the white kids talk and it was her attempt to provide some integration, and it didn't work.  The white kids were very nice, and we all sat in the same room which was startling.  It was in her home, but we didn't interact.  We were scared.
Story_ID: 571881
Speaker 1: Who is the lawyer in Memphis [Tennessee] that, that was like the spark of the Civil Rights Movement I mean there were--?
Speaker 2: Well, there are several.  I remember Russell Sugarmon [HistoryMaker Russell B. Sugarmon] as being very important (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, yeah, we've interviewed him, and, yeah.
Speaker 2: Russell Sugarmon, and there were several others, there was Willis [A.W. Willis, Jr.]--
Speaker 1: Yeah, Willis, right. Willis is the one I was thinking of.
Speaker 2: And Sugarmon were very important.  They were a breath of fresh air.  I think James Lawson might have also been there for a period of time.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  He was at the seminary--
Speaker 2: But he was also the Fisk [Fisk University, Nashville, Tennessee]--but he was also at Fisk for a while.  And the Lee family, who went to our church.  I was born in Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois] and I went to Providence A.M.E. Church [Memphis, Tennessee], and there was a family that had a house right behind Provident.  I think it may even be known by the church, and I think they had like eleven or twelve kids, and several--and I had a crush on one of them--and several of the girls, interesting enough it was the girls--were very active in the Civil Rights Movement, and besides taking me to Currie's Club Tropicana [Memphis, Tennessee] where I was, it was illegal for me to be so I could actually listen to Howlin' Wolf when I was sixteen.  I also got, you know, that was when I got my first introduction to the youth division of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now you were in high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] during the days--were the Freedom Riders before you got to high school?
Speaker 2: Freedom Riders were before I graduated in 1963.
Speaker 1: Before, yeah.
Speaker 2: The Freedom Riders began in 1960.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So you were in high school--yeah.
Speaker 2: I would have been a sophomore in high school.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.  When Diane Nash and the--yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were older.  I knew of Diane Nash.  [HistoryMaker] Andrew Young came to the church because I think Andrew Young was either dating or interested in dating one of the Lee sisters, so Andrew Young came to our church once or twice, but there wasn't a lot of conversation, but I remember my buddy, my best friend and I debating in my church.  I would set up programs, little youth day programs.  That's how I got to be a lay minister.  I would give the same speech about Jesus and Alexander, which I had memorized, and they would pay me fifty dollars, which I would then return to the church, and my buddy, Robert Rivers [ph.], was a very good friend of mine, whose parents were also divorced and who also was born in Chicago [Illinois], but grew up in Memphis and who went to my high school and I had gotten him into the Old Timers club.  Robert was always my--the guy who introduced me--and I would always give him five dollars as if I was bribing him for the nice introduction; I mean, I had a real, like, thing worked out and I did that a couple times, and Robert came to Chicago, I came to Chicago, when I came to college [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois] he came to Chicago and he died.  He was about twenty-one or twenty-two years old.  He was one of my best buddies in high school, but we once had a program in my church that I put together in which one of my other best friends, Roderick [ph.], and I debated whether it was a good idea to fight for integration, and my buddy Roderick was arguing that black people weren't ready for integration.  Now remember, this would be probably our junior or senior year, so would be 1962 or '63 [1963], and this is a very intelligent, I mean he's a doctor now, he's a very intelligent, very nice guy, but there were a lot of African Americans, not because they were nationalists, but because they were just conservative and they did not think that necessarily African Americans were ready to integrate with whites, and I'm sure they changed their minds as the--in the following years, but this would, this would have been just before the March on Washington.
Story_ID: 571882
Speaker 1: Now did you know people that, that went to the march, or--?
Speaker 2: Actually, I've met people who've met, who went to the march later.  I didn't go to the March on Washington.  In fact, I didn't pay that much attention to the March on Washington.  I was a strange kid.  I was such a happy guy in college--in high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee] that I didn't really plan on going to college.  Now, this is very strange because my father [Joseph Branham] and mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] are both college graduates, but I thought I would go into the [U.S.] Army and became a war hero.  John Carlos Harris was a year ahead of me, who had been class president ahead of me and who lived close to my cousin's house and who kind of was a role model for me, and I hung out a couple of times in the summertime and he went to Vietnam, and so I thought I'd go to Vietnam.  Now, they shipped John Carlos Harris' parts back.  He was blown to bits in Vietnam, and I had never applied, I didn't apply to college and so my mother, who was very good about these things, one day just kind of walked up to me and said, "What are you gonna do?"  And, we kind of sat down and she said, "Do you really wanna go to the Army?"  See, I figured, you know, I was a lieutenant colonel and battalion commander in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps].  I got to wear the uniform twice a week.  I mean, you know, which was great because the other time I just wore the same clothes, so I figured I'd be a war hero, come back, become a politician and run for president of the United States.  I was really bright at seventeen years of age, and she said well I think you should apply to college.  So I had two choices.  I wanted to go to a small school near Chicago [Illinois], because my father lived here, and I needed money because my mother had three kids and they were pretty close together.
Speaker 1: Now, was your father like a part of your life?  After you moved to Memphis [Tennessee] (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I saw my father twice--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --between eight and eighteen, and he came to visit once, and he drove down, and then another time we came to Chicago, but that wasn't a very happy experience.  We ended up actually being kidnapped--
Speaker 1: What happened?
Speaker 2: --by this woman who had a crush on my father and she actually kidnapped us (laughter), my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham] and I, and my mother had to find us.  But, I hadn't applied to any colleges, and so I had done very well on all the tests and colleges had approached me and so I picked these two schools and one of them required ten dollars for an application fee and the other didn't.  So I applied to one college.
Speaker 1: The one that didn't?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) And, it gave me a four-year ride.
Speaker 1: So this is Rockford College [Rockford University], right?
Speaker 2: This is Rockford College.
Speaker 1: In Rockford, Illinois (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I had never been there until I actually got on a bus, no, got on a train and then got on a bus and arrived with a big, you know, over-grown suitcase.
Story_ID: 571883
Speaker 1: Now, Rockford College [Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois].  Rockford is the second-largest city in Illinois.  Most people don't know that (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's correct. It's not now.  It was, it was then.  It was in the 1960s.
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, all right.
Speaker 2: There's another town--there's another Illinois town that's bigger than Rockford now.
Speaker 1: But it's not a big town, by any stretch that--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --no.
Speaker 1: So, what was it like?  Were there many black people in Rockford, or at the college?
Speaker 2: Well I never really spent much time in the city.  I have been back a lot, but I've never really spent much time in the town except to, you know, stop by a Blockbuster periodically.  But it was a culture shock.  In the first place, there were three black people in the entire college, all upperclassmen girls.  Two of them I had crushes on periodically; so it works out fine.  There were about three or four blacks in my entering class.  About half of 'em flunked out.  One of them became my best friend, who was also from Chicago [Illinois].  He was from 47th [Street] and Champlain [Avenue], at Washington [Washington Park, Chicago, Illinois], and he flunked out.  I didn't know anybody.  I kind of wandered around.  Various people would talk to me.  I remember hanging out with Steve Schulberg [Stephen Schulberg] a lot.  Steve Schulberg was Budd Schulberg's son, and Budd Schulberg, of course, wrote 'On the Waterfront' and 'What Makes Sammy Run?' Of course, his son hated his father.  He had just come back from Mexico.  He was incredibly witty and incredibly handsome and, of course, he flunked out after about a semester.  I just muddled through.  I got elected class president, freshman class president, and did pretty well my freshman year in terms of grades, but I wasn't an academic superstar.  I was very, pretty much kind of a B student, but not much more than a B student.  I struggled a little bit in English, of all things.  We had a Mrs. Carroll [Gertrude Carroll].  Mrs. Carroll was a part-time teacher.  Mrs. Carroll could not say the word sex.  Mrs. Carroll would write it on the board, S-E-X, and whenever she would reference it in terms of some piece of literature, she'd point to it.  I, of course, was new and doing the same thing I did in high, in fifth grade.  I was talking to people and trying to make friends.  And I remember Joyce Armanetti [ph.], whose parents owned the Armanetti liquor store chain [Armanetti Beverage Marts] in Dwight, Illinois was one of my first friends, and Ms. Carroll got upset that I was talking while she was talking, which is understandable.  I've been on the other side of that podium.  She then pulls me out of class and she explains to me, "Mr. Branham [HistoryMaker Charles Russell Branham], you're not gonna make it through college."  I've never forgotten that; I'm scared to death.  I'm in a school that's completely white and I'm being told by one of my first teachers that she can tell that I am not gonna make it through college.  But I muddled through and I remember going and taking swimming classes at 8:00 in the morning in January and if you anything about Rockford, January is a pretty cold time of the year, freezing, and we would take cold showers, then we would swim, we'd put our clothes, take warm showers, put our clothes back on, and then go out to ten, fifteen below weather.  We lived on, there was an old campus and a new campus, and so the boys actually lived on the new campus, so my freshman year the boys and girls weren't even on the same campus and--but I got--I muddled through and then I really hit my stride my sophomore year academically, but my freshman year a little bit of an adjustment.
Story_ID: 571884
Speaker 1: Rockford College [Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois] and there's a story you were gonna tell us about, wait a minute, what was it?  Well, the Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan] story, that's one story, but there's another one, too, I'm trying to think of.
Speaker 2: I don't know specifically which story, but I do, I had, the first experience with white people and my roommate was black, Steve [Steve Whitney, Jr.] from St. Louis [Missouri], but we had a suite concept, so we had two whites in the same room, and one was Italian from Lodi, New Jersey, and the other one was from Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, and we all got along great.  And to the--one of them used to bring in a huge pepperoni, which was a care package form home which he used to share with all of us and he had his gravity, I mean, you could actually go to college and have a knife on you at all times, which he flashed on occasion.  And the other one was kind of a, contrarian and a conservative, but both of them were Republicans because I went to a school that actually did not accept federal aid at the time and was known as one of the most conservative schools in the country, although it had a tradition of usually admitting one or two African Americans and it began an experience which was very ironic, because I grew up in an all-black environment and I went to an all-black school during the height of racial segregation in the South and yet much of my life following that I would either be the only African American or maybe one of two African Americans in a largely white environment, and so you learn certain kinds of coping mechanisms.  For example, my friend from Shrewsbury, Massachusetts, who is now a dean at Greenbrier college, used to like to tell--tell racial jokes, and one of his favorite jokes was, "Do you believe in integration?  No.  Do you believe in segregation?  No.  What do you believe in?  Slavery, son, slavery."  And he would tell me jokes like that all the time.  I don't think he meant them to be offensive, but this was his way of relating to an African American.  He also, I remember, argued one time that Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was the biggest liar in America and cited J. Edgar Hoover as his source.  I doubt today that he'd be very comfortable remembering that part of his past.  I remember there being a white supremacist having--living a couple doors down, who believed that all blacks should be sent back to Africa.  I remember mentoring a guy who I heard over the phone.  I was probably a junior then, and he was a freshman.  I remember his name, but I won't say it, from southern Illinois, and he was telling his parents, or telling his dad, I guess, that he is going to be coming home, that he was flunking out, and I remember going to him and saying, "Look, I will teach you history."  I taught, there was a French guy who was older than me, and I taught him philosophy.  I was actually teaching people various things I was good at, and I taught him American history and I taught him well enough to get a C and so he didn't flunk out of college.  I remember he used to bring his girlfriend around, but I remember being terribly insulted one day when he said to me, "You're not like the rest of those people.  You're like us," and there were actually white people who thought that was a real compliment.  I mean, I actually had a person rub up my arm to see if it would come off.  I actually had a trustee when I was probably a sophomore, because I was sophomore class president, and I was introduced to her and she said, "You're not black."  She said, "You're Latin American or Hispanic.  You're not black because you speak too well."  Now, I'm not making this up.  I actually had people say these kinds of things when I was going to school and most of them did not mean any harm.  Most of them were not like, "Oh, a black person is in my presence.  I don't want to have anything to do with him," but there was this sense that there was a stereotype and either I was accepted because I didn't fit the stereotype or, in some way, shape, or form, no matter what I did, I would always be one of them, and it was something I had to get used to and especially since half of the American Americans who came in with me, and there were only about four or five of us, flunked out.
Story_ID: 571885
Speaker 1: I had, I was dealing in one of those environments where I was freshman class president [at Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois], I was sophomore class president, I was student body president, I was a success and after my sophomore year, I was academically a success.  I had a wonderful woman named Evan Walsh, whose husband was Chad Walsh, who was a pretty distinguished poet, and she taught English and I came in one morning and she gave a pop quiz at 8:00 in the morning and I apparently wrote a good quiz because I got an A plus.  First time I'd ever gotten an A plus, and from that moment on, my sophomore year in college, I knew that I was smart.  And then I had a professor named Russell Planck in history, who was from the East Coast, who hated being in the Midwest and who hated the college where he was teaching and who drank a lot, and he announced that he was only gonna teach to three people in the class, and my roommate Gordon [Gordon Knight] and I, and a girl from New York named Nina Rosenblatt, were the three people he thought were smart enough to teach, and so that kind of thing reinforces your sense, "Hey, maybe I can compete in this world.  Maybe I have the goods, so maybe I'm not just, you know, good at making friends and good at being popular."  You know, being one of the few African Americans, I'm sure, was the reason I got elected to all these offices.  It was not because people like me that much, but there was the sense that it gave me a great deal of confidence that I even didn't have in high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], and also I must confess that I made friends there that I kept for forty years.  I have some friends that, not so much from my class but from the class behind me, a couple of whom have died, and these are people somehow who found me when I was in Chicago [Illinois] and whether we'd go on vacation or whether I'd go to their house, or whether we'd go out to meet for dinner, or whether we'd go to a concert or whatever, we found a way to keep up.  Black, white, Asian, these are my buddies, and my mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] refers them as my Rockford crew, and so beyond the fact they gave me a four-year free ride, beyond the fact that they gave me some honors, beyond the fact that I discovered that I could compete academically, I developed a group of friends that I love and cherish and that have been part of my life for a long time and, of course, when it all comes down to it, you won't remember the honors and you won't even be able to count the money.  The things that'll be really important to you are family and friends.
Story_ID: 571886
Speaker 1: Were you a history major in--?
Speaker 2: I was a history major.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And Russell Planck and Gordon Ross, both, were mentors to me and both, I mean, I remember once sitting in the car with Russell Planck when I was just getting ready to graduate, and I respected him a great deal and now, remember, he hated where he was.  I used to have a seminar with him and at 8:00 in the morning, I could smell the martini coming off of his breath.  I mean, he just drank to survive.  And then, of course, he was gay and Rockford [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois] did not, I'm sure, tolerate that so that also was painful to him and then, of course, there was this bright, sparkling, young charismatic teacher named Gordon Ross, who came in who taught me U.S. history and I spent more time with Gordon than with Dr. Planck, and Gordon was the kind of guy who would give you a theme like what are un-American and American habits of thought.  He would write the paper three or four times.  Each time he'd reject it and return it to you.  He'd come in and throw your entire class worth of papers into the garbage can and have you fish them out.  We all thought he was the greatest thing in the world, except for a couple people who really never forgave him for being so demanding, and so these were the kind of people who gave you the sense that you could compete, and I remember sitting in the car with Russell Planck as I was graduating and asking him point blank, "Did you give me a break because I was an African American?"  He said, "Initially I did."  And he said, "After a while, I started taking things away from you because you were so good, and I expected more out of you."  He said, "I think it evened out."  So, I may have gone to college before affirmative action came into play, but I'm sure that being an African American was part of the reason I got the four-year scholarship and I'm sure that it was one of the reasons why I got a number of the offices that I held, and in fact, being class president, student body president, was how I met Ronald Reagan [Ronald Wilson Reagan].  Ronald Reagan was running for governor of California in 1966.  He was in Rockford [Illinois] to raise money because Rockford was where a lot of heavy industry millionaires, all very Swedish or Scandinavian and all very conservative lived and, of course, the heavy--of course the flight of heavy industry in the 1970s, killed many of those fortunes and it devastated Rockford, but in the 1960s, they were big supporters of Rockford College and so Ronald Reagan came to tap their resources.  I remember seeing him about 5:00 walking into, he walked without any chaperones or body guards, or he was totally alone and I remember him coming in and the sun was behind him and the man looked golden.  He was bronzed.  He looked like a Greek god.  I mean, maybe, he and John F. Kennedy, Jr. may have been the two handsomest men I've ever seen in my life, and I spent an hour or so with him because we were waiting for the program and he was going to talk about his race for governor and I don't think he was enlisting anybody's help or trying to get money from college kids.  I think it was just part of his tour.  So anyway, we sat together and he virtually said nothing to me.  He didn't want to know who I was.  He didn't ask me why I was meeting him.  He did not ask me anything about my college career.  He was absolutely incurious; very polite but absolutely incurious about who this black guy was, who was chauffeuring him around and telling him where the telephone was, et cetera, et cetera.  He spent a lot of time on the telephone.  So then I take him to the Forrest Cool Lounge, which is the area where we had students sitting around waiting to ask him questions, and he was brilliant.  He basically spent much of the time saying, "I don't know the answer to that, but government is too big and too complex, and nobody should know the answer to that.  We must break up government and make it smaller so average people can run it."  He made an advantage out of his not knowing specifics and details.  He was absolutely charming, I mean we had Ayn Rand-ists at that school so they were eating up his conservative message.  But I remember my buddy, Jerry [ph.], who was no longer with us but was part of that group of friends that I was telling you about that I have had for a long time; both of us remarked how skillful this guy was.  Remember, he wasn't even governor of California, yet how skillful this guy was in communicating his message, and of course, he kept that message consistent all through his presidency, and I suspect also some degree that, that lack of curiosity.
Story_ID: 571887
Speaker 1: Was your specialty American history [at Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was American, but I was, no, I was basically a histor- a history generalist.  My first teaching experience was my senior year.  Russell Planck was teaching a high school class.  He didn't really want to do it so he gave a little bit of money to about three or four of his better students, mostly adults.  I was the only undergraduate.  And we each taught a couple classes.  So there I am teaching French history while I'm still in college to a bunch of adults at night school and that was my very first teaching experience.  I think I got fifty dollars.
Speaker 1: Now what, at that juncture, did you have a favorite historical period that you were really fascinated with?
Speaker 2: Not really.  I mean, it's fascinating.  I was going to be a lawyer and I took political science under Dr. Baker [Richard Baker], and political science was basically memorization, and you wrote 'til your hands bled, and I guess whoever wrote the most won, and he pretty much always sent one of his students to Harvard Law [Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts], because he had gone to Harvard Law and because he had been a judge and he had a lot of contacts, and I guess I was next in line for that, but I didn't like political science the way he taught it.  First of all, he was very, very conservative, and he lectured consistently.  And, there were no papers.  I mean, basically it was memorize everything I say in the lecture and then regurgitate it back to me.  And I decided I didn't want to do that.  And of course, you always wonder if you'd have done better and been more happy if you had been a lawyer, but I became a history major simply because I liked history and never applied to law school.  And there was no particular area of history; I probably had just as much fascination for the medieval period as I did for any part of American history.
Story_ID: 571888
Speaker 1: Although when I first met [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, I tried to pretend I knew African American history.  He saw right through me.
Speaker 2: Now, is this while you were at Rockford [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois]?
Speaker 1: I was a senior.  There was a scholarship, eighty students from smaller colleges in the Midwest would compete for this for two Ford Foundation [New York, New York] scholars--scholarships.  I remember a young woman named Laurel [ph.], who was a French major, and I, were, these were scholarships in humanities--went, we were taken to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], along with all the eighty students from all the other colleges, and we spent a day or two, we spent two days, actually, at the University of Chicago.  I had never been to the University of Chicago.  I had never seen the University of Chicago, and even though I stayed in Chicago [Illinois] all through the summers and worked in factories on the West Side, I loaded boxes, I worked in paper factories, I worked in warehouses, but I had never been to the University of Chicago.  So, we're there and we get the usual luncheon and pep talk, and then they kind of basically want to interview us, and so I'm wandering around the social studies department, and John Hope Franklin comes out and I don't think John Hope Franklin knew who I was, and I'm not even sure there was a scheduled interview.  John Hope Franklin calls me in and says, "Sit down."  He asks me if I want some tea.  He then asked me, what am I interested in?  I tell him I'm interested in W.E.B. Du Bois.  Why?  Because it was the only black name I knew besides Booker T. Washington.  He then asked me, what did I know about W.E.B. Du Bois?  The truth?  I knew absolutely nothing about W.E.B. Du Bois.  He is very kind, he knows I'm BS-ing, and he can see right through me.  Before I go, he says, "What is your name?"  He writes my name down.  I got one of the two Ford Foundation fellowships to the University of Chicago.  A very distinguished medieval historian, ironically enough, Emmet Larkin, not Emmet Larkin, I'm trying to remember his name but I can't remember his name.
Speaker 2: McNeill [William H. McNeill]?
Speaker 1: Comes out to--no, no, not McNeill.
Speaker 2: Oh, okay.
Speaker 1: This is an older guy, comes out to Rockford, takes me to dinner to tell me that I have won this very, very prestigious scholarship to the University of Chicago and so that was a wonderful cap to a happy four years in college.  I have no complaints about the--about my college career, and I've always been very fond.  I've been on the board of Rockford, they gave me an honorary degree, Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society].  I've always been loyal and will always be loyal to my undergraduate school.
Story_ID: 571889
Speaker 1: Now, okay.  University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], right? You're, you're--
Speaker 2: I, again, worked in a factory, but this time about a week or two before the fall quarter began I quit.  I did--I really hated working nights.  I used to work, take an hour and a half to get to work every morning and I lived with my father [Joseph Branham] during those summers.  The first time, actually, that I got a job they had to bribe the guy to give the guy money and, of course, all the jobs would be three-month jobs, because after three months you had to join the union, and so I was going to be fired.  I'll never forget one job, Pharmacy Paperbacks Company [ph.].  There was a white guy who was really, really funny, very nice, and he used to call me college kid.  I was either called college kid or Speedy Gonzales, because they said I moved too fast and that I, you know, if you work in a factory and you weren't going to college, you'd slow down because you'd know that you need to pace yourself and I was making things look bad for the other people.  So I'd slow down and I hung around with the guys and one guy tried to fix me up with his daughter and--but this white guy was very friendly and I remember one day him coming up to me, and out of the blue he says, "If Martin Luther King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] ever comes in my neighborhood, I'd put a bullet in his head."  And then he walked away.  And, of course, you remember what years we're talking about.  I'm working in factories from '63 [1963] to '66 [1966], '67 [1967], so this would have been 1966.  Dr. King was in Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: He was marching on the Near West Side in Marquette Park [Chicago, Illinois], and I had been to one of Dr. King's rallies. I had been in one of Dr. King's marches downtown, but I was largely oblivious.  I was at the rally because Roy Nesbitt [ph.] was trying to hook me up with a cousin and I thought the cousin was really cute so I went to these, I went to these rallies and it was relatively apolitical, and you know, off in my little enclosed world of college and this guy whom I thought was a really nice guy, explained to me very bluntly, how he would kill Dr. King if he walked in this neighborhood, and I had never forgotten that.  I have never forgotten that.  Anyway, what were we talking about?  Some--had we gotten to graduate school yet?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, university--this is the prelude to it, I guess--
Story_ID: 571890
Speaker 1: You said you were working, and I was asking you what the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was like, and what your (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh, the University of Chicago was wonderful.  I rode a bicycle, and then I rode a motorbike, which I bought from Hammacher Schlemmer [Hammacher Schlemmer and Company, Inc.], and the police stopped me and told me I had to have a license, and they were very nice and decided not to throw me in jail, but I had to get rid of that.  I bought it in the summertime and I'm riding a motorbike that can go no faster than forty miles an hour on Lake Shore Drive.  Huge trucks are behind me honking their horns, how I didn't get killed, I don't know.  But I would bike to, I live in my grandmother's [Erma Hines Branham] basement.  I had a stipend for two thousand dollars.  I actually ended up saving money.  I actually ended up giving my grandmother money for the United Negro College Fund, because she seems to always contributing to the United Negro College Fund [UNCF].  I had [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin my first year.  He was a role model.  He was the idea of what a teacher, what a professor should be.
Speaker 1: So this is your introduction to African American history?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.  John Hope Franklin taught southern history.  John Hope Franklin never taught African American history, even though he wrote 'From Slavery to Freedom' ['From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans,' John Hope Franklin] and the first edition came out in 1947, and even though he was the most distinguished African American historian.  He did not teach African American history.  I have never had a class in African American history.  I took urban history and European history, I took a class in sociology.  I'd never had a class in sociology in college [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois].  I got an A plus on the final.  John Hope Franklin heard about it.  He sees me in the hall, runs up to me and grabs me and hugs me and said, "You've had a brilliant first year, look forward to seeing you next year."  I had a one-year fellowship.  I explained to him that I had one-year scholarship, that perhaps I would teach for a year or two, and then come back, and he said, "Come see me Monday."  I went to his office Monday.  He pulls--opens a drawer, pulls out a full ride for graduate school for the next two years.  I didn't ask for it, didn't know it existed.  He just gave it to me.  John Hope Franklin invited me to dinner my freshman year.  Al Raby [Albert Raby] was in the class, and several other people, and I brought my grandmother and, of course, as you know, he grew orchids, and so not only does he have this wonderful dinner with my grandmother, because my grandmother thought that I had just invented, you know, sliced bread.  But he takes her down, takes us down, to his--to where he is growing the orchids, and gives her an orchid, which was like the greatest thing in the world.  Now, my grandmother was like six feet tall and had like three or four teeth missing in the front, and she was a schoolteacher all of her life and never drove.  Her entire life was dedicated to education.  Now, when she died she left nothing to me or my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham].  She left half of her money to her church, Olivet [Olivet Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois], and half of her money to the United Negro College Fund, which is the way it is supposed to be, and the thought that I was getting a first classed education and that I knew such a distinguished black man really made her day and I adored my grandmother.  She probably babysat every kid in the neighborhood.  And so, that's one of the great joys of my life, that I made her proud.  Now, she didn't live to see me get a Ph.D., but she lived long enough to know that I was probably on the right path and that I was d- would do something with my life.
Story_ID: 571891
Speaker 1: I mean, I, I got my bed out of the alley.  I've got my--there were some planters that I took out of the alley and then painted and then put my books on.  There was a, an old dining room table that was already in the basement that she [Branham's paternal grandmother, Erma Hines Branham] gave me and I put pictures on the table and then I put a glass on top of it.  There was a hollowed-out TV that somebody had thrown out that I used to put my albums in, and I had a little TV and that was what I had, everything I had in my apartment except for a rocking chair, which I bought for five dollars at a thrift store and carried three blocks on my black, everything that I had in my apartment in the basement, I got from an alley.  I lived there while I was going through graduate school, so I actually could save money living in the basement.  All I paid for was heat.  And, so I had--so it was kind of a rough existence.  I mean, you basically have plaster coming off the walls, brick walls, and a shower curtain, which I put up to give myself a little privacy (laughter).  Then, I'd go upstairs and take a shower because I didn't have a shower in the basement.  And so it was a pretty primitive existence, but you know, one of the great things about it is that you didn't have anything to take your mind away from studying.  And so, I had [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin for southern history.  I had Daniel Boorstin [Daniel J. Boorstin], who's got to be one of the dozen or maybe top twenty historians in American history who taught me and who was, again, one of the first people to kind of compliment me.  He asked a question, there was a guy who was a hot shot and I remember Boorstin would ask him a question and he would know part of the answer and, no, he would say, "I read part of this book and I read part of that book," and Boorstin went to him and said, "Mr. Such-and-Such, we're gonna someday have to help you read a whole book."  He asked me a question one day and I knew the answer and so he kind of took a liking to me, and then I had Richard Wade [Richard C. Wade], who was like a father of modern urban history, and everybody took Richard Wade, and he used to have these (unclear) dinners, and students just crowded around.  I think one of the reasons why he ran away from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] was because he had just, he was just such a popular charismatic teacher, everybody wanted to be a--do a Ph.D. dissertation under him, and initially I was doing my Ph.D. dissertation under Richard Wade and he left.  And so there I am an urban historian writing about African American politics and my major professor has abandoned me, and so I went to John Hope Franklin and he took me on as a student, and so he was my mentor when I wrote me Ph.D. dissertation.
Speaker 2: Now, the dissertation was about African American politics of Chicago [Illinois]--in Chicago (simultaneous)?
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was about the first hundred years of African American politics.  The first paper I wrote for Richard Wade was about Oscar De Priest's [Oscar Stanton De Priest] election to the city council, which was to write a twenty page paper.  I ended up writing like a fifty page paper.  He graded the first half and said I just stopped after a while.  So, I developed a reputation of being a pretty good student at graduate school, but again, I was in an environment where I was the only African American.  I was the only African American in the (unclear) dinners.  I was the only African American in my classes.  It was a strange existence.
Story_ID: 571892
Speaker 1: We were discussing off-camera the fact that you've never had an African American history course; you're largely self-taught.
Speaker 2: Right (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Even [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin in his southern history course, you said, never mentioned an African American by name.
Speaker 2: I--well obviously we're talking about the 1960s, late 1960s, and I had gone to the Democratic National Convention in 1968 [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember being, I remember exactly where I was when Dr. King [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] was assassinated.
Speaker 1: Where were you? What was--? Okay (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I was still in an all-white environment, but my political consciousness had certainly been heightened.  There is no question that my interest in African American history was a reflection of a political desire to not only find a usable pass that could give direction and also be a source of pride, but it was also part of a general intellectual curiosity.  The African American history is an intellectual field of inquiry was at its very beginning (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now was--did anybody encourage you to do this?
Speaker 2: Nobody actually encouraged me to do this, no.  This was pretty much self-generated.
Speaker 1: So, not even John Hope Franklin, or not even the--
Speaker 2: No, I went to John Hope Franklin my sophomore year, my second year in graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and I tried not to spend a lot of time in his office, because basically he was a very busy man, but I must confess that I had been, I had the opportunity to sit and talk with him a couple times every year.  So I was in there and I was talking to him and I expressed interest in learning African American history and he says, "We don't teach African American history, but if you want to learn African American history, you should teach it."  There was a man named Arvarh Strickland, who wrote a history of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] in Chicago [sic. 'History of the Chicago Urban League,' Arvarh E. Strickland] and he was leaving Chicago State [Chicago State College; Chicago State University, Chicago, Illinois] and they asked me if I would come in and teach a class, one class, on African American history at Chicago State.  In fact, I ran into a very important member of the board of education, who was actually in my first class.  And it was a mixed class, and I was starting from scratch and there wasn't a lot of African history.  I have subsequently spent a lot more time learning a lot more about African history and refining my generalizations about African American history, especially, African American geography.  But--I didn't know anything about Africa.  I would read people like Eugene Genovese and others and I was just cobbling together.
Speaker 1: Now, wait.  What year is this? This is--
Speaker 2: This would be 1970, perhaps 1970?  Maybe 1969.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, I taught a class for two semesters.  I taught a class in African American history for one year at Chicago State.  This is when Chicago State was at 68th [Street] and Stewart [Avenue], and then the next year I was asked to teach at Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois], and I loved teaching at Roosevelt.  The first place, you didn't have to drive.  You just, you know, I had a 1961 Mercury Comet with big fins, a car where I, which cost me $180 that broke down every six months.  I had a little radio that I put over a knob that I would play stuff and literally a hole developed in the floor near the accelerator, so we're talking about a beater, a really bad car.  So, I like to take the IC [Illinois Central Railroad; Illinois Central Gulf Railroad] down.  I could take the IC down from Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and teach at Roosevelt.  And so I loved teaching at Roosevelt.  I would get there very early.  I would get a huge stack of food at 8:00 in the morning and they would charge me like a buck [dollar], and then one day the waitress, not the waitress--not the waitress but the serving lady--wasn't there and I stacked my plate up again and it came out to like seven or eight bucks, and I discovered that the lady liked me and she knew I was teaching African American history, and so she was giving me free food for months at Roosevelt.  And of course, I was not much younger, not much older than the students I was teaching, but I really learned African American history after the first year, teaching at Roosevelt.  I gained more information.  I could put more into it and it was a great teaching experience.  I made some friends down there among the colleagues that are people that I got to know, and I--it helped me really learn to love history.
Story_ID: 571893
Speaker 1: Who did you, you mentioned Communiversity off camera.  Had they started up yet at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I, you couldn't be not politically involved in Chicago [Illinois].  I remember going to the, going downtown for the Democratic National Convention [1968 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember I was with a guy who was an undergraduate, and I was driving down and his basic thing was, "These people are crazy.  This is stupid.  I don't know what they are thinking."  We get somewhere near Grant Park [Chicago, Illinois], he jumps out of the car, starts screaming, "The streets belong to the people," and then he rushes in and I never see him again.  I remember wandering through the president's un-birthday party which was on 12th Street.  There was this big old cow barn, that was a kind of a meeting place, or whatever, and they were holding the president's un-birthday party, Lyndon Johnson's [President Lyndon Baines Johnson] un-birthday party, and I remember wandering over to a group of white people talking--
Speaker 1: Un-birthday party?
Speaker 2: Un-birthday party.  And I was wandering over to a group of people talking and introduced myself and started talking to them as if I knew them.  One was Norman Mailer, one was Terry Southern, and the other was Jean Genet.  Now that's an interesting trifecta of literary writers, and they just, you know, they wanted to know what I thought and how I felt.  So, I wasn't actually gassed in Grant Park, because I was too scared; probably too scared of losing my scholarship, and I didn't, I mean, I, we sat in the president's office at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], but they said "Let 'em sit, we don't care."  But you couldn't help but being politicized.  I remember being called in the middle of the night to go pick up a Black Panther that had been wounded and take him to a local physician's house to have him patched up.  We would teach at the Communiversity.  We would teach various things about African American history.  I mean I--it started a lifelong involvement.  I mean, the idea of public history, the idea of making it more accessible, yeah, that's actually, I taught one class, which probably only lasted four or five sessions.  At the, I think it was the Lincoln YWCA [ph.], I remember the elevators were so slow because it was a senior citizen's home.  I think it was like 48th [Street] and Wabash [Avenue] or something like that, and we'd meet every Saturday and we were constantly discussing politics.  We were constantly discussing contemporary events, and constantly trying to learn more about African American history.
Story_ID: 571894
Speaker 1: Communiversity, just kind of tell us what that was (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That was a kind of grassroots group of people named Bob Rhodes [Robert Rhodes], [HistoryMaker] Harold Rogers, a whole bunch of people who were colleagues of mine at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], some students, some just kind of hanging around, who would basically teach little mini-classes, often included with indoctrination classes, to other young people who were just interested in learning about black history and black culture and, of course, we were learning, or I was learning, as I was teaching.  I mean, it was great to meet older people.  I mean, you got to meet a lot of people in those days.  You made friendships with people like [HistoryMaker] Bobby Rush, you made friendships with people who, like Oscar Brown [HistoryMaker Oscar Brown, Jr.], people who were politically active in a variety of areas, and they appreciated that you knew a little history.  I mean, they began to understand history as perhaps a central part of any African American culture or curriculum, and remember there wasn't a lot that we knew about it.  So I was in on the ground floor in terms of reclaiming a past that nobody had actually spent a lot of time looking for.  I remember when I was a freshman, a first year graduate student, somebody stole every volume of The Journal of Negro History [The Journal of African American History] from Regenstein Library [Joseph Regenstein Library, Chicago, Illinois].  I remember I heard [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, (unclear) him saying that he actually offered to pay to replace that collection which would have, by the way, have cost him a fortune.  He would never, I don't think he would have had the money to replenish that.  And, of course, the Regenstein said, "Of course not--of course, we will replenish it."  Of course, now, it's a long line and my students are using it but, at that time, he took it as a personal insult that somebody, and we presumed was black, would steal from the University of Chicago, and I understood it from a quite different perspective.  These people were hungry for knowledge.  I mean, they weren't stealing it because they were gonna sell it on the black market.  They weren't gonna sell it out of the back trunk of their car the way you'd sell hip-hop records.  They wanted to learn and, of course, from the 1920s on, it had been the most important repository for knowledge about African American history.
Speaker 1: Yeah, they call it liberating the book.  I mean, that's the terminology.
Speaker 2: Oh yes, that was, you're absolutely right.  That was a term that was very important.  We were liberating everything.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  I might be able to tell you who did it, I mean, at this, but, we'll talk about that later. I've met Chicagoans who've confessed.
Speaker 2: Yeah, 'cause I remember, I remember people, I remember getting a lot of cheap books from the University of Chicago bookstore, because there were African American employees who were liberating books from the University of Chicago bookstore and I could buy them at a reduced price because books are very expensive if you are in graduate school (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now did--how did--were you an active customer at Ellis' Books Store [Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I began my lifelong, I mean I have tens of thousands of books and I will burn in tree hell for all of the paper that I have collected over the years and I began collecting books, especially everything I could get my hands on in African American history.  While I was in graduate school, now remember I didn't have much money, so I didn't do as much as I did when I started doing my TV show, but yeah, I would go to Ellis' Book Store--
Story_ID: 571895
Speaker 1: I'd go to--I actually spent a lot of time in the library reading journals.  I would sleep in Regenstein Library [Joseph Regenstein Library, Chicago, Illinois] because they had very comfortable couches.  I spent a lot of time trying to stay awake by drinking coffee in preparation for papers and other assignments.  So I lived on campus [of the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois].  I mean I didn't--I didn't, I lived at home and I would take a bus over and when I got a car I finally would drive home, but I spent a lot of time, sometimes days at a time, away from home, studying on campus.  I remember my first year as a graduate student.  I didn't have a date.  I remember times when I would read an entire book in one sitting.  I was scared that I wasn't good enough, so my freshman, my first year in graduate school I worked awfully hard, and then I worked probably less hard.  But it didn't seem like a chore.  It didn't seem like a job.  It was more, I really wanted to learn African American history and after my second year, that's where a lot of my focus was, just reading and learning a lot of African American history, and I remember doing a defense for my Ph.D.  No, the defense after I had finished my work, in preparation to take a Ph.D., and Richard Wade [Richard C. Wade] and [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin and Arthur Mann were questioning me and I remember feeling pretty good about it and as I walk out, John Hope Franklin says, "See me Monday," and I saw Monday again, just like when I got the scholarship and he said, "They've been trying to get me to do this TV show for many, many years.  The chairman of the board of trustees from the University of Chicago finances it and Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois] is ready to go for it and I don't wanna do it, but I thought you were very impressive and so I'd like to send you over to Channel 11 to do this course in African American history."  So John Hope Franklin had been pursued and he tapped me and that's how I got to do 'The Black Experience.'
Speaker 2: Okay.  So this will go, what year was this?
Speaker 1: Nineteen seventy-two [1972]?  Seventy-one [1971] or '72 [1972]; it's probably '71 [1971].
Speaker 2: Okay.  This is--
Speaker 1: In the first place, this is the first time I've ever been to the North Side [Chicago, Illinois], and it's 6400 North or something.
Speaker 2: It's the campus at Northeastern [Northeastern Illinois University, Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: I'm not even sure my--I wasn't even sure my car could make it.  And, I go up there and they basically are ready because they have the money to go with this thing and so they're ready to go and so they basically ask me to outline sixty half-hour shows.  Remember this is, there had never been anything like it.  This was the first national series on African American history.  It's still the most complete series on African American history, although most of the tapes have been destroyed.  I only have sev- a few.  So, they wanted sixty half-hours and they were gonna pay me more than most of my older relatives were making for just doing the show, and they were gonna buy books for me and they were also gonna buy clothes for me and so I thought I was in heaven, and so for two years, I didn't work on a dissertation.  For two years, I did this TV show.  I would write two scripts a week, I would shoot two shows a week, and then sometimes I'd have a little bit of a break so I could write more and kind of get ahead and we went to various cities, we went to New York [New York] and New Orleans [Louisiana] and Memphis [Tennessee], and a couple of other cities.  We actually went to about five cities.
Speaker 2: Did they actually shoot live?
Speaker 1: We shot location.  We shot on location.  We went to Tuskegee [Tuskegee Institute; Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] and I sat in Booker T. Washington's chair at Tuskegee Institute, because obviously if the TV show is coming down, they kind of give you carte blanche.  And, I wrote every word and I was the emcee.  I mean, I was the host, I mean, I wrote and then I read my lines off a teleprompter, which was right above the camera.  Periodically you could see my eyes looking kind of above the camera as I'm looking at the words I'm reading.  I started out with suits and by the end of the time I was dressing a little bit more informally.  I think I even had a dashiki on near the end.  I had my big leaping Afro, and I had Negro Number 2 makeup.  They decided I was too light-skinned to do a show on African American history, so apparently they said this was the makeup they put on Lena Horne to make her look darker.  So you'll see me and you'll know I'm wearing dark makeup (laughter).
Story_ID: 571896
Speaker 1: And I wrote and, and did the shows and we did the location shooting and we'd sometimes bring in guest people.  I remember [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin came as my guest for one half hour.  We tried to get Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Reverend Jesse L. Jackson], but he would not come on.  We got Herbert Gutman, whom I came to love and admire.  Herbert Gutman was a historian who has become kind of a patron saint; certainly one of the twenty or thirty most admired historians, did a lot of work with computers, long before computers were important.  I remember him giving a talk at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and me persuading him to come on my show.  And then I remember spending raucous night drinking beer with him at an AHA [American Historical Association] convention in New Orleans [Louisiana] and, of course, he died much too young but he's got acolytes, people who belong to the Herbert Gutman school and who, of course, never met him.  And he, of course, wrote a pioneering book ['The Black Family in Slavery and Freedom: 1750 - 1925,' Herbert G. Gutman] on the African American family, basically a response to the Moynihan Report ['The Negro Family: The Case For National Action,' Daniel Patrick Moynihan], showing the strength of the black family during slavery.  And, we would do a lot of graphics, so we took a lot of time finding pictures, and usually we'd have seventy or eighty pictures, because, you know, you obviously don't wanna hear this guy looking at you talking for half an hour, and then we brought in dancers.  We did, you know, we did everything we could to liven it up.  We would build a mock slave quarters so that you could see, you know, how small it was and basically we did everything we could to visualize the experience and, of course, that's when I really learned African American history.  I still have all sixty scripts with the instructions as to what the visuals are, and with my underlining of emphasis.  I did not think to get a teleprompter script.  I'd probably would never read it but just to have one would have been nice.  Something I--it's one thing I didn't do.  But, I learned to write on deadline.  I mean, these are twelve page scripts, single spaced, and I wrote two a week.  And I also gained a little bit of, I was a much better presenter, much more poised, much less focused on looking at the camera or looking at the teleprompter by the end than by the beginning, and you get to meet a lot of celebrities.  'Cause I'd hang out at Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], so I got to meet all kinds of celebrities, made a great friend in John Tweedle, who was the first African American director, and was a director at Channel 11.  He became my best buddy; in fact, I'm the godfather of his child.
Speaker 2: He's a great photographer.
Speaker 1: Yes, he's a wonderful photographer.  I've got pictures--in fact, probably a couple of pictures that he took of me.
Speaker 2: I think he's Jesse Jackson's number one photographer.
Speaker 1: Right, and he was, of course, the chief photographer for the mayor of Chicago [Illinois], Bilandic [Michael Bilandic], when he died.  But, I spent a lot of time with the crew and got, in fact, here's a strange story.  We're doing a scene and I guess it's my birthday or near my birthday and I'm reading from it and the guy says we gotta go again.  It happens all the time in TV, and I make some joke about, "Hey, you know, you can't buy these at the store.  You know, you've gotta try them on, you know, you can't get them through the mail," you know, some joke about it, and they film it.  And then the lights go down and all of a sudden I see this light in the corner of the studio and I have no idea what it was, and it's coming toward me and I'm a little scared.  I don't believe in ghosts but this is very weird.  What happened is they decided to celebrate my birthday with a watermelon with sixty candles in it, representing each show for the series (laughter).  This was a party.  Now, I wasn't insulted.  I mean these are people, this was the crew that I worked with, but it was a watermelon (laughter), not a cake.  That was how we celebrated my birthday when we did 'The Black Experience.'
Speaker 2: Wow.  So how many years did it run? (Unclear).
Speaker 1: It ran for several years.  It ran nationally.  It did not run in every major city, but it ran in most of the major cities.  It was on--picked up by PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and it ran for probably, oh, I don't know three or four years.  I know that at one time it was on both Channel 11 and Channel 20 [WYCC-TV, Chicago, Illinois], simultaneously, and I, of course, was back writing my dissertation and had pretty much forgotten that life and somebody called me up and said "Look, we're going to the Emmys [Emmy Awards], would you like to go?"  And they neglected to say that you're being nominated for an Emmy.  So, I said, "Nah, I don't care."  I'm back to, you know, blue jeans and being an impoverished graduate student, even though I had a whole bunch of money in the bank from doing this TV show, and so I'm watching TV and I hear them call my name, and I have to go back up to Channel 11 later to pick up the Emmy because I was not there, probably because I was too cheap to buy a tuxedo.  I was not there to actually pick up my Emmy the night it was awarded to me, and I was awarded as co-producer and host of 'The Black Experience.'  I actually wasn't the co-producer.  There was only one producer.  I was the writer, and, of course, I was the on-camera personality and I actually got to hire a couple people to be my secretaries, a couple of friends of mine got to work for me, and I got to, you know, give them some money.  I remember going to Memphis [Tennessee] and doing some shooting and getting some more friends and giving them some money.
Story_ID: 571897
Speaker 1: So it was just a, it was, it was a very great experience, a lot of hard work, and I learned the foundation of my African American history approach because I read voluminously and I wrote things, and, of course, you know I didn't want to plagiarize from anybody so you read five or six books on one subject in order to be able to put that part of the subject into your script.
Speaker 2: Did you ever consult with anybody about, like what, whose version of a certain (unclear)--?
Speaker 1: Ironically, no.  [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin was pretty hands off.  He was the consultant.  His name was on the screen.  They wanted his name on the screen.  As I said before, he was one of my guests, but I don't think he got scripts.  I don't think he ever commented on scripts.  I know he was pleased with the outcome, but I never heard a criticism from him or an argument, "Well, I don't know if this interpretation was correct or that."  And interestingly enough, thirty years later, almost forty years later, the scripts stand up.  I did not say anything that was markedly incorrect.  Now, there may have been a few small errors, but nothing important and that's pretty amazing, because as you know, history is constantly being revised.  I remember Robert Fogel, who won the Nobel Prize in Economics [Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel], coming and giving a talk on economics of slavery and talking about the probability of slavery when I was a graduate student [at the University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and folding that in to my discussion of economics of slavery on camera.  I was using pretty high level (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Is the same Fogel that was involved in writing 'Time on the Cross' ['Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro Slavery'] with Engerman [Stanley L. Engerman] and the other guy?
Speaker 1: He wrote 'Time on the Cross' with Engerman and--yes.  I basically used pretty good sources and I basically followed John Hope Franklin's pattern of trying to be balanced.  I mean, you know, there's no screaming and hollering and trying to be factually accurate, and so I'm very proud of that series ['The Black Experience'].  I'm very proud of the fact that it was the first, I'm proud of winning the Emmy [Emmy Award] and I'm very proud of the fact that the history still holds up.  In fact, that's the thing I'm the most proud of, that the history still holds up.
Story_ID: 571898
Speaker 1: This had a life past the actual show ['The Black Experience'] when you're doing it.  For years, they kept showing it on television (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, yes.  I had moved on.  I wanted to finish my dissertation and I also started teaching and that was the other problem.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I probably went back to academia too early, but there was a big demand.  Roosevelt [Roosevelt University, Chicago, Illinois] called and wanted me to teach a class in African American history.  I had initially said no, because I was doing the TV show.  In fact, I tried to get a couple of my friends, one Gwen Robinson [Gwendolyn Robinson], who later was head of DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] for a brief period of time, and one Jim Patton [ph.], who was a history teacher at Governor State [Governors State University, University Park, Illinois] for years, to assist me, but the reality was that they wanted me.  And so, when I had finished the TV show, I went back to Roosevelt, and then U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] contacted me and so there was a kind of tug-of-war between Roosevelt and U of I and basically U of I came to me and said, "We'll offer you money."  I remember sitting down with Robert Remini at lunch and he said, "How much do you want?"  And so that began my teaching career so I'm certain that it delayed finishing my dissertation.  So, I took two years out to do the TV show and then I started teaching full time at the University of Illinois before I finished my Ph.D.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how long was it before you got a chance to finish it?
Speaker 2: Probably about nine years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it probably took me about nine years.  So, that's, well, maybe a little bit less than nine years.  But, basically what happened was I got a call from [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin, and John Hope Franklin had left the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] and was teaching at Duke [Duke University, Durham, North Carolina] and John Hope Franklin said, "I don't want to leave you behind."  And that's an extraordinary incentive, because John Hope Franklin, I admire and revere him so much that I would never want to disappoint him.  And so I redoubled my efforts.  He chaired my committee.  I remember standing out in the hall and then coming back in and John Hope Franklin looking very sad and somber and saying, "I'm very sorry to tell you, Charles [HistoryMaker Charles Russell Branham], but you're now a Ph.D." (Laughter) He was playing with me.  He was making fun of me.  But, yeah, I put that puppy together.  My students are amazed that you can write a six hundred, seven hundred-page dissertation on a typewriter.  And that I covered essentially almost the first hundred years of African American politics.  There'd been nothing like it and there still is nothing like it.  There is no book that covers it.  There is no comparable book of its size of New York [New York] or Los Angeles [California] or any other major city's politics, and I did it pretty much all from scratch.  I spent two years just going through the Chicago Defender at the George Cleveland Hall Branch [George Cleveland Hall Branch Library] of the Chicago Public Library [Chicago, Illinois] and everybody may be familiar with the Carter G. Woodson Branch [Carter G. Woodson Regional Library, Chicago, Illinois], but there used to be a branch called the George Cleveland Hall Branch--
Speaker 1: Yeah, it's--it's still there.
Speaker 2: ---which had a lot of African American material, had copies of the Chicago Defender, and I read every single copy.  I remember spending one summer in my office at the University of Illinois.  Every single day I'd force myself to come in and microfiche of the Chicago Whip.
Speaker 1: Did you know Vivian Harsh [Vivian G. Harsh] at the George Cle-?
Speaker 2: I did not know Vivian Harsh, no.  But I do know that everybody at that library knew me and was very nice to me as I came in every single day, because actually I kind of took a year off after my TV show before I started teaching and I devoted that year completely to research, so there's an awful that I discovered.  There's an awful lot of history that I was able to reconstruct and I, fortuitously, I was doing research on African American state legislators and, of course, when Julieanna [Julieanna Richardson] came to me with the idea of doing a video on African American legislators in Illinois, I was able to tell her, "Well look, I've got all this stuff in my Ph.D. dissertation.  I'll give you a copy of it.  You'll have a chronology.  You'll have a lot about what they introduced, who they were, and what they did for a living.  It'll be a nice jumping off point."  And so it just so happened that what she needed at that time in order to gain support from the Illinois legis- African American legislators and what they wanted was something that I could provide and I was very grateful that, in fact, I've always been very grateful that people have been interested both in me coming and talking to them about African American history, but they've also been specifically grateful about the area of my expertise, which is African American politics.
Story_ID: 571899
Speaker 1: I got to University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] primarily through Gilbert Osofsky.  Gilbert Osofsky had given a discussion, which I think was probably one of the most influential and fascinating lectures I ever heard.  He was invited to teach a class and he talked about basically slave narratives, and he spent a lot of time talking about H. Rap Brown [Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin] and comparing H. Rap Brown to slave narratives, and of course he then went on to put on 'Puttin' on Ole Massa' ['Puttin' on Ole Massa: The Slave Narratives of Henry Bibb, William Wells Brown, and Solomon Northup,' Gilbert Osofsky]--
Speaker 2: Right, that's a--
Speaker 1: --which was a wonderful, wonderful book but I didn't really know him, but he came and spoke to our class and I was very impressed by him and so he calls me out of the blue and says, "I want to come to U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago]," and so I come there and he says, "Don't worry about the interview."  And he takes me into this room with all these professors, none of whom I've ever met before, and they don't really ask me one single question.  We just kind of socialize.  And, we walk out and Gil says, "Well, you're in if you want the job."  And then he commits suicide over the summer, so I never got a chance to spend time with him and I never got a chance to thank him.  I mean, this is a guy who basically took me by the hand and said, "Okay, I'm gonna be the guy that's, you know, got this hand on your shoulder while you meet these people for your first interview."  In fact, come to think of it, I probably have never really interviewed for a job in my life.  I generally knew that I had the job before I went in but I've always been grateful for Gil Osofsky's kindness and I entered a situation where half the faculty hated the other half of the faculty, and so I was kind of in the middle all the time, but I enjoyed teaching there and it was during the 1980s.
Story_ID: 571900
Speaker 1: And I remember the ferment around Harold Washington's run for mayor.  I'd been involved in independent politics--'cause I lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois]--a little bit.  I remember being recruited, ironically, to work for a candidate [A.A. "Sammy" Rayner] for [U.S.] Congress whose family owns a funeral home.  I'm trying to remember his name now, who ran against Ralph Metcalfe for Congress.  Not Griffin.  I'm trying to remember the funeral home, because they've got several branches.
Speaker 2: Leak? Not Leak.
Speaker 1: No.  Not Leak.  Anyway, it'll come to me.  Anyway, I was independent and I was supporting independent candidacy and, of course, we got our heads handed to us.  And then I worked for an aldermanic race and I worked for Al Raby [Albert Raby], and he lost in Hyde Park, and then I worked for Dick Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.], and we were more successful, and I was a precinct captain.  I mean, I literally had people working under me.  We literally went door-to-door with hard cards.  We knocked on the door so I had a little bit of a practical political experience, and then came Harold's run and it was a different experience.  In the first place, everybody seemed to be involved.  Everybody I knew seemed in one way or the other to be involved in the race.  I remember working with a bunch of people on radio commercials.  We didn't--we weren't paid to do it.  We just put together radio commercials for Harold Washington.  We went out canvassing for Harold Washington.  I remember staying up all night working for Harold Washington, and then what happened is I, my body Phil [ph.] and I were coming into a restaurant on 53rd [Street] and Lake Park [Avenue] underneath the house of--a Chinese restaurant and this was apparently right around the corner from where Harold Washington lived, and we walk in and Dick Newhouse called me over and says, "We want you to sit at our table."  So, the morning Harold Washington is elected mayor, I'm having breakfast with Harold Washington and Dick Newhouse.  Now, part of the reason was I had written a series of articles on, again, on the history of African American politics for the Chicago Journal, which was an independent newspaper and it was all over the city and it was a two part series and it was pretty long at the time for an article and actually pretty serious history stuff, but it gave people importance of the history of African American politics.  So, I got to be kind of known for that and that was something a lot of people read.
Speaker 2: What was it in?
Speaker 1: It was the history of black politics.
Speaker 2: In?
Speaker 1: It was in a newspaper called the Chicago Journal, which is kind of like the Chicago Reader.  I mean, it was a free newspaper that was spread all around the city.  It was actually a white newspaper, but most of its circulation was on the South Side [Chicago, Illinois], so a lot of African Americans could grab it.
Story_ID: 571901
Speaker 1: The other thing, of course, was that Dick Newhouse [Richard H. Newhouse, Jr.] had tapped me when I was at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], to be an expert witness on black politics for what was known as the PACI [Political Action Conference of Illinois] case.  Now, the PACI case originated when Sam Patch [Samuel A. Patch], who was a third ward committeeman and friend of Harold Washington's, filed a suit against Mayor Jane Byrne, because of the redistricting of the city council.  He thought that African Americans had been denied adequate representation of the city council, and so they knew I was independent and that I was, I wrote a dissertation on African American politics.  I spent an entire summer with Richard Newhouse as my lawyer, working out a strategy for my testimony in the PACI case, and it took a while for that case to finally get to court, and I remember being interviewed and a buddy of mine was actually an apprentice lawyer on the other side and he felt so embarrassed, he came and apologized to me and I remember [HistoryMaker] Earl Neal, who was a very prominent African American lawyer, was, again a counsel for Jane Byrne, and he asked me some pretty tough questions.  I mean, even though he was a very proud African American, he was a good lawyer and he was going to do his job, and Dick Newhouse asked me my questions and apparently my testimony went very well, but we weren't striking any sparks and then the lead lawyer, and his name has escaped me, but there's a white lead lawyer and Earl Neal was his assistant, made some comment about the treatment of African Americans and the treatment of the Irish or the treatment of whites generally being the same in politics.  And I went off.  And in about a three or four minute flurry of words, I made all the points about how you can't compare them, what the differences are, how the--the differences in treatment.  I reminded him that as late as 1950s, blacks and whites were not even coming to the same Democratic headquarters in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois], and so I got a chance to put in all kinds of stuff that was not in my direct testimony into my response to his last point, and apparently it worked.  I could see a difference in the audience.  As I'm walking up, people are petting me on the back and Earl Neal even comes to me and says, "If there's anything I can do for you, I'd be happy to do it."  And then the white lawyer says, "I never should have asked that last question.  You hit it out of the park."  And so that kind of established me, because obviously lots of other attorneys and other people commented on the fact that I did a pretty good job as an expert witness, and of course, the upshot of all of this was that they redrew the boun- the aldermanic lines.  Harold Washington had been stymied because there had been twenty-nine Vrdolyak [Edward Vrdolyak] aldermen and there were twenty-one in his group.  They had to hold new elections because the map was redrawn.  The new elections brought him, for example, Gutierrez [Luis Gutierrez] as an alderman.  It brought in a 25/25 tie.  Actually it was a 25/24 tie, but one alderman from the North Side [Chicago, Illinois] who worked for George Dunne decided to switch over to the Washington forces because Washington had cut a deal with George Dunne.  So now it's 25/25, which means that the mayor can break the tie.  So our court case changed Chicago [Illinois] history, changed Chicago politics, made it possible for Harold Washington to be an effective mayor, made it possible for Harold Washington to be reelected.  It legitimized the independent movement, because Harold Washington was a man of conviction and he basically was the mayor for everybody, but he pursued enough of the independent political course with, for example, the anti-patronage provisions or the ethic provisions that he set a standard that people couldn't really violate, and he set a standard for inclusiveness that future mayors had to emulate, and so none of this would have been possible if he had spent all of his time worrying with a majority of the city council.  He would have been absolutely ineffectual, and so I do think for a very small part I helped play in terms of Harold Washington getting that majority in the city council, or at least getting a 25/25 split in the city council.
Speaker 2: I think (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) That testimony, they thought, was the key testimony.
Story_ID: 571902
Speaker 1: Anybody who's ever studied history probably is asked by people, "Why are you doing that?  Why are you digging up those obscure facts?  Who cares?"  Now that may have even contributed to the death of Gilbert Osofsky, studying slave narratives.  What does a Howard Holman Bell do with all this research on the Negro Convention or--you know, so when you--
Speaker 2: I'm glad you referenced that book ['The National Negro Convention, 1848,' Howard Holman Bell].  I love that book.
Speaker 1: Right.  So, when you dig into something like that that people have neglected for so long, nobody knew what John Thomas and the first black (unclear)--
Speaker 2: John W. Thomas, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  You know, I mean there's nobody cheering you on, saying, "Yeah, go ahead and do that," 'cause--you know, but here you have this reward when somebody pitches this big softball (laughter) and you knock a homerun 'cause you know how to knock that over the wall.
Speaker 2: Well, you've hit a very important question and I'm going to be very brief about it because nobody wants to hear somebody philosophize about history, but I do think that it's something that I've only grown to appreciate after a period of time, and that is I grew into, or came into African American history as a kind of indulgence.  It was something that I wanted to do because I believe that African Americans had a past.  It was something that I was interested in because I didn't know anything about it.  It was something I was interested in because I figured this was an area nobody else knew a lot about, so I could make my mark.  I also came into it because I would get a sense of pride, a sense of accomplishment in what other people had been able to do and discovering things that they had been able to do that nobody knew, that people had not been giving them credit for.  I didn't want to be one of those people like the Russians used to be after World War II [WWII] where we would claim to have invented the icebox.  In fact, I spent as much time debunking claims in African American history as arguing things that people did not know, because I think it's really important to tell your kids the truth.  I don't care if it's unpleasant, and if somebody says something that you think really is a source of pride but you know it's not the truth, either they or somebody else will find out that it's not the truth, and they won't believe anything else you said, so it's very important that I try as much as possible to be accurate and not overstate the case.  Okay, but, there is a joy in the public history parts.  I've probably given two or three thousand speeches, mostly for free, to every kind of audience you can imagine and that there are people who really hunger to know about African American history and that it seems to me, especially when I was a younger person in the '70s [1970s] and '80s [1980s], that hunger was intense and people really loved everything that you told them about the past.  They loved things especially about Chicago [Illinois] and about African Americans in Chicago and so that was part of it, and then to find that I can use it to be of service to what I believe was a very important political event.
Story_ID: 571903
Speaker 1: I mean, after this happened, I got to spend more time with Harold Washington.  After this happened, Harold calls me, and s- well he doesn't call me, he actually has one of his assistants call me and says, "We want to hire you."  And I go down and I spend a summer for pay working on an infrastructure plank for the Democratic Convention, and I didn't know a darn thing about infrastructure, and I guess because I taught history, they thought, well, you know, he's smart, but I wasn't an expert on infrastructure, but somehow they decided I was going to do the gig.  And so I spent all summer working with people in the city [Chicago, Illinois], working with people who were experts in various departments in the city, got to have a lot of respect for them, wrote these planks, refined these planks over a period of time.  They were submitted to the 1984 Democratic Convention [1984 Democratic National Convention, San Francisco, California], and they were part of the Democratic platform, so I actually ended up writing word for word, part of a national platform in 1984 and, of course, we will forget the fact that Mondale [Walter Mondale] lost (laughter), but that's a lot of fun, and the only reason why I was elected to write that plank, was because Harold Washington knew who I was and I think that they were trying to express some gratitude.
Story_ID: 571904
Speaker 1: When Harold Washington died, I get a call from city hall and I was then teaching at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] and again said, "Look, we need you to put together an exhibit for the Harold Washington Library [Chicago, Illinois].  We're gonna open up a library.  We want to put together an exhibit honoring Harold Washington.  We don't want a professional curator; we want an historian."  That's why they didn't choose Harold Washington's half-brother, Ron Price [sic. Ray Price], and again, I got to spend an entire summer working at in the most refined areas because I was in the rare book rooms, putting together an exhibit.  I got the first look at his papers because, basically, they sealed his entire office when he died, so everything was still there.  And I got to work with his secretary, and I got to look through thousands and thousands of papers and basically develop themes so that I had a pretty clear idea of Harold Washington's accomplishments were.  So when the library opened, that exhibit was part of the opening library.  Of course, I was nowhere to be found on the dais because I didn't have a political name and so Harold Washington's half-brother, who had nothing to do with either developing or selecting other pictures or putting together a design of the exhibit, Harold Washington's half-brother got to stand there and talk about his exhibit, and I sat in the back laughing.
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Well, they weren't going to insult Harold Washington's half-brother, but he had absolutely nothing to do with the exhibit, and I of course, had everything to do with it.  But I was the one that got paid (laughter).
Speaker 2: Consolation.
Speaker 1: I didn't do it for free; I got paid.  But I was--it was a great honor to be the one that they thought, be the historian that they thought could best tell the public history story of Harold Washington and, of course, I've got to talk about stop and frisk, and I got to talk about his time in Springfield [Illinois] as a legislator and I got to talk about his independent candidacy.  Remember, he ran for mayor once before.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: And I got to talk about his relationship with Ralph Metcalfe, and I got to talk about the attempt at one point to run somebody else named Washington against him because he was too much of a thorn in Mayor Daley's [Richard J. Daley] side and I got to present Harold Washington's contributions to all of the neighborhoods.  I got to talk about the things he did in white neighborhoods.  I got to talk about the things he did in terms of his ethic ordinance.  I got to talk about the way in which he actually tried to live up to the promises he made and so I got to present my Harold Washington.  In fact, I remember Dempsey Travis [HistoryMaker Dempsey J. Travis], sending Dempsey Travis a copy of my script and saying, "What do you think?"  He calls me up and says, "It's really good.  I really, really like it."  Then about five minutes later he calls up again and says, "I really think this is wonderful.  I gotta call you again and tell you how wonderful it was."  So I got to say what I wanted to say about Harold Washington.
Story_ID: 571905
Speaker 1: Now this is, we're now in 1987? (Unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) We're about in 1980--yeah, this would be about 1987.  I was now teaching at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois], and I was beginning to make the transition because I was moving from Northwestern to Indiana University [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana], and I was being courted by one of my ex-students, actually somebody whose dissertation committee I sat on, to come to work at DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  I had been on the board at DuSable Museum.  I had been on the board at DuSable Museum since the '70s [1970s].  [HistoryMaker] Margaret Burroughs had, Margaret Burroughs was giving a speech somewhere and we hit it off, no, she was giving a speech at the University of Illinois [University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and we hit it off and I drove her home, and we started talking and Margaret Burroughs loaned items to my TV show ['The Black Experience'].  The first time I met her she was lending, this was even before the show had been realized.  She was lending out objects for a price for TV shows and so I had met her a couple times and she just basically said, "I need you on the board."  And so I got on the board of DuSable Museum, and I never liked meetings.  I didn't like being on the board of DuSable Museum.  I didn't like being on the board of trustees at my college [Rockford College; Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois].  I did love being on the board of the Illinois Humanities Council.  That was the greatest board I've ever been on.  It also got me an invitation to John F. Kennedy's [John F. Kennedy, Jr.] birthday party in the '92 Democratic Convention [sic. 1996 Democratic National Convention, Chicago, Illinois] when he was having a party for George at the Art Institute [Art Institute of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois] and I remember walking with my date into the park and this was the hottest ticket in town and somebody running up to me and looking and saying, "Oh, they're nobody," and then walking away (laughter).  They thought we might have been a celebrity because, you know, all the big movie stars were there and they ran up to me and my date and went, "They're nobody," and then ran away.  You know, that will really bring you down, so I loved the Illinois Humanities Council and I liked being, working for the United Way [United Way Worldwide].  I loved chairing the committee, I loved issuing reports on racial and religious discrimination.  That provided me a chance to exercise leadership, but I hated just sitting in meetings.  I didn't want to just, I was getting kind of bored and Gwen Robinson [Gwendolyn Robinson] wanted me to come to work at DuSable and I already had a job.  And so the question was how could I work two places at once?  Well, I've always taught part time a U of I [University of Illinois at Chicago] when I was at Northwestern; I taught part time at Northwestern when I was at U of I.  I had summer seminars I used to hold at Newberry [Newberry Library, Chicago, Illinois] on teaching in Chicago [Illinois].  I always had like two or three jobs and I'm not even West Indian and I had, you know, like, I basically never turned down a job.  But it was kind of a transition, and the--part of the reason was I loved public history.  I liked being able to present history to a broad audience, and also there were no papers to grade.  So, the '90s [1990s] was, or the late '80s [1980s] was important because I was driving all the way to Indiana and hating the commute and I was being entreated to become a historian and then later to become director of ed- to actually develop an education department at DuSable Museum.
Story_ID: 571906
Speaker 1: So you were saying they called you senior historian of DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois]?
Speaker 2: (Nods head) That was a title that basically she [Gwendolyn Robinson] made up.  But it was a great adventure, because since nobody knew exactly what I did I could do anything I wanted.  I could hold a panel.  I could do panels with other organizations.  I spent a lot of time working with other organizations.  I spent a lot of time working with the Chicago history society [Chicago Historical Society] at that time, now the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois].  I spent a lot of time working with The Field Museum [Chicago, Illinois].  I spent a lot of time working with the Chicago Board of Education.  It was around that time that I wrote the curriculum, the first African American history curriculum for the board of education.  It was around that time that I put together the first African American travel guide [Illinois Generations: A Traveler's Guide to African-American Heritage] for the State of Illinois and I would chair their meetings and I would coordinate their activities and, of course, I wrote the introduction to it, and so you got to do a wide variety of things.  The one thing I didn't do, of course, is I didn't put on exhibits because that was the responsibility of the curatorial department and I was the historian, so we had a nice division of labor.
Speaker 1: Was there interaction between, or relation between exhibits and (simultaneous)--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh yeah.  I would, we would talk to them.  You had to have close coordination because you had to explain to people what they're seeing.  You had to provide political context to what they were seeing.  You had to bring in guest speakers.  I remember bringing in Paul Oliver.  Now, Paul Oliver was an Englishman and he must have been probably in his seventies at the time.  He wrote probably the best book on the blues you've ever heard.  It was called 'Woke Up This Morning' [sic. 'Blues Fell this Morning: The Meaning of the Blues,' Paul Oliver], and he was coming in to Chicago [Illinois] and I had a contact in the city government in the public affairs and he said, "Look, we can get him DuSable."  And so here's this very proper Englishman, talking about the blues and one of the most brilliant, well put together, thoughtful, and thoroughly researched with illustrations, lectures I ever had.  I had to basically beat the bushes to scrounge up a respectable audience.  I mean, I didn't want him to be talking to twenty people.  I would go to restaurants and put up signs.  I would call people on the phone.  I wanted them to hear this guy that I admired so much and had, you know, an Englishman come in and talk about the blues was not an easy sell, and I got a huge audience, or at least a respectable audience, and then later on I took him to 79th Street to listen to some blues, which he didn't appreciate because he was more lead belly blues; you know, he was not Robert Cray blues.  Didn't like the tom-tom but he was a very good sport about it.  I mean, this is what the blues has come to, but he thought it was too much like rock-n-roll, but a wonderful evening, we learned a great deal, found out that perhaps the number one expert of blues that was alive at the time was an Englishman.  By the way, perhaps the number one expert on African American religion and the Afro-Baptist religion is an Israeli scholar named Mechal Sobel, who's called me on the phone several times from Jerusalem.  So you get to meet and talk with people all over the world, and you get to do public history and it was an absolute fun job.  Whether it was honoring African Americans or whether it was bringing guest speakers, whether it was learning about various aspects of art and connecting it to history, we did an exhibit once on burial.  I had no interest in African American burial.  At the end of that exhibit, after having done research and taught people about it and talked about it with a lot of people, I found it the most fascinating subject in the world.  So, it was a great learning experience.  It was a great chance to communicate with people, to tell them about their history, to tell them about history of African Americans, especially in Chicago and in Illinois.  It's a great chance to work with bright people, the head of the Mexican--the founder of the Mexican Fine Arts Center [Mexican Fine Arts Center Museum; National Museum of Mexican Art, Chicago, Illinois], for example, in collaborations.  It was a wonderful opportunity to learn a lot of history that I would never have thought to explore, but that was forced on me by the dictates of having to do a variety of exhibitions.
Story_ID: 571907
Speaker 1: I have a note here about a book, 'The Transformation of Black Political Leadership in Chicago' ['The Transformation of Black Political Leadership in Chicago, 1864-1942,' Charles Russell Branham]--
Speaker 2: That's my Ph.D. dissertation (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, okay, that's your dissertation, all right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and as I said before, it's--it goes from the pre-Civil War period to the 1940s.  So, it covers virtually a hundred years of African American politics.
Speaker 1: Did you ever plan to publish it as a--
Speaker 2: I've had a lot of people begging me to do it.  At some point, I need to do it.  The problem is finding the time.  I mean, I just spent last weekend writing an article for a British publication.  I usually write about two or three articles a year.  I routinely review books for The Journal of African American History and, of course, I've got two books that I'm very fond of, one of which that is in its third printing, which is the 'Great African Americans' ['Profiles of Great African Americans,' Charles R. Branham].  So, there's a lot that I do in terms of keeping my hand in the net, but I spend so much time teaching and consulting that it becomes very difficult to find the time.  I'm basically at a point now where I actually work seven days a week.  I--my workday may seem short because I'm basically usually out four days a week by 11:30 in the morning.  You might say, "That's not a very onerous teaching schedule," but I'm usually there sometimes until 6 or 7 or 8:00 at night and then, of course, right now I'm teaching a mini-course on Barack Obama [HistoryMaker President Barack Obama], and I'm consulting on the Lincoln Bicentennial [Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission], so I'll be going all over the country for town hall meetings, so I don't have the time to do the writing that I want.
Story_ID: 571908
Speaker 1: Well, when you look back at everything you've done to this point.  Is there any major thing that you would do differently if you could?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  That's an awfully tough question.  I mean, I got to do a lot of different things.  I mean, I never got to put an exhibit on at DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], but after I did the Harold Washington exhibit for the opening of the Harold Washington Library [Chicago, Illinois], I got an emergency call and put together an exhibit for Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  I was born at Provident Hospital.  They were offering a lot of money because they said they wanted this thing done in one week.  I put together an exhibit down at the county building, because I remember Stroger [HistoryMaker John H. Stroger, Jr.] and some other people at the opening, and I discovered an African American woman who was at the heart of the founding of the oldest independent African American hospital in the country, Emma Reynolds.  Everybody knew about Dr. Daniel Williams [Daniel Hale Williams].  I learned and gave equal attention to Emma Reynolds.  One, because I was raised in a house full of women.  I was raised in a house of five women.  The doctor who brought me into the world at Provident Hospital was a woman, so I've always been concerned to try to include more women in African American history, and when I did the 'Great African Americans' ['Profiles of Great African Americans,' Charles R. Branham], each new edition is more balanced in terms of increasing attention to the contributions of African American women.
Story_ID: 571909
Speaker 1: I had a chance to work with an African American nurse, a woman of senior, let's say of advanced years, and she had made it a kind of a cause of her life to draw public attention to Emma Reynolds, and I had never heard of Emma Reynolds and so she had pictures and she knew a little bit about her and the more I researched her the more I realized how important this black woman was to the founding of Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois].  And then I went to Provident Hospital and looked for their archives.  They had no archives.  They actually had old documents in a closet.  They had letters that were over a hundred years old that were in a box.  People had stolen medical equipment that Dr. Daniel Hale Williams himself had used.  It was--it was a crime.  Anyway, I gathered together a lot of material, even got material from people that she knew, the people that would volunteer material, and I put together what I thought was a great exhibit.  We had the poem ['Intern at Provident'] by Langston Hughes on Provident Hospital.  We had wonderful, I remember this one lady whose husband had been a physician there, gave me a bunch of old photos that I didn't return for years because I had actually lost them.  I'm so grateful that I actually ultimately found them and was able to return them, and she was very grateful to have them and she didn't even reproach me for the fact that I kept them so long, but I felt terribly guilty.  But there were a lot of people who gave me photos and told me about aspects of the history of Provident Hospital and I began to realize how important Provident Hospital was to the African American community, emblematic it was of African American institution building and how characteristic it was of the African American interest in having something of their own.  How Emma Reynolds had been a very important part of its founding, how she had later gone on now to become a nurse, but also become a, one of the first African American female doctors, so I got a chance to elevate her as a part of African American history and it was a big hit.  It was exhibited for, I think, six weeks at the county building.  Now, my job was done.  I was off doing something else.  I was actually building an education department at DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  DuSable Museum had not had an education department for probably twenty or thirty years, twenty years, and so they didn't have anything as a foundation and so the new director, Antoinette Wright, came to me and said, "We want you to be director of education and we want you to start, you know, build an education department."  So, that was pretty busy, teaching at Lab [University of Chicago Laboratory Schools, Chicago, Illinois] for a couple of classes, then going to DuSable Museum from, say, oh I don't know, 10:30 to two o'clock, and then getting on the road and going to Indiana [Indiana University Northwest, Gary, Indiana], and then often coming back to the museum to work on grants until midnight.  I mean, I actually literally would work seven days a week and sometimes I'd work very long hours, but of course, I was splitting my time between three things.
Story_ID: 571910
Speaker 1: I just happened to go by Provident Hospital [Provident Hospital of Cook County, Chicago, Illinois], maybe to pick up a check, and I see in the driveway near the trash collection all of the material that we had put together for the exhibit.  The hospital was going to throw away all of that material.  I then prevailed upon them to take it in and I said, you know, if you don't want it we'll give it to DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  They kept it.  I last saw some of it at the Museum of Science and Industry [Chicago, Illinois], 'Black Creativity' exhibit ['Black Creativity Juried Art Exhibition'], not as well put together as the initial exhibit, not as well prepared.  There was a document that I discovered of an abolitionist giving money to Provident Hospital, talking about her mother giving money to the abolitionist cause before the Civil War and how this would always be a part of their family tradition.  I think that was a wonderful letter, and it was on very brittle paper and it was being exhibited at the Museum of Science and Industry without any cover.  No glass, no plastic, nothing to protect it from the elements, so I was disheartened.  I mean, I was a little upset about the fact that we had worked so hard and we'd worked so many long hours and I remember working until two or three o'clock in the morning with Winbush right around here at his studio, putting together material.  I would get in the car and I'd drive around.  There was, I think, a White Castle, on 22nd Street [Cermak Road].
Speaker 2: Now this is Mr. [HistoryMaker] LeRoy Winbush--
Speaker 1: I'd be driving into that and as I'm getting a hamburger or something, about two or three o'clock in the morning, there's a car that pulls up beside me and there's a guy blindfolded in the backseat and it's apparently either a gang initiation.  I think they're getting to off this guy and he just pulls up beside me and then keeps going.  (Laughter) I mean, you know there were strange things that happened in those days and again, it gave me a chance to express myself and to feel creative.  It gave me a chance to reclaim an aspect of African American history that people did not know.  It gave me a chance to find something new, but it didn't last.  It wasn't incorporated into any lasting archive. And so my fear is that one of the great tragedies of public history its--is its ephemeral nature, which makes what HistoryMakers [The HistoryMakers] is doing so important, because they're institutionalizing and preserving as opposed to creating just for the moment.  I'm sure that much of the material that we put together for the Harold Washington exhibit has ceased to exist.  Same thing with much of the material for the Provident Hospital exhibit.  I'm sure a lot of people have forgotten things that I said in public lectures, and so that's the downside of public history.  That unless you're able to institutionalize it, people forget.
Story_ID: 571911
Speaker 1: The interesting thing, of course, is that sometimes history bleeds over into politics and that has a more specific function.  That has a more practical use and its impact is longer lasting.  I remember I was called when I was at Northwestern [Northwestern University, Evanston, Illinois] to testify before the city council and they wanted somebody to talk about economic discrimination against African Americans in Chicago [Illinois].  There was nothing more than that; would you come as an historian and talk to the city council.  So I did, and my testimony was put on the record.  Later I find out that my testimony was the single foundation for the affirmative action program of the City of Chicago.  And I found out because a few years ago, a law firm calls me up at the museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and says, "We need to talk to you," and they tell me, "We have to have you, because you're the centerpiece for the affirmative action policy of the City of Chicago.  We're being sued by the building contractors.  They want to end all of our minority set-aside programs, so we need you as an expert witness."  And so I was able to work with them for two years, because it took two years for the case to finally come up.  I read all kinds of material from other scholars.  I became kind of an expert.  I got to interview a lot of people, older people, who'd been in the building trade.  I got to write a history that went all the way back to the 1880s and '90s [1890s].  I got to learn about how intense the discrimination within unions against African American contractors.  Now, here's the ironic thing.  I'd been a consultant on a made-for-TV movie sponsored by unions on the same subject and so I've actually been on both sides.  They contacted me in what must have been the '70s [1970s] for a TV show [sic. episode on 'American Playhouse'] called "The Killing Floor," and Alfre Woodard, whom I met--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --was the star.  It was sponsored by unions and it was about the 1919 race riot, and it was about an African American who stood up for the unions.
Speaker 2: And directed by [HistoryMaker] Bill Duke?
Speaker 1: And I spent--yeah, I met Bill Duke--and I spent, I must have met with them a dozen times.  I spent a lot of time in meetings with them on the scripts.  I must have read seven or eight versions of the script, and, of course, I was sympathetic.  I've always been sympathetic to union organizing, and I was always sympathetic to anything that tried to portray accurately African American history and talks about the 1919 race riot.  I mean, that's Chicago history, that's in my wheelhouse.  They couldn't get the script right.  They couldn't deal with the imbalance between the patent discrimination among, or prejudice among union workers and the fact that this was a pro-union African American.  And they--since they were basing it on scant, historical information, they basically could come up with an ending any way they wanted, and they came up with an ending and the ending was that he stands up for the union and Heavy, who's a bully, another black person who's kind of a company man, starts beating him up and they beat him up and then he climbs to his feet after having been beaten up by Heavy, and he puts the meat hook on his shoulder and he starts painfully, grudgingly walking toward the stockyards to lead the union workers in and they all rally around him and they follow him and that's the end of the movie, and they loved it.  They thought it was great; it's heroic.  I mean, he gets beaten up.  He climbs out from the muck.  He stands up for the union and people see his courage and they follow him and I say, "I mean, this is a great ending."  The only problem is this is exactly the ending of 'On the Waterfront.'  They were furious at me.  They screamed at me.  Because either they had forgotten, or they did not know that they had actually copied the ending of 'On the Waterfront,' and so they had yet again to come up with a new ending, so we finally got a script and I was credited as the consultant, but they misspelled my name.  To this day, I have contended that my name was misspelled because the female producer was furious at me for recognizing that her ending was the same as 'On the Waterfront' (laughter).
Story_ID: 571912
Speaker 1: So here I am [testifying in Builders Association of Greater Chicago v. City of Chicago, 2003], and this time I'm defending the city.  And remember, remember the first time I was ever a--an expert witness [in Ketchum v. City Council of City of Chicago, 1984], I was against the city.  Now, I'm being hired by the city, and I guess that's a sign of progress.  And I go and give my testimony, and I've, of course, worked with these lawyers and we were already expected to lose.  We know the conservative trend of the country, but I'm going to give it my best shot and, of course, I've got a lot of historical facts at my fingertips, and I've done a lot of research on this and I've prepared and I go in and give my testimony.  And the other side then gets up and wants to cross-examine me and they ask me some questions and I answer their questions and then my side gets up and cross-crosses at me, and the other side gets up and wants to cross-cross-cross me.  Judge Moran [James Byron Moran], a very, I mean he has a reputation.  One of my buddies, Standish Willis [HistoryMaker Standish E. Willis], who is a lawyer and a civil liberties lawyer, says he has a very good reputation of being a very fair judge.  Judge Moran stops the defendant lawyer, stops the prosecution lawyer, the plaintiff lawyer--stops the lawyers who wished to do away with all affirmative action.  Remember, the white billing trades companies have somewhere like 94 percent of all the building anyway.  I mean, it's 94 percent of all the money, public monies, anyway.  So it was only a very small percentage of African American companies that are even in this pool and so, what they want is not 94 percent, they want 99.9 percent, so you know, it's not exactly as if they're losing money or that African American building associations are getting the lion's share of contracts, but anyway, they get up and they start asking me questions and Judge Moran stops him and he says, "Look, are you trying to tell me that there was no discrimination against African Americans in the 1960s?"  He's sitting there with this white beard and he looks like Santa Claus and he's looking directly at these lawyers and the lawyers back off.  It's as if they've been slapped.  He's saying, "This guy's testimony is right.  Are you gonna really argue with him about discrimination against African Americans in the building trades in the 1960s?"  So, my testimony is finished, but he stops me and he says, "Before you leave," and he tells the stenographer not to write anything down, and then he asks me questions about Richard Wade's [Richard C. Wade] urban history classes at the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] in the 1970s.  And we wants me to recollect the experience of being a Richard Wade student, which of course, I do, with great pleasure because I've always had a great deal of fondness for Richard Wade and I always felt he was a great teacher and I learned a great deal.  And so my testimony, again, is a success and my lawyer said, "Well, he really likes you."  And we lost, but we lost by a very narrow margin in that there were things that we could do to change the wording of the con- code so that the affirmative action and minority set-aside program will be constitutional according to the law.  So, it's not like it was struck down completely.  It was simply said it has to be rewritten, a victory we did not anticipate and one I'm very proud of.  I never set out to be a public historian, but when you're talking about things that you believe, and at the same time they have some social impact beyond simply enlightening the audience, that's a wonderful feeling.  That's a good thing.
Story_ID: 571913
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: I'm very much concerned about family disorganization.  I'm concerned about a division or split within the African American community.  I'm concerned that at a time of unprecedented opportunities, there are African Americans who are still disheartened, African Americans who lack cultural and emotional support, who give up on themselves or who have had society give up on them much too early.  They need a sense that opportunities exist.  They need a sense that there are rewards for disciplining themselves and preparing themselves for these challenges.  They need to see that other people have been able to accomplish great things against great odds, and again, we're not at a point where we can comfortably point the finger at other people.  Increasingly we also have to look inward to our leadership, to our institutions, and to ourselves, to see if we've made the sacrifices, if we've developed the character traits which would allow us to succeed and also which would allow us to realize our greatest potential.
Story_ID: 571914
Speaker 1: What today, when you look at everything you've done, would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I hope my legacy isn't done--isn't over yet, I mean, I'm very enthused about working as a consultant on the Lincoln Bicentennial [Abraham Lincoln Bicentennial Commission].  Adam Green from the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois], working with Congressman Jesse Jackson [HistoryMaker Jesse Jackson, Jr.] and Congressman Jack Kemp out of Washington [D.C.] to set up a series of town hall meetings around the country to talk about Lincoln [President Abraham Lincoln], race, and the idea of equality in the 21st century.  There can be no better time, because we are right at the point of extraordinary historic election.  There can be no better time, because we're in the 21st century and so much has changed in terms of race relation; so much has changed in terms of the way in which people understand the world.  We live in a global economy.  There's been extraordinary technological changes.  We need to be more competitive and we certainly need to deal with a public school system which has a great many--has a great many problems.  So how then can we funnel resources into those areas where it's needed?  How do you understand equality when the black/white paradigm has shifted?  We're a far more diverse society.  The vast majority of the students in African American history class not only aren't African American but I'd say most of them aren't even black or white.  Lots of people who have come here from other cultures and other countries and we have to talk about a new America where there is a larger Hispanic population than African American population, and so ideas about equality which largely flowed out of the struggles of African Americans in the 1950s and '60s [1960s], had to be reevaluated in light of the 21st century.
Story_ID: 571915
Speaker 1: Tell us a little bit about your family.  Do you have--do you have children, or--?
Speaker 2: No, I'm not married.  I don't have children.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So your family would be your sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham], I guess, at this point.
Speaker 2: Oh, God, no.  I hang out with my eighty-seven year old mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon], who is a wonderful person.  I have friends that I have had for forty years that I'm very close with.  I've got different sets of friends.  I've got friends at work that I have a cup of coffee with every day, and that I spend a lot of time at their home and we socialize a lot.  We have much the same interest in movies and music and literature.  And I have friends from my old disco days, my party days, buddies that I see and talk to pretty much, but largely I've been able to keep most of the same friends for a long period of time and even a couple of ex-girlfriends are close friends of mine and ultimately I enjoy going to a lecture or listening to somebody who knows a lot more about something than I do, and I enjoy learning from people who are my friends.  I mean, my friends aren't people you just hang around with.  I should actually be taking notes sometimes, because when they're talking about food or when they're talking about a trip or when they're talking about something that they've experienced, it enhances my life.  Most importantly, they make me laugh.
Story_ID: 571916
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything I haven't asked you you think we need to mention before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: No, I actually think you've covered virtually everything in great detail.  I might have had a couple of bad experiences with police, but that's--for a very law-abiding guy.  I remember when I was teaching at Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], there was a friend of mine named David Bruce.  David Bruce was the great-grandson of Blanche K. Bruce, but he wasn't black, he was Jewish and he had long blonde hair, and he looked like Grover Cleveland [President Stephen Grover Cleveland], no, he looked more like [President] William Howard Taft.  He was kind of, you know, overweight, and he was one of my buddies in graduate school [University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois], and so I took him up to Channel 11, because he knew a lot of African American history and his brother was actually passing for black on occasion, so we're talking really strange, and I'm driving through the neighborhood after we had left Channel 11 and he spent some time talking to my friends and I'd shout a show and I'm stopped by the police and I don't know a lot about Chicago [Illinois], and the guys stop and I ask him, "Officer, what did I do?"  And he says, "Just shut up and sit in the car."  And he goes and goes around the other side and he looks and he sees that instead of this blonde-haired girl, there's a blonde-haired guy with a big, thick walrus mustache.  He looks at him for a second, then he comes back, hands me back my license and says, "Okay, what are you doing in this neighborhood?"  And I tell him I work at Channel 11, and he said, "Okay, bye."  He never explains to me what I did and basically he stopped me because he thought I had a white girl in the car.  Now this is Chicago in the 1970s.  I remember being stopped once on the West Side, and a police officer said, "I'm going to lunch," no, "I'm going to breakfast."  This was may be 12:00 at night.  I'm going to breakfast, and I kept saying well, you know, I wasn't speeding.  I didn't do anything, and he says I'm going to breakfast, and he must have said it about three or four times, and I didn't get the message that he was basically saying, "You need to give me money so I can go to breakfast."  He wasn't asking for a bribe.  He was simply saying he's going to breakfast, so eventually I gave him ten dollars and he let me go.  Another time a guy was in the lane in front of me and moved into another lane when you head into Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and when you head into the Stevenson [Stevenson Expressway], and I couldn't let him back in ahead of me because I guess he headed in the wrong lane.  He chased me down Lake Shore Drive, and when I pulled off he then tried to corner me and I got around him and then I drove down 53rd Street and he cornered me again.  He had a badge and a gun.  He pulls me out of the car.  He handcuffs me.  He pulls the handcuffs up tight so that he almost breaks my arm and throws me on the ground.  Then he realizes two things.  One, he is not a Chicago policeman.  He is a Cook County [Illinois] sheriff, and two, I didn't do anything.  My crime was not letting him put his cart- letting him get ahead of me in line.  So he un-handcuffs me, jumps in the car and then drives away, because he realizes that if the police come, he's gonna go to jail.  I write down his license plates, turn him into the police.  They say they don't know who he is, but I just happen to have a tenant who is a police officer.  She gives me his name and tells me who he is.  The police covered for him.  The explanation was he just bought the car.
Story_ID: 571917
Speaker 1: And my worst experience actually was when I was doing my TV show ['The Black Experience'].  I had been introduced to a young lady by John Tweedle, and I had just been interviewing Lorenzo Dow Turner and Lorenzo Dow Turner was the author of 'Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect,' and he taught at Roosevelt University [Chicago, Illinois], although he'd retired by the time I started teaching at Roosevelt, and he was just the most gracious of people.  He lived in Hyde Park [Chicago, Illinois] and so I went to his home and he pulled out this old phonograph with a pine needle, which he stuck in the arm and then he brought out these big metallic records and put them on the turn table, and put the pine needle on the turntable, cranked it and I could hear the actual voices of the people he'd interviewed when he wrote his famous book and so I was on cloud nine, because this was something we could use on the show.  We could photograph this and we could show him as a pioneer scholar and I was one to promote African American scholarship, and at the same time we're learning something about Africanisms.  We're talking about perhaps the most African people in America and it's a culture as you know that has virtually disappeared and so I was driving down Lake Shore Drive and I ended up at 71st [Street] and I just happened to drop by this girl's apartment building and I knocked on the door and they, I mean I was buzzed in and so I get on the elevator and go up and as I get ready to knock on the door, the door opens, a guy comes out, pushes me against the wall, puts a gun to my head, and says he's going to kill me.  Apparently, she had a boyfriend.  Apparently she was breaking up with the boyfriend.  Apparently he thought I was the cause.  He held me there for what seemed like two hours.  It was probably more like twenty minutes.  He was a police officer.  He explained to me that he was going to say that I was breaking in, and that he was going to say he had to shoot me as a robber.  I, of course, basically said nothing, except I looked him in the eye, maintained eye contact, which of course, is the worst thing you can do, basically.  You're not supposed to maintain eye contact if people actually have a gun to your head, and basically said, "You know, you don't want to do this.  You'll never get away with it."  And I apparently learned later that you're not supposed to say that.  He kept telling me he was going to kill me.  After twenty minutes, he decided he wasn't going to kill me.  He puts the gun away, gets on an elevator and leaves.  Later he tells her mother, he calls her mother and says, "I almost killed a guy."  I called several friends of mine because I have a lot of ex-students who are police officers and I talk to them about it, and to a man they said--now remember this is the 1970s--they said, "Leave it alone."  I mean, Wilbourne Woods, who was Mayor Washington's [Harold Washington] guard.  Wilbourne Woods was a student of mine and we got to be friends because he would always reassure me that he was not an FBI [Federal Bureau of Investigation] agent when he was in my class, and he said, "Look.  These guys will put drugs in your car.  They will not let one of their own go down, so just leave it alone."  So, I don't know how many people have ever had a gun put to their heads, but I was actually kind of proud of the fact that I didn't panic.  We now know a little bit about what you're likely to do, whether or not you can remain calm, when you have a gun put to your head, but I never want that to happen again.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Wilbourne was one of the members of the African American Police League [Afro-American Patrolmen's League; African American Police League], yeah.
Speaker 1: (Nods head) And he told me, he said, "Leave it alone."  He says, "I'll talk to the guy but don't turn him in because they'll end up putting drugs in your car."
Story_ID: 571918
Speaker 1: Our last question that we ask is similar to legacy but a little bit different.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Well, part of me wants to say as a perpetual student.  I have had the great pleasure of learning a lot of history and sharing a lot of history, and I feel pretty selfishly that I've gotten the better of the deal.  I think I've learned from my students and I've had a great deal of fun doing it, and I have a continuing passion for history.  I guess the other part of it is, of course, that probably [HistoryMaker] Timuel Black and I have been the two most prominent public African American historians in the City of Chicago [Illinois]. I mean, between us Tim has been doing it a lot longer, but I've probably done a few more high profiled areas.  We've been the public face of African American history.  There have been others who have written wonderful, scholarly works, but we spent a lot of time talking to a lot of people, trying to tell them about African American history and also tell them about African--specifically tell them about African American history in Chicago.  It's important for people--especially young people--that you try to mention their street name, that you try to make references to things that they can relate to, so that they can see themselves as a part of the history, not heroic men and women, so  unflawed that people can't hope to aspire to what they've accomplished.  And so I do think that that's been probably the most important part of my legacy, that I have been able for a long time to, not only learn a lot of history and introduce people to a lot of history that they weren't familiar with, especially about African Americans in Chicago, but that I've been able to do it in a vast array of venues, working with a lot of organizations.  I remember [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin once telling me, he thought that the one mistake I made was being so accessible, for spending so much time talking in public organizations and volunteering for public projects.  I remember [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett once berating me for taking a speaking gig and not charging.  He said, "You could have made money, and more importantly they could have come to me and I could have money."  He was smiling when he did it, but the point is that, yeah, I've been, I've talked everywhere and I've spent a lot of time learning about and introducing people to a variety of aspects of African American history.  I think I have benefited from that.  It's made me a better historian.  Certainly, it's continued my enthusiasm.  I don't want to be the guy who plays 'Stormy Weather' every night for forty years.  I don't want to be the guy who has one note.  I don't want to ever do the same thing twice.  My jazz instincts which come from my mother's [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon] side of the family are too strong.  I've got to constantly shake it up and so the great pleasure of doing so many different things in terms of the museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois] and in terms of exhibits and in terms of testimonies and expert witness, and in terms of consulting and in terms of working with institutions and writing history and trying to identify great African Americans and trying to learn more and more about African American history in Chicago, especially in the 19th century, all of this has meant that I never got bored.
Story_ID: 571919
Speaker 1: That would be my [paternal] grandfather.  That's Joseph Branham.  He was the assistant pastor of Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois].  My guess is because it's a companion piece with his wife, my father's real mother, Maggie Fitzgerald [Maggie Fitzgerald Branham], that this was a picture which was probably taken around 1910 or 1911, probably somewhere in that area.
Speaker 2: And that's my father's real mother, who was reputed to be half white, Maggie Fitzgerald.  Her father was--came from Germany to New Orleans [Louisiana], and she died shortly after my father was born.
Speaker 1: That's my wonderful mother [Charles Hurd Branham Halthon], who's eighty-seven years old now, and those are my brilliant sisters, Cathryn [Cathryn Branham] and Carol [Carol Branham].  Carol is on the camera left and Cathryn, who is the older one, is on camera right.  Cathryn is minutes older.  Cathryn went to the University of Chicago [Chicago, Illinois] undergraduate and got two master's degrees from the University of Chicago, but she hasn't worked probably the last ten or twenty years, because she's had three mastectomies.  My sister, Carol, graduated from Bryn Mawr [Bryn Mawr College, Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania] and they both live in Brea, California.
Speaker 2: That's me with [HistoryMaker] Vernon Jarrett and my buddy, Jerry.  I get to tell two stories at once.  I was mentored by three great African American men.  The first, of course, was [HistoryMaker] John Hope Franklin.  I spoke a great deal about him.  The second was Earl B. Dickerson, whom Dr. Franklin sent me to meet very early in my dissertation process.  The third was Vernon Jarrett.  Vernon Jarrett, I first met when I was doing my TV show ['The Black Experience'].  He came to Channel 11 [WTTW-TV, Chicago, Illinois], basically, to look at a show before the series aired and he gave me his comments.  I had been on his television show many times, but Vernon used to like to call me up (background noise), just to say hello and to curse me out and to have fun.  I mean, he genuinely liked me.  The white guy to his right is Jerry Malloy.  Jerry was one of my best friends from Rockford College [Rockford University, Rockford, Illinois].  Jerry and Tom [ph.] and I became the Three Musketeers.  Jerry died about seven or eight years ago, much too young.
Speaker 1: That's the picture of--that's the earliest picture that I think that I have, that would have been about 1900, maybe 1901.  It's in Texas, I'm sorry, no it wouldn't be 1900, it would be more like 1911 or 1912.  It's in Texas.  My father is a baby on the lap of the person to the far left.  He would have been one or so years old, and so this was Texas and this is the Branham family gathering.  They were farmers.
Speaker 2: That's a calendar that my father's church, South Shore Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], put out.  That's my father and he's holding one of my sisters, my mother, who was quite a looker apparently, holding my other sister, and there's me, probably pouting.  I did that a lot.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on. (Pause) Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's me and the man I consider my mentor, John Hope Franklin.  John Hope Franklin, of course, has every award known to man.  He is the first African American president of the American Historical Association and the first African American president of the Organization of American Historians, first African American president of Phi Beta Kappa [Phi Beta Kappa Society], which is why I wore my key during the interview, and he's the man who is probably--made--who is singularly responsible for me being able to complete my graduate education at the University of Chicago.
Speaker 1: That's probably one of the few pictures I have from my days at DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois].  That's Gwendolyn Robinson and I was on the panel that presided over her Ph.D. dissertation and in the center is Jim Edgar, the governor of Illinois.  We put together an exhibit for Illinois generations.  I was primarily responsible for coordinating it and I wrote the introduction for it.  Edgar came to the museum to both honor work on the thing and also to have his picture taken.  That picture also, or a picture like it was also on the front page of the Chicago Tribune.
Speaker 2: That's a younger picture of me when I was giving a speech at Rockford College.  I got a chance to give a number of speeches, a Phi Beta Kappa address, a speech which basically talked about my personal history there.  I got to give a speech when I was honored by the Organization of American Historians and others and when I was given an honorary degree by my alma mater.  So, that's a program from one of the times they invited me to come and give a talk.
Speaker 1: That's a snap--that's a picture that was taken on the set of 'The Black Experience.'  It's the first national television series on African American history and it was sixty half hours and we moved from suit and tie to more informal dress as the show went on.  Yeah, they're dusty because I haven't shown them in a long time.
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 1: I was wearing Negro (unclear), Negro number two.
Speaker 2: That's high school [Manassas High School, Memphis, Tennessee], a high school reunion.  These are some of the guys who are members of an organization called the Old Timers, which was the top social club; just a perfect reminder of how a guy who was basically a geek can be a member of the top high school social club.  So, there are several friends that I've tried to keep in touch with over the years in that picture.
Story_ID: 571920
Speaker 1: That's another picture of the governor [Jim Edgar] and myself and Ramon Price.  If I remember correctly, we're going through an exhibit of paintings done by African American artists commemorating the history of African Americans in Illinois that was done in 1963, to commemorate the hundred year anniversary of the Emancipation Proclamation.  All of those paintings are now in the possession of DuSable Museum [DuSable Museum of African American History, Chicago, Illinois], so they were displaying those paintings and that's the reason why the governor was there.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of me, rather unkempt, with the Emmy [Emmy Award] that I won for writing and co-producing and hosting ['The Black Experience'].
Speaker 1: That's nineteen--
Speaker 2: I'd say that Emmy was 1971 or '72 [1972].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture, probably from the early 1920s, maybe 1921 or '22 [1922].  That's a woman's group at Olivet Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], and the very tall woman at the far right is my [paternal] grandmother [Erma Hines Branham].  That's a very  young picture of my grandmother, and that picture was also part of an exhibit that was did on Bronzeville [Chicago, Illinois] with the Chicago History Museum [Chicago, Illinois] that was very, very popular both at the Chicago History Museum and then reimagined and we showed it for six months at DuSable Museum.
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my father [Joseph Branham] in the center, and that's the board of trustees.  Somewhere, actually, in that picture is the woman who kidnapped me, but I won't point her out, but I can remember virtually every one of those trustees including the gentleman standing in between the two much larger gentleman because my first car, the 1961 Mercury Comet, would break down every six months--every six weeks, and he helped fix it (laughter).
Speaker 2: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Next.
Speaker 1: He's a wonderful man.
Speaker 2: That's a picture of my buddy, Eddie [ph.], who was in the previous picture at my high school reunion, and Magic Johnson.  We ran into Magic Johnson and Penny Hardaway and spent an evening talking with them and I don't think gives you an idea of how much taller he is than I am, but that's Magic Johnson.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Hold on please, hold on, hold on. Okay.
Speaker 2: That's a picture with Harold Washington.  I remember the times that I spent with Harold Washington.  I met him first when he was a state senator.  We were not close friends, but he was somebody who knew my name and somebody I was proud to support and proud to work with and, on occasion, work for and I just thought he was a great man.  He was always very charming and just fantastic.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me up at Great Lakes [Naval Station Great Lakes, Lake County, Illinois].  I gave a speech to the troops.  I actually had given a talk somewhere before, and the African American commandant of the Great Lakes was in the audience.  He invited me to the union club.  I went to the union club, and we sat at a table, and we struck up a friendship and he then invited me to Great Lakes to give a talk to the troops upon their graduation, and then give a talk to his officers, and they gave me a nice plaque and a nice lunch.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's just too big. That's a column in the Chicago Sun-Times.  They gave me a blown up version, called Someone You Should Know, and what happened was I had worked for them for Illinois Generations [Illinois Generations: A Traveler's Guide to African-American Heritage], which was the African American travelogue, and had written the introduction for them and they had not paid me, so instead of giving me money, they said we need to give you publicity, so they asked me if I would let them interview me for their paper and it ran in the newspaper and I got a lot of calls from ex-girlfriends.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMREA DISCUSSION)
Speaker 2: That's just one of the handbills.  I got an opportunity to talk about the real reason for Washington's election.  There are a number of different venues.  The most important one was I got to actually present a paper on it for the American Historical Association which, of course, is the premier professional historical association in the country, and I was very proud of that, but because I had access to his papers before other people had, and because I wanted to constantly tell the Harold Washington story, I did it in a variety of venues, and you'll probably find a dozen different versions of a different fliers basically of me talking about the same thing, which is the importance of Washington's victory.
Speaker 1: That's another presentation.  Malcolm X College [Chicago, Illinois] has a lot of programming, especially a series every year, and I've been a guest of theirs talking about various topics, generally they design the topics every year.
Speaker 2: Sorry about the (unclear). That's a picture of my father with Mahalia Jackson.  I remember once sitting and my father was the pastor of South Shore Baptist Church [Chicago, Illinois], and then another church which was smaller and then a third church which was even smaller than that, and so we're basically in almost a storefront and I'm sitting in church one day.  This was one summer when I went to church and was living in his house and most of the time I would--I slept in, I'm ashamed to admit, and I'm sitting in this little storefront church and there couldn't probably be more than twenty or thirty people there, and in walks Mahalia Jackson, and Mahalia Jackson says, "Reverend, do you mind if I sing a song?"  And then she proceeds to sing three songs, and she was absolutely mesmerizing.  Then she invites us over to her house for dinner, so my father, my sisters [Cathryn Branham and Carol Branham], and I go to her house.  She gives each one of us a dollar.  I, of course, have spent the dollar.  My sisters both have the dollar that Mahalia Jackson gave us.  A warmer, more generous person, my father was not near the end of his career, a very successful or very prominent minister, but she was loyal to the people that she liked and she loved singing gospel music. That was too long.
Speaker 1: (OFF CAMERA VOICE): Okay, next.
Speaker 2: That's my father; standing next to him on his camera right is Studs Terkel.  My father, I later discovered after he had died, preached the funeral for Big Bill Broonzy, the legendary blues singer, and Studs Terkel, the Great Chicagoan, Studs Terkel, was close to and a loyal supporter of Big Bill Broonzy, and so as you can see, he's there at the service.
