Story_ID: 597628
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Sade Turnipseed.  Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Karen Jeanette Briggs, K-A-R-E-N; Jeanette is J-E-A-N-E-T-T-E; Briggs, B-R-I-G-G-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: August 12, 1963, in New York City, New York.
Speaker 1: All right.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: I'm a violinist, and a mom (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is October 4, 2004.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?  You don't have to give your exact address--
Speaker 2: My address--
Speaker 1: --if you don't want to.
Speaker 2: Well, we're at my home; we're at my home.
Speaker 1: In?
Speaker 2: Oh, Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 597629
Speaker 1: Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they only take a short, they only require a short answer.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: The first one is what is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yaka mein.  It's a noodle dish that only people in parts of Virginia and maybe New York know about.  It's noodles, boiled egg, boiled chicken, with ketchup, soy sauce, and black pepper mixed together.  And it's call yaka mein, or yak for short.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Red.
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right, you're known as the "Lady in Red."
Speaker 2: Yeah.  (Laughter) It's my favorite color, always has been.
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: August, summer.  August is, I don't know, I always have great luck during the month of August.  Plus, it's my birth month, so--but I don't know, a lot of great things happen besides my birthday.  Usually in the month of August I make more money, and great things happen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: No.  Right now it's the last one I took.  I went just home to my family in Virginia, and we hung out in Virginia Beach [Virginia].  We did a crab steam, barbeque sort of thing, and I took that as a vacation.  But I travel so much, I rarely do that.  Because a lot of my work takes me to places--like I'm going to Bermuda tomorrow night for, what, four days?  So, that's going to be like a vacation, but I'll be working.  And I prefer to work when I go places.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Yes, Mr. or Mrs. Right is someone whose faults you can tolerate (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 597630
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you about your family history.  I'm going to ask you about your mother's side and your father's [Frank Briggs, Jr.] side.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: We'll start with your mother's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  Her name is Ruthie Powell, R-U-T-H-I-E, P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, Accomack County, Virginia is her place of birth.  Her date of birth--
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: Accomack, A-C-C-O-M-A-C-K, I believe--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --County.
Speaker 1: Accomack County--
Speaker 2: Virginia.
Speaker 1: Virginia, okay.
Speaker 2: And her date of birth, I cannot recall.
Speaker 1: Do you have an idea of what--
Speaker 2: I know it's November, and I think it's the 27th.  The year, I don't--it's either '24 [1924] or '27 [1927].
Speaker 1: Okay, 1924 or 1927?
Speaker 2: I want to say yeah, '24 [1924] or '27 [1927].
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, what do you know about your mother's side of the family?  Do you know much about her ancestors going back?  And how far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can only go back to her parents.  Her grandmother's name, Bertha May Powell; that's B-E-R-T-H-A, M-A-E, Powell, P-O-W-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Her father's name, I cannot recall.  I did not see him but maybe twice in my very, very young childhood.  But I know that they had twelve children, and I'm more familiar with those aunts and uncles.
Speaker 1: Now, is this, I imagine this is a rural area?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Accomack County.  Is that, yeah--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's pretty rural.  I've not been through there in a long time, but I've been through just in passing and traveling.  By the time I realized who they were, they had moved to Baltimore, Maryland by that time.  So, my recollection was most of the time he was not there.  But I did remember seeing him coming there at times.  I'm thinking with that many children, and at that time with the law stating that the man could not be in the house if you collected any kind of government assistance--which was the stupidest thing I ever heard of--I think that contributed to a lot of that as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So your grandfather was not around that much.
Speaker 2: No, no.  I saw him, and I know he went fishing, and he came through, but he did not actually live there.
Speaker 1: Do you know what he did for a living?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: So, your grandmother basically was on public assistance.  Did she do anything else?
Speaker 2: No, she just took care of those children, as far as I know.  By the time I became really aware of her she was diabetic, and she had become a double amputee over the years and was in a wheelchair.  So, what she did prior to that, I was not aware of, other than her raising those children.  She did attempt to attend to attend school for two years--college--and I couldn't believe that.
Speaker 1: Where did she go?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  This was just something my mother told me; she was very proud of that fact.  So, that was a huge hardship, to attempt to go to school, and the fact that she managed to do it, just for two years, I think was amazing.
Speaker 1: Now, did your grandmother ever talk about growing up herself?
Speaker 2: No, no, she didn't.  I just observed her doing things around the house. I remember they had that type of washer where you rolled the clothes through the two rollers--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --to dry it.  I remember that, and the back of the house that she lived in in Baltimore.  And I have some visions of us playing in the street with water hoses, and getting wet and that sort of thing.  But I don't have a whole lot of recollection about it otherwise.  Eventually, from there she lived with one of her daughters in New York, in Mount Vernon, New York.  And I think I probably remember more about that than anything.  By that time her husband had passed on, and, yeah, that's all I can really recall.
Story_ID: 597631
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Ruthie Powell Briggs] talk about growing up in [Accomack County] Virginia?  And Baltimore [Maryland], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and [Mount Vernon] New York as well, because that's where I was born.  She said that she started working when she was twelve.  And she talked about how her sisters, they were all very protective of one another, and probably had several fights to support that point.  (Laughter) And she, she, I think she got married when she was in her early twenties to her first husband; and he died.  She had two kids in that marriage, and then eventually met up with my father [Frank Briggs, Jr.].  She, she talked about certain things growing up.  But I think the thing that I remember the most was her starting to work at twelve.  She worked since she was twelve years old.
Speaker 1: What did she do primarily?
Speaker 2: She did work as a volunteer, oftentimes in nursing homes, hospitals, the candy stripe [candy striper] thing.  But a lot of her work centered around helping the elderly disabled.  When it was all said and done, she retired as a trainer of the mentally ill to try to create independence for them.  She attended church regularly and sang, but only in church.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, how would you describe your mother's personality?
Speaker 2: Oh, she was a tough lady.  I think somehow the way that she processed her pain was internalized.  And I honestly believe to this day that that's the reason why she's no longer here.  Because she left us, I think, way too early.  But she, she stood strong.  She never let it show that she was sweating or hurt in any way, even though you knew she would be.  She was very bright, and she was not afraid to speak her mind about whatever she felt at the time.  She was highly committed, and she liked to help people.  She had a lot of respect for elders, and she valued family.
Story_ID: 597632
Speaker 1: Now, I'm going to ask you about your father's side of the family.  Can you give us his full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His name is Frank Briggs, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you spell that for us?
Speaker 2: That's F-R-A-N-K, Briggs, B-R-I-G-G-S, Jr., J-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Can you give us his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I know it's April. I believe, 7th.  I do not know the year.  I believe he was born in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: So, was he about the same age as your mother [Ruthie Powell Briggs], or older?
Speaker 2: He was a couple years younger.  I think he was a couple of years younger, two or three.
Speaker 1: Okay, so maybe 1922, '23 [1923].
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, somewhere in there.
Speaker 1: No, actually, oh, you said younger.  So--
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, younger, yes.
Speaker 1: So it would be '28 [1928] or '29 [1929], I guess.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Twenty-Eight [1928] or '29 [1929], that's right.  Okay, now what do you know about your father's side of the family, the ancestors on that side?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, that side, I grew up around the most.  Because the mother's side, they eventually all migrated to New York.  On my father's side, they all went to Virginia, and eventually my parents moved us to Virginia.
Speaker 1: Oh, where was he born?  I'm sorry, I didn't ask you.
Speaker 2: Oh, I think he was born in New York City.
Speaker 1: In New York, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And once we moved, his parents lived next door to us.  They had a house built on a lot right next door to his parents.  And my grandfather is, or was, a preacher and an entrepreneur.  He had his own restaurant business.  My grandmother [Estelle Jones Briggs], she cooked and made pies, and did things to support that business.  He was also a preacher.  He had a church in Norfolk, Virginia [sic. Portsmouth, Virginia] called the Prince of Peace Pentecostal [Church].  And he also played trumpet.  And they had, I want to say fourteen children.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now this is your grandfather on the--
Speaker 2: Yes, on my father's side.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, a lot of aunts and uncles, and a host of cousins there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, the family was originally from Norfolk, in that area?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure where he was originally from.  I want to say that he is from Virginia, but I'm not positive.  I believe he's from Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  What was your grandfather's name?
Speaker 2: His name was Frank Briggs, Sr.
Speaker 1: Oh, Frank Briggs, Sr.  Yeah, that would make sense (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: I'm sorry.  Yeah, Frank Briggs, Sr.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And he played the trumpet, and was a gospel minister?
Speaker 2: Yes.  His style of trumpet playing was very much like that of Louis Armstrong to me, (laughter), it was, really was.  That's the only reason I wanted to go to church, was just to hear him play.  And his style was only in church, and he only played like spirituals and gospel type music.  But the style that he did it in was very much like Louis Armstrong, who I think was probably his idol in that day, a great idol.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now, did you know your great--did he talk about his father?
Speaker 2: He didn't much, but everybody else did.  (Laughter) And he was also a preacher as well.  And he was also an organist, keyboardist.  And gosh, his name--was John Briggs was his name.  I can go back one more generation, I just realized--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --if I have my facts straight.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, so that's great-great-grandfather, John--I mean great-grandfather, John Briggs?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, the great-great-grandfather would be--
Speaker 2: His name was listed, and I'm not sure why.  And I'm not sure if I have my facts straight, but there was a Bishop Mackey [ph.].  Gosh, I wish my baby sister [Liza Briggs] was here; she's in Uganda.  (Laughter) And she knows this stuff so much better than I do.  But Bishop Mackey was also a keyboardist.  That was probably the easier instrument to get ahold to at that time.  But that's what he did.
Story_ID: 597633
Speaker 1: This takes us back almost to the middle of the 19th century, I guess?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I understood that he knows about--he knew about slavery, so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, was Bishop Mackey [ph.] born in slavery?
Speaker 2: I believe he was.  That's the rumors I hear.
Speaker 1: And he was a bishop of what church?
Speaker 2: That information I wouldn't know.  I don't have enough--I attempted to gather this information, but I was not able to get enough details.  But I have some of it documented, just to know this much.
Speaker 1: Do you have a sense it was around Norfolk [Virginia]?
Speaker 2: I think it was somewhere in the (unclear) area of Virginia.  That's what I think, but I wouldn't be sure what part.  But from that group right there that I just mentioned, there's just like a host of cousins, and fourth and fifth cousins.  It's crazy; I can't keep up with them anymore.  I know by the time my grandfather [Frank Briggs, Sr.] died, I remember there were like fifty-seven grandchildren, and I was one of those.  And, you know, some of those had children, and some of those children have children.  So, when we have family reunions now, it's absolutely ridiculous.  I can't keep up with them.  The names are starting to repeat, and there'll be more than one person in the family named Karen.  So, we have to think of really unique names for our kids, to distinguish them from the others.
Story_ID: 597634
Speaker 1: So, your father's [Frank Briggs, Jr.] side of the family has a long tradition--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh
Speaker 1: --in the church.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And a long tradition in music, I guess--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --that goes back, you know, many, many years.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, do you have a sense that they were always involved in the Pentecostal church, or did it change at some point?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.  It's something that just never came up.  You know, the aunts and the elders in the family, they would just speak of it, you know, in an everyday kind of way.  And they weren't specific; it was just things that you heard all the time from different ones.  Like my grandfather's [Frank Briggs, Sr.] sisters, if you sat around them long enough, you would hear, you know, certain comments about how things were when they were younger.  But one of them, she actually became a preacher also.  She lasted up until--I think last year she passed away.  She was like ninety-eight, and she had a very deep husky voice; a very strong woman.  Never married, and she was a preacher.  She was an ordained minister.  And that was my grandfather's sister, Aunt Deucy [(ph.) Briggs].
Speaker 1: Was she in the same denomination as your grandfather?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh, yes.  And she always, she never had that senility that happens when you get older; she always had her facilities together.  So, a very neat woman.  And I just, I would overhear them talking about things that happened when they were little, and what goes on when they were growing up.
Speaker 1: Can you remember any specific stories they would tell?
Speaker 2: I remember when she got up in church, and she was talking about how times changed with each new generation.  Because, basically what she was suggesting--and I can't put it exactly how she put it--but the way she suggested that during her time, the big no-no that was going on with the youth at that time was sex.  And then by the time I was coming up, it was turning into something else, with drugs and--it was sex and alcohol in her day.  In my day, it was becoming drugs and sex and alcohol.  And then nowadays, it's guns and drugs and sex and alcohol.  It's just like gradually getting worse and worse with each new generation.  And I remember when she stood up and said that at a service.  And I thought, "Oh, gosh, it's getting worse with each new generation.  It's actually getting worse."  Because she explained it, and I was like, "Is that all that was going on when you guys were coming up?  That's nothing."  You know, I was seeing kids fighting with razor blades and things like that.  And now, it's gotten worse than that.  So, it's very scary when you think about where the world is progressing, or at least the world that I see.
Story_ID: 597635
Speaker 1: Did she [Briggs' great-aunt, Deucy Briggs (ph.)] talk about growing up in Virginia?  What was it like in Virginia in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, it was like a village.  All of the family lived in a, like a three to four block area, one right next to the other.  You know, my grandparents [Estelle Jones Briggs and Frank Briggs, Sr.] lived next to me.  Aunt Lizzie [ph.] was my grandfather's other sister, she lived on the other side of us.  Then there were cousins next to her.  And then next to her--and everywhere you walked on the block, somehow we were all related.  They didn't always feel like the closest family members, but there was somewhat of a, almost a village-like lifestyle, in that everybody knew each other's children.  There was, everybody knew who was who in the neighborhood basically, and knew what the connection was to the family.  And so, there weren't really any secrets.  And when someone who was not in the family came through the neighborhood, everybody knew it, even if they just walked through the street.  And everybody speculated who they were, why they were.  But that, that tight-knit connection, I think is something I miss more than anything.  When I finally did leave there to come to the West Coast, I left everything I knew, and that's what I grew up in.  There was always music.  Everybody had pianos in their homes.  We had classical musicians.  We had jazz musicians.  Most of them were church-based.  My aunts, a couple of them played piano, I'll say three of them--Aunt Doris [ph.], my father's [Frank Briggs, Jr.] sister.  She was a keyboardist, but she was all ear-taught.  And even when I last saw her, she was in a senior home before she passed.  And she couldn't remember her own sister or her brother-in-law.  She couldn't remember--she remembered me, and she remembered all the songs that she played in church.  But she couldn't remember her own children, when it was all said and done.  But she still remembered what a note sounded like, what key a song was in.  It was amazing, the things that cancelled, and the things that didn't with her.  Then there was Aunt Christine [ph.], she was a total classical musician.  And then she had another sister who we called Eggie [ph.], that's what they called her.  And she played, she had more of a jazz influence in her playing, but it was only relegated to church.  There were lots of vocalists in the family.  A lot of grandchildren sing today, a lot of my aunts and uncles.  My father was part of a singing group.  I mean he was like a writer and a singer during that doo-wop period in music history.  His brothers, they sang.  In fact, there's a book called 'They All Sang on the Corner[: A Second Look at New York City's Rhythm and Blues Vocal Groups' Philip Groia], and my father and his brothers are mentioned in that book.  So, the music--
Speaker 1: What was their group?
Speaker 2: I cannot remember what the name of the group was.  It was mentioned in the book, but I cannot recall it.  But--
Speaker 1: Were they living in New York [New York] at that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they were in New York by that time?
Speaker 1: In New York City?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: Where did you all live in New York City?
Speaker 2: We lived in Harlem [New York, New York] for a while.  There was a period we lived in Englewood, New Jersey.  Yeah, it was mostly in Harlem before they went Virginia.  And then I went back there after I left school, and I stayed in the Bronx [New York, New York] before I finally moved to California.
Story_ID: 597636
Speaker 1: Well, how would you describe your father's [Frank Briggs, Jr.] personality?  Now, he's still alive, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  My daddy, he's quite funny.  He has a sense of humor.  They tell these funny stories about people, and you can tell it's something from the era that he grew up in, the way he tells the stories.  But they like to get together and tell stories about, well, accidents and things that happened.  Like, he has a brother for example that--and I know he tells this story about how he had gotten in a car accident, and that (laughter) and that he--when the car crashed, he hit his face on the steering wheel.  And he, they talk about his big his lips are.  They always would joke on this--and this is the eldest brother.  And he said that when the ambulance arrived to help him in the accident, that they came up to him and they said, "Are you okay?"  And he's like, "No, I hit my lip on the steering wheel."  (Laughter)  And he said they asked him, "Which one?"  (Laughter) And they always repeat that story frequently at family gatherings.  They just crack--what do you call it?  It's like calling the dozens on each other; they'll do that.  And a lot of the grandchildren are just as funny, they just tell a lot of funny stories.  There's usually a lot of music going on, but the stories I think are the most precious thing about the gatherings.  It's the funny stories that they tell, and some of them are really not worth repeating on camera; you just have to be there.  (Laughter) But they're very dramatic in how they explain them.  And the elder aunts in the family, they laugh like hens, you know, almost like opera singers.  And we just sit around, and we eat food, we do music, we sing, and we crack up about these stories that they tell from their own childhood (laughter).
Story_ID: 597637
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Earliest?  Yeah, yeah, I can recall a lot of that.  What specifically?
Speaker 1: Well, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  I mean, do you have something that you can recall when you first, you know, realized you had a memory?  Or do you remember something--
Speaker 2: I have certain scenarios that I remember.  I remember the scenario of living in Englewood, New Jersey.  There were relatives that lived next to us then.  My father's [Frank Briggs, Jr.] sister lived next door to us at that time, and I recall things that I did.  I remember riding my tricycle down the attic stairs (laughter).  That was something like a three or four day decision-making process before I finally decided to do it, but I did.  I remember being busted going into the medicine cabinet looking for those little orange aspirin they give kids.  I thought they were delicious at the time.  And I woke up at some very early hour in morning and decided to seek them out in the medicine cabinet.  And I think by the time my parents found me, I was brushing my teeth with poison.  So, I remember the whole incident of going to the hospital, and the tubes in my nose, and having my stomach pumped.  But that was very traumatic.  I remember sticking a hairpin the wall socket in the top floor of the house, and not getting electrocuted, but burned.  The entire imprint of the hairpin was just burned in my thumb and my index finger.  And I remember what I was doing.  I thought I was playing house, and the hairpin was my key, and this was the door lock.  So, I went to great precautions to avoid that with my own child, because I understand a lot of kids did that at one time.  And that's why they developed these little plastic inserts for your wall sockets.  But I remember exactly what I was thinking when I did some of these things.  I remember backing my father's car out of the driveway.  He left it warming up, and I decided to get in.  And of course it was up here, and I was down here trying to see above it, and I remember that.  (Laughter) And I remember developing a terrible headache.  As soon as he walked out and saw me, I knew I was in trouble, and I had this splitting headache.  I remember when we moved, I had a headache then.  When we moved from there to Virginia, I remember Auntie Rita [ph.] was this Italian woman who we referred to as Auntie.  She had children my age, Delores [ph.] and Makal [ph.], and they lived across the street from us.  She would keep me at times as a child, and I'd play with her daughter, Delores.  And she had a junior, herself, named Rita [ph.], and Eddie [ph.], and all of her children.  Eventually we left and went to Virginia, and I remember her crying about us leaving, because we had been there so many years, and she was going to miss us.  And Auntie Rita could cook, too. She was an Italian woman, so she could really cook.  Other things I remember, I remember all of the ethnic drumming, I remember a lot of that going on.  A lot of artists passed through my house.  We lived not far from the Isley Brothers.  My parents knew them, and they would come through.  There was another singer--
Speaker 1: Is this in New York [New York]?
Speaker 2: This is all in Jersey, actually.
Speaker 1: New Jersey?
Speaker 2: In Englewood, New Jersey.  We would commute to and from New York to visit other relatives that were there.  A lot of my grandfather's [Frank Briggs, Sr.] sons and daughters had gone to New York as well.  So, you know, there were always visits to New York.  I think it was probably like, you know, a twenty or thirty minute drive from Jersey, Englewood, New Jersey to New York where they would visit them.  Some lived in Amsterdam [New York], some lived in Harlem [New York, New York].  But that was always the base for the time being.  Eventually, the grandparents moved back to Virginia.  And when that happened, everybody started kind of migrating down South, and we were one of them.  What else do I remember?  I remember learning to ride a bike in Englewood.  And my cousin, Hermoyne [ph.], she taught me--her and Makal, my neighbor's son, they taught me how to ride a bike.  And I remember falling several times.  I remember falling in the brook in the neighborhood and thinking I was going to die.  It was a foot deep (laughter).  You know, I have many scenarios in my head about--just scenes will flash by, things I experienced there from my childhood.
Story_ID: 597638
Speaker 1: We always ask this question.  You've already answered a lot of it already, but what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Oh, the sights.  I remember getting a whipping for something I did.  I think I cut a triangle out of one of my mother's [Ruthie Powell Briggs] suits, in the hemline, I just cut a triangle.  And she gave me a whipping, and I decided to run away (laughter).  And I was, I know that I had to be about four or five when I did this.  And there was a Safeway store, I'll never forget, just around the corner from my house.  And it was apparently in walking distance, because that's where I went.  And I decided I was going to survive and, you know--forget my mother, she whipped me.  So I went, and I loaded up a shopping basket full of groceries and things that I liked, and candies and cereal.  I stood in line, and I didn't have a nickel.  And the woman looked at me like I was crazy (laughter)--"You don't have any money," you know, "you can't buy this stuff."  And so I could hear--it must have been very close, because I could hear my mother's voice calling me from a distance.  And I eventually came back home.  I think I must have scared her to death.  She didn't whip me again after that.  But I remember that.  I remember a wedding that took place in Auntie Rita's [ph.] backyard, and I remember all the trees that were there.  I remember my Uncle Freddie [ph.], who lived next door.  He had a black cat who he called Spooky [ph.], who he only kept in the basement.  So, he must have been there, because that's where he stored all this food.  That must have been where he kept the cat, to prevent the mice factor (laughter).  So, you know, you kind of open the door and then it would be black down there.  And then you'd see this cat's eyes looking at you, and you would hear him.  He was friendly, but I think he was kept there just to do that.  And I thought that was very inhumane, because he was never allowed out of the basement.  But he was fed, and that's it.
Story_ID: 597639
Speaker 1: You had an exciting childhood, the one you're describing here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I did things (laughter).
Speaker 1: We were talking about the sights and sounds and smells of growing up.
Speaker 2: The smells, I don't recall.  I remember more of the sights, the trees.  There were lots of trees, and lots of nature going on.  I remember the air being cleaner than where I am now.  The birds, dogs, cats--not in the farm sense of the word, but more in the suburban sense of the word.  Englewood [New Jersey] was beautiful, from what I can recall.  I remember the leaves turning colors in the fall.  The smells, if anything I would recall, would be the ones that I remember from Auntie Rita's [ph.] house.  My Uncle Freddie [ph.], I never liked the way the house smelled, now that you mention it (laughter).  And I don't know why if it was because there was--maybe it was an old house.  It was one of those three-story homes.  Maybe it was a wood factor, I don't know what it was.  But there was something about the house, I just never liked the way it smelled, and I don't know why exactly.  I know in his backyard he used to have these blow-up pools, and I remember these old fashioned bathing suits we used to wear, and just getting the little water pool and playing around.  And a lot of family members would come over and we'd go visit other family members' homes that lived--like I had an Aunt Peaches [ph.] who lives in, she lived in Long Island [New York] at that time.  And she had about, oh gosh, I think she had five or six children herself, if not more.  And we used to come over there and play a lot.  And she had this one bathroom that I was just always told to never flush this toilet, ever.  And every time I went over there, it's like, "You can use it, but don't ever flush it."  And I was a little kid, I was under seven.  And after going there so many times and using this bathroom and not being able to flush it, one day I just decided, "I have to flush this toilet, this is ridiculous.  I mean, I can use it, and people are using it, but you can't flush it."  So, I pushed the handle--flooded the entire house, both the second and first floor.  (Laughter) I flooded the entire house.  To this day, they don't know that I flushed that toilet, but they needed to fix it.  I don't know why they didn't, but I guess that prompted them to do that; they just had to.  They were probably struggling with all those kids, and Uncle Freddie, maybe he was just waiting for the right time to accumulate the money to call the plumber.  But (laughter) to this day, they don't know that I flushed that toilet and wreaked havoc in their home.
Story_ID: 597640
Speaker 1: Do you remember when you first became interested in music?  Or were you always interested in music?
Speaker 2: I can't even call it a legitimate interest.  I think everybody has an interest in music on some level.  You hear it, you're exposed to it, but I wouldn't call it a legitimate interest.  I took violin in junior high school [Alford J. Mapp Junior High School; Cradock Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  I'd taken piano lessons from my Aunt Christine [ph.] before that, and I hated them because they were on Saturday, which to me was a day to watch cartoons, not to be in school.  And so, I didn't really catch on to anything that she taught me; I was not interested.  And she told my mother [Ruthie Powell Briggs] I didn't appear to be interested, so I never did it again.  We did have a piano in the house--that was common--that we just would tinker with it every now and then.  I did take a test in elementary school [Brighton Elementary School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  It was a multiple choice test that was given to students in the entire State of Virginia by this time.  It was multiple choice, and they had a reel to reel tape recorder, and they would play a short line of about maybe three or four measures, and you had to pick which one it was.  To me, that was common sense.  I knew if the note went higher, the note went higher.  And if the note went lower--I understood the intervals of the notes and which direction they were going, and I got them all right.  I think I was one of maybe two or three people in the state who got that right, got them all right (laughter).  And no more was said about that.  I don't even think I told my parents about it.  I just was like, "Okay, great."  But in junior high school, the orchestra, which was run by a lady named Geralyn Harding [ph.], a great teacher.  She was a saxophone major that ended up teaching orchestra.  They recruited by coming into the elementary schools, which ended at sixth grade.  She would bring students from her current orchestra in junior high, and they would play the music.  In addition to the classical music of [Wolfgang Amadeus] Mozart and [Ludwig van] Beethoven, they would also play the music that we heard on the radio.  Like, she would play a song by The Spinners and have a singer, or do a Barry White tune.  And that's how she recruited her students.  So, the orchestra was not lame, it was actually hip.  And she said, "Well, we're going to New York [New York] the following year."  And I was, "Oh, I'd love to go back to New York and see my sister [Estelle Briggs] and see some of my family members.  So, I'm going to join this and maybe play good enough to make the trip, just so I can see my family members."  I had no intention of trying to be any kind of, I don't know, well-disciplined violinist, or any of the stereotypes that people have about us out there.  So, I just did it for that reason, and I ended up liking it--
Story_ID: 597641
Speaker 1: I caught on--I took it in summer school, initially, and by the time we started school I'd advanced, I'd become placed in the advanced class.  I auditioned--she did a test where everybody had to play in front of one another.  I think I was scared to death of being embarrassed and playing it wrong, so I played it right.  I'd forgotten everything she'd taught us in summer school, so I was doing it by ear.  But I'd gotten through a song called 'Festival March' [William Gordon] and I played it better than anybody else in the class.  And that made me the concert mistress of the class orchestra, which also meant I had to really watch my back.  Because all of the girls who supported the girl who had the position prior to me, were looking to beat me up after school.  Because there was this prevailing attitude that would exist in schools, where if you were too smart, people wanted to beat you up.  I don't know what it was, but it was strange.  But I was subjected to that, as an orchestral player.  (Laughter) So, needless to say, I got in a lot of fights protecting my need to grow mentally and excel. (laughter) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) So, they would actually threaten you and--
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, they would.  And you know, "Who do you think you are?"  You know, and in the South they had these major league issues, which we all probably know the cause of--you know, of light skin and dark skin, and what kind of hair you had, and this and that.  So, I was a target frequently for that sort of thing, even from my so-called family members who are maybe fourth or fifth cousins down.  And I think--when I think of them now, I recall a lot of trauma in my childhood because of just dealing with that.  Because my folks, my parents [Ruthie Powell Briggs and Frank Briggs, Jr.], said, "This is your family."  I'm like, "Why are they treating me like this?"  And it was about things that I couldn't help, I couldn't--I don't know.  There was some history I later learned behind it, something about my grandfather [Frank Briggs, Sr.].  It was almost like an African guy with a Native American, and that caused a problem.  So, and I was a product of that union, and that was a problem, because these other family members had more African features.  And so, I think later on I was told that was some of the reason behind it.  But for me, their children, they never really guarded me against the wrath of their children.  So, I found myself in several fights coming up, particularly in Virginia, and with no protection.  And my parents were so preoccupied, I think they couldn't really be there for me in the way that I needed them to be, to get me through that.  So, I just kind of dealt with it on my own, and did eventually get through it.  The way I really kicked their ass, though, was playing that violin.  That's how I kicked everybody's ass; nobody expected that of me.  And to this day, I think that's the one thing that has just about provided every kind of resolve for a lot of the issues that went on in my life at the time.  So (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's an interesting point there. You play a furious violin.  Anybody that's seen you play, now you play a very (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, uh huh. It's a tool of expression.
Speaker 2: It's a lot of energy in there--
Speaker 1: It's a tool of expression (simultaneous)--
Story_ID: 597642
Speaker 1: What was the name of the first school you--now did you go to school first in New York City [New York, New York] or Englewood [New Jersey] (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) First I went in Englewood, New Jersey.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what's the name of your school?
Speaker 2: Do I remember the name of that school?  Oh, gosh, I want to say Cleveland Elementary [School; McCloud Elementary School, Englewood, New Jersey].  My teacher's name was Miss Gray [ph.].
Speaker 1: Okay, that's in Englewood?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Are there any stories about any--of that school that you--
Speaker 2: No.  My neighbor, who I refer to as my cousin Delores [ph.], she went to school with me there, and she was my protector.  I didn't start school until first grade, which I consider that to be a disadvantage to a kid, because there's a social skill level that you obtain on the way to elementary school.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) You didn't have any kindergarten at all?
Speaker 2: No, no kindergarten, no pre-school, so I went there kind of socially disabled to begin with, and I think the kids picked that up in me right away.  I was almost starting to get in a fight--at that point kids found a reason to pick on me then, because I just didn't, I wasn't up on the social level.  I was hanging out at home with my mom [Ruthie Powell Briggs], and I don't know why she didn't put me in school sooner, but she just didn't.  So, when I started school, it was first grade.  There was no pre-school, no nursery school, none of that.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It was all new to you.
Speaker 2: It was all new to me, and I think other kids sensed that.  So, I was starting to encounter a few bullies before I eventually left.
Speaker 1: Do you think, were you excited about school when you started, or were you kind of scared?
Speaker 2: I really wanted to go, really badly.  I had no idea what to expect.  You know, I just know I wanted to go.  It seemed like everyone else was going, and why hadn't I?  So, I was getting to the point where I was the only one at home during the day, during school season.  So, you know, when I got there, I was really glad.  And then I started learning a few things about what goes on in schools, and I think over time my attitude about it started to change drastically.  I think I was introverted for a lot of years as a result, and it was actually music that extroverted me, to some degree.
Speaker 1: So, did, I mean did, so you kind of--you didn't like school as much after you got into it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: What was it that you didn't like?
Speaker 2: It was the social aspects of dealing with the other people in the environment, and their attitudes and the things that I just wasn't aware of because--you know for example, like, I didn't go to the pre-school and all that.  So, by the time I got in first grade--even with my own kid [Kai Briggs] I can see she's not going to have that problem, because I put her in school as soon as she was of age.  So, she was already dealing with the mean stuff that kids can do.  And you know, she already knew all the little social things that kids talk about, and how they played, and what's fair and what's not.  And so, it didn't bother her when things went to the left a little bit.  You know, she knew how to handle it, whereas I had no inkling whatsoever, because I was around mostly very mature people who were very--more inundated with concern over their kids.  So, even when I played with other kids my own age, it was like it was family, and it wasn't going to go but so far.  But when you're at school, you know, you have this teacher watching over twenty kids or whatever, you know.  And it's not going to be the same intimacy level of concern about your well-being or your emotional space, or whatever, you know, if we can go that far.  So, so, I think, you know, not starting school until first grade was somewhat of a disadvantage to me socially as a child.  As time went on, I eventually started to catch on.  But I remained pretty introverted all the way through elementary school and junior high school [Alford J. Mapp Junior High School; Cradock Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia], and a lot through high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  I didn't go to the prom, I didn't go to the graduation, I didn't--you know, I just kind of stayed to myself.  I didn't hang out with a crowd of people.  I had decided crowds of people caused problems, and you know, I had these thoughts about what I thought about people.  You know, so I just kind of stayed to myself, and then I found myself spending most of my energy with this instrument, and just with my family and this instrument, and that was it (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Now--
Story_ID: 597643
Speaker 1: What was the name of your junior high school?
Speaker 2: It was called Alfred J. Mapp Junior High [sic. Alford J. Mapp Junior High School; Cradock Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia], and that was in Virginia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is that M-A-P-P?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I think I've heard of that before.
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  It's been about, almost four hundred interviews.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: I may have, yeah.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I wouldn't be surprised, after four hundred interviews.
Speaker 1: So, did you have any mentors in school, you know?
Speaker 2: I think my violin teacher was one of them.  All of my African American female teachers, which there was a host of them coming up, I admired them for one reason or the other.  And they seemed to like me very well.  And there was a little girl who was just in school temporarily, she was from the Philippines.  Her name was Angeli Abracuso, and she had a tremendous impact on my handwriting, and I was competing with her, because she had this impeccable handwriting.  And she was not born in this country.  I knew that her parents had moved here, I figured that out eventually.  And she was very quiet, and she got--on every single spelling test, she made 100 [percent correct], no matter what.  Because we would have to switch papers, and I'd have to check her paper.  And I would get mad.  I said I just want to find one thing wrong with it (laughter) because she was so brilliant.  And her handwriting was so neat.  I've never seen any handwriting like before, nor since.  But the way that I write, I get a lot of compliments about it, even when I write checks, you know, "Wow, look at your handwriting."  I blame Angeli Abracuso for that.
Speaker 1: We were discussing the biographical sketch you turned in--
Speaker 2: Yeah?
Speaker 1: --and how neatly that was done.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay (laughter).
Speaker 1: It was like calligraphy, you know.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was beautiful.
Speaker 2: And this came from the influence of this little girl, who I've never seen again.  I have no idea what she's doing in life, and I would love to know.  But--
Speaker 1: And how do you spell her name?
Speaker 2: Angeli, A-N-G-E-L-I, Abracuso, A-B-R-A-C-U-S-O.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: All right.  Well, so in junior high you're playing the violin.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And that's sort of--did you have any people that you knew of that played the violin that you looked up to at that point?
Speaker 2: No, not at that point.  Eventually, the orchestra--we did do the New York [New York] trip.  And then after that, we did a trip, a short trip to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  This orchestra traveled at least once a year, or every other year or so.  And Miss [Geralyn] Harding [ph.] took us to Philadelphia, and I think I had all of twenty bucks [dollars] on me for a trip that lasted a week.  And we went, I went to a music store at that time--it was vinyl.  And there was on Internet, there was no downloading, there was none of that; you just went to the record store.  And I saw this album of this gentleman who had no shirt on, and he was kind of like this, and holding a violin.  His name was Noel Pointer.  I had heard of Jean-Luc Ponty before that, and heard some of his music.  My brother [Henry Choice] had exposed me to an album ['Aurora'] with a song on it called the "Renaissance."  Patrice Rushen had played on that album, and I'd heard that.  But Jean-Luc Ponty was the first African American that I'd seen, that I knew about, that--Noel Pointer was the first that I knew about, that could play violin that was sort of non-traditional.  And I bought that album--I starved the rest of the trip, because I spent most of my money on that record.  (Laughter) And I learned every solo that he had on that record.  And I was already kind of fiddling around with gospel music, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 1: Fiddling around (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, I was, literally, (laughter) with gospel music, and with some of the voice inflections and embellishments that I heard in that music.  But I was scared to tell anybody, because I knew there was a certain attitude that prevailed about that instrument that you just didn't want anybody to know.  And I didn't really come out with it until high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Story_ID: 597644
Speaker 1: I was in a pageant, it was called--I went to Woodrow Wilson High School [Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Now that's in Virginia?
Speaker 1: That's in Virginia also.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And they had a pageant called the Miss Wilson pageant, and my mother [Ruthie Powell Briggs] encouraged me to enroll in that pageant, and I did.  And my teacher, my violin teacher, also encouraged me to enroll in that pageant, and I did.  So, when I auditioned, she said, "Well, just go up there and play your violin," and I did.  And I played 'Amazing Grace,' but I played it different than anyone had ever heard it.  It was very soulful; it was like I would have heard Aretha Franklin do it, or like it would have been sang in church.  And that's how I tried to play it on my instrument.  And my teacher had never heard me play like that.  Up to that point, I was reading notes in class and playing whatever she dictated that we played.  Even though the pop, and the R&B, and other stuff--the jazz and the classical music she did--she had never heard me play like that, really until this time.  I was just so scared to tell anyone.  So when I did this audition, I mustered up the nerve, and I went and played it in this way.  And the first thing she did was she--I walked off the stage, and she was just like, "What are you doing playing that instrument like that?  Why are you playing like that?  Don't you play like that."  And I felt bad that I showed her that this was something I could do.  And then she walked away for about thirty minutes, and she thought about it.  I don't know what initially bothered her about it, I really--except that she'd never seen it before.  And then she came back and she apologized.  And she said, "No, you play that just like you feel like playing it."  And that was the beginning of my exposing this way that I play violin, and I always did it.  And then I acquired a wedding within two years after I started playing.  I think I was about fourteen or fifteen then.  And the guy asked me how much would I charge to do a wedding.  Well, I'd never done a wedding; I'd never done any job for money with my instrument.  So, I told him twenty-five dollars.  And he had a huge wedding.  This guy could have paid me five hundred [dollars], easily (laughter).  But I didn't know.  So, that's the story of my life (laughter).  But he--
Speaker 2: That was your first gig?
Speaker 1: That was my first gig.  I think I was fourteen or fifteen at the time.  And I've seen that guy since; he's still married.  And I realize now that he was very well-off, but I did the wedding for twenty-five bucks.  (Laughter)  And I also performed in a lot of churches, and 'Amazing Grace' was the song that I ended up playing everywhere.  My teacher had an orchestra that functioned outside of regular school.  And she would have me stand up and play 'Amazing Grace' wherever we went.  And it was that song helped put me through college [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia], which was playing at churches and various events.  Everybody wanted me to play that song in the area.  And my mom would take trips with me sometimes, and I'd go--but then on the other hand, my father [Frank Briggs, Jr.] was taking me to jam sessions.  And he took me to a place called the Foxtrot [ph.], and I was listening to a lot of jazz.  He liked Miles Davis, he liked Freddie Hubbard, he liked [John] Coltrane, Charlie Parker, you know, all the wonderful standardized jazz music; we heard it all.  We also heard Nancy Wilson, we heard Miriam Makeba, we heard salsa, we heard a lot--my mother liked salsa, she liked to dance salsa.  And we heard a lot of music aside from gospel.  So, my father always influenced the other side, the more secular side of things if you will.  And he--
Speaker 2: That's interesting, because he's a reverend.
Speaker 1: Well, my father was not.  His father [Frank Briggs, Sr.] was.
Speaker 2: Okay, his father was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: His father was.  But your father was not a reverend?
Speaker 1: No, he was not.
Speaker 2: Your father played the trumpet?
Speaker 1: He played saxophone.
Speaker 2: Saxophone, okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, my father played saxophone.
Speaker 2: Oh, so your grandfather played the trumpet?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Then your great-grandfather was a keyboard player?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Your great-grandfather, okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Now we got it.
Speaker 1: Yes, you got it.  So, daddy took me to this jam session.  And by this time I'd worked up this Dizzy Gillespie tune, 'A Night in Tunisia,' and I was scared to death.  You know, these are all local folks, and like, you know, they were all at this place.  And there was this jam session going on led by this guy named Philippe [Fernand] Fields.  And I walked into that club, and they called me onstage.  I don't even think I had a pickup for my violin at the time.  But there was a mic [microphone] there, and I stood there and I played 'A Night in Tunisia.'  And I was scared to death.  I'll never forget how scared I was.  When I got through, it was like dead silence, for like five seconds, and then everybody rose up so loud.  And they stood up and they applauded.  And I just, I didn't know what to do with that energy, but I know it somehow hooked me.  It's like, I need to experience this again and again and again and again.  And I think I just tried to learn more about jazz, as a result.  And I enjoyed being in those environments, because people were older, and appeared, to me at that time, more sophisticated.  I was not yet eighteen, that's why my father was with me.  And it was funny.  I mean, I was exposed to guys who liked to hit on young girls.  And I'd be telling them, "Well, I can't give you my phone number, because I'm only fifteen."  And then they would see my father, and they'd be like, "Is that your daughter?"  And he's like, "Yes, it is."  And so, you know, eventually that caught on.  But they liked the way I played violin, and I think they saw the potential of what I could do later.
Story_ID: 597645
Speaker 1: Now, was your father [Frank Briggs, Sr.] a professional musician?  I mean, did he make his living playing the saxophone?
Speaker 2: He did that part-time, and then he also--he's an ex-military person, and he also--he was in the [U.S.] Army--and he also, he did paint jobs in homes.  He was always very creative and good with his hands.  He fixed cars, he did whatever he had to do to make ends meet.  But primarily he would play his horn, and he would paint the interiors and exteriors of homes.  So, he was more like a contractor in that respect.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But he never, I don't think he ever pursued it.  There was a period in his life I think he tried to pursue it, and I think he had a bad experience.  He and his brothers had a bad experience with a record company.  And I think after that--that determined his fate.  And then he got with my mom [Ruthie Powell Briggs] and he started having kids.  And it's like, okay, this is what has to happen in order for us to make ends meet.  And it was still a struggle, but I think he attempted to just try to stay on the straight and narrow, and just try to make ends meet as best he could.
Story_ID: 597646
Speaker 1: So, when you were in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia] did you have--now you were in the Miss Woodrow Wilson contest. Did you win that contest (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes--I became first runner-up (laughter).  I was first runner-up, and I think the only reason I got that was because they liked the way I played.  Otherwise, I was totally not into this whole pageantry thing; I just wasn't into it.  And they were trying to get in more pageants after that, but I just did not want to do it.  But they liked the way I played, and I think that's why I made first runner-up.  It wasn't because I was this poised beauty or anything.  I had quite--when I look at pictures from that time, I was quite innocent and dumb-looking.  But, you know, I was not pageant material.  I just think they liked the way I played, really.  It was always that; and that has followed me to this day.  I still think people--I mean most of the people I know, I know because I play.  And that's mostly the only reason I go out of the house, besides groceries and standard things.  I mean I don't--that is my social life.  So, most of the people that I know, they know me because I play.  And that was a part of that--the beginnings of that realization, I think.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now was, Woodrow Wilson I guess was an integrated high school by time you got there?
Speaker 2: Yes, by this time it was, yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.  You're one of the younger people I've interviewed.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You know, most people came along with segregation, and that sort of thing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I caught the tail-end of that.  In Virginia and that area we were in, they were amongst one of the last people to actually get that together.  Because I remember when they switched.  When they started getting to where our area was, where we had to switch, it was like do or die.  They initially employed the city buses.  The city buses were going to every stop on the way to school in every neighborhood.  And they would pick up kids until they were full, rather than have a designated stop for each bus like you would expect, like a yellow school bus.  So, the yellow school buses came a couple of years later.  So, I still caught the tail-end of the impact of that change down in Virginia.  And there were some things going on, and there was some conflicts.  And there were a couple of little, very small magnitude kind of fights going on between blacks and whites at first.  When it first happened, there was an adjustment period that I remember.  But you know, eventually it resolved itself, you know, and it didn't get too far out of hand.  You didn't have to call in the National Guard or anything like that.  It was just a more localized kind of thing that took place.  And certain attitudes still prevail there to this day.  When I go back and visit and I go to some parts of town, there are still certain things there, you can just tell.  It's not gone, but it's a lot better than it used to be, I'm sure.
Speaker 1: You can't make those changes overnight.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, I'm not even sure if that will happen in my daughter's [Kai Briggs] lifetime.  That's a lot of generations of undoing.  It didn't happen overnight, so I'm sure it's going to take a long time to go away, but--and it has.  But it's gradually improving.
Story_ID: 597647
Speaker 1: Did you go to the prom, and that sort of thing in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia]?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).  No, I think I was just too introverted, and I'm not--I don't know.  The guys seemed to be looking for something that I wasn't willing to give up at that time, and there were a lot of girls that would, so I think that might be part of the reason why I wasn't asked.  And then again, socially, I was introverted.  I was only into the violin.  The way I dressed at the time, it's like the money that I would earn from playing gigs, I would go to the thrift shop, and I would buy these shoes that are very much in style now, they've come back.  But they were pointy-toes and the little tiny heel, and they were just really long shoes.  I was into the stuff long before the stuff came back.  I just liked them, and I didn't care if it was a trend or not.  And they were all obviously at the thrift shop because they were well out of style.  But I used to integrate that '60s [1960s] fashion statement with my modern clothing, and do these interesting things with my hair.  And people just thought, "She's kind of interesting and strange."  I guess I had that artist vibe.  (Laughter) So, that's would I say.
Speaker 1: So, this is the late '70s [1970s], early '80s [1980s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: Well, you graduated in '81 [1981]?  Was it '81 [1981]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I graduated in '81 [1981], yes.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And so, it was like the end of the disco era, sort of?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was coming about.
Speaker 1: Sort of, you know--
Speaker 2: I wasn't crazy about it musically, because music changed a lot then.  At this time, I was catching all of that Return to Forever stuff, and that Weather Report and all that.  And you know, I used to listen to this stuff religiously, all the time.  And then by the time I became old enough to play, it was like there was nowhere to go with it.  You know, all of it had dissipated, and this whole other market came about, which we now call smooth jazz.  And there was just nowhere to go with all of that interest and that way of playing--that virtuosic way of executing on your instrument; it was just, nowhere to go.  But eventually I did record an album with Stanley Clarke.  And I was glad, because that's how I got that little interest out of the way, with that scenario.  But I remember thinking--and I remember going back to New York [New York], and the radio station that played jazz just went out of business.  And it was, at this point I had my heart set on learning how to play bee-bop and learning how to execute this music, which was really difficult.  And then when that happened, it just pulled all the wind out of my sails.  I was like, "You know, I messed up, up here trying to be a jazz musician.  There's not going to be anywhere to do jazz.  Every place I thought I was going to be involved in, is now disappearing, all the outlets."  And when that radio station went in New York City, I was like, "Oh, man, this music ain't gonna survive."  So, I think I got married after that (laughter).  It's like, you know, I'm just going to get married and just do the--
Speaker 1: Now, when you were on the verge of graduating from high school, were you thinking about going to college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, and I did.  I went to a local college [Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] in the area.  And I have to say, I was discouraged from going after a regular conservatory, by my high school counselor.  I'll never forget that elderly woman telling me, encouraging me--or shifting my direction more towards, "Well, why don't you go--" as if they raised us up in the school.  And it's like they knew that we weren't going to be hang with the typical, you know, standardized university.  Because the education system that was going on at that time, I really feel to this day that we were cheated.
Story_ID: 597648
Speaker 1: We were talking about your counselor's advice--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia].
Speaker 2: Yes.  She pretty much railroaded me to a local university called Norfolk State University [Norfolk State College, Norfolk, Virginia].  Well, it wasn't a university then, was it?  It was Norfolk State College at that time.  It later became Norfolk State University.  And I went there, and I was offered a choice in music--of music education, or you could take music courses with mass communications.  I went for the, I attempted to do the music education thing, but I really didn't like it.  And at the time, I was really denying what I wanted to do, which was be a performer, that's what I wanted to do.  I wanted to play.  This was something I really enjoyed, and I couldn't even put my finger on it--describing exactly what it was about it that had me so geeked.  But I just knew that was something I really had to do, and I wanted to do.  So, I knew it was going to be something.  I needed to be involved in music.  So, I went and took this mass media major that allowed me to take music courses.  And gosh, the obstacles I ran into.  Because by this time I'm thinking, they're going to support me in this obviously different way of playing that I do, and they're going to support me in perfecting that.  And that wasn't the case at all.  I was running into all kind of roadblocks that were forcing me to not do this, but to stick with the traditional aspects of the instrument, which used to frustrate me to no end.  I wanted to play in the jazz ensemble, and it was like pulling teeth to just, you know, make a way, so I as a violinist could play in the jazz ensemble like the other horn players.  I would do it, but they seemed to make it more difficult for me to function in the class, by requiring me to transpose all my parts, and all of that.  And I'm like, "Why can't you just give me a flute part, something that's already in my cleft?"  "Well, we already have a flautist, so you're going to have to transpose this part."  And, you know, they just made it really hard.  Because I was carrying like eighteen, nineteen, twenty-one hours, you know, per semester, and I just didn't have time for this.  So, it was like, gosh.
Speaker 1: Why is it so difficult for people to accept the violin in any other context other than a classical concert type--I mean orchestra context?
Speaker 2: I think change is difficult for anybody.  When things have been done a certain way for a long period of time, evolution is usually forced, I think.  And I think music has to be forced.  There are people who we call purists who just--you know, they fight with the force of evolution.  And I think it has to take place in many aspects of life, including violin, has to make its own evolutionary process.  And I think we're in an age now where that's actually happening.  There's a lot more people interested in doing more non-traditional type playing than there ever was.  But it's not something--I still run into people every day who say, "I never knew a violin could do that," or, "had I known the instrument could do that, I would have kept playing."  But it just never occurred to them, whereas in my case it never occurred not to.  I don't know, it just never occurred to me that I was doing anything that was so strange and bad.  It was just--but I did it.
Speaker 1: Well, you must have known it was a little odd, because--
Speaker 2: I knew it was odd--
Speaker 1: --(simultaneous) because in the black community, you don't see a lot of violin players.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But see, by the time I got into college, my teacher, as you recall, had already--she's like, "You know what, it's okay.  You just play what you feel," and she was okay.  And then it started catching on, but that was only locally, in my own local neighborhood, and then the jam session thing I did.  And then eventually elders who were in the jazz audience started telling me about these other fiddle players that existed--the Stuff Smiths and the Ray Nances and, you know, the ones who I hadn't heard of.  And they would allow me to hear some of their recordings, and I was like, "Wow, wow, wow."  You know, it blew me away.  But on a massive scale, people were not aware of this instrument in that context.  And that much, I did know.  I was glad for Noel Pointer and Jean-Luc Ponty for that reason, because it validated me in a way.  It's like, "Okay, so they don't know about it on a massive scale, but it's still okay for me to do this."  I didn't run across any women who were doing this at the time--any female instrumentalist, really, that I knew, not who represented anything that I wanted to do, other than my aunts, which they were all into the classical and church thing.  So, I was like looking for this model, you know.  And then Patrice Rushen, when she was in her big heyday in R&B music, I took quite a liking to her, because I knew that was the closest thing I was ever going to find for what I thought I wanted to do--
Story_ID: 597649
Speaker 1: Now, did you hear Bobbi Humphrey in those days?  She was--
Speaker 2: I knew about Bobbi Humphrey, yeah, I had been exposed to Bobbi Humphrey's music.  My father [Frank Briggs, Jr.] or my brother [Henry Choice], one or the two, had brought her music home.  But until that point, I mean it was like--
Speaker 1: I'm thinking, too, that--now Alice Coltrane--
Speaker 2: Alice Coltrane, I had heard of her.  I at the time I heard of Alice, I think I wasn't particularly in tune with her music real well at that time.  I don't think I knew what I wanted to play; I just knew I had this way of playing that I needed to find a place for.  And I just went into college [at Norfolk State College; Norfolk State University, Norfolk, Virginia] thinking they were going to support me in this endeavor.  And it was like, "No, you know, this is a state university, and we have a curriculum we have to follow, and you're going to have to do it this way."  They wanted to go through years and years of sight-singing and ear training.  When I came to college, I didn't even know there was a such a thing.  You know, I was the first sibling to attend school in my family, to go to college.  So, there was no one there to tell me what this was going to be.  So, this was all new to all of us.  By the time my baby sister [Liza Briggs] went, I think we understood it a lot better.  But I came in there with some--a total--whole other concept in my head about what I thought this was going to be about.  And I think the whole college thing, it just blew me away, just the systemic way that things progress in college.  So, it didn't turn out like I thought.  And I realized that they wanted me to follow a certain way, because of the instrument that I played, and that this was the way it was done; you play in the orchestra, and that's that.  If you're lucky, you'll get in the Virginia Symphony [Orchestra] and you go to the conservatory, and you study this, and these scales, and this is the way it went.  So, I tried to do that, and then I kind of did the other thing on the side, locally, in the community churches and events and things of that nature.  And I also did jazz.  And when it was all said and done, you know, I still managed to do it.  Now, when I was playing with the Virginia Symphony, and a newspaper article came out about me playing jazz, they started giving me problems in the orchestra.  And I was already like, you know, experiencing a few problems in there already.  But, you know, I worked as a part-time musician with them for about four and a half years.
Speaker 1: Now, we're speeding pretty fast.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, I just want to go to the Virginia Symphony.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, this would be considered like a high goal for any musician, you know, especially in a state school where you get a chance to play with the Virginia Symphony.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Now, did this happen to you, and how did you feel about it at the time?  And--
Speaker 2: Quite honored.  I was a sophomore in college by this time.  The violin teacher, Dr. Peter Zaret, he was the only violin teacher at the school.  He was a Jewish guy from New York, went to [The] Juilliard [School, New York, New York].  And he didn't understand how I played like I did, when I auditioned for him.  But he was I think almost required to endorse me to get into this orchestra, which was just something I had to do as part of my college education.  So, I auditioned.  I learned the music they gave me.  I auditioned behind a screen, and passed with flying colors.  And I think the screen helped, I hate to say it, but I do.  (Laughter) Once I got in there, and they saw who I really was, I started experiencing other kinds of things that were subtle.  And like most -isms, I'm just not sure if it was me or if it was--you know, you had to weigh whether or not--okay, just as a black person in the South, you just wonder, "Okay, are they treating me this way because I'm black, or is it just because I'm not playing right, or whatever?"  So, I was running into these problems, but they never fired me.  I mean they threatened to maybe once, but they never did.  So, I stayed there four and a half years, and I quit eventually, because I just needed to move on.  And it was, I enjoyed sitting in the middle of all that beautiful music and all the acoustics and the violins, and sitting in the middle of a symphonic orchestra with professional musicians.  It was an incredible experience, and I enjoyed it immensely, just because I was in the middle of it, and I knew there was a prestige attached to it.  But, like, a member of the audience once wrote to the board of directors that they were disturbed with me because--I mean, I grew up in the hood.  I showed up with some earrings on that were a little too large for them, and they noticed that from the audience.  And I thought that was just stupid.  You know, I just thought it was--so, I think I just had issues with the formality of it, I think (simultaneous).
Story_ID: 597650
Speaker 1: --Classical music, we've interviewed some other musicians that span both--[HistoryMaker] Charles Burrell in Denver [Colorado] plays a bass in the Denver Symphony [Orchestra], and plays jazz.  He's retired now from the symphony, but he, he talked about the contrasting conformity of the orchestra--
Speaker 2: I had such a problem with it.
Speaker 1: --it's highly competitive, he said.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they expect the conformity.  And he was the only black one, so--
Speaker 2: Oh, gosh, yes, that's always been the case.
Speaker 1: --you know--
Speaker 2: So few, compared to the others.
Speaker 1: Compared to jazz which is, you know, people want you to express--they want you to be different.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they want you to do something--
Speaker 2: Yes, something they can't do (laughter).
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: So, it's like, you know, and eventually I reached that conclusion after going through this enough.  It's like, you know, why am I going through this?  This music I understood to have a very strong European background and culture to it, whereas the music I grew up with was this gospel and this jazz, and this music that I related to, just as easily as they related to that.  So, why am I being pressured to perfect this, when this is so natural to me, and that's so natural to them?  They can't do this.  I could do that, but I don't think I'll ever do it as good as they.  And that was--so it's like I took and borrowed what I could borrow from it, in terms of technique and so forth.  But I decided one day that I was going to focus on this, because this, I knew I understood twenty times better than I would probably ever understand that.  I appreciated this, but this flowed through my veins; I grew up with it.  I can go back generations with it, and it was just a theory that I had about it.  I mean, I've played salsa, I've played charanga, the Cuban music.  But I would never fool myself into thinking that I would play that music better than a person who grows up in Cuba and plays violin.  And I think you would be able to tell the difference immediately when compared.  So, I was like, well, okay, I'll indulge in this.  I'll indulge in the salsa, I'll indulge in this.  But this is me; this is what I know.  And I think I should focus on it, because there's nobody else doing this, and I need to focus on this.
Speaker 1: Now, you said, you said when you started this interview--before I think we even started rolling you said you're not classically trained, and you always tell people that.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It sounds like you've got some classic training, maybe not as much.  Are you talking about the proportion in terms of how people--you know, because I know musicians who get into classical music, and they often start when they're quite young--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --and sent to music camps all summer long.
Speaker 2: I made some music camps, actually.  I made a couple of them just by auditioning, and I had been--the exposure that I got to classical training came from, like, getting a job with the Virginia Symphony [Orchestra].  I always seem to play well enough to make these auditions to put myself into those environments.  And once I get there, I'd be one of one or two black folk that would be there.  But it would be fun.  I'd have a good time and come back and talk about that experience, and integrate whatever I'd learned from that into my playing.  But then I'd turn around that weekend and go to a club and play, too.  So, you know, it's all wrapped up in here some kind of way.  I think all the influences and all the experiences show up in the basic signature, you know, they're all there.  Even Yanni, you know, all that stuff; it's all wrapped up in there some kind of way.  I can't play without demonstrating that exposure.  So, people hear the classical experiences that I've had, but I haven't had it like, you know, like Itzhak Perlman, or like, you know, like--
Speaker 1: Okay, so you're--
Speaker 2: --a violinist who just does that.  He plays klezmer also, which is a music that's culturally connected with him, and he plays it very well.  But, you know, he's clearly a classical violinist.  I would never put myself in the same category as him in that respect.  But I think I'm just as good as he is, for what I do.  And I don't think he can do what I do any better than I could do what he does better than him.  And I guess, so, I just see a parallel there that should even us out.  And it did, eventually.  You know, it's cool.  Well, I'll tell you that when we get to it.  I don't want to jump around too much.
Story_ID: 597651
Speaker 1: So you played until I guess about 1987 or '88 [1988] with the Virginia Symphony [Orchestra]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was about it.  And then I left and I went back to New York [New York], and that's when I started performing in those amateur night contests ['Amateur Night at the Apollo'] at the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York], which I won, like, I won four times.
Speaker 1: You won four--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --amateur nights at the Apollo?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Did you ever lose?
Speaker 2: The fourth time, I placed third.  I lost to Tommy Davidson, the comedian.  And a vocalist who won it, first place, was David Peaston.  And after that, I think Tommy Davidson went on to do 'Saturday Night Live.'
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: And he does movies.  He does a lot of--
Speaker 1: 'In Living Color.'
Speaker 2: Yes, 'In Living Color.'  But he placed second and I placed third, the fourth time.  And that was what they call the Top Dog Night, and this schoolteacher out of Brooklyn [New York, New York] with this high tenor voice, he came in there and just like won the contest.  The cabdriver was telling me on the way there, "You know, I heard there's this singer they have there that's really good."  And I was like, "Oh, really?"  I said, "Well, I'm just going to do the best I can do," and I did.  But he clearly--when I heard him, I was like, "There's no way I'm going to beat this guy."  I had to play right after him (laughter).
Speaker 1: What's he doing now?  Is he--
Speaker 2: I don't know.  David is still singing.  I don't know if he went back to school teaching or not.
Speaker 1: David--what was it?
Speaker 2: Peaston is his name.
Speaker 1: David Peaston, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's wonderful.  I haven't seen him since then, either.  And I know he had a record deal for a short time, and I don't know how the record did, but I haven't heard any recordings from him lately.  But everybody seems to know who David is when I speak of him, you know, just in the musician settings; they seem to realize who he is.  And Tommy Davidson, we've covered that; he's known very well.  But it seems like right after that I left New York.  I did a little stint as a booking agent at a place called SOB [SOB's], Sounds of Brazil, in the Village [Greenwich Village, New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, that's a place that played a lot of alternative music.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  I did a little stint as a booking agent there for a while, and then I got--
Speaker 1: I saw [Babatunde] Olatunji there.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes, I used to know him.
Speaker 1: Mahlathini [Mahlathini and the Mahotella Queens] was there.
Speaker 2: Yes.  I used to be one of the people involved with putting those kinds of shows together for a short time.  And then I eventually left New York and came out to Los Angeles [California (L.A.)], and that's when the whole L.A. thing started.  I hardly ever played in New York during that time, other than at the Apollo.  I mean, I went to a couple of jam sessions, but nothing major.  I think that job took up most of my day and my time, and I didn't practice.  My violin was like sitting on a mantel in my sister's house collecting dust.  That was probably the longest period of time I didn't play.
Speaker 1: That's about how many years?
Speaker 2: That was about a year, just for a year.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: More months than years (laughter).
Story_ID: 597652
Speaker 1: So, you came out to Los Angeles [California].  Now, how did you end up out here?
Speaker 2: I married my college sweetheart, and he came here a year ahead of me while I was in New York [New York] and set up and got his job and stuff together.  And eventually, he called me out.  And I got on the plane on the 22nd of May in 1988, and on the 23rd I got married.
Speaker 1: Okay, so 1988?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, when did you pick your violin back up again?
Speaker 2: It was maybe about the second year into the marriage (laughter).  It's a funny situation.  Because after I'd gone that many months without playing, I really had to do a lot of practicing to get my muscles and my chops to kind of feel familiar again.  And one of my favorite places to practice--and all my siblings will tell you--would be the bathroom.  I just liked that hollow reverberation that you hear against the tile and all.  So, I would go in the bathroom and practice.  And one day I had been doing that for something like six or seven hours.  And suddenly, the window over the shower just blew out (laughter).  And I was just kind of like this, like, "What was that?"  And so I called my husband.  I was like, "Man, the window just blew out."  And he came in and investigated, and he realized somebody was shooting at me.  (Laughter) This was in Hawthorne [California], in an apartment that we had in Hawthorne, in California.  And so, he called the police, and it was like this male and female cop showed up.  And I remember trying to explain to them what happened.  They asked me to explain the scenario, and I'm like, "Well, I was practicing violin in the bathroom."  And you know, to me, this is as normal as I'm talking to you right now.  To them, they're looking at me like I'm crazy.  "Okay, ma'am, let's get this straight.  Now, you play violin?"  And I'm like, "Yes."  "And you were playing violin in the bathroom?"  I'm like, "Yes."  "How long were you playing?"  I said, "Oh, since about nine o'clock this morning."  By this time it's probably about five or six.  And they were like, "And so, then suddenly the bathroom window exploded, and you found this bullet?"  (Laughter) And they were trying not to laugh.  I could see on their faces that they were trying real hard not to just bust out laughing, in light of that everything was safe and all by this time.  But it was like, that was me trying to put myself back together as a player. Because I was really going crazy with just this housewife thing and, you know, him going to work and, you know, keeping the house clean, and doing laundry and doing the dishes and cooking.  And then you go to bed and do it all over again.  And there was just something missing, so I had to start practicing again, and he encouraged me to do so, so I did.  But that was one of the funny incidences that happened in the process--
Story_ID: 597653
Speaker 1: --So, eventually, he [Briggs' ex-husband] also encouraged me.  Because I would look in the paper, and a lot of names I saw just playing locally in and around Los Angeles [California], these were people I'd heard of, you know.  These are like people I'd heard of back in Virginia.  So I was totally intimidated, and I was like, "I can't go out and play.  You know, these people are famous, and they're well-known, and they're experienced."  It was quite intimidating.  But he was like--well, [HistoryMaker] Marla Gibbs had a club called, oh gosh, what's the name of it?  I can't think of the name of the club that she had, but it was in Los Angeles, and she was having a talent contest there.  And so, he encouraged me to go into that talent contest.  I still had no chops as a player, but I said, well, I would go and just see what happened.  I think the prize was something like, I don't know, a couple of hundred dollars or something.  So, I went down, and I played.  I was okay, but I was still rusty.  But I placed first runoff.  They had, they let the audience vote.  And it was kind of, very much like the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York], because they were louder for the person they wanted to win, of course.  So, I believe a vocalist got it initially.  And gosh, there's a comedian, he's an older guy, very, very light-skinned gentleman with red hair.  And I can't think of his name, but he was the host for this contest.  And he felt that I should have won.  And so, he gave me a prize anyway, and I ended up playing regularly in that venue.  It was Marla's Memory Lane [Los Angeles, California]; that was the name of the venue.  And eventually, she put together a band that went through so many name changes.  We were the Blues Sisters; we were Velvet Jazz; we were called Bo at one time.  And this was a group of all these female musicians, all very talented, and we used to play there quite regularly, also around town as well.  The group never really got off the ground, but it was the first time I'd run into musicians who were women, who seemed to approach music much like myself, in seriousness.  And they, this one guitarist in particular named Lois McMorris, we called her Lady Mack, she really could play; she still can play to this day.  And I was just--wow, it was like I met a parallel to my own thinking in this person.  So, I befriended her right away, and we've been friends for years.  And I just continued to perform, and eventually the more places I performed, the more gigs I began to get with, with various artists.  And I was totally--and I have to say this to anybody that's in this business: learn the business.  My gosh, because I was like totally unaware of the business.  Because as things were going along, I started to realize that my marriage was not going to work out.  And the one skill that I had was to play violin, and I was going to have to make this work.  Well, in order to make anything work in the music world, you have to understand the business, because eventually that's what happens.  So, I took, I got my first professional tour at that time.  But I've had to survive on that ever since, and rely totally on myself and that instrument--
Story_ID: 597654
Speaker 1: Now, when was your first professional tour?
Speaker 2: My first professional tour was with a group called Soul II Soul, and that took place in 1990, thanks to Patrice Rushen.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what was Soul II Soul?
Speaker 2: Soul II Soul was a British-Jamaican, I wouldn't even call it a rap group.  But they were like an R&B group, and they were probably, they had a huge impact on black music in this country.  Still to this day, I can hear remnants of their sound.  But they did a song called 'Back to Life,' that was sang by Caron Wheeler, and it was a huge hit.  And they put together a tour.  I think the tour must have been about a hundred people, and they had three violinists with that group, and I was one of them.  All three of their own couldn't make it, so they hired me to replace the one that couldn't make it.  And we toured Japan and the United States, and eventually they went back to England and did some touring there.  I did not go with them, because we had had a bus accident in which I was involved.  So, it was just outside of Chicago [Illinois]--
Speaker 1: Were you injured?
Speaker 2: Yes, I was injured.  And also, I don't think they wanted me there; they didn't want me to go.  The other two violinists didn't want me to go, for some reason.  They wanted to take the other girl back on, or whatever.  We had our conflicts about that, but you know, the tour went on England without me.  But I did do most of it; I did all of the American leg of the tour and then Japan.  That was my first time in Japan, and that gig at the time paid something like $2300 a week.  And I was like, "Well, this is cool.  Touring is cool," (laughter).  I never, I mean I'd never seen that kind of money in my life in one week.  And I was getting it consistently every week, and this tour was lasting like for a few months.  So I thought, "Oh, this is really cool, this is something I can do."  And you know, I had pursued touring for a long time after that, and still to this day I'm touring.
Story_ID: 597655
Speaker 1: After that [Soul II Soul tour] finished, actually before that actually finished, I'd taken another short trip to Bulgaria with a jazz musician named Milcho Leviev, he's a keyboardist.  And the other person in the band was [Albert] Tootie Heath, and then this wonderful bassist who I brought into the situation named Nedra Wheeler.  And we went and we did a concert with the Sofia Symphony [Sofia Symphonic Orchestra], and it was a jazz concert with a symphonic orchestra.  That was very special to me.  One of the highlights of my career was on that gig.  And we toured all over Bulgaria, and Varna [Bulgaria], and Sofia [Bulgaria], and Plovdiv [Bulgaria], these cities, and did these jam sessions to this appreciative audience.  It was something I'd never seen before.  And I saw another culture, which eventually unstrapped some of the locks growing up in the South had on my brain.  I saw another culture in white folks I'd never seen before, that didn't treat me like what I'd experienced here.  So, and that was good.  For that reason, that trip was most profound.  It was one of my favorites of all the trips and tours that I've done in my life as a musician, it was that one.  Because it changed my insight about things; it had an impact.  And it was special; it was an orchestral type of gig, which those don't come very frequently, where you're the feature.  And it was still jazz, but with all the formality that I'd experienced as an orchestral player; all of that was there.  We were reading music that was highly respectable.  The musicianship was top-notch, and it was just a very special time for me, to experience that in that little eastern country, European country of Bulgaria.  We shot a video there, a film.  A lot of it was black and white, but it was actually film, not video.  And they had all the English subtitles underneath each scene.  It was like a documentary, and I enjoyed that very much.  It was mostly about Milcho, but they couldn't help but focus--they just--they had never seen women play like that there, and I think--and we were young, we were so young.  You know, we were like in our lesser twenties at the time.  They'd never seen a woman play bass like that, let alone--and there weren't a lot of brown people there, as my daughter [Kai Briggs] calls them.  The brown people that I saw there were the Turks, and there seemed to be some kind of rivalry going on with them that I was gradually learning about at the time.  And they were having political rallies, and I think that while communism had just come down just prior to that, it was a scary transitional kind of time.  They were going through famines at the time.  There was all kind of stuff going on there, and people were so humble, but they were so nice.  And the music was so great.  And I find that in countries where that kind of turmoil is going on, they produce some of the greatest musicians.  And I ran into some gypsies [Romani] while I was there; they knew about jazz.  I mean, we're talking about a camp with a bear on a chain with the covered wagon where they made their own liquor, and I had never seen anything like that (laughter).  I saw it in fairytale books about Hansel and Gretel and stuff, but I'd never seen anything like that.  And I was like, "Milcho, are those gypsies?"  "Yes, [HistoryMaker] Karen ["Lady in Red" Briggs], these are gypsies."  "We have to stop.  I've never seen anything like--."  To him, it was like nothing.  But I was like, wow.  They had a bear on a chain tied to a tree, and I said, "We have to stop."  So, we stopped.  He knew the language.  It was cool.  They seemed to know who he was, because in his country, you know, he's like the top musician, he's this jazz pianist.  And they had some phenomenal fiddle players in that camp.  They had phenomenal dancers, and they played other instruments.  And then they made this liquor that changed my body temperature; I started to get cold.  And they sat there and laughed at me when I experienced that (laughter).  I didn't know what they were talking about.  It just made my body temperature drop.  I'm like "Wow, what is this stuff?" You know, and that was very special.  I didn't go near the bear.  They told me not to (laughter), so I didn't.  But I just watched him from a distance.  I did not have a camera with me at the time, but my brain certainly recorded the experience.  I tried something called tripe soup, which I shouldn't have, because it made me quite sick (laughter).  But, you know, the time that I had there was special, and I've never been back again.  And I don't know if I'll ever have that experience again; I know it will never be the same.  I met the conductor of the orchestra, he was so sweet.  He died within a couple of years after we came back.  And so, it was right after that, I went on the tour with Soul II Soul.  I came back from that, and I was right into this next door.  And that was the beginning of my touring career, I think.  I think my violin teacher set us up for it by taking us on these much shorter trips by bus when I was in junior high school [Alford J. Mapp Junior High School; Cradock Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia] and high school [Woodrow Wilson High School, Portsmouth, Virginia], to New York [New York], Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and Michigan, those places.  But it seemed to prepare me, or give me the experience I needed to handle a tour later.  And that's what I ended up doing.  Of course, the buses changed.
Story_ID: 597656
Speaker 1: You went on a second tour with Soul II Soul?
Speaker 2: I just did the one tour.  Yeah (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Oh, the one, okay. So the Bulgarian trip was prior to the Soul II Soul?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they actually blended one into the other; it segued one into the other.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And after that I had gone for about a year, just wondering what was going to happen with my life next.  My mom [Ruthie Powell Briggs] had died, I'd gotten a divorce, and was trying to figure out what to do with my life.  And then I heard about an audition for this guy named Yanni.  And the audition--
Speaker 1: What year is this?
Speaker 2: This was 19--
Speaker 1: This would be 90--
Speaker 2: Ninety-one [1991].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I think Patrice Rushen submitted my name when whoever his manager was at the time made inquiries about violin players.
Speaker 1: And at the time you didn't know who didn't know who Yanni was?
Speaker 2: No (laughter).
Speaker 1: Well, for the benefit of this audience who are watching this, who is Yanni?  What's your, I mean--
Speaker 2: He's like this Greek guy who came here from Kalamata, Greece along with his siblings to go to school.  And he went to school here and had pursued music on the side in a rock band, but he's a keyboard player, essentially, who went solo.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, he played in a rock band?
Speaker 2: Called Chameleon.
Speaker 1: Called Chameleon, all right.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.  And he decided to go solo somewhere along the way.  And he became this phenomenon of a new age keyboard composer.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, so that's how you discovered him, a new age keyboard--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  He's shooting for the world music theme right now.  But that's how he started off being labeled.
Speaker 1: Because he certainly has a--you know, he has a strong following, and he's known for these huge productions, and--
Speaker 2: Yes, he is.
Speaker 1: --these huge productions that people are--you know, I don't know, he has just a huge following.  I didn't know what he--you know, to tell the truth, I still--as I'm interviewing you here, I still don't even know what his background is.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well--
Speaker 1: So, he's a Greek musician?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's Greek.
Speaker 1: Is he classically trained?
Speaker 2: No, he's self-taught.  He played accordion as a child, I understand, at least that's what his parents encouraged.  But he didn't really--I guess that led to his eventually turning the keyboard around (laughter) so he could play it this way, as opposed to like that.  And he composes his own music.  He has his own notational system and way of understanding how to translate that music, which--it takes a special kind of musician to work for someone who speaks another language than you musically, that only they know.  So--
Speaker 1: So, he--
Speaker 2: So I was destined to do this, because you have to have great ears to work with a guy like Yanni.  He's just--
Speaker 1: So, that's the thing, you have to be a singular type of--as you said, to work for somebody like Yanni.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah--
Speaker 1: He has his own notation system?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he has his own notes that he makes, with these symbols that he uses only for himself.  No one else can read his music with that.  It eventually had to be translated over to something that we all understood the language on.  But that was something he did.  He even sold t-shirts as part of his merchandise, and that had that notational system printed on some of them.  So, I auditioned for this gig, and I realized once I got there where I'd heard of him before.  Because my eldest sister [Virginia Choice] knew who he was.  But he had done an Olympics prior, way prior to my doing this audition.  And I remember during some of the outtakes of the Olympics they kind of showed him briefly, and they said this was Yanni.  And I remember I had an interest in this music and this musician, but I forgot his name.  And years went by before I came across it again, and I did not recall that he was the same person until I auditioned.
Story_ID: 597657
Speaker 1: My audition was very strange.  I was auditioned by Yanni, at his house, by Yanni and his drummer, Charlie Adams.  I knew they told me they were looking for a very international kind of band.  And I knew I had to have this job; I had to get this job, because I was doing very badly at the time.  So, I knew I had to get this job.  So, I didn't know how I was going to get it.  And no one seemed to be able to tell me what the musical requirements were, but I really needed this job.  So, I went to his house.  It was horrible.  I got lost because it was the [San Fernando] Valley [California], and I just didn't know how to get around really well.  But I got lost, called him and got there late; he was okay about that.  And he put this music in front of me that looked like somebody took black pepper and just went like that all over it.  And he said, "Okay, now read this."  And I was like, "You want me to play this now?"  He's like, "Well, yeah."  So, I--and it had these odd time signatures, a 7/8 time.  And I was just--I remember thinking to myself, "There's no way I'm going to get this gig if he expects me to sight read this in one take like this."  So, I went through it about six or seven times, and it was like, okay, he was like, "Now, I figured after six or seven times--"  Of course, the more I did it and screwed over it, the more nervous I became and the more distracted I became.  But that wasn't what did it for me.  What happened was he put a video up, of one of his songs.  And it was a song called 'Within Attraction.'  An actual orchestra was playing.  He had not had any dueling violins or anything like that attached to it by this time.  And while he was playing, he kind of got up and walked around or something.  And I just picked up the violin, and I heard the song, and just kind of started playing along with it, and that's what got his attention.  And I wasn't real familiar with that time signature, because it was very odd.  It was like 1-2, 1-2, 1-2-3, very gypsy, very--I had just started to indulge in that kind of feeling in music at that time.  But I hadn't studied it well enough, and now its second nature to me.  But when I saw it, I just tried to play along with it.  And I would miss the 1 every time it came back around.  But it was like, "Yeah, you know, that's interesting; I think I can catch it."  So, that's what caught his ear eventually.  He almost didn't hire me just on sight reading alone.  I mean, I could read, but the stuff he put in front of us--because he didn't read music, he didn't understand that you just don't put music like that in front of people on the spot and expect them to read it.  And he just didn't understand the dynamics of that.  There's very few people I know that can do that that quickly at the speed that he wanted.  So, you know, I said, "I'm going to lose this."  And I remember at that time thinking, "Gosh, are there people who can really read this stuff in one take that quickly?"  You know, because I'm looking at it, and this is unreasonable (laughter).  But I eventually got through it, and I learned the music mostly by ear; I got a feel for the 7/8.  And I remember my mom [Ruthie Powell Briggs] died right after that audition.  And after that, all I remember doing was waiting to hear from them about whether or not I'd gotten it.  He had auditioned one other person, and that was to be his favorite fiddle player in this band, for a while.  We ended up being a nine-piece band that had four string players--drums, bass, percussion, and another keyboardist.  There were no vocalists at the time, and then four violinists.  One of those was a cello and three violinists; that's what it was.  And this guy, Charlie Bisharat, was like his number one fiddle player, and I understood him to be Arabic or something of that nature.  And yeah, he gave us all a little feature, but he gave this guy all the feature.  Yeah, this was like, you know, his number one guy.  And I hated it (laughter).  I hated the validation that I was not getting, and I felt like this was a waste of my talent and a waste of my time.  And it took three years of touring with him before I was like, you know what?  Forget this guy.  You know, I'm never going to--this is a glass ceiling, and I'm never going to get in.  And I didn't care who heard me say it.  And I was like, I was frustrated, because he was just ignoring me.  Because while I was not on tour with him, I would go out and do my other gigs.  And I felt that I was worthy of getting a little more attention than what I was getting in the context.  It was like, yes, this guy was good; I loved the way he played.  But I have something to offer too, and he was just kind of dismissing it.  He didn't understand where I was coming from as a player.  So I said, "Okay, I don't care if I do this gig or not next year."  You know, I wasn't afraid of the manager; I didn't care what they thought about me.  And then in the summertime, I get a call, "Guess what, you're going to be the new soloist."  And he said it with laughter in his voice, like he didn't believe I could pull it off.  I was like, "Okay."  So I called Yanni up, and I was like, "Listen, I don't have a problem with doing this, you know, at all.  But you know, if you don't support me about doing it, it doesn't make a difference what the hell I play or how well I play it.  If you don't support me about it, it's not going to fly.  If you support me about it, I'll make it fly."  He was like, "Okay."  He got kind of quiet, and he heard what I was saying.  He was a very smart man, so he was reading into this probably a lot more than I gave him credit for at the time.  But that's--by this time, you know, he was with Linda Evans at the time, and they were trying to figure out--I think she actually--in theory, I really do believe she was the one who suggested that he do that.  I believe he had some kind of conflict with the other violinist and he left the band.  And I think Linda was the one that suggested "Why don't you just give [HistoryMaker] Karen ['Lady in Red' Briggs] a try (simultaneous)?"
Story_ID: 597658
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Is this Linda Evans, the actress?
Speaker 2: Yes, Linda Evans, the actress.  I really do believe that that was--to me, she was the better half of his [Yanni] consciousness when it came to women.  Because I mean in Greece--I kind of got the feeling they weren't raised to be dealing with that.  And I'm an African American woman, so we had conflicts about some of that stuff.  And he knew I was not used to whatever his perception was, or how he saw women.  And so, we used to have clashes about it, and I think later he respected me for not backing down on it.  Most of the time I just, I stood up against it, because I didn't see any need for it.  I was like, "Why should I have to play this role when it's not real?" you know?   So, we had conflicts about it.  And everybody thought I was so bold, that I stood up to him when I did it.  But I did, and even when he wouldn't let me play, I just did, and that just kind of fueled it.  But eventually we came to some kind of mutual respect level, where he just saw I'm not a Greek woman, you know, if that's what's leading him to think I should be.  No, I'm not one of them.  I know that I've got this other thing that comes with my culture that's, you know, a little more bodacious, if you will--(laughter)--a little more outspoken, and a little more willing to take you on about certain things--rights, and things of that nature, and those -isms that come across.  And plus, I was black.  So it's like, "Please, you know, you're in my country visiting, and we built this place for free.  So, don't come here trying to, you know, make me feel less than you."  And I just had this attitude; I don't even know where it came from, but it was there.  And so, eventually, you know, he put me in this position.  And Linda was like, "Oh, this is going to be just wonderful.  And we're going to have you here--."  And I remember they were saying, "And we're going to cut your dreadlocks."  And I was like, "No, you're not."  "Well, we're going to cover them."  And I said, "No, we're not."  So, she was like, "Well, you should be--you know, we're probably thinking you're going to wear a red dress," and this and that, but she didn't focus on it.  So, he's getting ready to do this video at the Acropolis in [Athens] Greece.  He's going to fly all these people over.  He's going to have an orchestra.  We were going to use a Greek orchestra, but somehow it didn't work out; he said they couldn't play music.  I don't remember what he said the problem was, but it didn't work out.  So, now he's looking all over the world looking for an orchestra.  Of course, I suggested the [Sofia Symphonic] Orchestra in Bulgaria, but it was the Royal Philharmonic [Orchestra] in England that eventually became available to do the gig.  So, he flew them in from England while all this preparation was going on.  They were like, "Okay, we've got to get you a dress made."  It was crazy for them, I'm sure.  So maybe they weren't paying attention, but I remember Linda said, "Red."  So, they sent Yanni's assistant, a lady named Susan [Smela], and myself out to kind of get my outfit together.  And he said he wanted earth tones, but Linda said red.  So, we went to this designer named Linda Stokes, and we told Linda what they asked for.  And she pulled out this like hot, orange, stuff.  And I'm like--I don't know--there's some people that can pick up a piece of fabric and they see dresses and curtains and all kind of--I'm not one of those people.  But I just saw the fabrics, and we sent a swatch of it to Greece to get them to approve it, and that it was going to work out alright for the lighting.  And whoever did the lighting, they were like, "Yeah, this will be fine."  So we went on and proceeded to make this dress that was actually a modification of a dress I had worn previously on all the Yanni tours.  By this time, we had done several tours in the United States and tested out my being the soloist in front of audiences.  And I'd been wearing black dresses up to that point; it was going over fine.  And then, you know, now we're just preparing the same show for this video.  So, this dress gets approved, and the sleeves get lengthened on this outfit I had already worn.  And the skirt gets lengthened and we get shoes, and it's like this burnt orange.  And then Linda took it upon herself to put all this gold applique on the shoulders, and I was like "Gosh, isn't that a bit much?"  But I brought the dress to Greece and I opened it up, and I was like, "Well, here's the dress from the fabric you approved."  Then the controversy started (laughter).  It was like they were whispering about it.  And they were like, "You know, you can't wear this.  This is too bright."  I think Yanni may have had on white or something.  And it's like, "You're going to--you know, this is too much."  And I'm like, "But this is all I have."  Everything else I brought was like tourist clothing, and I didn't have, I didn't have another dress.  I just brought that; I thought that was it.  They approved the fabric, it was Linda who said red.  This was red, this was--you know, we did everything, and his assistant was going through this with me during this whole process.  So, I'm like, "You know, I didn't come prepared for anything else.  I thought this was it; y'all approved everything."  And I was like, "Yeah, okay."  So then I had this head wrap on, much like what I have on here.  And they were like, "Well, that, you can't do."  And I was like, okay.  So I folded it down to about an inch wide, and pulled my hair so tight that many people thought I was Asian when it was all said and done (laughter).  They thought, aren't you the Asian lady? (Laughter) "Playing with Yanni?"  I'm like--no, or they would meet me, and say that they thought I was Asian.  It was really funny.  That took place for a few years after.  But you know, we got through and recorded it.  At the time, he said he did not know how it was going to be shown.  And they probably had, you know, irons in the fire and ideas.  But PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] and all that hadn't materialized yet, but eventually it did.
Story_ID: 597659
Speaker 1: We had had that earthquake.  This was in '94 [1994]; we had the earthquake, that huge one, that Northridge [Los Angeles, California] quake, and I was in Sherman Oaks [Los Angeles, California], and it rocked.  I told him [Yanni] I wanted to leave here (laughter).  That was the first time I'd ever lived by myself, and it was like we had a major earthquake.  And we rocked so hard, and I just wanted to leave.  And he's like, "Please don't go," I remember him telling me that.  And I didn't know why at the time; I took it as some term of endearment.  But I think by that time he probably had gotten his PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] deal, and he knew it was going to show.  And he cut a deal that gave them unlimited showing of this thing, and it was nationwide.  And they faxed me the schedule, and I remember my stomach jumped up in my throat.  And then I thought, "Oh, no."  Because 99.9 percent of the time when you do people favors in this business, a lot of times their projects do not take off.  This was the one time.  This project ['Live at the Acropolis'] took off so big, and then you realized what you agreed to do it for.  And this thing sold over time about eight million copies.  In my case, there were no royalties, no--it was like I did it for a flat fee, that I'll just embarrassingly say that it was less than five grand, significantly less.
Speaker 2: Now this--just to be clear again--
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Because, you know, I saw this, I saw this on PBS back in the '90s [1990s] when they broadcast it.  I didn't know who you were in the front, way before this interview.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: When I saw it, I mean it was clear who the star of this was.  I mean you were the featured, the featured person.  And I don't know if you got more air time than anybody else, but you certainly--I mean people who saw that, you know, couldn't forget your performance, and that's all they talked about, the people who saw it, you know.
Speaker 1: Thank you.
Speaker 2: So--
Speaker 1: It certainly impacted my life real hard.  I mean, I can tell you some funny stories about reactions from people.  The impact that that showing had on my life was so profound.  It was--I went from an obscure jazz musician that only a few people knew about, to wherever I went, people knew who I was; they recognized me.  And when that happens to you, it's strange.  Because I remember being in the bank and arguing with the teller, because she told me it was going to be a ten day hold on my check.  And I was about to lose my mind; I had bills due.  "What do you mean, ten days?  You've been getting this same check from this person for the last four years.  Has it ever bounced?"  And I'm just going on and on and on, and her facial expression is changing.  She's like, "Do you play violin?"  And I'm in the middle of this argument, and I'm like, "Oh, my God, she's busted me," (laughter).  It's like, I remember I lived behind a Mobil gas station in Sherman Oaks, in the [San Fernando] Valley [California].  This is where we had this earthquake.  And there were all these Arab cats working in there.  And I would go in there and I'd be like, you know, "Could you check the air on my tire?"  "Why do you want the air checked on your tires?  Oh, there's nothing wrong--" you know, they'd treat me like that.  This video came out, and I got up as usual and fell out of bed, and went to go around the corner to get a cup of coffee or whatever.  And I get in there, and the guys on--I don't know what you call those boards that you roll under the car to fix underneath the car; they have wheels.  He saw my feet, and rolled out from under there.  And he said, "It is you; it is you."  This is broad daylight.  And he fell on his knees, and I was--I looked like a dog anyway.  I'd fell out of bed and just wanted to get some coffee; it's right behind me, and he was on the floor and he was doing this and that.  And I was like, "Could you please get up?  Just get up, you know."  And he had treated me like a dog until then.  I mean, just the impact.  Those are the funnier stories.  But I would go to airports.  I'd be sitting at a light, a traffic light.  And I remember an old lady pulled up beside me, her and her girlfriend.  They probably were both about seventy years old.  And they blew the horn, and they looked at me, and they were--and this going on all day, every day.  I just lost my sense of privacy.  So, I had to move up and get into an apartment that was more secure, because everybody knew what I did, and that I have instruments, and so it scared me.
Story_ID: 597660
Speaker 1: Yanni toured on that.  I'd walk out in front of these audiences, seventeen, eighteen thousand people.  And it was just like--"WAH!"  And it was amazing, you know, just the energy of that, all these people.  And at the same time, I was trying to balance all of this response against his ego (laughter).  It's like, "Okay, you're just supposed to be a side person on this gig.  So, just be cool.  You know, don't overdo it."  You know, how could I not overdo it?  I was the only person with a red dress on.  And you know, I just, I never backed him up against the wall about anything.  I just went along with whatever he wanted to do, and tried to make it the best I could.  I had a steady job, whatever.  Because as I told you, I needed that job when I got it.  And now the job was taking off beyond anyone's wildest imagination.  Eventually that video ['Live at the Acropolis'] sold, I heard eight million copies, and it's still selling to this day.  He's done others, but none of them have sold quite like that. And there were two standouts in that video besides Yanni.  I can proudly say I was one of them, and the other one was the drummer that auditioned me, Charlie Adams.  Charlie's been with Yanni a long time.  But to me, those were the two standouts.  Now he'll have five, six, or seven standouts, because no one or two people could ever have that much influence in his success again (laughter).  And I really tried to work with him in the confines of his insecurities about that, but it didn't matter, it didn't matter.  So, I stuck it out and stayed totally committed to that gig, forsaking all others--all other titles, all other genres of music.  I was just known as Yanni's violinist, and I stuck it out for the better part of thirteen years, minus a four and a half year period that he took a hiatus.  He broke up with his girlfriend, and all kind of drama happened in his life.  I broke up with my guy and, you know, I just, so I just--
Speaker 2: Has it been that long, thirteen years with Yanni?
Speaker 1: From '91 [1991] to June of this year was my last tour.
Speaker 2: Thirteen years with Yanni?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, you know, in that experience, there were a lot of things.  Most of my traveling came out of that experience.  So, let's see, I've been to Greece, I've been to China, I've been to India, Puerto Rico, Canada, most of the European countries, many of them.  And I've done the whole television thing, you know, the big time stuff associated with when you have success, that kind of promotion; I was involved in a lot of that.  And '[The] Oprah Winfrey [Show],' '[The Tonight Show with] Jay Leno,' all that stuff came out of that.  It also introduced me to other artists that made me visible to other artists.  So, out of that came Diana Ross.  That was actually who I did Oprah Winfrey with, Diana Ross.  And I played on her last release, and I don't know, all the musicians in town who knew me about me--there were some people that called me out of the woodwork.  I'd done an interview with Essence magazine, and things were happening that I never dreamed of, essentially.  And my work picked up, my commodity value picked up.  But I always stayed committed.  Number one, I wouldn't do anything that interfered with Yanni.  So, that thirteen year stint minus those four and a half years he took off, that was the number one priority; it became my life.
Story_ID: 597661
Speaker 1: After that big blow-up with his '[Live at the] Acropolis' video, I took on a past musician friend that I used to play in a band; I took him on as a boyfriend.  And out of that resulted my daughter, Kai [Briggs].  And I still toured.  I took Kai with me to China.  She started walking in Beijing, China when she was about, oh, ten months old I think.  I'd not gone to India--no, I'd gone to India when she was eight months old, yeah, and then I took her with me to China; that was the chronological order.  And that was quite an experience for her, just being around all those people.  It advanced my daughter's character and her ability to communicate significantly for her age and made her quite the international child.  She was not jailed in those boxes that I grew up with, because she was exposed to so many people at once at such a young age.  And I'm trying to keep that vibe going with her.  I want her always to be an international person, and not have to deal with those demons of the South and the things that I experienced, which is not as bad as they were back in the day, maybe in the '60s [1960s], but they were certainly still there, and it did have some impact on how I saw life and saw people, and saw life in this country.  For her, I think she'll have--she has an awareness of herself, but it will not be encased in boxes that I came out with.  Because coming to Los Angeles [California] was quite the culture shock to me.  The jazz scene here was, the music lacked an edge that I was so used to coming from the East Coast, and I saw that.  And you know, folks didn't have the same kind of qualms that I grew up with on the East Coast.  But at the same time, it also lacked a certain flavor that I was used to as well.  But you know, I just stayed on with Yanni and just continued to do all of his tours and everything he did.  And eventually--I was always afraid to, for fear of being fired--but eventually I asked him for a raise, which I saved that money diligently, and finally bought a house to put me and this child and, hopefully, her father in.  And that eventually took place and did not work out.  And then I moved back to the East Coast after all of that.  I guess when I look at it in hindsight, I wish I'd had better management at that time to negotiate whatever took place.  As I said, 99.9 percent of the time people would be like, "You know, I'm just doing this out of my pocket.  I don't know what's going to happen with it.  Could you do me a favor?"  And I would do it and nothing would happen, almost as they pretty much had anticipated.  In this case, it did the extreme opposite, I think, beyond anyone's imagination.  It blew up, and I was like contractually totally unprepared to reap any successes from it, other than what I earned from touring.  And the tour schedules at times were extremely just dogmatic.  I can remember a time when we had done twenty-one one-nighters in a row.  And I was so insane, out of my mind.  I think my child's father actually just chanced upon a woman who was not in her right mind at the time (laughter).  It was like on the twenty-first day, I think, or maybe the twenty-second day, that I ran into him.  And I was so distraught.  I was feeling like I was, I felt like I was going to lose my job at that time, because he was starting to take on other talents to feature in the show.  And I thought--I felt that seriously to be a threat on my ability to stay afloat employment-wise.  I just had all these dreams.  And that's when I wanted to buy the house, and I wanted to do things.  And it's like, "Oh, gosh, everything's being threatened now."  It's like, "He got what he wanted, and now he's going to kick me out and he's going to replace me with someone else."  And he hired a friend of mine, who I was highly supportive of.  And he would call me up sometimes and say, "I really like this flute player," and then just hang up the phone.  I'm like, "You know, he's going to fire me."  So I went on this tour with this twenty-one days in a row, with all this on my brain, thinking I was going to lose the tour.  So, I decided that maybe my life was a little too non-traditional, and maybe I needed to do things like other women did, and, you know, just kind of get with a guy and not put your career first and do this and that, you know, and try to settle down a little bit, and I think it was a form of mental illness just based on doing twenty-one one-nighters in a row, a very hard schedule.  And I can't explain to you what that does to your thinking and your physical and mental aspects of who you are when you're subjected to that kind of tension and travel and lack of sleep, day-in and day-out.  We got through it, but by the time we did, I'd taken on somebody that in another time I would never have taken on. And eventually, I pursued it and eventually ended up with a child out of wedlock--a beautiful child, a smart child, an advanced child, but still out of wedlock--
Story_ID: 597662
Speaker 1: --So, I tried to right this wrong.  And I bought this house, and we got the father in, and we tried to do the family thing.  Within about two and a half years, it fell apart, and then I just kind of found myself floating, figuring out what to do next.  In fact, my entire support system--child care, management, the child's [Kai Briggs] father, and the Yanni tour--everything stopped within like six months' time into it.  And so, I sold the house and decided it was time to go back to the East Coast, which I left Encino [Los Angeles], California at that time.  And I went back to the East Coast for another condo [condominium] in Takoma Park, Maryland.  My sister [Liza Briggs], younger sister and I, bought condos in the same building, and I stayed there for two and a half years.  Another thing that took place was in 1999, when I joined this band called Vertu, with Stanley Clarke.
Speaker 2: How do you spell Vertu?
Speaker 1: V-E-R-T-U.  It's supposed to mean a fine work of art.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now, you joined this band in 1999?
Speaker 1: Yes, it was formed in '99 [1999]. It was a conceptualization of Stanley Clarke and Lenny White.  Originally, it was going to be Stanley, and Lenny, and Patrice Rushen, and Allan Holdsworth, and myself, which was really scary.  Because Allan Holdsworth--I was like, "Wow!"  (Laughter) He's a ridiculous guitar player who has his own way of playing, that no one's been able to really duplicate, in my mind.  But then Allan was tied with his own album project, and then Patrice Rushen decided not to do it.  And so, we replaced the two musicians with a guitarist from the rock band, Poison.  His name was Richie Kotzen, and we replaced Patrice with a keyboardist named Rachel Z out of New York [New York].  And we were like--this was my time to actually experience the jazz fusion that I had grown up hearing, but the venues just didn't exist for me to perform in that market until this band came about, and they were trying to bring the music back.  And we did this album, and there was so much drama associated with making this record, with all the changes and players.  And Stanley had all this stuff going on in his personal life that eventually came into my house and caused a lot of problems.  I was having problems in the relationship anyway, but his wife accused me of sleeping with him and all this stuff that never really happened, but just caused a lot of drama (laughter).  And when you hear the music, you can hear the drama in the music, in just the style of the music.  It was highly dramatic, and just told this story where you could just tell it was not a very peaceful kind of grouping here.  There were just things going on, and I could just, I could tell it in the music that was written.  We all contributed; I contributed a song.  But Stanley's music, oh, gosh--
Story_ID: 597663
Speaker 1: That, at the time, that was Stanley Clarke's girlfriend.  And so, that drama leaked into my household eventually, and it just caused all kind of problems.  And I continued to do the tour, because this happened the day before the release of Vertu's first and only recording ['Vertu'], which was done on a largely--well, it was Sony 550 [Music], and I said, "Okay, yeah."  This is after having to go through the court system and all of this stuff had taken place.  And it's like, "Man, I really want to do this music, but I can't stand this drama."  And then it was like, "Okay, I'll do it, but I don't want to have to face this woman on this tour.  You know, we got three weeks on the road and, you know, I'm a professional, and this is all I want to deal with."  You know, I was coming straight out of the Yanni camp into this.
Speaker 2: So, needless to say, I mean, the group didn't stay together?
Speaker 1: Over time, it didn't.  We did the tour, and I had another big blow-up in Italy, because she did show up on the tour.  And it was like, you know, the whole thing just kind of fell apart after that.  And Stanley went back to being Stanley Clarke, the musician and movie score writer.  And Richie [Kotzen] went back to doing the rock thing.  And Rachel [Z] went back to doing the jazz thing.  And I went back to, well, I didn't know what I was going back to, because Yanni was done.  This was that four and a half year hiatus that had begun around then.  And then it was like it was wide open.  But then by this time, I was by myself with this young baby [Kai Briggs], and with this house.  And I was like, "Oh, gosh, okay, what am I going to do?"  So, I sold the house, there was no need to stay there anymore.  And I just moved to the East Coast and bought another one, a condo [condominium], and I stayed there for about two and a half years. I think that two and a half years was basically spent reviewing what had taken place in my life over the course of seven years.  It went by like a blur, just traveling all the time, and the rise of Yanni, and being gone, and then this thing happened--I mean, there were so many aspects of my life that I just lost touch with, from traveling so much and performing so much, to where I was like, "How did I get here?"  And I figured it all out.  If I hadn't had that time, I wouldn't even be able to tell you this now.  So, I think that's what that time was for.  My father [Frank Briggs, Jr.] had had a triple bypass surgery.  I had spent some time with him, and I think what was the most special about that is my father was quite the drinker as I was coming up.  And after he had that triple bypass surgery, I actually spent six weeks with my father when he was under the influence of nothing but whatever drugs they gave him as a result of the surgery.  And I'd never seen him before outside of that.  I knew him, the drinker, but I'd just never known who he was without that.  And so this--I didn't experience that until I was like thirty-nine, forty years old, something like that.  And so, that was the great gift that came out of that.  And I reconnected with my family members and then decided it was time to go back to work, which meant moving back to Los Angeles [California].  So, I sold the condo, and I came back about a year and a half ago and resettled here in Los Angeles.  My daughter is attending a Korean institute, private school.  And I'm still touring--
Story_ID: 597664
Speaker 1: --I've done lots of jazz festivals this year.  I've signed a record deal with Hidden Beach [Recordings], which is the same label as Jill Scott's on, and I'm waiting very patiently--impatiently, is really what I'm doing (laughter)--but I'm waiting to get in the studio and do a recording and release that.  Well, Yanni is going to tour again I think in November.  This will be the first tour I've not done with him.  I would like to have had product out by then, but I know it's not going to happen until 2005, hopefully.  And so as a result of that, I decided to take a tour with Kirk Franklin, Yolanda Adams, and Donnie McClurkin, as a musician.
Speaker 2: Is that gospel?
Speaker 1: Yeah, gospel, contemporary gospel, and that's going to be starting up.  But just prior to that, I'm also going to Bermuda to record, I mean, to do a jazz festival in Bermuda with the Unwrapped Band, which is the conceptualization by Hidden Beach that has fused--I shouldn't even say fused, because the two are related.  But it's a collaboration of two producers who felt that they should do a record that features jazz musicians.  The music would cover popular rap grooves and songs.  You would recognize the grooves; they took the rapper off.  Maybe that's why they called it unwrapped, and they feature the jazz musicians instead.  And this concept caught on, and there's been a Volume I, a Volume II, and a Volume III is out now.  And we've been doing performances based on the success of those volumes, and so we're going to Bermuda to perform in the Bermuda Jazz Festival.  Three days after that, I'll leave with Kirk.
Speaker 2: Now, who are some of the--who are some of the rappers that--what is some of this music like?  I mean, there's--I know that--well, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Well, they, like, for example in Volume III, they did a tribute to Tupac Shakur and Biggie Smalls, some of the, if you will, dead rappers.  They did a tribute on this record.  I played on at least one of those.  They--
Speaker 2: So, it's the music without the rap?
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's no rap.  The groove is there.  You would recognize it if you listened to that music at all.  The groove is there; you would recognize it right away, but there's just--you won't hear a rapper.  In some cases, it's actually done better, because its focus is on the musicianship.  In some cases, okay, so, you know, all the drumbeats are there, all the critical identifying characteristics of the song is there, just no rapper; it's replaced with a jazz musician.  There's guitarists, there's, they have different vocalists.  I covered an Eminem tune on Volume III.  I covered somebody's music on each volume, and I've been on all three volumes.  And you know, I like it like that, actually.  You know, and I feel a generation removed from rap to a certain degree, because I didn't really--I knew about it growing up.  I remember when I first knew it was going to happen before it was commercialized.  I saw it happen at a college in Buffalo, New York once, while on the road with my orchestra teacher and her group.  But it commercialized itself maybe six or seven years later.  It blew up and became this phenomenon that people had a love/hate relationship with, and still do in some cases.  I think the concept is more palatable to people who maybe don't like hip-hop, and who've always kind of liked jazz.  There's some music out there for them, and this concept kind of fits the bill.  So, it's going well (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I can think of two rap groups that had a jazzy kind of orchestration.
Speaker 1: Yeah, there's the--
Speaker 2: De La Soul, Black Sheep (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yes, and DJ Jazzy Jeff, who's one of those people. Yes, yes, true. They always fused the concepts, but this was the first time where the focus was really on the instrumentalists, and people caught on to it.  It played on a lot of the quiet jazz stations, if you will.  Like in [Washington] D.C., they have a jazz station there that I know supports it very much.  Atlanta [Georgia], and you know, places where they have that quiet fire kind of jazz feel, those kind of groups, they support this music highly.  And people have been buying the records.  So, you know, we've been doing some performances just based on that.
Speaker 2: So, you've got a record coming out soon, or (unclear)--
Speaker 1: I'm hoping it does.  I was hoping it would be recorded by now, but it didn't work out for reasons I can't even explain, I don't really know.  I've heard that record companies take a long time.  I pursued a record deal once I had been instilled with the belief that I could actually sell records--
Story_ID: 597665
Speaker 1: --People have told me a violin can't sell records, and I believed them.  I just kind of said, "Okay, all right, fine."  You know, I've done television shows, and worked as a soloist, and a studio musician, done a lot of things.  But I didn't--I believed them.  I thought, "Okay, well, fine, what's the sense in pursuing this, you know, if that's the going rule?"  But after '[Live at] the Acropolis,' I realized that I could sell records.  And even with that kind of a track record, you know, I started to pursue the deal.  I pursued another manager, and even in that pursuance, it was like I still couldn't convince him enough.  Because I think the first time Hidden Beach [Recordings] heard of me was actually with Stanley Clarke.  They didn't know anything about Yanni, so much.  They knew about it, but not in the sense that people really know.  They weren't on top of the PBS [Public Broadcasting Service] stuff, but they knew about me first and foremost behind coming to see a showcase of Vertu.  And they sent a rep [representative] there to see, and they came back and talked about the violinist.  And that's kind of how that happened.  But, you know, I stayed committed to Yanni all that time, I mean, I always say, forsaking all other titles and ventures that I could have done.  [HistoryMaker] Regina Carter blew up around that time.  Vanessa-Mae blew up in that time, after the video came out.  Let's see, there were several.  I mean, I can't come up with all of them right now.  Now there's a girl, Miri Ben-Ari, she's blowing up in New York, known as the hip-hop violinist.  I had done a hip-hop record with the Wu Tang Clan that did very well; it went quadruple platinum.  I never got credit for my work on the record ['Wu Tang Forever'], but everybody--when I talk to kids in that generation, and I tell them I played on that record, they know what song ['Reunited'] it is; they know what record it is.  So, it did very well for them.  But I would do these projects always in between the Yanni tours, always.  And so, it was nothing that I could actually settle myself into focusing on, you know, going after something for myself.  And that realization--and then of course, I had to deal with the reality of survival.  You know, this was a job, it was a steady job.  I couldn't push the envelope about it, because, I don't know, he doesn't like for people to ask for raises (laughter).  He didn't, you know, he had issues with it.  But I said, well, I'll take the confines of what I'm working with and try to build something on that.  A lot of good things came out of it, mainly in terms of the exposure.  But I think for all the time I'd invested, I'd hoped that I would have more to show for it later.  But, you know, like you say, hindsight is 20/20.  So--
Speaker 2: But like a lot of things, though, that blow up and become--they grow big, some years later, and they come back again.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: Some of the mediocre musicians, you know--
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is true.
Speaker 2: --have been--you know, have come back.
Speaker 1: Yeah, this is true.
Speaker 2: They have tours, and some people that--I won't name them, but a lot of people have tours and stuff now where they come back and do stuff that's really not near as good as Yanni.
Speaker 1: It happens.  I mean, now, I could see myself touring with them.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Well, again later, maybe in the future.  I mean, we parted on okay terms.  I don't think he's angry with me, why should he be?  I just, I just have regrets that I didn't handle things--I don't know if anything like that will ever happen to me again, and especially under my own name; it would be really cool, but I don't know if that's ever going to happen again.  Some people get an opportunity like that once in a lifetime, and I wasn't quite prepared for it in terms of management and in terms of overall experience and knowledge, you know, those things.  You know, I just considered myself a fiddle player, and that was it.  And up until that time, my style hadn't really been validated in that big of a way.  There were a lot of people that always enjoyed me playing in much smaller environments, but that kind of validation had never come until that time.  So, and even then, I don't think people were really clear that I was an improvising violinist.  I'm not sure if they were clear, or really understood where I was coming from as a musician.  They just know they liked--to me, the hit single on that video was 'Within Attraction' with me dueling with this conductor, Shahrdad Rouhani; he's from Persia [Iran].  And I think that was the hit single for that video, and I just can't, I can't help but look back on it now and it's like, gosh, if I had just a nickel, ten cents, for every video he sold, you know, I'd be in another position today.  You know, and I'm looking at my kid [Kai Briggs] and saying, "Damn."
Story_ID: 597666
Speaker 1: When you look back on all the things you've done so far, is there any other major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I think, and I don't even know if I have it in my character to do it, but I think I would have walked from that gig when '[Live at] the Acropolis' blew up.  I would pursued my record deal then, and I would have just taken advantage of that wave, and I would have rode it like a professional surfer, which I was not, obviously, at the time.  You know, it was just this anomaly in my life that just happened, and that's what I'm mostly known for.  But, yeah, I think at that time, I probably would have said, "You know, I have to leave and I have to pursue this thing, so I can make this happen for myself and for my own future, because I don't think this is going to happen to me again."  And that's what I would have done differently.  But I don't know if I have it in my character to do it, because there's a huge conflict between being a businessperson in music and being a true artist.  It's just something you--the characters clash somehow.  And I find that the people who are the most successful in the music business oftentimes are not artists in the sense that I know.  And I will say that about Yanni, yes, he is very smart, and he's creative.  But he's not an artist in the sense that I know.  He never understood why people liked my playing.  And I remember him trying to figure out--you know, things that I interpreted as a feeling, where I'd bend the note--to him, it was out of tune.  You know, so it's like, yeah, we had two different ways of looking at music, and our approach was different.  So, you know, there was always a constant battle for me to, you know, fight for, you know, my own interpretation versus what he thought was it.  Because I didn't play like other violinists, so it was strange.  And I remember him trying to figure out, or trying to coin or explain why he felt my playing was appealing to people, and I couldn't tell him.  He concluded that it was because it was real, is what he said, which it was.  You know, I've always felt violin was a tool of expression for my own life experiences.  I think a lot of artists feel that way about their instrument or their compositions, or whatever.  But I don't think he ever resolved himself why that was, because he just couldn't compare me with a lot of other violinists.  And in the interim of that, I also got, I'd gotten the role of myself in a movie called 'Music of the Heart' that was recorded and filmed in New York [New York].  And it was an actual event that I'd done with Dave Grusin to raise money for a string program in the New York City [New York, New York] school system.  They were trying to do away with the program, and it was doing so well.  These kids could really, really play.  And I mean they were in tune, and everything was wonderful.  My teacher showed up, and that was the last time I saw her, was at this event I did at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York].  And they turned that actual event into a movie featuring Meryl Streep, and they called back all the available violinists, which included Itzhak Perlman, Isaac Stern.  Midori [Goto] was in that; I was in there; there were several of us.  And they called us back, those of us who were available to do this movie.  And they built a script around it, and hired Meryl Streep and taught her how to play violin.  She did pretty well.  And the movie is actually a good movie, it really is; it's a really good movie.  It's available on, you know, DVD and video and all, and it's a good family movie, and I went to see it in the theatres, and it was quite a thrill, you know.  There was no acting part involved for me; I just had to kind of stand there as they went down the list of players in the show.  And people, when they showed it on TV and television, people often tell me, you know, "I saw you on TV."  You know, it was cool.  I think there will always be a prevailing--hopefully, you know, a prevailing recognition of what I have done, even if it's just for Yanni.  I think it helped to propel all the other things, but I still give myself credit.  Because if I could not play--I mean, every musician on that stage was offered the same opportunity to be outstanding.  And a couple of us took advantage of that, and a couple of us--and the vast majority of the band members either couldn't, or wouldn't, or didn't want to, for whatever the reasons.  So, I don't apologize to anybody for that.
Story_ID: 597667
Speaker 1: The other thing that I have to mention is when we finished the Acropolis ['Live at the Acropolis'], the actual performance [at the Herodes Atticus Theatre, Athens, Greece]--that red dress that I wore on stage mysteriously disappeared (laughter).  It disappeared, and hasn't been found to this day.
Speaker 2: Have you performed in red since?
Speaker 1: We had the dress remade.  The designer [Linda Stokes] refused to make an exact duplicate of any of her clothing; she just refused.  So, I did get a couple of more red dresses.  I even had the same dress made in black and in chocolate, too.  But she would never duplicate the exact dress.  So, the original dress is somewhere in Greece, I think.  It just mysteriously disappeared, and not to be seen or heard from since (laughter), right after that performance.
Story_ID: 597668
Speaker 1: Do you have a certain philosophy of music?
Speaker 2: I probably have several theories, I think one of which I expressed earlier, when I referred to the violin being a tool of my life expression, and the fact that I tended to lean towards music that I grew up with, I think was significant.  Because I always embraced the fact that--once again, even though I spent a good eight to ten years of my life indulging myself in playing salsa and Afro-Cuban music that featured violin, and even featured improvising violin--I think I would be foolish to think that if I went to Cuba that I would be a better player than someone who grew up with that music and lived this music and actually have this music flow through their veins.  I just think, you know, whatever music it is that you're exposed to, I just think that's going to be the better outlet for you to express yourself through, I guess is my theory.  And the other thing is, I think there's a conflict between the artist and the businessperson that's going to be ongoing.  The music business is just that; it's a business.  It has very little--I think, talent, that's what I learned.  You know, you really have to be up on your business skills and know how to work those politics and all that, when it's all said and done.  And I think all of us have some knowledge of it, some much better than others.  I think I focused more on my presentation than I probably should have, maybe for the sake of knowing the business.
Speaker 1: Do you have any musicians who are business role models?  I mean, like, who balance the two things?
Speaker 2: Oh, I would say Yanni is definitely number one on my list.  I saw him go farther than anyone, up close and personal.
Speaker 1: Not just the business side, but in terms of--you said balancing the art and the music.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, well, I still say Yanni.  It's just the way that he balanced the art was through the talents of others.  In my case, I felt it to be somewhat of an exploit but, you know, I'm still here.  And the way I resolve that is, you know, I walked away so that I could have the opportunity to do it for myself.  So, if all the shit I talked about, playing with him, is true, I should be able to pull this off on my own; I should be able to.  I don't have nearly the resources that he has to work with; my life is different.  I have a child [Kai Briggs]; I'm a single parent.  There's a lot of things going on, but I'm still doing it.  And the kinds of work that have come my way--the kinds of performances at The [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts, Washington, D.C.], and Carnegie Hall [New York, New York], and all that, had nothing to do with Yanni.  So, those are things I acquired on my own, even at times when I had no representation whatsoever.
Story_ID: 597669
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: Oh, I have dreams about that.  The unity factor is, oh, gosh, it's so complicated, so complicated.  I think the mental illness that still prevails from one generation to the next as a result of the American historic institution of slavery is still there.  I know it's still there, and I just, I just would like to see that dissipate to its absolute minimum, at least in my daughter's [Kai Briggs] lifetime.  I would love to see that.  But it's, you know, it's gone on to create some unique dynamics, culturally.  This is still a new culture, really.  It's a new--there's not a culture like this anywhere else in the world; the experiences are different.  Even though there has been--the institution has taken place in other parts of the world, I still find the dynamics of how it took place here are highly different.  In fact, I was reading some history about Bermuda the other day, and they were telling the story about how a ship showed up in Bermuda with eleven black families on it.  By this time the British had liberated slaves, and they hadn't done it yet in the United States.  And I don't know why this took place, but they told these families, "You can either stay here in Bermuda and be free, or you can go to the United States where they still have slavery."  Ten out of eleven families stayed in Bermuda.  And I've been trying to figure out for the last five days, why that eleventh family continued on and came here, knowing what was going on.  And oh, gosh, I wish I knew the name of that family.  I'm still going to try to find out when I go--find out if anybody knows the story there, and what's the name of this family that decided to stay on that boat and come here.  In some aspects, it's probably a great thing that they did, I mean for how the nation turned out later, for the most part, once we got past the institution.  But I thought, "How strange!  Why did they do that?  Ten out of eleven?  You're outnumbered by ten families, and you still decided to come here anyway?"  When I speak to other black cultures that had the institution, there was some sense of their traditional state of mind that is still intact, that I do not see here.  I think I, like several others, have tried to recapture it as much as we possibly can.  But in these other cultures, it's like they've always managed to maintain or somehow sustain some aspect of where they came from, in terms of their traditional African heritages, or even their native heritages.  I still see them intact to some degree, you know, and in balance with the contemporary world.  But still there's certain things and practices and things that--and I've learned from them, when I go to these other countries.  When I look at the African American population, it's like, yeah, a lot of us are trying to get back in contact with that.  And at the same time, you know, there's a cutoff point where you can't go any farther to figure it out--
Story_ID: 597670
Speaker 1: --Slavery here [in the United States] lasted longer, apart from the actual slave trade from Africa than in any other place.
Speaker 2: Yes (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Because I think they actually stopped trading in the 1830s.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So, but the middle--but they still had slavery going on.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So, you were without the benefit of your grandparents and other people who remembered--
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: --and--
Speaker 2: Yeah, there's a cutoff point.
Speaker 1: In some ways, it was culturally more brutal than--
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, and it wiped out things.  So, it's like okay, then you get this clean slate, and that's left open to write whatever you want up there.  And it can only be, you know, whatever takes place from that point on; there's nothing to reach back to.  And I think there's been many mental illness characteristics associated with that cutoff, that I think would have kept the people a little more stable, a little more in touch with themselves.  How this waves out in the society and affects everybody else, regardless of whether they're a descendent of it or not, I think has been conveniently overlooked to the point where I'm not sure if anybody's ever going to admit the damage it really did.  I understand there are people going after reparations and all that, but I think it's always going to be a slow process.  But I'm glad things are not--I would not have wanted to live back then.  I don't know if I would have been a fiddler or not at that time, but I'm glad for the people who fought for what we have today.  I think there are some things in hindsight they might have wanted to do differently.  Like, I think, I hate to say it, but in some aspects maybe--segregation in some aspects wasn't bad, because I think I did better when I had my own people teaching me.  The teachers who had the biggest impact on my life were black women.  There weren't many black males that I can recall who were teachers.  But there were certainly many black women, and I think I did better in those classrooms.  I knew they understood something about me that, you know, maybe an Arab teacher or a Hispanic teacher may not get, about this particular of kids.  Because it was just cultural differences and issues, and un-familiarities, or what have you.  So, especially in that aspect, the education process, I think it would have made a difference, maybe not to segregate.  Because I think we were just more of an independent people, and not so dependent upon other peoples' resources to survive and to learn and to know, and to determine who we are as individuals and so forth and so on, just to determine a lot of influences on how we live individually.  So, I guess in that respect, I would like to see the unity factor pick up.  And I've tried to use my talent and my gifts as a way of reminding people--because I know what I do couldn't have come from anyplace else.  You know, the influences are from other places.  But the bottom line, root foundation of what I do, I know it couldn't have come from anyplace else but Africa, because of the gospel and the spirituals, and the music that I heard in church.  You know, there's no place else that could have come from.  And under those circumstances I try to represent in that way, and be some type of symbol for whatever it means to people.  You know, I think people, a lot of my own people, are very proud of what I do.  And I just set out to just be a representative of something good, that's what I want to be.  Not perfect, but something good, something they can stand on.  And there are more coming.  There's a girl named Tai Murray, who I was introduced to by--actually [HistoryMaker] Minister [Louis] Farrakhan, he's a violinist; that's how I met him.  So, and Tai is doing well.  She came out in the Ebony magazine, or Essence magazine in this month's feature.  She works with the Chicago Symphony [Orchestra] as a soloist, and is doing very well.  She's a total classical violinist.  And there had been some doubt as to whether or not we could produce that, and now we know we can.  I think it's going to come along.  It's just never going to be at a pace that anyone should be comfortable with, really, until it's solved, until it's rectified, until there's the peace and the healing and all that's taken place.  But it's not over yet.
Story_ID: 597671
Speaker 1: When you look back at what you've done, what would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: I think that I took the--I had the courage and the insight to follow through on an idea, basically, that was not in keeping with trends or what everybody else thought, and I pursued it.  And I've eaten quite a bit of jealousy darts for that, but they don't know what they're jealous of; they have nothing to be jealous of.  I just took something that I strongly believed in, and I pursued it with a focus and a sincere desire and love, which is, basically I coined that to be my signature style of playing.  I'm kind of outside of the box with it, and I just kind of--I wouldn't even say I ran with it, but I just pursued it with a sincere love to want to do it and express myself in that way.  I put a lot into it--a lot of energy, a lot of thought, a lot of physicality, and I've been trying to perfect it even more and more over the years, to keep it respectable.  It encompasses a lot of influences that come from other places.  But it's still my signature style, and I guess the whole validity of it is that it's okay to do that.  You don't have to follow everybody.  You don't have to be a follower and do what everybody else does.  And you never know where it can take you, you just never know.
Story_ID: 597672
Speaker 1: What does your father [Frank Briggs, Sr.] think of your playing?
Speaker 2: My father is very proud of me.  I think the one thing that my father said that influenced all of this was, "Don't ever copy anyone else."  That was the one thing he said, and I think I'm the fruit of that comment (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Is your daughter musically inclined?
Speaker 2: I'm not sure yet.  And I'm not pushing her to do anything in that regard.  Right now, she seems to lean more towards sports.  She likes basketball, she likes soccer, she's had a fascination with this sphere since she was very little, and she still does.  She just likes balls, in any size and format; she just loves them.  Musically, she's been exposed to all kinds--I mean this is a kid who when asked by her teacher to give a small lecture demonstration for her class in second grade--I asked Kai [Briggs] on the way there, "What do you think I should play for your class?"  She suggested that I play 'Teen Town' by Jaco Pastorius (laughter).  And I thought--I tried really hard, (laughter) I didn't laugh, because she's uncomfortable when I laugh at those profound comments that she makes.  But I just told her, you know, "Kai, I don't think anyone in your class is really going to be able to relate to that.  Do you have another suggestion?"  It was around Christmastime, and she said, "Okay, 'Jingle Bells,'" (laughter).  And she was about five then when she said that.  But she's only now becoming aware that everybody doesn't hear the same kinds of music that she's exposed to.  And I was the same way, growing up.  I just happened to end up in a music class in junior high [Alford J. Mapp Junior High School School; Cradock Middle School, Portsmouth, Virginia].  So, that may happen to her.  She has instruments that I didn't have at her age.  She has a violin, she has a drummer kit, she's always had that, and percussion; and she has a guitar.  But she's not expressed any particular interest for them one way or the other.  I think she'll always be around it and have an appreciation for it, but whether or not she'll be a musician, I don't know.
Story_ID: 597673
Speaker 1: There's several African stringed instruments around on the walls.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: You know, a brother named Samuel Charters wrote a book called--oh, it's about the African origin of the blues.  I can't think of it right now, but it's about Taj Mahal and other black musicians, you know, got together with a core of players and people playing, you know.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: Have you, have you explored any of that?
Speaker 2: Usually when I go to these places, my time schedule is always so confined.  Well, first of all, I be trying to catch up on the jetlag thing.  And I was just trying to adhere to the schedule, you know, under the duress of the jetlag and lack of sleep.  So, I didn't get a chance to meet or perform with many other musicians.  But I always try to study a little bit about the music before I go to each country, a little bit about its history or culture, or whatever.  But once I would get there I would just find myself--at least in the case with the Yanni kind of gigs--there was so much promotion dealt out, to where I really didn't have the freedom to walk out of my hotel oftentimes, to really go out and venture, and not be recognized or stopped for one reason or the other.  It was really weird (laughter).
Speaker 1: It's '[The] Roots of the Blues[: An African Search,' Samuel Charters], is what it's called.
Speaker 2: Yes, I think someone was telling me something about that.  Now these instruments, actually not all of them are African.  That one there is Chinese, it's called an erhu.  It's one of those crying violins that you kind of hold on your knee.  I can't play it, but I've tried, and it sounds horrible when I play it.  But you hold it on your knee and the bow--the strings, actually, there's two strings on it, two pegs, as you can see.  And the strings are actually in-between the hair and the stick of the bow.  It wraps itself around there, and you pull outward to get your tone.  And it cries.  When I hear someone that plays it really well, I love that instrument.  And I just--
Speaker 1: So, does it sound--is the music in 'Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon'?
Speaker 2: Yes, it has that crying violin sound.  It's a very warble-y kind of vibrato, much slower than a European violin.  The other instrument that I have--
Speaker 1: The one directly behind you--
Speaker 2: Yes?
Speaker 1: What's that one?
Speaker 2: This one is an instrument that I acquired from an African American museum here [Los Angeles, California] in town.  I believe the instrument's origins are in Kenya.  And I also acquired one from Ethiopia that was this little--it's so primitive.  It's just this little square box with one peg, one peg, and the neck is stuck through the box.  And it doesn't even have strings.  It has horsehair on the actual instrument, and then it has this little bow that's maybe about that big around, and more horsehair.  So, you rub the horsehair together.  So, I kind of gather it was more like a percussive type of string instrument.  Or I don't know, I can't even call it a stringed instrument.  But I think it was intended more for percussive use rather than--not like, you know, a melodic sound or tone.
Story_ID: 597674
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: I think I would be like to remembered, first and foremost, that I pulled off my dreams.  And I'm not through dreaming yet.  My dream was to have fulfillment as a woman.  And some of them I pulled off.  I know what it's like, for eight years now, to be a mother.  I've gone after my musical dreams.  I've traveled, I've been a property owner and loser.  I've been married and divorced.  I think I've had a full life.  I've experienced a lot of things that I can talk about.  And I still want to have the experience of success under my own name.  I have had success, but I want a larger success than this, and I think that will contribute to the legacy that I'm working towards.  And I just hope that everything that comes after me--my child's [Kai Briggs] children and their children--I hope they benefit from whatever I'm able to accomplish while I'm here.  And that's all I can ask for, that everything comes after me is fruitful and successful in their own right, hopefully because of something I did right.  And I'm still working on it, but right now that's what I see as the thing that I want.
Story_ID: 597675
Speaker 1: Maybe we can hear a little violin, maybe, if you're willing to do so.
Speaker 2: Okay.  I'll have to pull it out and play it.
Speaker 1: The only thing I can play that would--
Speaker 2: (Music).
Speaker 1: You know what?  You could make a million dollars on--
Story_ID: 597676
Speaker 1: Okay, that's a picture of my brother.  He's the second child to my mom.  And his name is Henry Choice, also known as Damu, D-A-M-U.
Speaker 2: When was that shot?
Speaker 1: This was shot this past summer.  And I credit him with exposing me to a lot of fusion and rock, and telling me who Jimi Hendrix is, and [HistoryMaker] Herbie [Hancock] and Stanley [Clarke].  He made me aware of a lot of those artists.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: That is my mother, Miss Ruthie Briggs.  She sang much in the style of like Mahalia Jackson.  She worked all of her life.  She's now deceased.  That's my mom.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All right.  That's a picture of me with David Grusin [Dave Grusin] after I'd finished my performance at Carnegie Hall [New York, New York] for an event called Fiddlefest.  That was the reception afterwards.  He accompanied me on piano, and I think we played 'Summertime,' an arrangement of 'Summertime' by George Gershwin.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is a version of the band called La Orquesta Versatile.  It's a group that I played with basically during an eight to ten year period, where I spent a lot of focus, time, and energy learning to play dance, and to understand the culture of salsa music or Afro-Cuban music, also known as charanga, and that was one of the bands that I played with.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, that is Estelle [Jones] Briggs.  That is my grandmother on my father's [Frank Briggs, Jr.] side.  And she's sitting actually at church.  She looks like Elijah Muhammad (laughter).  Sorry, grandma (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is my grandfather, Bishop Frank Briggs [Sr.].  He played trumpet, and he was the husband of Estelle.  And they raised a whole lot of children, I think about thirteen or fourteen children together.
Speaker 2: Okay, ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is a picture of my mother and three of her sisters.  My mother is the one in the pink or fuchsia colored dress, second from the right.  On the other side of her is Aunt Margaret [ph.].  On the other side in the black dress is Aunt Virginia [ph.] and Aunt Cora [ph.].  Aunt Virginia and Aunt Cora are still alive.  And that is my baby sister's [Liza Briggs] second birthday, which took place at a house in Englewood, New Jersey.
Speaker 2: All right.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That is a picture of myself with my daughter [Kai Briggs], who was being rather clingy just prior to my performing for the Leimert Park jazz festival [Leimert Park Village African Art and Music Festival, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is my eldest sister.  Her name is Virginia Choice, also known as Ingani, I-N-G-A-N-I.  And this picture was taken during the period of the '60s [1960s], in New York.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my father.  I think I understood that he was about twenty years old in that picture.  And I think I explained earlier that he's a saxophonist, musician, writer, and also a contractor.
Speaker 2: Frank Briggs?
Speaker 1: Frank Briggs, Jr.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.  This is what I refer to as a photo of my two babies.  That's my violin (laughter) and the other is my daughter, Kai, when she was maybe about two weeks old maybe, two or three weeks old I think at that time.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: That's a cello (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay, this photograph is from about a year ago, when I played the national anthem ['The Star-Spangled Banner'] at the World Series with Yanni.  And we took that picture just prior to us going on, or right after maybe.  That was quite a thrill.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay.  This picture was taken in nineteen--no, not nineteen, 2001.  I had cut all my dreadlocks off in that picture, and I did a performance in Soweto [South Africa] with Chaka Khan.  And I was also featured, so someone apparently captured me while I was performing a solo.
Speaker 1: All right, 'Showtime at the Apollo.'
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: This one here?
Speaker 2: What's Ralph's last name, the host, the old host, the traditional--it says that he wrote the book... who's the author?  I can't think of it.
Speaker 1: Ralph Cooper?
Speaker 2: Oh, Ralph Cooper.  He had done the Apollo [Theater, New York, New York] for years and years and years.  He was the main host who would introduce all the various talents on stage for 'Amateur Night at the Apollo.'  And unbeknownst to me, they captured a photo of me performing as a guest one night.  As you can see, my hair was very short, (laughter) and much easier to manage.  And he wrote a book and released it with my picture in it, which I was really happy for.  Because it let me know that of all the thousands of acts that must have come through there, I stood out to him.
