Story_ID: 4024
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Observing is Ronnie Baker Brooks.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name--my name is Lonnie Brooks.  That's my stage name, L-O-N-N-I-E, B-R-O-O-K-S.
Speaker 1: All right, now, do you mind giving us your given name?
Speaker 2: Lee Baker, Jr.
Speaker 1: Okay, and is there a story around why you changed your stage name to Lonnie Brooks?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  I was using the name of Guitar Junior, and when I moved to Chicago, they had another Guitar Junior.  And we was kind of like clashing.  People didn't know who was gonna sing.  So I just changed mine.  You know, and a few records that I made when I was living down in Texas.  And then I got chance to--after I moved to Chicago, I got chance to cut another record for Capital Records, 'Broke and I'm Hungry,' and I been hungry ever since (laughter).  But that's the reason why I, I, I changed the name to, to Lonnie Brooks.  And a lot of people ask me how did I come up with that, that kind of name.  See, back when I was a kid, my mother [Lillian Thomas Baker] used to call me Little Lee.  And down in Louisiana a lot of Creole people, they couldn't say that cause they speak real fast.  They'd say Lee Lee.  And then it went from Lee Lee to Lennie, and I hated it.  And so that's, that's why, you know, when a guy, Billy "the Kid" Emerson, produced one of my first records here in Chicago, and I was tell him that I was having a problem with, with this name, with the Guitar Junior.  So he said, well, let's change it.  Let's make, make up another name.  And I went to--he said, what'd they use to call you as a kid?  I said, they called me Lennie.  I said, I didn't like that.  And so I said, I rather, I like Lonnie.  And he said, well, we got to get a last name.  So it was a lady used to take care of, care of us when my mother would go to work.  Her name was Bertha Brooks.  And she treated me--she, she had all girls.  She wanted a boy.  And so she used to beg my mama to let, let me, you know, let her keep me.  And like, you know, I--a lot of time I'd go and stay all night.  And she'd just feed me all the time.  And I loved that (laughter).  I was about say maybe four or five years old, maybe six.  And so I just decide to use that name because I, I wanted to be a Brooks then, you know, cause she treat me so nice.  And that's how I come up with Lonnie Brooks.
Story_ID: 4025
Speaker 1: What is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Dubuisson, Louisiana.  I'm say it the way they say it (laughter).  Ninth--nineteen thirty-three [1933], December 18.
Speaker 1: Okay, twelve, eighteen, thirty-three [12/18/33].  And, sir, this may seem self evident, but what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: Music, singing, writing, playing a guitar.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: The date?  Today is the fourth of December 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: HistoryMaker.
Story_ID: 4026
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Oh, boy, fish, gumbo.  I'm still locked up from Louisiana.  I love that Louisiana food, Louisiana, you know--and I like red beans and rice with smoked sausages in it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, I'd say, I love brown, but my wife [Jeannine Brooks] say, brown don't fit me (laughter).  It don't look good on me.  I'd say black, blue.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite time of the years?
Speaker 2: For some reason I think September, October.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Ah, I wished I did (chuckle), cause I guess every day is a vacation for me almost, you know.  I'd say when I'm, when I'm on the road, I, I'd say that's a vacation to make it easy for my work.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I don't think I want to say that (laughter).  Oh, no, I'm just kidding (laughter).  I don't, I don't know.  I, I never thought of that.  "I love you".
Story_ID: 4027
Speaker 1: I'm gonna ask you about your family history, as much as you can give us.  I'm gonna ask you about your mother's side of the family and your father's side of the family.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Let's start with your mother's side.  But first, can you give us your mother's name and spell it for us.
Speaker 2: [Lillian] Lillie Baker, that's, that's her, after she got married to my dad.  Her family name is Thomas.
Speaker 1: Okay, how does she spell Lillie?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of time I seen her spell it a couple of ways, L-I-L, L-I-L-L-Y (laughter) or L-I-L-L-I-E, Thomas, T-H-O-M-E-S.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Wow, that's a good one.  Bastrop, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: How do you spell that?
Speaker 2: I don't know, like a bear and a strap (laughter).
Speaker 1: Bear strap, Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I think, I think she was born in 1917.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On October the 26th.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what do you know about her side of the family?  I mean do they have stories about their ancestors going, going back into the nineteenth century?  What do you about them--?
Speaker 2: Well, really all I knew my grandfather was a musician, and his name is Joe, Joseph Thomas, but they called him Joe the Banjo.  That was his little nickname.
Speaker 1: Okay, and he was a musician in Louisiana?
Speaker 2: Well, he was a little of everything, you know.  He worked, he farmed and, and, you know, he worked on--had a little farm.  And he was, hunter, fish, play music on the weekends.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you ever get a chance to meet him?
Speaker 2: Yes, he used to live with--after my grandmother [Eliza Thomas] died, he, he used to live with us.  And that's how I got attached to the banj--playing music.
Speaker 1: Okay, did he ever tell you any stories about his, stories from playing gigs or, or--?
Speaker 2: Well, I used to go with him when I was a little kid, you know.  I used to--you know, they used to have, down there, when he started living with us, they used to have house parties.  We were living on a farm.  And we used to go, go, like on weekends, and a lot of time, people they have, have popcorn, popcorn balls and, and potato pies, all like, you know, them little small ones, when they wrap around or whatever, you know, they used to roll 'em in, in the dough and, and bake it.  And, you know, people would have like parties.  And they'd have him and, and a guitar player, you know.  And I used to go with him.  And my grandfather, mostly, what he was really playing for was drinks, you know, because people didn't have no money, you know.  They'd, and nickels and dimes.  A lot of time he'd, he'd get a chance to make maybe a dollar and a half, two dollars, which back then, that was a lot of money, you know.  And the more he would--you know, he loved to drink, and he'd play better after he'd get drunk (laughter).  And I used to, I used to--we had--I don't know how, what we called this, made him a--we called it at home, and the Creole people down there, they say slide, but I mean it's like sled, you know, with a chair on it.  And we had a, a horse, you know.  I would--I think I was about seven, seven years old, and I would drive that for him.  And a lot of time, I'd fall asleep and the horse would, would come take us home, and, and paw on, on the front step.  And my dad [Lee Baker] would get up and, you know, put the horse away and take us in the house cause I'd been a fell asleep, you know, like a lot--it wasn't that--I'd stay up all night, you know.  And a lot of times people would be in the other room gambling, you know, and pennies would fall on the floor.  I'd crawl under the table and, and pick up some pennies.  Sometimes they'd say, you can have it, you know, if the guy that won, you know, you can have the penny.  And that's what--and then I'd go back in and listen to my grandfather.  And some time, you know, say at 4:00 o'clock in the morning, I'd be real sleepy.  I was a young kid and a lot of time, the--I'd get him on, on, on this sled--I'm a call it slide cause that's all I, what I know it.  And--.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a vehicle that's--.
Speaker 2: No, this is, this is something like Santa Claus would ride on, you know, sled, what they call that?
Speaker 1: Sleigh, yeah, a sleigh.
Speaker 2: Well, it was something like--but we would make this and make a, put a little seat on it.  And he would just lay on the seat, and, you know, be laid out, and I would take him--I'd, I'd follow him.  I loved him so much, I would go everywhere with him.  And I would bring him home.  Sometime I would, I'd fall asleep, but the horse had sense enough to take us home.
Speaker 1: Now, a sleigh like that could work in Louisiana on the roads too--.
Speaker 2: On the farm, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, cause I know you don't have snow down there.
Speaker 2: No, no, no snow.
Speaker 1: It was just sliding across the mud or what--?
Speaker 2: Well, if it was wet, but mostly it was a lot of dust down there (laughter), yeah, cause it stayed dry down there, you know, in a certain time of the year.  In the wintertime, you know, you could--it wasn't no snow.  It was just a little rain, but that wasn't, you know, you still could, you know, a mule can pull a plow, you know.  He could pull that little sled (phone ringing).
Speaker 1: We're rolling now, right.  Okay, now, we're rolling.  And we were talking about your grandfather.  Did your grandfather tell you stories about his father or did he ever talk about his family?
Speaker 2: No, he used to tell me about he used to work in the circus, you know, he was the strong man in, you know, in the circus.  He'd, you know, like they would give people two or three dollars if they could stay two rounds in the ring with him, you know.  And my grandfather was a person, he could take his hand and turn back like this.  And, you know, I don't know if they call it double joint or slip joint or whatever it is.  He could do things with his hand and his feet that you, you know, that just make him look like he was crippled or something.  And it was something, he used to tell he used to love--well, I knew that, that he loved to drink.  And he was working in the circus.  And when they'd, you know, when they would like pay him, he'd go and get drunk, you know, and couldn't find his way back.  So they stopped paying him, and, you know, they'd pay him every month to keep him from drinking.  And he said, he wanted a drink so bad until he would go, go on the street, you know, and he'd turn his feet around backwards like this and his hand like this and hold a cup in it (laughter).  And people would give him money (laughter), and when he got, when he'd get enough to get enough, what he drank, you know, then they had to look for him again.  And say, you know, after he got to be a grown man, then he stopped doing that, you know, and started playing the music.  But he was the strong man.  He did a lot of tricks, you know, he could--in the circus and stuff like that.  And so when he married my grandmother, he stopped all that, you know, and just did a family life.
Speaker 1: Now, are you saying that he toured with the circus when he was a youngster?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Was he a boy with the circus?  Did he--?
Speaker 2: He must have been in his twenties.  He was--.
Speaker 1: He was a young man.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and he was like, you know, like some of these boxers, you know.  He'd box, and he'd, you know--I, I wondered, I--he used to show me stuff a long time ago, I didn't know--I just found out what he was showing me, cause he didn't tell me, you know, like the judo stuff like that.
Speaker 1: But he knew of that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, you know, and he used to bust coconuts with his, with his fist (smack sound), like that.  And he used to show us that, and he was about seventy-five then.
Speaker 1: About when would you guess that he born?  What would you think?
Speaker 2: I don't know, man.  He was, he was up about a hundred and something when he died.
Speaker 1: And that was when?
Speaker 2: I think around '52 [1952] when he died.
Speaker 1: So he, you're saying he could have been born around 1850 or something, if he was around a hundred years old.
Speaker 2: Probably so.
Speaker 1: About the time of the Civil War or something, he was probably born around that time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, in the eighteens.
Speaker 1: Yeah, sounds like a remarkable person.  Did he talk about how he learned how to play the banjo or who taught him to play the banjo?
Speaker 2: No, he just--he used, I know he could make 'em.  And he made me one.
Speaker 1: He'd make them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he could make the banjos.  And he made, you know, violins, or whatever you want to call it, fiddle.  He'd make that and guitars and stuff like that.  Well, he could do, I mean he was all-around person.  He'd make furniture.  He made a bed, you know, with posts about that big, you know.  And what he did, he made it in the house, you know.  I mean he put it together in the house, and when, getting ready to move, they had to take the bed a loose (laughter).  And this white lady bought from him and give him a lot of money for it.  And I think they still have it.
Speaker 1: Okay, he sounds like quite a person.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, he did everything.  I mean he was, what they call a dick of all trays, trades (chuckle), trades.
Speaker 1: Okay, named Joseph Thomas.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Okay, anybody on your mother's side of the family?  Did you--what about your grandmother on your--?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, my grandmother died when I was, I'd say I was about six or seven years old.  I was, you know, I knew about her, you know, cause my mother used to take us there to her house, and we'd stay there, you know, on weekends.  I, I knew her, but I mean not as much as I did with my grandfather cause my--after my grandmother died, he, like a year later, he moved with us, you know.  And that's why I got a, attached--well, I--my mother told me a long time ago, said I'd be in the bed wet, and when my--crying, and my grandfather would start playing his banjo, I would stop.  And she said, I knew that boy was gonna be a musician, you know, (laughter).  And, cause I loved the music from the beginning.
Story_ID: 4028
Speaker 1: What about your father's side of the family?  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Lee Baker, L-E-E, B-A-K-E-R.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're a junior, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Nineteen eleven [1911], August 10th.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what do you know about his side of the family?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: Oh, my dad, well, I, I knew his dad, you know.  He was really a person that I was really scared of.  He had this great, big loud voice, you know.  He was like a, a deacon.  And sometime he would preach, you know.  And he had this voice that carries.  And I was scared of him.  I mean, you know, like my grand--on my mother's side, you know, he played music, so I, you know--but he was, he'd whip you with a Bible, my, my daddy's father.  You know, it was just everything, you know, you know, to just scare you.  And so, I mean, you know, you know, it was the kind of person, I kind of backed away from a little bit.  I loved him, but I mean, you know, just like, you know, he didn't, he didn't play.  I mean he was just like, upset all the time, you know, everything is wrong, you know.  So I just kind of flinched and stayed away from him cause it would scare me when he talked, you know.  But I'd say my favorite grandfather [Joseph Thomas] was the one played music on my mother's side.  But my grand, my grandfather, I mean he was just--I mean he was the type of person to just scare you, just had a voice that would just go clean through you, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did you have to spend a lot of time in church coming up?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I went to church so much, that's why I probably don't go as much as I should now.  My mother [Lillian Thomas Baker], she kept me in church every--I mean through the week and every--never missed a Sunday.
Speaker 1: So did you know anybody else on your father's side or did they talk about where they came from and--?
Speaker 2: Well, all I know, I don't know where, where he came from, but I know where--cause I was born in his house, you know, in Dubuisson.  That's, that's the only place I know of where he come from.
Story_ID: 4029
Speaker 1: Tell us about your mother [Lillian Thomas Baker].  What was she like and what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: Well, she raised us (chuckle).  Well, you know, she'd help my daddy [Lee Baker], but it was so many of the kids, most, you know, I mean she didn't do too much field work, you know, it was farmers.  She didn't do too much field work, you know, just--cause they had a lot of kids.  It's twelve of us in the family, and I'm the oldest.  And she would like, after she'd fix food and stuff, she'd come out and help my dad.
Speaker 1: Now, was she--now, she grew up in that part of Louisiana too, I guess, in Bear, said she was born in Bearstrap [Bastrop]--?
Speaker 2: Bearstrap [Bastrop], that was, my grandfather [Joseph Thomas] stayed at, near about everywhere, you know.  Most, the place where I remember is, they call it Whiteville, Louisiana.  And it was a couple of places he stayed, you know.  As I said, you know, it's about two or three places he stayed since I remember my, you know, from my grandmother [Eliza Thomas], I think, was in Whiteville, and places, By Break or Bar Break or whatever.  And, but it was all in the same area almost, you know, hop, skip and jump.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, did your mother have a chance to go to school down there, do you know?
Speaker 2: Yeah, she went to school, she went to school.
Speaker 1: All right.  What was the schooling like when she was coming up?  Did she talk about it at all?
Speaker 2: Not very much.  I mean all I know she would help me with my lessons, which, you know; my daddy, he went to school--what, my daddy went to school in, in Divi--Dubuisson, I'm a say it the way they say it.  And I think my mother went to school in, in Whiteville.
Speaker 1: Now, did she ever talk about growing up, you know, what life was like when she grew up?
Speaker 2: Not too much.  My mother was really kind of, you know, didn't talk about her life that much to us.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, is there a story about how your mother and father met?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I think he came to, came to, to the house.  She had older sisters and he'd never seen her, you know.  And, you know, in the country, you know, how boys do, they, they follow girls, you know, and they have a--she was the youngest.  And, you know, she didn't go, go too much, you know.  And, you know, I, I guess they're still doing that down there.  You know, they see the girls and they walk behind 'em, you know.  And then they get chance to meet 'em at church or something like that.  And so some of the guys got invited to, to my grandfather house.  And, and but all the other girls had, occupied with other people, you know, other guys.  And so my daddy saw her, you know, and she was real young.  And so they, they met up, and then they got married.  I'd say about, I think that marriage--I think they got married about--I think he was twenty, probably twenty-one, and she was sixteen.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Well, tell us about your father.  What was he like and what did he do for a living?
Speaker 2: Farmed all his life.  He was just a farmer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, you know, he worked hard because money was real short around there, you know, couldn't get--only time you make money is when you, when you--from your crop, you know.  And he used to go to the cane farm, you know, like in the wintertime and cut cane, sugarcane.  And sometime he'd work in the sugar mill.  And he would do--every year he would go there.  And, and we was looking forward for that because we'd have extra money, you know, to buy us something for Christmas, you know, because every time the, you know, the end of the year, you know, the harvesting of crop, he'd owe the man, you know.  And the only way we'd have money for Christmas, you know, he'd go other places and work.
Speaker 1: So he was sharecropping--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --he was sharecropping basically.  And did he ever talk about the, what--did he think that he was being treated fairly?
Speaker 2: I don't think so.  Nobody feel that, you know, if you, if you owe the man every time (laughter), every time you get through with one year, I mean, and I remember when I was a kid, they had a hundred dollars.  And, he'd always say, thank God, we did good this year, you know.  And I used to listen at that all the time, you know.  And I used to go to work with him when you'd have like little work for us to do.  And I think he was making fifty cent a day, and I was working with him, and they was giving me a quarter a day, you know, working with my dad.  Then I'd say about round, about '45 [1945], '45, 1945 when--or '46 [1946] and '47 [1947], I'd say '47, I was, I got chance to make three dollars a day.  And that was a lot of money.  And my dad was still, still making three dollars a day.  And I used to go out and, and work for those, the Creole people.  You know, they had you dig potatoes and stuff like that, you know, and working the dry tractor.  And like I couldn't go to work for them until we get finished with, with our crop, you know.  My dad would go to the cane farms.  So my brother and I, we was the oldest, and we'd go dig potatoes and make three dollars a day.  I'd come home and give it to my mom, and she'd give me fifty cents and I was happy.
Story_ID: 4030
Speaker 1: You mentioned Creole a couple of times.  Now, what is a Creole, you know, what's the definition of a Creole, and you know--?
Speaker 2: Well, what I think it is, is it's like a black person getting married to a French person and it's mixed.  Now, I don't know if I'm saying this right, but, you know, they call, everybody down there, they say you're Creoles.  That's, that's--.
Speaker 1: So they're black people basically.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know--.
Speaker 1: --but they have French ancestors.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, yeah, well, you know, it's mixed up, you know, the French and, you know.  The, and if you're, the one is a little lighter than the other, say, oh, he's Creole, you know, the skin, skin color.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the color makes a difference--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --whether you are or not.  If you're not light enough, you can't be one?  Or what is it?
Speaker 2: Well, a lot of, they got a lot of dark people down there who can't speak English--well, back then, couldn't--I mean they could speak a little English but not much.  And what it, what they're speaking, you couldn't hardly understand it no way because it's so broken.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that would be like a Creole dialect or something.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I know people say it a lot, but it's hard, some time to get a definition of what Creole really is.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it, it--well, down there, it had the black people and the half white people and the white people.  But nobody stayed together, you know.  They coming together now, but I'm just staying back then, if you was real light skinned, you know, half white, some of 'em looked white, but they was, you know, mixed, well, you, you couldn't marry this girl if you was dark.  You know, she had to marry one of her kind.
Story_ID: 4031
Speaker 1: So you said it was like some, you had three ranges of colors down there that kind of stuck together, sort of?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And there was prejudice amongst the two black groups, the light black group and the black, black group, and the light black thinking it was better, I guess.  And the--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, this was really funny down there.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's kind of rough, but, you know, I got out (laughter).  Yeah, when I--I left home when I was about seventeen years old.
Story_ID: 4032
Speaker 1: What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Down in Louisiana?
Speaker 1: Um-hum, what did it look like and what did it smell like?
Speaker 2: It was, the smell of green grass and corn and the cotton, and it was, it was bett--it smelled better than it do here (laughter), you know.  It was, I mean it was, it was beautiful, man, to me, and it's still beautiful.  A lot of time, I, I go back down there just for that, you know, to see the flowers and stuff like that and the birds and the bees, you know, flying around.  Oh, man, I mean especially, in the spring, it was the most beautiful thing you could, want to ever see, you know.  And I, I still love it down there.  I always say if I ever get enough money, I will go back, you know, and just, you know, build my dream house in Louisiana.  And every time I go down there, I look at the land that I would like to buy, you know, but it haven't happened yet.
Speaker 1: Now, Dubuisson, is it near Baton Rouge or is it closer to New Orleans?
Speaker 2: No, well, I'd say, it's Bat--it's close around, I would say Baton Rouge.  It's, it's a little closer, you'll--it's, it's about sixty miles, I'd say about sixty miles from, from, from Baton Rouge, just north--I'd say it would be north.
Speaker 1: North of Baton Rouge?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So it's near Grambling College [Grambling State University]?
Speaker 2: I played out there, and I don't know the direction there.  Bunkie, you ever heard of a place called Bunkie?
Speaker 1: No, but--.
Speaker 2: I know it's close around--that's a little small town.  I mean three-light town, I'd say.  I'm trying to name some place you may know.  Alexandria, it's in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay, that puts it someplace.
Speaker 2: Okay, so, I'd say it's about twenty, about thirty miles north of Lafayette.
Story_ID: 4033
Speaker 1: What kind of little boy were you when you were growing up?  What did you like to do?  You know, I--we, we know you liked to follow your grandfather [Joseph Thomas] around.  In fact, if you have some more stories about that, that's fine.  We can talk about that.
Speaker 2: Well, you know, I, I loved music more than anything I could name.  I used to go out and, you know, and listen to--had a first cousin, he played guitar.  I used to go and go to his house and try to get him to teach me to play the guitar, you know.  And, you know, what we had to do is on Sundays we'd go out and, you know, get hold a little money, you know, and we could have ice cream and stuff like that, you know, and walk way behind the girls (laughter).  You know, and go to, you know--I, I think, and go to church, you know, and we'd play ball, you know, you know, kid stuff.
Speaker 1: What kind of ball was popular?
Speaker 2: We played baseball, and, you know, we'd do that, and, and sometime we'd box, you know, stuff like that.
Speaker 1: With gloves and stuff or just slap boxing and what not?
Speaker 2: No, we would wrap our hand up with tape and stuff (laughter), you know, like that, you know.
Speaker 1: And actually punch each other in the face and stuff?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  We did--.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: We'd, you know, well, I was--I think I wasn't, I wasn't really a fighter, but I was, you know, I loved sports.  You know, I, I wasn't a bad person, I would say that, you know.  I tried to be the nice buy, you know, but, you know, I didn't, I didn't run away from anything.  You know, nobody really was, you know, wanted to fi--I would say I was probably the nicest one in the family, you know.  My brother got in fights all the time, you know, he was the big, bad man.  And, and everybody, you know, they'd say, well, Lee, he's a good guy, you know.  But my brother, he, he was--I mean it's just something he wanted to be like my grandfather, you know, because my grandfather used to tell us stories about, you know, how he used to fight, you know.  And, and he wanted to be like him.
Speaker 1: But your grandfather now, he was a pretty big man, I guess.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was about six--6'5", 6'6" or something like that.
Speaker 1: Now, that's the musician, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah, on my grandfather on my daddy's side, well, he, he was about 5'11".  He probably--I'd say about six cause my dad [Lee Baker] was 5'11".
Speaker 1: Are your brothers big now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, he weighed 200 pounds at twelve years old.
Story_ID: 4034
Speaker 1: How many siblings do you have, brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Well, it was five brothers and, and seven girls.
Speaker 1: Okay, so twelve.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, and where do you fall in the--?
Speaker 2: I'm the oldest.
Speaker 1: You're the oldest?
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: Did you have a lot of responsibilities for the other kids when they were coming along?
Speaker 2: Oh, man, ooh, my God, that's how much I, I bribed my daddy [Lee Baker] to leave (laughter).  My mom [Lillian Thomas Baker] used to make me, used me to come out of the fields, you know, I'd be helping my dad.  Go fix food.  I'd go home, you know, well, all I had to do is cook some rice, you know.  And she had the beans and stuff already, you know, cooking.  And, and she made me do a lot of stuff I didn't like to do.  And, you know, like mop the floor, wash dishes.  I hated that.  That was one of the things.  I'd do anything outside, but I hated that.  That was one of the things.  And, and because she knew I hated it, she'd make me do it all the time.  And I mean I just thought that she was really picking on me, but, you know, it was, I was the oldest, and if anybody get in trouble, you should have stopped, you're the oldest; you know better, you know.  I was blamed for everything, you know.  I mean that's the way I felt, you know.  And I guess if somebody keep telling you, that's the way you're gonna feel.  You know, and I held that in for a long time, why is she picking on me like that?  She don't love me, you know.  And I just did everything I could to make my mama love me, but she still would get on me about, you shouldn't let this happen, you know, cause you the oldest.  Well, that's the way it was at home.  I didn't understand that, you know.  Everybody, the oldest, you got a older kid, you supposed to take care of 'em when the, when the mother and father are not there.  But I couldn't understand that, you know.  And I guess everybody else feel the same way, you know.  And I just thought she was picking on me, but now, since I got grown and got kids, I know why she was doing that.  It took me years to find out about it, you know, but--and I'm still trying to buy her love cause I'm thinking, you know, she'll just make me do it cause she don't love me, you know.  And, you know, it, it wasn't that.  You know, it just--even after I got--it took a long time for me to understand it, until I got these kids here.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, and how many do you have now?
Speaker 2: All together, about eight.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I can't name 'em all (laughter).
Story_ID: 4035
Speaker 1: Where did you go to school in--?
Speaker 2: I went to school down in Garland, this place at Garland, Louisiana.
Speaker 1: Now, that's--so you had to walk to another town to go to school?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, where we were staying in, up in Dubuisson, close, between Garland and Dubuisson.  And so my daddy [Lee Baker] wanted me to go to school where he went to school, okay.  And then after we moved, we moved closer to Garland School, so I went, I went to school in Garland.  I would say--and I, I stopped in the eighth grade.  So, you know, I had to help my dad, you know, work.
Speaker 1: Did you like school?
Speaker 2: Oh, I loved school.  I mean this was something I--I think I was the best student there.  You know, I, I was, I would say I was the teacher's favorite because I tried so hard.  And, you know, I don't know, it just looked like that wasn't for me, you know, cause my dad, you know, like--I had a little accident in school.  You know, they used to feed us in school.  They had a cook there, and a little girl was sitting side of me, you know, and, you know, kids play.  And she'd make like she was gonna take my piece of sausage.  And I aimed to scare her and thought she was gonna move her hand and stuck in the hand--hit that, that little vein or something like that.
Speaker 1: With a fork or something?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but I didn't, wasn't aim--I didn't mean to do it.  I'm trying to, like this.  And I'm thinking, you know, if she see me coming, she gonna move her hand.  And it stuck her hand.  And so teacher sent me home and told me don't come back to school until she talked with my dad.  He didn't, he didn't go; I ain't got time for that.  You stay here and work with me.  And so I missed school.  And I didn't, I didn't go back to school until I married at a real young age, I was eighteen years old.  And I moved to Port Arthur, Texas.  And I, I started going to night school there.  And then I, I bought a guitar and start messing with the guitar, and then got, got some songs together and started playing and I quit school.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I want to go back to, to grade school though.  But what were your favorite subjects in school?
Speaker 2: History and, and I would say back, back home, then they called arithmetic.  What they call it now (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Math.
Speaker 2: Math, that was my favorite, you know.
Speaker 1: Was this--how big was your school?  Did you have like --was it a one-room school or two-room--?
Speaker 2: Ah, man, two, two rooms.
Speaker 1: Two rooms.
Speaker 2: Two rooms, one--and it didn't go no higher than to the twelfth grade there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you had like grade school and high school in the same two rooms.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: And were--now, this is, I take it, I mean for the sake of history, I want you to say it, was this a, this is a segregated school, an all-black school?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But it had a few, the Creoles, you know.  But they would set them in, in a, you know, they all sat together lessen it was--most of the, they would try to like put them together cause they felt more comfortable, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the French-speaking, lighter skinned people sat together.
Speaker 2: Well, they, they tried to keep them, keep them together because they felt more satisfied that way, I guess, comfortable that way.
Speaker 1: Now, I've heard from some people we talked to that were down there that a lot of the Creoles went to Catholic schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so even though they were poor too, you know, they still ended up in Catholic schools.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, well some of them could go and some of 'em couldn't.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the ones that couldn't would be in the school with you?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.  Now, well, you said you were the teacher's pet or one of the best students.  Who was the teacher?  Who is the teacher and what were the teachers that you remember there?
Speaker 2: Well, I had one, we called her Miss McGee, and that's all I know.  I don't, that's, that was her last name.  And Miss Valentine, but been a long time ago, man (laughter), you know, I could remember.  I (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 1: Did they change a lot?
Speaker 2: No, well no, after you, you leave one grade you go, go to another teacher with certain--Miss McGee was the higher grade, you know, like that, one that was, like first, second and third and fourth, you know, Miss Valentine taught us.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there are two different rooms and the lowers grades in one room--.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --and the higher grades in another.  Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was something then, to get on that other side of that room, boy.  That was, when you made it there, you figured, hey, you got it made, you know.  And like we would, they would send us, you know, to get something just to go and, and--just to get on the other side, you know, because all those kids, they would stick together, you know.  And you, you're nothing, you know.  And it just made us want to get there, man, and it made you study hard to get on that other side of that room.
Story_ID: 4036
Speaker 1: When you were a young man, were you playing music as a boy, as a young boy or did you start--when did you start playing music?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't, I, I didn't buy a guitar until I was, I'd say, oh, about twenty-two years old.
Speaker 1: But--.
Speaker 2: But I'd mess around with the banjo a little bit.  My grandfather [Joseph Thomas], you know, used to teach me on that, you know.  And he would tune it where I could just put my finger across like that, and it'd be a chord.  You know, you wouldn't have to do the chicken finger, say like my son.  (Laughter) You know, double your fingers up like that to make a chord with it.  It just like that now.  And I could play them, you know, one, four, five.  And bloom, bloom, doom.  But no, no solo on it.  And then when I, when I heard the guitar, that's what changed my mind about the banjo.  I heard my first, I heard my first cousin playing some songs.  Then I'd say about, around '49 [1949] or '48 [1948], '49, they had a ice cream truck would, would come through, and it had a loud speaker on top.  And they would play [Sam] Lightnin' Hopkins' song.
Speaker 1: Lightnin' Hopkins on the ice cream truck?
Speaker 2: Yep, they would play it and you could hear it for miles and miles.  So we was like about three quarters of a mile from the highway, and we could hear this, say maybe about three or four miles, and we would run all the way from, from--they say we was living in the woods, but, you know, it was a bunch of trees back there, run all the way out there and catch the ice cream, you know, and get ice cream.  And that was fun, you know.  And, and we would make bets who would get there first, you know.  You'll buy me--I'll buy you ice cream, if, you know, if you beat me, you know, like a lot of time, you know.  And we'd run hard when we there it would be so hot, and it was like ninety degrees, you know.  But that was the first blues that, that I heard, and I just fell in love with it, you know.  And, and I was, well, I bought my guitar to try to play like Lightnin' because his music--I was a young kid, but it did something to me.  And it would give me chills, you know.  I loved his voice, I loved the way he played the guitar, and I figured--I didn't want to listen to a band, you know, because, you know, maybe I didn't understand it, you know.  I mean that was my music, the, the acoustic style, you know.  And then that sounded so good to me, I said, "I 'mo play like him", you know.
Speaker 1: Now, what style would you say your grandfather played?
Speaker 2: He was mostly New Orleans jazz type, that ragtime stuff, you know.  You know, like riverboat stuff, that he played mostly.  Well, he played a lot of stuff, but that was more his style, you know, just played kind of jazzed up like.
Speaker 1: I guess he would have been playing a long time--I guess he did play some riverboats and--.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, probably did, but he never told me about that.  But that's the sound, you know.  Like a lot of time, you know, I'd see this stuff in the movies and say that sounds like my grandfather.
Speaker 1: A lot of musicologists now are saying that the banjo is an African instrument, has its origin in Africa and the slaves developed the banjo and a lot of music, the early music, you know.  But--.
Speaker 2: I didn't know that.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: I did not know that, because I, I see a lot of--I see it in a lot of this, what you call bluegrass music.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  Yeah, most people in the States now associate it with white country music.
Speaker 2: Cause that's where I thought it was--I'm, I'm glad you told me that.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Some of the songs too that we, you know, like 'Oh, Susannah,' and stuff like that, those are black songs, you know, and nobody, you know, remember--you know, for a while it sort of got obscured as to what the origin of those songs were.
Speaker 2: Well, you told me something.
Speaker 1: And you're telling me.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).  But I'm just saying, I didn't, I didn't really, you know--.
Speaker 1: But your grandfather was experienced to be able to make one and all that.  You know, people are writing about that now, about how people on plantations would make banjos and how they got started and facility for making all kinds of things.
Speaker 2: I used to take nails and, and put it upside the wall--I used to, I used to take cigar boxes, and, you know, and, and my mama would get mad with me cause I used to take the screen wire a loose (laughter) and steal a few strings and put it on there.  And, and, you know, she'd see--I had a way I would cut up to the top, and then I'd pull it out like that, and then take the others and push it back together (laughter).  And, and, you know, she caught me a couple of times about it.  And I used to make, make my own guitar, you know.  I had, it was--I could make noise, but I couldn't play it, you know.  But I, I used to take brooms and make like I was playing.
Speaker 1: So what were the Lightnin' Hopkins songs, the first ones that you heard, what were they?  Do you know, remember any of them?
Speaker 2: 'Untrue Love,' you know, that was, and I'm thinking about one of these days, I'm a cut that tune cause you know, well, you know, one of the things when, when, when I started playing, I went off in another direction.
Story_ID: 4037
Speaker 1: It's been established already that you left the eighth grade and worked with your father [Lee Baker].  And then, I mean, how soon after--well, you started, you say you started playing guitar when you were about twenty-two?
Speaker 2: Twenty-two, I bought my guitar when I was twenty-two years old.
Speaker 1: But from the time that you were, I guess, thirteen, for that ten years, I guess, from age twelve or thirteen to age twenty-two, you were mostly doing farm work with your father?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I, I lived from when I was seventeen, almost eighteen years old.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My uncle on my mother's side, the, the baby, he was living in Jenerette, Louisiana and he was a foreman on a, on a job there.  And he used to come and see us every once in a while.  And he told me that he was a foreman there, and I said, will you give me a job?  He said, sure.  He said, we, we need somebody, but you got to work.  It's hard work.  He was working in a junkyard.  And they didn't have these lifters that they got, and I thought it was gonna be easy, you know.  So my dad, I asked him, I, you know, I said, dad, can I go, maybe my uncle could get me a job.  No, I need you to help me.  I said, dad, if you let me go, I'll give you half of my money.  Well, go head on then, you know, but he made me beg him before he's gonna give it up, you know.  And so I went, and every week, I would send him half of, half of the money that I made until I got married.  And after I got married, I couldn't send it to him then.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And, and I, I worked on this job with my uncle, and--of course, I was, my dad's work was real home, but at home--I was pretty strong.  And I'd say in about six months I developed muscles, I didn't, I didn't even realize how big my arms was.  And I was a big man with a little kid bod--a head on, you know (laughter).  That's what it was cause you'd look at the body, you know, working, picking up pipes and things.  You know, they didn't have all the lifters and like they have now, you know.  Two mens would grab and pick up 400 pounds and put it on a truck.  And we'd do that every day, every day.  It was just like you working out in the, you know, body building.  And I'd say in six months, I was, I was like [Arnold]Schwarzenegger--.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: I was, I didn't, didn't even see it.  I, I'd shake people hand, and, you know, from working, grown people hand, you know, "You're hurting me" because I'm so used to picking up stuff.  So I--.
Speaker 1: About what year is that, I guess?
Speaker 2: That was '51 [1951], I think about around '51.  Yeah, it was about '5.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you're about nineteen now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was, I was nineteen years old.  And then I left there and moved to Texas.  And my wife was pregnant, and got there--well, I laid off, off the job from the first one down in Jenerette--well, it wasn't Jenerette, it was New Iberia.  I got hurt on the job.  We was picking up, they call--I think what they call these things, a tool joint, what they drill for oil.  And I think the thing was like close to about 400 pounds.  And I was working with a, a shorter guy.  But I mean he was probably stronger than me, and, you know, I had to kind of bend down cause he couldn't pick it up no more than that high cause he was shorter than me.  And it had rained that day and working in this junkyard, he slipped on, on, on a piece of iron.  It was like they didn't see it.  It was a lot of dust on it, I mean, you know, and it was wet, and he slipped, and it was falling down, and I grabbed it and held it up, and it hurt me.  And I still feel it today, but to keep it from killing him, cause he slipped and it was going right down across his neck.  So I held it up like this and all of a sudden my back started feeling real warm back there and hot, you know, cause it busted what that--.
Speaker 1: Vertebrae fuse--.
Speaker 2: You know, you know that thing between the backbone, it just pushed that out.
Speaker 1: So you had a slipped disc in your back.
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I went to, went--they sent me to the doctor.  And the doctor say I was okay, you know, and let me stay home for like two days, and I went back to work, and they give me real easy work.  Then I went back to the doctor, and he said, oh, he's okay.  And then they laid me off, and I didn't know why, you know.
Speaker 1: No workmen's compensation in those days.
Speaker 2: Nah, no insurance, nothing.  And so I had, on my dad's side, he had a sister who lived in, in Port Arthur.  And, you know, it was like oil refineries there.  And she, you know, and I called her, and she said, oh, yeah, they're hiring here, but when I got there, you know, they--you couldn't get a job unless you was in the union.  And you couldn't get in the union unless you a job.  So I was, my, my wife pregnant, and I'm--I know my, my auntie was tired of taking care of us, you know.  I said, I got to do something.  So what I did, I'd go to the union hall, and I, I would write down where they said, you know, they'll call for some of the union guys.  And they said, we need twenty men, you know.  And they wouldn't let me get in cause I, you know, I wasn't working.  So I would, I followed the guys out.  You know, I'd have, have a friend of mine and drive out there, and I'd go through the gate, get in with a bunch of them, and I would stand up there.  And the guy said, "You, you, you, you".  And one guy said, he's not in the union, you know.  And this guy--I'm, I'm praying, please pick me, you know, cause I needed a job.  And the guy said, you want to work?  Yes, sir.  Shut your mouth.  And he give me a job.  And I worked, I worked there, I'd say, up until I learned how to play the guitar, I'd say maybe about five years.  And let me see, yeah, five years I worked there, and then after I learned to play the guitar, and I got lucky enough to get a good seller, and I recorded.  I started playing with Clifton Chenier first.
Story_ID: 4038
Speaker 1: You had just mentioned Clifton Chenier, and he's known as the King, as I recall, some people call him that, when did you meet Clifton Chenier?
Speaker 2: I'd say about, around fifty, '52 [1952].
Speaker 1: Okay, now, had you been playing a long time--?
Speaker 2: No, no.  I just had bought my guitar.  Let's see, I, no, I was, I had a acoustic guitar, what I was messing around with, but I bought a Fender guitar.  I wanted a electric guitar.  You know, I figured, hey, I, I could sound like B.B. [King] now (laughter), you know or [Clarence] Gatemouth [Brown].  And it just happened that Cliff walked up on the step--I didn't, you know, I saw him pass by.  He had a Cadillac, you know, and I said, one of these days, I'm a get me a Cadillac, you know.  I mean this is every musician's dream back then to have a Cadillac, I mean, you know, before he get a home, he wanted a Cadillac.  And I saw this black car going by and then, you know, and he saw me on the, you know, on the porch.  But what I'd, what I would do so I could play my guitar, you know, and don't get dis--attract--distracted, you know, I would turn my back.  So I'm just playing my guitar, and I, you know, like you just feel somebody behind you.  And I looked around, and there's a big guy, but I just jumped, you know.  And he said, hey, you sound good.  He said, my name is--he shook my hand and said, my name is Clifton Chenier.  I play zydeco.  I said, I heard of you, you know.  And he asked me where was I playing.  I said, I'm not playing with anybody.  I said, I'm just learning.  He said, you sound good to me.  And so he said, asked me to come to his house and let's, you know, jam a little bit.  And hell, and I didn't have my guitar no more than say six months, and I'm jamming with him.  And, you know, for some reason, you know, I, I could make a few, few chords, not many.  And I could--but I could feel where he was going cause I'd heard the music from a little kid, you know.  And it, I just could follow.  And so he said, you sound good.  He said, try you out Saturday night or Friday night.  And I went out, and boy, you talking about a scared person.  Oh, my God, I was so scared, man, the people looking at me playing, you know.  I just figured, I can't do this.  And, and so one--I just kept going, going with it, you know.  And I had this guitar, I had a--I didn't know nothing about tuning, tuning the guitar.  Whatever key he was playing in, I would tune up to that key until the neck was, you know, coming in like, warping, you know.  And I'm still trying to bring them strings out.  And I had strings on my guitar, was hay-bailing wire, if you, if you know what I'm talking about.  And, and I would bend them strings all the way to, to touch the fret, and it was about that high from the fret because I had it real tight.  And I, you know, and it got blisters on my finger.  And it was hurting me so bad, I would--I slowed down.  And he looked at me--he would, he would drink, you know.  And I'd be around my drunk uncles and stuff.  I always was scared of drunk people (chuckle), you know.  And he hollered, play.  And when I went, I went to--you know, he cursed at me, you know, play--I don't want to say the word.  But, and I started playing and the blisters burst on my fingers.  And this guy over there said, this cat played so hard, boy, his finger's bleeding, you know.  You know, so, so I, I wouldn't go with him that next week.  I was trying to let my fingers get better.  I told him, I said, my fingers hurt.  Then he got a guy they called Clarence Garlow to play with him.  And, you know, one of the things, I, I'd saw Cliff--we played a gig in Mississippi.  I think Edwards, Mississippi.  It was somewhere, where, close where Little Milton came from.  And I hadn't seen him in a while, and I walked over to his bus, you know, and said, hey, Cliff, remember me?  Yeah, I remember you.  You know, he was really like, didn't want to be there.  And, you know, I'm trying to cheer him up, you know, cause everybody I'd tell this to, they would laugh.  I said, remember that time when my, the blisters burst on my finger and blood was running all down on the guitar, you know?  Yeah, I remember.  You ought to thank me.  Look where you at today (laughter).  And I left him alone, you know, I'd say, he didn't want to be bothered, you know.  That was the last time I saw him before, you know.  But he the one really got me started in the music.  And before that, you know, back when he got, he got a contract with Specialty label out of Los Angeles, I think it was in Los Angeles, and he wanted me to go with him.  But see, when I was playing with him, I was still, you know, working.  You know, I would work with him on weekends and sometimes if it was closed, you know, through the week I would work with him.  And he was giving me a dollar, fifty cents some times, you know.  But that was--he didn't have--I, I would have paid him, you know.  That's how bad I wanted to play.  And he got this contract, and he asked me to go.  I said, well, you know, I'm not making enough money to go out, you know, go to California with you.  You know, and so he got Lonesome Sundown which is a old buddy of mine.  We used to work together down Jenerette.  And he went with him.
Story_ID: 4039
Speaker 1: He [Lonesome Sundown] was such a nice guy, he had these guys--where he was playing, in this place they call Port Acres, to let me play in his--while he was gone [to Los Angeles], in, in the place, get, get me a little trio together.  And I wasn't even singing then.  And Long John Hunter was, and Irving Charles was playing together.  And they used to play this song 'Two Trains Runnin'.  It was one of Muddy Waters' old songs.  And everybody was playing this song.  So after I started playing in the place, they asked me to play that song cause that was everybody's favorite song.  And I didn't know the song.  I mean, you know, I knew a few words.  I hadn't never, really tried, never tried to sing cause I, I had, I had--really, Lonesome--I got this backward.  Lonesome Sundown was playing bass and singing for me then.  But he went with Cliff [Clifton Chenier] after that, after, after he left me.  And so when he left, then I, I had to get this guy that was the club owner's brother, which he couldn't speak English, but he would sing in French, you know.  And so the zydeco stuff, you know, but I could play it, and he would sing.  And, and, and now, when he would come down, I would play instrumentals, you know.  And this guy said, hey, man, I give you a dollar if you play 'Two Trains Runnin'.  I said, I don't know it.  I don't know all the words.  Said, well, play what you know.  And I, I sang part of it, you know, and words that I didn't know, I would make up, I'd make up my own words, you know.  And nobody really knew the difference.  And so he come down and said, you can write.  I said, no, I can't write.  He said, you just wrote the song a while ago.  He said, that wasn't the right words to it.  He said, if you can do that, you can write.  And then, you know, the bells started turning then, you know, ringing in my ears.  I said, okay, you can write.  And I went home, and I started--I wrote a tune that I dreamed was, I was dreaming--cause back then, I used to love to box.  I was dreaming I was in a, a boxing ring, playing a guitar with gloves on, you know.  That only could happen in a dream, okay (laughter).  And I was singing this tune 'Family Rules,' and I woke up and, you know, I said, I never--you know, I went and got a pencil, and I wrote it so I wouldn't forget it, wrote it down.  And, you know, and I was looking for paper, you know, and so I just reached up and grabbed one of my shirts.  You know, you know, when you send them to clean they'd put these cardboards in it.  And I wrote the words down, you know.  And I thought I was gonna forget.  I wanted to make sure that I didn't forget it, and I got up that next morning, and I started singing it.  I went to work, and I come back, and I just kept singing it, you know, so I'd remember it.  And that was my first tune that, that I recorded that was a, I'd say it was a big seller for me.
Story_ID: 4040
Speaker 1: I didn't have but one tune, and I went, I went to Houston, Texas, talked with Don Robey, which had this company in Houston, Texas, Peacock label, [Clarence] Gatemouth Brown and a lot of, Bobby Bland, was, you know, recorded for.  And I went there, and they had, one of the guys had auditioned me, you know.  And he said, you can't sing; you sound white, and that's not a good song.  And I, I really felt real bad about it, and I said, okay, and I said, this guy had made me think I could, I could sing and I could write, you know.  And so I had this little trio band, say maybe about a year later, you know.  And I'm really trying, I mean I just wouldn't give up, give up at it.  And it just happened, we was playing in a club over in Louisiana because, you know, Port Arthur is not that far from the state line, at a place they called Club LuAnn.  So a disc jockey, and they said, y'all sound good tonight.  Say, how about y'all coming over this--it was on, that Friday night, you know, and like we would play from--we would start playing at 12:00 o'clock and play until 4:00 o'clock, 5:00 o'clock in the morning; said how would you like to be on the air this morning?  I said, yeah, I said radio?  Yes.  You know, and so we packed up our stuff and, and drove back to Port Arthur.  And we started playing--we started at 6:00 until 10:00.  So I--back then I didn't know but twenty tunes, you know.  You know, like what they would, they would have a place for, you know, people come in and have donuts and coffee, you know, before they go to work or something like that, you know.  And so we played up--it was almost, say like about ten minutes to ten, you know.  He said, I got time for another tune.  I said, I don't know any more.  And I didn't want to play the same tune over.  And so my drummer said, why don't you play that tune that, that you wrote.  Well, I didn't care then, you know.  I said, okay.  And I played it.  The phone lines lit up.  Everybody's calling, play that again, play that again.  So this guy came in, a white guy came in, and said, hey, is that--that last song, is that your song?  I said, yes.  I never heard nothing like that before; said, I know--I got a friend looking for that kind of stuff.  And he give me his card, and told me, you know, to put his, the guy, Eddie Schuler's name on it.  And I never did call.  So they got in touch with me.  So I went down and, and it was in a place, it wasn't--about this size, a garage.  He was playing in his--he had a two-track recorder in a garage.  And we cut it.  And the first time we--I mean the first take was the best, and we went over it and over it and over it, you know, trying to beat, you know, because you couldn't mix them like you, like they do it now.  And you had to get it right the first time.  So I probably got it a little bit better music wise, but it didn't sound as good as the first one so we kept that.  And he said, now, you got to get another side.  You just got one side.  You need another song.  And I made up another song, right in the studio, 'Got It Made In the Shade', you know, and recorded that.  So he came, he said, it look like we got a record here, you know, but I didn't--I'm just so glad I wasn't even listening at what he was saying, you know.  But after a while I remembered what he said.  And so, he said, I'll tell you what, you know, cause what we was doing is doing a demo, you know.  He said, I'm a--how about if I just--I can't pay you.  I will press you up 500 records, and I'm a press up 500 for myself, you know.  I said, okay.  And then, then he thought about it and he come to my, my--where I was playing at in Louisiana cause where we cut it was in Lake Charles, Louisiana.  And he said, I know your name is Lee Baker, but you use the name of Guitar Junior, you want to put that on it?  I said, yeah, put Guitar Junior on it because, you know, I was using the name Guitar Junior because, cause all the guit--all the, just about everybody was naming their self, you know, after the guitar, like Guitar George, Guitar Joe, Guitar Gable, Guitar Slim.  And people--that was a thing, if you say, people will listen to you to see if you're good.  So I said, yeah, put that on there, you know.  If I had thought the record was gonna be good, I'd have told him put Lee Baker, really.  You know, but I was just thinking, you know, I wanted all my friends to know, I--you know, the people that knew me, that I had cut the record.  If I'd a said Lee Baker, they would not know who it was, you know, until they, until it, it started playing on the air or something like that.  And that's, that's how I got that, that name of Guitar Junior because I didn't think, you know, I didn't think it was gonna, you know, the record was gonna sell or nothing like that.  I was just jamming, and that's how I got started in, in, in Texas, you know.  And after that, it went from that record to the next one,  you know, and got me on the road where I could make a living playing music.  And--.
Speaker 2: Now, how much did records sell for?  I mean was that a seventy-eight you made or a forty-five?
Speaker 1: A forty-five.
Speaker 2: Forty-five, okay.
Speaker 1: Well, they was making seventy-eights then cause I, it was a few of them they made in seventy-eights back then, back in that time.  Well, it was like getting away from it.
Speaker 2: So it's early '50s [1950s].
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was fifty--1956.
Speaker 2: Fifty-six, okay.  And forty-fives were really starting to take off then.
Speaker 1: But it was, you know, it was, it's just like the CD started, you know.  At first a lot of people didn't want to even mess with that, you know.  But they went, you know, and they start making the, the record players where you could play a forty-five.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then it started getting popular then.
Speaker 2: I know you could buy that disc that you could pop in the middle of it so it would fit on a regular, on a spindle, you know, that didn't have a forty-five changer on it.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: How much was a record, if I--?
Speaker 1: Oh, it was forty, about forty-five cents per record.  And I used to sell 'em for a dollar on the street (laughter).  Oh, I'd, back then, you know, I'd autograph it and sell 'em for a dollar.  And I sold like 400 records in one night cause the guy--I went and I brought him like five records, you know, to give, give away and play.  And soon, I mean, this record was so popular, they played it on country stations.  They played on blues station; they played it rock stations, and they would play it on the spiritual stations for commercial, you know, (singing) "Family, Family, Family--ladies and gentleman, you can come down here and get you a car over here", you know, to get the people's attention.
Story_ID: 4041
Speaker 1: (Singing), "Family, family, family, oooh, how they can be so cruel", you know, that was a--that was the kind of stuff I was doing then.  And I really didn't know I was so close to country, you know.  And it just--I didn't know.  I thought, you know, that's the way I sounded.  And now, that's what made me so different from other people back then, you know.  And so the guy, he knew I didn't want to go country.  I wanted, you know, be rock and roll, and he, he slipped a, a country song in on me.  (Singing) "Pick me up on your way down, when you're all alone and blue", you know.  And, and said, well, we gonna do this rock and roll.  He knew it was hard for me to try to make it rock and roll.  And I tried it, and it didn't--it still come out country because I had the country voice.  And it sold real big.  I mean, you know, the guy was in, in Dallas, Texas was calling for me.  They just kept calling me, said, I got to have this Guitar Junior.  Well, he didn't know I was black.  And that was, that's the reason why I'm not playing the--I would have kept on playing cause I, honest, I did like--I still like country.
Speaker 2: Okay, you could have had a career in country music had you not been--?
Speaker 1: Before Charlie Pride.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: I was there and didn't, but you know, it just--what it was, I just couldn't take what was going on, you know.  I, the guy back then was number one in, in Dallas, and they had this big country thing going on.  And they had a lot of like, I think Tex Ritter was there, Ernest Tubb, a lot of those, a lot of those big names.  And so the guy sent me with his son, I mean, you know, Ed Schuler's son sent me with his son.  They thought his son was, was the one gonna sing, and I was the helper.  And they wouldn't let me go in the room where, where their--where the musicians were.  So what they did, said, well, they had some--go in the kitchen and go in the toilet to change clothes.  And musicians didn't want to play with me cause I was black.  And so that's, that's why I'm not playing country today.  But, you know, I used to, I can play it.
Speaker 2: Did you--so they didn't play with you that night, I mean when you went on?
Speaker 1: They played with me after I come out on the stage.  I mean after they seen--cause see what it was, I was, I was used to--see, the clubs that I was playing in, I was playing in a lot of white clubs, you know, playing the rock and roll stuff, you know.  And I hadn't got into the blues yet, but that's what I wanted to play.  I didn't--like I wasn't scared or nothing like that, because I was used for playing for white--even though that I couldn't mix with them, you know.  We had a room on stage, and this is the stage, see, that was a room you go in when, when you get through playing.  Well, you know, I'm--I was used to that.  I mean that didn't bother me, you know.  And so other words, what I'm saying, like a lot of--I was already used to playing for white, but a rock and roll audience.  But I wasn't, you know, had never been in front all country.  A lot of the country people have come in the rock and roll places and seen me, you know.  And so I went out, the guy told me, said, look, for my fifteen hundred dollars, you're gonna play by yourself.  And that's when I, I found out I could play by myself.  I played by myself--I was so scared.  I went, and I, I started playing songs, Fats Domino songs, Little Richard, everybody.  And then I started picking, playing the songs that they, they hired me to play.  And so, I'm sitting, this--had a guy with a big cowboy hat on, man, real skinny guy with jeans on.  And he pulled his chair up to the bandstand and put his foot up on the bandstand.  And the people, man, they was screaming and hollering, and, you know, and he just looked at me.  He said, a nigger can't play no country, just like that, you know.  But I said, I said, they like it.  It still ain't country, you know, and that, I said, and they tried to, tried to get me to play, you know, to do, do country again, I said, no.  But if, if I'd a known, you know, that I could have broke that barrier, I would have because, you know, I kind of--at the time, you know, by being raised around the zydeco and country music all the time, it's in your blood.  I mean it's something, if you hear it enough, you can, you can do it, you know.  And, and I would wake up to Eddie and Arnold in the morning, you know.  You know, in the morning, you have the radio on, and you'll hear him doing the, the cattle call and stuff like that.  And so, I mean, this is what I heard all my life, so it was easy for me to fall into that bag.
Speaker 2: So country music dominated radio back then?
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, and zyde--and the, it's according to where you at.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know in the mid-'50s [1950s], I guess growing up in the '50s, country music was really on the air in the Midwest too, you know, I mean we heard a lot of country music.  It was real popular radio music because you heard more of that than you would black music on the radio.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Right.
Story_ID: 4042
Speaker 1: Me and my first wife separated, and I wanted to get away from Port Arthur.  And so I told my booking agent, I said, book me as far as you can, you know.  And that's who I, I met up with Sam Cooke and L.C. Cooke and, and I came to Chicago.
Speaker 2: Now, how did you--where did you meet them?
Speaker 1: In Atlanta, Georgia.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And I left there and come to--I played with them all the way from, all, all out East.
Speaker 2: Now, were they performing as the Soul Stirrers then?
Speaker 1: Nah, nah, nah.
Speaker 2: Sam Cooke was singing?
Speaker 1: It was Sam Cooke.  And I got chance to, to hang around with him and his brother and come to Chicago.  And I've been here every since.
Story_ID: 4043
Speaker 1: This happened after I cut my first LP with Alligator Records, I went to Europe.  And my guitar got lost--well, not, say got lost, they had it on another plane, and I didn't know where to go because when I got there, I couldn't speak the language.  And so I'd--the guy that was looking for me, had a big sign, I just, you know, I told him, but he couldn't understand what I was saying.  All he know, had a, Lonnie Brooks, and he was supposed to get me to the stage.  So what hap--really what happened, I was, one of the guys here was supposed to be one of the openers there, and he could get through the--.
Speaker 2: Customs?
Speaker 1: Customs.  And so they called Bruce Iglauer from Alligator Records to send, to send him somebody, and so he sent me.  And I had to leave Milwaukee to get to the airport.  The plane leave at, I think about, around 6:00 or 7:00 o'clock, something like that.  And they put me in a limo and drove me all the way back to Chicago and the plane waited a few minutes for me.  And I got on the plane, and so they didn't want to open the hatch, you know, to put my guitar on.  So they, they put it on another plane which was gonna get there same, same time, but they didn't land in the same place, and they didn't tell me that.  So I'm thinking that my guitar was lost, when I got there, and I'd never played a gig without my guitar.  So I'm asking a lot of the fellows to, loan me a guitar, you know.  We got the rehearsal.  We, and it was, I had like twenty minutes to go on stage.  So it had a place downstairs that was selling guitars.  So I said, I'll just go buy me one, you know.  And so I got the, the stage manager to take me down there.  So as I was walking through, to go downstairs, I heard some country music, you know.  And I just went and opened the door, and here this guy, a big guy come running.  I thought he was running, coming to tell me to get the hell out of there.  And it was Roy Clark.  He said, I know you.  He couldn't call my name.  And then he told me the people that I record for, that produced me.  He said, Wayne Schuler, you know, and he, you know--and so I told him, I said, Roy, look, I said, I got to go downstairs.  I'm going to buy a guitar.  I said, my guitar got lost on the plane.  He said, you need a guitar?  I said, yeah.  Well, use mine, you know.  And it just happened that, you know, he showed me, and, you know, it was one of these guitars that was real different for me to play cause he had all these effects on it.  And he was telling me what it was for.  And I went right on, (finger snap) on stage.  And so what he did, he watched, was watching--I didn't know that we was taping because I didn't have a chance to talk nobody cause I just got there in time.  And he's watching the monitors down there, and so when I got through he jumped up on the stage and give me a great big...
Story_ID: 4044
Speaker 1: We left off with Roy Clark giving you a hug.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I said, he ran up on the bandstand.  And I, I didn't know we was taping, you know.  And the guy, you know, started saying, was trying to get him, get him off, you know, said, ah, we're taping, you know.  And he just kept on, he said--I ain't gonna tell you the words he said to me.  He said, I want you on my show, just like that.  And said, when you get through if you'll come on, you know, come on, let's talk.  And so--.
Speaker 1: About what year is this?
Speaker 2: This was '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Oh, we really jumped (laughter).
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: We really jumped some here.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I know, you didn't want to get that far, okay.
Speaker 1: Okay, but, okay, but finish this story, though.  That's how you got on--.
Speaker 2: That's how I got on 'Hee Haw.'  And he gave me the guitar that I played, still got it.
Story_ID: 4045
Speaker 1: When you got to Chicago, you were playing with Sam Cooke and them, right, and they, they're from Chicago?
Speaker 2: I, I really--I didn't play with Sam Cooke.  I, you know, I played with his brother, and I cut records with his brother, L.C. Cooke.  We did, you know, like--we would all go up together and, you know, and, and sing, you know, like, what they call it finale?  Is that what they call it?  The end of the show.  We all go up, you know, and sing.  And, but most times we spent time together, it was like, you know, in--on the bus or in a hotel, you know.  I didn't know he could play guitar.  Well, he was, you know, he could play some chords, you know.  But he could play more church music than he could what he was singing.  That's why he had to get another guitar player.  And, but I really worked with his brother a lot.  I used to, used to--I cut about two or three records with him, you know.  And I, I stayed, I stayed over to his, his mother's [Annie May Cook] house, say maybe about, about six weeks, you know, until I got chance to know some people and, and get me a hotel room.
Speaker 1: Now, what was Sam Cooke like?
Speaker 2: A sweet guy, man, really, you know.  I mean he--in front of me.  I don't know what other people would say.  But I mean he was really, you know--I had a lot of respect for him.  You know, he was real--well, he didn't talk to too many people unlessen he knew 'em.  You know, I mean you know, he'd have to know you.  And he had some brothers that make sure that you ain't gonna get to him unless, unlessen he knew--somebody that they know.  And we used to get in, go in, go in his room and, we'd play the guitar together.  And I'm, I'm looking at his guitarist.  That's the guy I was scared of, you know, because he, to me, he was the best in the world.  You know, and I wanted to play like him.
Speaker 1: Who was that, his--.
Speaker 2: I don't--I can't call his name.  He had a guitar player with--he looked something like you, man, you know.  And, but he was really good.  And Sam knew a few, a few chords, and him and I and, and his brother would, you know, be in the hotel.  And we'd just be making up songs.
Story_ID: 4046
Speaker 1: Civil Rights Movement is kind of heating up, you know, in 1956, the Montgomery Bus Boycott, and had the sit-in movement in the '60s [1960s], and one of Sam Cooke's songs, "Change is Gonna Come" was played a lot during the Civil Rights Movement, and became sort of a anthem for some, you know.  What were you, what were your thoughts during those days?  How did you feel about the Movement?
Speaker 2: Well, I'll say like everybody else, I was a country boy, raised up in it.  It didn't bother me that much, you know, because that's all I knew, you know.  You see the white toilets and the colored toilets.  You go around to the back and get your hamburgers.  You couldn't go and sitting with, with white people.  We, we was used to that, you know.  I figured it would never be a day--I mean that's the way I lived, and, and it didn't bother me as much until somebody would say something to me and call me names.  That would bother me, but knowing that I couldn't go in a certain place, that didn't bother me.  But when you, you start calling me names, that would bother me.
Speaker 1: Okay, was Chicago that much different when you came up here?  Did you find it much different from the South?
Speaker 2: Yes, it was, it was different.  I mean by the way I lived, I didn't try to go to any other, any other place but black places.  And it had so many to go to, so it didn't bother me at all, you know, cause, and when you're down South, you got one place you can go, maybe two place to--places to go and the rest of 'em are white.  You know, and you know you couldn't go in there, so you go there.  But when I got to Chicago, it didn't, it didn't even dawn on me that I, I want to go any place, other place because, hey, I was, I was used to it.  I mean, you know, just like, let's say, my son now, and he couldn't go some place now, and say, nah, you can't come in here, it would bother him.  But back then, things--it didn't, didn't bother me cause I didn't want to go to any, you know.
Speaker 1: What were the names of some of the places you liked to go to play or to just hang out?
Speaker 2: Now, or back then?
Speaker 1: In Chicago, yeah, in those days?
Speaker 2: Oh, well, I, I guess I done played all of 'em now, you know.  At, oh, man, this a tricky one here, (laughter) because I'd say I was already used to playing in, in places because, you know, they was hiring black people to play in, in places down South, but I mean, if you want to go in there to be a, like drink or something, you something, you couldn't go there.
Speaker 1: Okay, so (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: But I would say, I would say back then, I might be taking you back too far now, back then a musician could--if they're a known musician, could go anywhere he want to go, you know, back then, you know, because everybody, oh, that's old so and so, you know.  And he'd, you know, want you to play something for him.
Speaker 1: So even in the South, you'd have a certain level of respect because of you were--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well, I mean if you're a musician, you know.  And you--now, if you wasn't a musician, you couldn't go in there, but if you're--they know you, like the club owner, oh, that's so and so.  Okay, or, or even a person who wasn't a musician, let's say he work for Mr. John, Mr. Joe or somebody, and he'd say, come on, let's go and have a beer.  Oh, well, he's well known, they respect him.  They ain't gonna say, you got to get this boy out of here now.  You see a lot of, lot of black people got in places that a way, you know, because Mr. so and so, he with him.  "Oh, he's driving me; this my boy, come on."  You know, but it wasn't open to ordinary people, you know, to just go in and have a good time.
Speaker 1: But in Chicago when you were arrived here, what were some of the popular places for black music, I guess the--for black blues music and, you know, in the black community, I guess, because--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, more so, but I'd say, I went to the West Side and I--they had a lot of black clubs on the West Side, South Side.  Back then it was Peppers Lounge for blues, oh, man, I can't name all these places.  I'm going way back now.  Places--.
Speaker 1: I know now a days, it's not, it's kind of declined some in terms of--(simultaneously).
Speaker 2: Oh, nah, man, them places, they--but you got a lot of places, you'll find them on the North Side, North Side of Chicago.  It just done changed.
Story_ID: 4047
Speaker 1: Really most of the, mostly all of your blues is on the North, North Side of Chicago now.  They had a lot of clubs that you could go to on the South Side, and, and I never been on, on the West Side in so long, so I don't know what's over there because that--I live out South.  So they got a few clubs.  I really don't know the name of 'em, you know, because the clubs, clubs that I play in, you know, in Chicago, is like Buddy Guy's Legends and the House of Blues.  And a lot of time I get private parties, and you know, some club in the suburbs of Chicago.  So.
Speaker 2: In the days when you first came to Chicago, there was a lot of clubs on the South Side and the West Side, and you'd have--.
Speaker 1: Oh, man, I mean you--I remember, this was back in '63, 1963, 63rd Street, it had, say maybe about twenty clubs.  And, and say from Halsted, Halsted all the way back to, going back to--.
Speaker 2: Stony Island.
Speaker 1: Stony Island.  You could run into, say at least about fifteen clubs, playing blues.  43rd Street, 57th--I mean 47th.  And then it starts going further south, you know, around in the seventies.  Excuse me.  They start moving from 63rd on into, in the seventies.  And it still, it still got a few clubs; got one, where is, let's say on 78th Street, Ronnie?
Speaker 2: 87th.
Speaker 1: 87th.
Speaker 2: Artis's.
Speaker 1: Artis's, that's, that's one place that's, that's still around.  It's a small place, but it's still around.  And I, I saw a club was, I can't--I just went there, a guy invited me.  I can't--it's out there in Dolton.  I done, I done forgot the name of it.
Speaker 2: But there aren't that many on the South--?
Speaker 1: But, nah, nah, I mean you have to really look for 'em.
Speaker 2: In the black community
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Yeah.
Speaker 2: Itself.
Story_ID: 4048
Speaker 1: So many blues musicians came to Chicago from all over the place, you know, from all over the South.  Chicago's like a magnet for the--was it because of Chess Records or?
Speaker 2: I think so.  You know, they found out that he's recording blues, and everybody just, you know, come to Chicago.  And that's why Chicago got the name of the Capital of the Blues, you know, because every musician that you know is not from here, I mean in the blues is not from here.
Speaker 1: Right, from all over the South, from Mississippi, especially, I think.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, Mississippi, Alabama, well, it was different places, you know.  Georgia, people that was--I think it is the capital, man, really, but you know, look like it's kind of melting down a little bit, you know.  And, of course, near about all the other places it's gone, you know, like they got a few places in New York, you know, little small places.  And it's really just, look like it's fading out, you know.
Speaker 1: Now, did you record at all with Chess Records?
Speaker 2: I did, I did, I--.
Speaker 1: You had a contract with--in Texas, right with the--or you had, you did some recordings in Texas when you first started out?
Speaker 2: I did, I did--most, most of my recordings I did in, in Texas.  But I did, I did cut one record with, with Chess.  I didn't directly cut it for Chess.  The producer sold it to Chess.  And this guy, his name--we call him Tex McGuinness, and I really, really don't know his real name, but his last name--that's his last name, McGuinness, but we called him Tex.  He was one of these great big wrestlers, you know, what you see on television.
Speaker 1: Now, he was actually a wrestler?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, he was, you know, and he, he produced the, produced a record on me.  And he give--wind up giving it to Chess.  And, and I had to go back and do a--but he didn't want but one side.  I had to go back and do another side for the record.  And that was--but I did some, some records for people that was in the family, I would say.  Paul Glass, I think, I don't know, I think they was, they knew each other or they was good friends or something like that.  I did, did one for him.  He had this U.S. label [USA Records], and I did one for, was it Leonard's brother.  I forgot his name.  His--.
Speaker 1: Is it Phil Chess.
Speaker 2: Phil, no, I think it was--.
Speaker 1: Or was it Phil Chess or--well.
Speaker 2: No, it wasn't Phil.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It was another guy, but his name, I can't call his name.  They didn't, they didn't put it out so we wind up letting, letting Bob Kessel [sic, Barney Kessel?] have it, you know, dem--.
Speaker 1: Ralph Bass.
Speaker 2: Ralph, Ralph Bass, yeah.  Oh, he was some kin to him.  Was he a brother or kin to him, Ralph Bass?  Well, he was a producer or something over there.
Speaker 1: How was your experience in the--with the recording industry overall?  I mean we've heard the story of Muddy Waters.  He kind of got cheated out of a lot of money, and other people have complained and what was your experience?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, this is something you, you could--I, I wouldn't say--everybody think that you did better than what you did, you know.  Only the person that's produced it, you know, so you don't know if he's telling the truth.  You don't know, you know, if he lying to you.  So I'd say it like this, what you don't, what you don't know, don't hurt, you know.  So you'll never know.  They got--the only way you're gonna find out this, you got to be in this man's head or have somebody to look at his books because he can tell you anything he want to tell you.  You just have to--I'd say just forget it because you're gonna go through a lot of trouble trying to find out about it, you know.  I don't know.  I'd say, a lot of peoples, you know, that, they hear their records certain places and figure they done sold this.  But, you know, hey, and it's all kinds of ways they can make it right, you know.  So we had to spend this on this; had to spend this on that.  So, what can you do?  You do what you do, and let him do what he do.  But I mean, you know, some people, you know, some of 'em get cheated.  And some of 'em get cheated and don't know that they're getting, getting cheated.
Speaker 1: And some are thinking they're being cheated.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, well, quite--everybody think they're getting cheated, you know, because a lot of times the man might have to go under the table to get your record played, you know.  And he gonna get his money back, you know.  That's the way the business is, but, you know, I--everybody that cut a record, I don't care who they are.  I don't care how big the record get, they'll say, I got cheated.  And you'll never know unlessen you got somebody there watching the guy.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the majority of your income really that you depend on comes from performances, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you don't depend on--.
Speaker 2: Nah, you can't, you can't depend on it.  But, but I tell you, I have, you know, I've made a little money,  a little money, you know, or some time or enough to get me out of trouble, you know, with my bills and stuff, you know.  But, you--it's, it's kind of rough out here when, when you have to--if you're trying to watch this and watch that, it--you got to have, you got to have a family like, you know, that's working for you where you can make big money playing, playing the blues.  Like you got to have the, the connections like B. B. King.  Then, you know, then you got something to watch out for (laughter), but it's--.
Speaker 1: More problems.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, hey, it's, it's, it's no way that you can, you can find out.  I mean it gonna cost you more money to try to find out if somebody's stealing from you or not, and the, you know, and, and what you're gonna get.
Speaker 1: It's not worth it in other words?
Speaker 2: Well, I, I don't--well, it's according to, I mean, you know, what make you feel good.  You know, it's some, you know, some people would say, well, you know, you did me wrong.  I don't care if it cost me a million to get back a hundred thousand, you know.  It's what makes him feel good, but, you know--or you run into some people, it don't--even worth it, you know, you know, as long as you're making a good living, you know, and I ain't, you know, eating cheese or nothing like that, but it's rough.  I mean, you know, hey.  I--some things ain't--it ain't gone never be right, because you don't know.  It's, it's, you got to, you got to have a--all right, you spend, say fifty thousand dollars a year with a lawyer, to keep your things straight.  You don't know if he doing wrong.  You've got, you've got, you got to have somebody watching the man, and one watching--the man watching somebody else, you know.  And it's, it's no way, you know, you can--unlessen you got two or three hundred million or billion dollars, then people know--I know this ain't right.  I know what this--now, you got a case.  But small stuff.  You ain't gone get nothing.
Story_ID: 4049
Speaker 1: The themes of some of your music have to do with hoodoo and voodoo and hoodoo women, and there's one song I heard where, waking up and there's a black snake under your pillow--.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --all, you know.  And the girl done put a hoodoo on you, and all that, you know, but that's, you know, are those themes from your experiences in Louisiana and the stories you heard down there?
Speaker 2: Nah, not--well, some of it is.  I, I started looking it up after I, I cut the first, first tune, which "Two Headed Man".  Well, I used to hear people talk about that at home--.
Speaker 1: A two-headed man?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what, what they mean, person that can read your mind, you know, the, they say he got two brains, you know, it's, maybe two brains.  You know, a person that can see things, you know.  That's what they call--down in Louisiana, that's just a name that they call it, a two-headed man, okay.  Now, what started me to doing this stuff.  I used to get a request for (singing) "Got my mojo working, just don't work", every night, [Got My] Mojo [Working], play Mojo, in the black clubs, white clubs, everywhere.  And I got tired of playing it, said, well, let me write a, write my own song because I, I hated playing other people's song all, every time I look around.  I don't want to be known for playing somebody else's song.  I want to play my own.  So I wrote this song.  I used to hear people talking about two-headed man, this, this, this guy, you know, you know, the, the voodoo man, you know, he, he can give you something that'll make you lucky and all this kind of stuff, you know.  I heard this.  But to tell you the truth, I, you know, I didn't, I didn't have too much of believing in anything, you know.  And I always just thought those people was crazy (laughter), you know, to me because, you know, I had an uncle, man, he was so up into this stuff until we used to take talcum powder and sprinkle it around his gate, and he wouldn't got through that gate.  He would go around and cross the fence somewhere else.  I mean, you know, we was kids, and we knew these people was like that, and so we would just worry the heck out of 'em, you know.  And, you know, we would find old, like this, this, this stuff they put on cotton, you know, some of it is kind of pink like, you know.  And we'd take, take all kinds of colors and mix it up, you know, and, and sprinkle it around people's gates and stuff.  And they'd say somebody--and, and hankerchiefs and stuff on it, and they wouldn't go cross it, cause they were so strong out behind this stuff.  They believed this stuff.  And so the kids and I, we would just do this to people, not that we could--you know, that we believed in it.  We just did it to people that really believed in it.
Speaker 1: Kind of having fun at the expense of--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was a fun thing, you know, it's like--.
Speaker 1: --kid stuff.
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, and I remember all this stuff about Louisiana, you know, and, and this is like some people kind of kept it like a secret, didn't want nobody to know that they believe in, in voodoo, you know.  And they kind of kept it like a secret like, and then they find somebody that talk about it, and then you'd see them walking together, just like two musicians would get together and say, man, you know, blah, blah, you know, or something like that over something like--it was like under the cover, and they had somebody to talk to about this.
Speaker 1: When two get together, then they would talk, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, you'd, you'd hear 'em talking.  And, you know, and I, I kind of knew this.  And, you know, and like a lot of times I worked on, on a lot of things because I knew what the person thinks cause I remember once I, I used to go, go in--when I'd play, I would like preach a little bit, you know.  And one night--and the people was going for this, you know.  And so that one girl come up, and I'm giving the people blessings, you know.  And I would take my (laughter), I don't know if I want to tell this (laughter)--I would, I would take my hand and rub it in ashes and put it in their foreheads and say you gonna get some money and just--but, you know, but I was doing as entertainment, you know.  And so this lady came back in, it was a little beautiful lady, you know, she come back in one night.  I told her, I said, I say you're gonna find a hundred dollars under your pillow, you know.  And, and everybody come to, just throwing money up there.  I was getting money, man (laughter), you know, I'm preaching and giving people blessings and stuff.  And so, you know, and the waitress was taking for me.  She was going around passing like the hat, you know, just, just throwing money.  So I give this lady her blessing and told her, you're gonna find--but it was a act, you know.  And, and she come back in, in the next night and give me fifty dollars, say, and it wasn't under the pillow.  It was on the dresser (laughter).  You know, she found it, you know.  I said, thank you, you know.  But, you know, see, what it is man, what people believe in, you know, it's--if you believe something so strong, it happens.  That's what I believe, you know, because I done seen--I remember a long time ago, it was a guy that would get beat up, you know, and they'd, and guys would pick on him because you know, he was scary.  He wouldn't stand up for his self.  So he went to this voodoo man, and he give him some kind of root, say, you chew this, and they can't hit you.  And he, when, when he and the boys was coming at him, he got those roots and started chewing 'em, and he stood up there (chewing), you know.  And because he wouldn't act scared, they didn't hit him, you know.  But he believed the roots did it.  But what it was, what he did, he stood up to 'em, and this is what it is, the whole thing, you believe in something, you stand up for yourself, then you win sometime, not all the time, but I mean, you know, that person that's picking on you, he just want to show off to somebody, I can whip him because he know you're scared of him.  But if you stand to the guy, then, then he can't do nothing.  You know, just like a, a bad dog done bit a lot of people.  If you don't show no fear, he can't bite you.  He's just gonna--the reason why, he'll bark at you, you know.  He's, when he smell the, the oil on your hand, you know, the fear, then he'll bite you.  Well, that's the same, people have that, but the don't know that they have it.  You know, a person coming straight at you to beat you up, and if you stand up to him, he, he gonna wolf at you, he's gonna say something.  And he gonna keep talking to you, and, but at first, if you didn't say nothing, he'll go up and just slap you upside your head.  Well, that's the same thing--that's the way people think and, and believe, you know, why they go to this person.  And they give 'em, say you're gonna be lucky.  Or this girl, you, you want, well, you take this and put it in your pocket, well, he got--then he got nerve enough to go up there and talk to her.  All he had to do was that in the first place.
Story_ID: 4050
Speaker 1: I wanted to ask you about 'Bayou Lightning'.  That's one of your most popular albums, and you know, why do you think that was so popular?
Speaker 2: Long story.  I was--got tired of playing in Chicago without a record.  And what I did, I wanted to be different from anybody else cause I knew that's what it take for anybody to, to really make it.  You know, be good, but different.  So I, like quit, called myself quit playing music for a while to go to the wood shed to write, you know.  And I like went to see every musician in town playing blues or, you know, whatever.  And I would see what the people was really responding to, what they danced off of, what they listened to, what kind of music.  Then I went--I'd go back and I'd write a song similar to that, but, but most different as, as I can.  And, you know, like analyzing the people and, and musicians, what they played.  You know, I went in to see Hound Dog Taylor.  I went in to see Muddy Waters, Howlin' Wolf, Junior Wells, Buddy Guy, everybody, and, you know, and I'd stay there all night listening to what did they like about this guy?  What was he playing, you know.  And I think that's what did because I took a--I had like two and a half years, you know, just to put this stuff together.  I mean the thought of what, the direction I wanted to go.  But after I got the record--and this happened to a lot of people, after I got the good record, the first record, then the next one wasn't quite as good as that one because I was on the road working.  I didn't have time to write it.  I mean, you know, to get into it.  That's why you see some of the rock groups, man, they just stop for maybe two years and come out with a big, big hit because when you working out there, you, it's, it's hard.  You have to be something like a genius to, to just keep writing the, those, those type songs and working too.  So I think that's what it--.
Speaker 1: So, popularity can be a curse in some ways when you get, you know, get too--.
Speaker 2: Well, but you know--.
Speaker 1: --and you're touring so much, you can't really create.
Speaker 2: But with a big company, once you get that, that first hit, they got people can write every--the way you think, you know.  And they keep you there.  They got, they say, oh, this what made him.  Let's make this stronger, but you can't do it yourself because you're out there working every night.  But you, when you--that's what I'm saying, that family thing; when you got the family, the house, every, everybody working, going one way, you know, to meet this point, you know, you got people gonna see that you stay there.  But when you did it, do yourself, it's hard for you to do it again because you're out there promoting the record, you can't think of all that stuff no more, you know.  I mean you gonna think you, you're doing it right, but you have to be good.  You have to be, really be thinking about this, man.  You have to analyze everything that you do.
Speaker 1: Now, okay--.
Speaker 2: Let's say, like a lot of time you hear a person come up with a big hit.  Then you don't hear from 'em any more because it wasn't, it wasn't big enough hit for to get somebody interested and say let's go with this guy, or according who he got managing him, won't let go because he want, he wants it all.  See if he, say, well, let's, you know, get with somebody that say let's get behind this cat, you know.  He got something.  Let's keep him going.  That's how, that's how you see a lot of, a lot of the guys that do.  And they got some guys out there is just genius, man.  But I, I know everybody out there that's on top now didn't, didn't write all their tunes, you know.  It's just, they found somebody that can copy you, can put you a little bit, put--give 'em the same thing that you give 'em before, but just a little bit better.  They gonna make it better and make it easy where, and put the right kind of people, music behind you that gonna keep you going.  And that's what, all the big guys, that's what they have.  But, you know, when you with a small company, they can't afford that.  Then you don't stay there.  You don't get no bigger than the company.
Speaker 1: Okay, tell me now, the title of that album 'Bayou Lightning,' was that, were you making reference at all to the [Sam] Lightnin' Hopkins?
Speaker 2: Nah.  I, no, I tell you what, you know, Bruce Iglauer named that record.  I didn't, I real--I really didn't, I just, you know, hey, I, I did my part right here, and I wasn't even thinking about a name, you know.  So, I mean he's good at that, you know, making names up for records.
Speaker 1: Well, I thought it was interesting because your first exposure to the blues with Lightnin' Hopkins or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, well, you can't never tell.  Well, he knew that; probably, maybe that's what he did.
Speaker 1: That's true.
Speaker 2: You know, he, you know, cause he, he had interviewed me many times, and I'd say Lightnin' Hopkins, Lightnin' Hopkins.
Story_ID: 4051
Speaker 1: Who are some of your favorite musicians?  Who are your favorite musicians?
Speaker 2: Oh, B.B. King, [Clarence] Gatemouth Brown, I would say, Muddy Waters, Albert King, who else?  Well, Guitar Slim back in the days and John Lee Hooker, boom, boom, boom, boom, yeah.  Oh, man, that, you know, cause we used to dance to that music a long time ago.  [Sam] Lightnin' Hopkins and there was the only two, and--three, Muddy Waters.  That's all they had, you know, in the country.  They'd go get that, and I used to dance to that years ago.  And what make me feel good, I got a chance to play with all those guys that I used to listen to when I was a kid.
Story_ID: 4052
Speaker 1: When you look back on your life and music, what would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I'd, I'd say entertaining the people, I entertain--entertaining people and writing songs.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, fix it up, get, get the gangs out of there and live peacefully.
Story_ID: 4053
Speaker 1: Did your parents get a chance to see you become a successful musician?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And they did feel about it?
Speaker 2: Well, you know,--.
Speaker 1: I mean one can only (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: --my, my dad [Lee Baker], I remember this when I, I made my first, first record.  And my, my daddy never, at the end of the year come out with, with five hundred dollars.  And they always, like I told you, he owed the man.  And I went home, when I made my first record, and I gave him five hundred dollars, you know.  And he said, thank you, son.  This is great, God bless you, you know.  And then he, you know, we went out and guys, you know--well, I didn't, I didn't drink then.  I didn't have a drink until I was twenty-seven years old.  And they was drinking you know, and my dad said, "Yeah, that's my son there, yeah, he still playing that old starvation box", you know, (laughter).  I said, wow.  I just give this man five hundred dollars a hour and a half ago, and he gonna say I'm playing a starvation box.  You know, but that's what they call a guitar at home, you know, and so I--it took me a long time to figure it out.  But that's what they called a guitar at home.
Speaker 1: So the implication being that if you dedicate your life to music, you're not gonna make too well, you're gonna--.
Speaker 2: I didn't understand.
Speaker 1: No, they--I guess the implication was if you dedicate your life to music--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, every, everybody tell their kids that.  No, you go to school and get your education because that ain't no, that ain't work, you know.  What I did, I think, you know, I--what I did, this was back around in, let's say the '80s [1980s], I bought them a house down in Louisiana.  And my dad, it was on--the reason why I bought it because where they was staying at was standing on, they call it "bayou belt" down there.  And trees would grow, you know, on--when you're close to the water, a lot of trees, they couldn't see the house.  So my mother [Lillian Thomas Baker] took sick, and was living out in the country, I'd say about twenty miles from the town--the city or town, whatever you want to call it.  And they had to send the ambulance out to pick her up, you know.  And they couldn't find the house.  And she almost died because they couldn't find the house, you know.  They had a mailbox out there, but I don't know if the add--the name or nothing was, you know, out, the road, highway.  We called it "turn away" at home (chuckle).  And I decided, I said, well, you know, and I got all of the, the brothers and sisters together, I said, look, we have to get them in the city close to, to a hospital, you know.  I said, I would, I was thinking of two years, you know.  I said, let's everybody get together and just, you know, a hundred dollars a month, a couple of hundred dollars a month a piece.  I said, whatever y'all, all of y'all put together, I'll double it.  Yeah, we gonna do it, put me down, I'm 'mo, you know.  And I opened up a account here in Chicago.  Nobody send no money.  So I just went down there, and I said, okay.  I said I wanted to get them out from back there, out of them, them trees, and I bought the house myself and, and moved my dad--and I couldn't stay there to move 'em.  And I bought all new furniture and everything in the house.  You know, I told 'em, y'all just bring your clothes.  And I couldn't stay there from when the, for them to move.  I had to take a plane and get back to Chicago.  And about time when I got to Chicago, my dad, I'd never heard him laugh like that since I was a little kid--ha, ha, ha, ha.  Son, it's nice, you know.  I said, okay.  It made me feel real good.  I mean it just give me a chill man, to, you know, to see them move away from this place.  I mean this house had--we used to, used to go there and lay down in the bed.  You could see the stars in his place, and had a brother living with them.  And he wouldn't get up there, said, no, the--paying rent, the man supposed to fix it.  I said, man, you get up there and put something over it, you know.  But, you know, it was funny, it would rain, and just a little bit of the water would come in the house cause it was going down so fast (laughter), it just--but you could feel, little sprinkles would get on you.  But I told him, I said, man, why don't you get up there and fix that?  He said, no, let the man.  He paying the rent, let him fix it.  But the guy never fixed it.  So I got 'em away from there, and my dad, I mean, you know, only thing that the didn't like about the house was air conditioning.  He didn't like air conditioning.  He used to, he used to raise up the window with a fan.  He couldn't stand the air conditioning.  And they didn't want me to know that, so when I would call them and tell them I was coming, he'd tell 'em, "Y'all put the air on" (laughter).  And when, when I'd leave, he'd, you know, I told him, I said, well, look, dad, if you don't like it, you can turn it off in your room (laughter).  He'd just make 'em turn it off.
Story_ID: 4054
Speaker 1: When you look back on your career, is there anything that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I think I would probably get, work a little bit harder and try to control some of the money that I make.
Speaker 1: And one last question, it's similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: One of the greatest blues players in the world.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I got to work hard for that, cause they got one out here, B.B. King, I would like to get as big as him or bigger.
Story_ID: 4055
Speaker 1: I did a little better for my dad [Lee Baker] and usually that's the way it happens.  I would like for my sons to do better than I did.  I have Ronnie Baker Brooks, that's his stage name.  But his real name is Rodney Dionne Baker and Wayne Baker Brooks.  You know, I would like for them to take it further than I could take it because I took it--I got it from my grandfather [Joseph Thomas], and I took it further than he could ever take it.  And he, I think he got as far as the radio station.  And he used to talk about that all the time.  And so I would say that's like being on the 'The Tonight Show' with me, in his time.
Speaker 2: So your grandfather had a chance to perform on the radio once?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 1: And he used to tell us all the--tell us about it all the time.  And, and I was really, that's what I want to do, you know.  So I, I got a chance to do the 'The Tonight Show' and do, was in a movie.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I just read 'The Blues Brothers 2000', you were in that one.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And did commercials and stuff, but, you know, I would like for my sons to take it about a thousand miles further than I took it.
