Story_ID: 187674
Speaker 1: My name is Reginnia Williams and I'm the interviewer and Matthew Hickey is the videographer, and we have no observers today.  But I'd like to address you as Mrs. Brown [HM Ernestine Brown], if that's okay?
Speaker 2: Or Ernestine, it doesn't make any difference to me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I'm gonna try to stay with Mrs. Brown (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: But we know each other better than Mrs. Brown.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's so formal and--(simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well if I slip and say Ernestine don't think I'm being disrespectful.
Speaker 2: No, that's not a problem at all.  In fact that's almost preferred.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well let's go ahead and get started.  Would you please state and spell your name, including your middle name?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Ernestine Turner Brown.  E-R-N-E-S-T-I-N-E, T-U-R-N-E-R, B-R-O-W-N.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your date of birth and location of birth?
Speaker 2: Oh my (laughter) history, I have to--I've been hiding it all these years.
Speaker 1: Oh have you now?
Speaker 2: I was born on October 22nd, 1935 in Youngstown, Ohio.  I can't believe it's been that long ago, but that's the history.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is March 15th, 2004.
Speaker 1: The location of this interview and the address of the gallery?
Speaker 2: We are at the Malcolm Brown Gallery in Shaker Heights, Ohio.  Our address is 20100 Chagrin Boulevard.
Speaker 1: And your occupation please?
Speaker 2: I am the co-owner with my husband [HM] Malcolm Brown and director of the gallery.
Story_ID: 187675
Speaker 1: Now I have to ask you some People magazine-ish type questions.  And they may sound a little silly but I really do need these answers (laughter) just for the slating.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Could you please tell me your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Depends on the day (laughter) my favorite food, my favorite food.  Do I have to have a favorite?
Speaker 1: Well, or something that you like.
Speaker 2: I like vegetables.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I eat too many sweets, sweet potato pie, peach cobbler that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: And your favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Fall and spring.
Speaker 1: And your favorite color?
Speaker 2: May favorite color is--I love purple.
Speaker 1: Your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) My favorite destination, my favorite location destination.  That's a hard--well is it hard?  There're several places that we enjoy going.  We like going to the Southwest, you know we've enjoyed being out there.  But we also like New England.  It's--for me it's hard to narrow it down to one particular thing 'cause my personality flips all the time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: The difference between a stepping stone and a stumbling block is how high you step.
Story_ID: 187676
Speaker 1: We're gonna talk a little bit now about your family background and I just wanted to start by asking if you could please tell me about your mother, her name and where she was born and where she grew up?
Speaker 2: My mother was name was Alma Hill that was her maiden name, Turner.  And my mother was born in Mississippi, no my mother was born in Alabama.  And my grandfather [Sylvester Hill] came north to work in the mills, and my grandmother [Gessner Hill] was expecting my mom.  She's a second of seven children and so shortly after she was born, within a couple of months they came to Youngstown [Ohio].  And that's where my mom was--she really considered being an Ohioan as opposed to an Alabamian because she spent all of her life at this direction.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you talked about that migration about what time period was that when they came north?
Speaker 2: My mother was born in 1916 so--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --you know, shortly after the turn of the--what almost the turn of the [20th] century?
Speaker 1: Um-hm.  So it's right in keeping with that popular thing of the war time--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --migration, World War I [WWI], okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: And they came directly to Youngstown, Ohio?
Speaker 2: Um-hm, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And how would you describe your mother, did she stare--share any stories with you of her growing up and if so what are some of those stories?
Speaker 2: Well my mom was a tiny little woman, five feet tall and a powerhouse.  When I look at mothers today and how they rear their children and how we were reared, it's just so different.  You know they always wanted you to eat properly, they wanted you to behave properly, it was important that you always made the proper impression on other people because you reflected on your family.  And there were certain things that you did not do or things you did not say, places you did not go or people you did not associate with because they--and that's necessarily not to imply that one thought that they were better than the other one, it's just the idea, that you know you are, you are special and I think I grew up thinking that all of my life that you know I had--I had a special anointment (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now coming from the south as your mother's family did--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --in that war time, great black migration, did they come into an African American community in Youngstown, or was it primarily a working class, steel mill kind of community?
Speaker 2: It was a--it was steel mill working class community.  The thing that I--coming up in Youngstown, we always lived in a very integrated setting.  Everybody lived together and this is how it was with my--with my mom and her family.  Our grandparents were very important in our lives you know.  Sunday dinners were always at grandma's house after church (laughter) and I remember you know good hot rolls and fried chicken and fried corn and all of that that goes with that southern style of living, good eating.  But family was very close and church was very important and Sundays were spent not shopping as they are today.  But in church and with--and with family, Sunday mornings, Sunday school, regular service, and we were Methodist at that time.  And then many times there were activities after church and the youth group, you know we'd have dinner some--we had dinner at church or if we didn't have dinner at church we'd go to my grandma's house, my grandma and grandfather's house.  My mother was one of seven children, and she was the second oldest so there was always a big family, all--there was always lots of things going on.
Speaker 1: Do you remember the name of the church, the family church in Youngstown?
Speaker 2: Oh Philips Chapel [C.M.E. Church, Youngstown, Ohio], that's the church I got married in, C.M.E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And C.M.E. stands for what?
Speaker 2: Colored Methodist.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Colored Methodist Episcopal [sic., Christian Methodist Episcopal Church].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, all right.
Story_ID: 187677
Speaker 1: And can you tell me a little about your father.  What was his name and where was he born and how'd he grow up?
Speaker 2: Okay, my dad's name was Isaac Turner.  He too was born in Birmingham, Alabama.  Well, I'm not gonna say Birmingham, outside of Birmingham, Marion [Alabama].  My dad comes from a large family, nine boys and three girls.  And my father, I have heard him talk about him and some of his buddies that came from the same area where he was how they picked enough cotton to get fare to come north.  They too came to work in Youngstown [Ohio] an older--two older brothers had already come to Youngstown.  And of course they let them know how wonderful life was working in the steel mills and my father got enough money together and he took the bus and the rest is history as far as his life is concerned.
Speaker 1: So did most of his siblings migrate from the South to the North or do we have this image of the two homes of going home to the south and then coming back?
Speaker 2: Well, there were about--there were three brothers in Youngstown and then others went other places toward Chicago [Illinois].  And then many of 'em stayed there, in fact the old home place and the heir property still exists.  There are tons and tons of cousins, in fact so many that we have--some years, there are three family reunions, different segments of the family.  I mean it's a huge, huge family.
Speaker 1: That's excellent.  Okay.  Now do you have any favorite stories that your father shared with you other than the migration experience and the cotton picking for the fare?
Speaker 2: I remember him and one of his buddies talking about how come they had to leave--how come his buddy had to leave.  And being black female, and knowing what happens in life, you say this just seem so unfair, and we still see it repeated today.  They--the person where that that wherever they did their--I don't know if--I can't say they were sharecroppers 'cause I never heard him use that term. But whatever--wherever they picked their cotton that the lady of the house found one of them very attractive, all right (laughter)?
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that was the incentive or part of the incentive?
Speaker 2: That was--that was the motivation.
Speaker 1: For them to leave (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: To get on out of there because she--she made an--she challenged them and said you know if you don't you gonna be--you'll be accused thereof.  And they--they got their money together and they left, because they didn't want to get involved in anyone--they knew what life would be like if they had ever got--if they ever violated anybody.  Not that that wasn't an intent, if you understand how I'm saying it, but it was just the idea that the approach came.  And they were young men, you know probably early--I don't wanna say--probably late teens, early twenties, something like that.  And I mean--that's--that rings out more in my memory than many of the family stories that they told, fun things that they did brothers and sisters and so on.
Story_ID: 187678
Speaker 1: So that kind of segregation then that might've been a part of a young man's social life was it rigid in Alabama for them?  Did they talk (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Oh very much so, very much so.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So Jim Crow--
Speaker 2: Very much so in fact when we would go to visit, you know how the families make the treks and we'd pack up and put lots of fried chicken in the car and all--and all of that stuff.  My father [Isaac Turner] would always have his shotgun with him or he--not a shotgun he called it his one of his five brothers.  It had--he said because if anything happens I'm gonna protect my family and you just never, ever know.  You don't do anything to cause trouble, but you have to be able to protect yourself and sometimes you couldn't stop at the restroom, you had to--we'd leave three or four o'clock in the morning so you could drive as far as you could go because there were ho--hotel accommodations where you would stop and you'd find a safe place to sleep 'cause my mother [Alma Hill Turner] wasn't a driver at the time.  So it--it's the story that's been repeated in many, many instances.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So these are family vacations?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: In the summer?
Speaker 2: Going back to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Showing off the children.
Speaker 1: Did they continue through your teenage years?
Speaker 2: Not as much because my grandmother died and we started doing--then you know I had a summer job working at the--at the swimming pool in Youngstown [Ohio] as a locker girl.  So you know, as you get older, it was just not as easy to pack the children up to go for a summer vacation as it was when they were younger people.
Story_ID: 187679
Speaker 1: You said just a moment ago that your grandmother played a really important role in family life in Youngstown [Ohio].  Was that your grandmother on your mother's [Alma Hill Turner] side?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell me a little bit about your grandparents then?
Speaker 2: Well my grandmother and grandfather were great people.  My grandmother loved to cook, with seven children didn't--nobody could cook like grandma could.  And as I was saying those hot rolls and that fried chicken and fried corn and all of the good things that we enjoyed through all our lives were part of a Sunday ritual.  And then all holidays we would all gather at her you know at their home with, with the rest of the family.  My grandfather worked in the steel mill, my grandmother was not a--not a working mother outside of the home.  She was involved with the Missionary Society at church and those kinds of things, but just plain, ordinary simple people.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what where their names, please, your maternal grandparents?
Speaker 2: My mat--maternal grandmother was Gessner Hill and my grandfather was Sylvester Hill.
Speaker 1: And how about your paternal grandparents?  Did you know them?
Speaker 2: I know I never knew my grandfather on my father's side.  He had died already, but my grandmother's name was Narcissus Winston.  And my father [Isaac Turner] said that as long--oh funny story.  My mother told me that when I was born, my father said are you sure that's my daughter; you know skin's too fair (laughter) kind of thing.  And my grandmother came to be with my mother to see--see the new baby.  My grandmother said she's alright with me.  And as I grew older, my father would say to me, mama will never die as long as you're here.  So you see that complete reverse in and change of thought?  I am the spitting image of my father's side where as my sister [Alma Joyce Williams] was the image of my--of my mother's side.
Story_ID: 187680
Speaker 1: Okay, you talked earlier about your experiences in the C.M.E. church, the Colored Methodist Episcopal Church [sic., Christian Methodist Episcopal Church].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And I thought that was interesting you talked about the rigid segregation in the South and then coming north, and still sort of a self-segregation in the church community, but did you in find in Youngstown [Ohio] that there were opportunities to sort of reach across the color line, interact with other groups?
Speaker 2: Oh with us always.
Speaker 1: Always?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah always.
Speaker 1: And where did those interactions take place?
Speaker 2: Well the neighborhood I lived in you know the neighborhood I was born in, the school I attended.  There weren't that many--there were not that many African American children.  I mean we lived on the east side of Youngstown, very, very integrated.  In fact, when I came to Cleveland [Ohio] to teach school, I had never seen an all-black school 'cause then we just did not have 'em at that particular time in Youngstown, very mixed with lot of European folk.  Then when I went to college, I went to Youngstown University, which was now Youngstown State [University, Youngstown, Ohio], again a very, mixed, mixed setting.
Story_ID: 187681
Speaker 1: And if we can stay with Youngstown [Ohio] for just a minute, I wanted to ask about your earliest memory of growing up in that city.
Speaker 2: Well I thought it was great because I didn't know anyplace else.  You know summertime--I loved school as--as a youngster, the teachers liked me you know.  I was a little fat girl (laughter) but that little smart girl.  And as I said, the teachers used to--they really--I was looking at some pictures, my fourth grade teacher, my first grade teacher, all of them used to really think--think a lot of me.  I think I assumed a lot of responsibility as a youngster.  My mother [Alma Hill Turner] worked in the steel mills.  My mother and father [Isaac Turner] divorced.  My father was still in Youngstown though, and the thing that is just so funny when I think about them, my father was between ten and twelve years older than my mother.  And my mother told me that she married him because she was the second of--of seven children and the [Great] Depression was coming, or they were into it, and my father drove a new car 'cause he worked in the mill.  And--I won't say a new car my father drove a car, I don't remember if she said it was new or not.  But she thought that he had money (laughter) and so when he asked her to marry him, she said yes.  But as time moved on, she realized that maybe that wasn't the wisest decision because he was older, he wanted to treat her like a child and she didn't like that, okay?  So it was that kind of situation, but it was always, even though my parents were divorced, school time whenever you know we did anything, the three of us, they were always--he--he--my dad was always there.  He was--he was always in and out and if you know, call your dad about so and so.  But my mother worked in the mill and as a mill worker, she worked three shifts and as I think maybe I was eight or nine, I don't remember the age, but we were--when she worked the three to eleven shift, she would have dinner ready when we'd get home from school and we were told that you don't go off the porch.  We had everything that we needed at home and the neighbors would kind of make sure that we abided by it and then my mom would--told us or she would let us know people would say, I've never seen children like those children because we didn't do what we were not told to do, which is just so different.  And you see now, she would have to go to jail because we were there for those hours without supervision, 'cause you--they didn't have babysitters, per se.
Speaker 1: Now can you tell me who's involved in the we, your other siblings?
Speaker 2: My brother and sister.
Speaker 1: Okay, and their names please?
Speaker 2: My sister is Joyce, Alma Joyce Turner Williams, and my sister's now deceased and my brother still lives in--he lives outside of Youngstown.  He lives in Berlin Center [Ohio], and his name is Isaac Turner.
Story_ID: 187682
Speaker 1: Now can you tell me something about the street that you lived on as a child, and describe your block and your neighbors?  I know you said the community was integrated.
Speaker 2: Oh very much so.
Speaker 1: But can you tell me a little bit about those neighbors who are watching out for you (laughter) when your mother [Alma Hill Turner] was at work?
Speaker 2: We lived at 1225 Dale Street [Youngstown, Ohio] and Mrs. Pearson [ph.] lived to the one side of the--one side of us and Mrs. Wiser [ph.] a little Jewish lady lived on the other side of us, and Mrs. Bogovich [ph.] lived across the street.  And I can remember having fun playing baseball in the street, the boys and girls would play together.  Knights Grocery Store [ph.] was a black family that owned a--that had a business at the corner, and around the corner there were you know all kinds of people.  I can remember my mother would bake something and that she would share with some of the neighbors and they would share some of their as we call them now ethnic dishes with each other.  It was just--it was a good life.
Story_ID: 187683
Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite smells from childhood something that reminds you of home?
Speaker 2: Baked bread baking, Schwebel's Bakery [Youngstown, Ohio].  You could--we could smell the--we could smell the--seeming in the wee hours in the morning, you'd get this aroma and not that we lived near the bakery I can just remember that bakery smell.  And I loved--I loved to smell baking bread.
Speaker 1: How about favorite sounds?  I think of Youngstown [Ohio] as sort of an industrial city (laughter).  There must be some noise.
Speaker 2: We have--and I guess you can say well I love the sound of water.  But you said now where did you hear water (laughter) in Youngstown, Mahoning River?  Well we weren't near the Mahoning River.  But when you--and when you think about a favorite sound, I like--I like the sound that you hear of water tinkling--movement of the water in the--in the little brook.  And sometimes, fire you know how you're sitting around a fireplace and that crackling wood, that--that's a reminiscing sound as well.
Speaker 1: Reminds you of home?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187684
Speaker 1: Can you tell me a little bit about your elementary school and maybe the names of one or two of those favorite teachers you mentioned earlier?
Speaker 2: I went to Madison School [Youngstown, Ohio] and I have taken my children to show them how far we had to walk to go to school.  And Mrs. Mylott [ph.] or Miss Mylott, she wasn't Mrs. I--she was wonderful.  Mrs.--Miss Mylott was my third grade teacher.  Bernice Russell [ph.] was my fourth grade teacher and Miss Grubb [ph.]; I still have my report card from elementary school, got all As, they even had my weight on it.  I told you I was a fat, chunky little girl (laughter).  Oh dear, boy am I going back in my memory to think about all of those years, such a long time ago.  Used to be an office helper, watch the room if the teacher had to go out of the room (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay now you told me that the Turner children, the neighbors even noticed how well-mannered you were, but were you also mischievous, rambunctious like some children are, even if they're good students?
Speaker 2: You know what, I--when I think about my childhood and I think about how kids might have tell their parents that they were going someplace, but they went someplace else,  I never lied to my parents [Alma Hill Turner and Isaac Turner], I never lied to my parents.  If I said I was going to do something, I did and I think some of that might've come from the fact that I was the oldest of three, although my sister [Alma Joyce Williams] was fifteen months younger than I.  And then my brother [Isaac Turner] was less than two years, almost the same with my own--with my children, my boys [Malcolm Brown and Jeffrey Brown] are sixteen months apart, and then less than two years I had Rhonda [Saffold].  And it was just the reverse, I had my moth--we were--there were two girls and a boy, and I had two boys and a girl.  But I sure don't want to sound like Miss Goody Two-Shoes, but I didn't--I didn't do any bad stuff when I was little--I didn't do.  My mother counted on me so much, she told me, I don't remember this but she told me that at--and this sounds preposterous today.  At six years old, she gave me money to go downtown to pay--to go to the East Ohio Gas Company [later, Dominion East Ohio] to pay the gas bill, now this is what she told me she did.  She told me that I did, took the bus, went downtown, made this and then came back, which sounds unbelievable, doesn't it at six years old?  I have, my--our grandson turns six in June and I said, I just can't believe that, but I did it.  I assumed a lot of responsibility 'cause if my mother was working, there was nobody else to look after my brother and sister.
Story_ID: 187685
Speaker 1: --I just wondered if you would tell me a little bit about your dreams and aspirations as a child coming of age in Youngstown [Ohio].
Speaker 2: I wanted to be a television performer, that's what I always wanted to be, and you'd say how would you know about television?  I just--Leon Robinson [ph.] in the choir said to me and I used to sing in the--we used to have a junior choir.  One time I played for Sunday school.  I'd go blink, blink, blink, I wasn't any good but you know I took piano lessons and so I used to play for the junior choir.  And we had plays and we all kinds of things and he'd say you know you're not happy unless you're in the limelight.  And I resented that but as I got older and realized I said I'd love to be on TV, but that was impossible.  So I ended up with a business--I was a business major in college [at Youngstown University, later, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio] because I wanted to be a CPA [certified public accountant] I was--it was a television performer or CPA.  And I end up becoming a business teacher.
Story_ID: 187686
Speaker 1: And you said just a little while ago that as a high school student, you wanted to be or aspired to be either a television personality or a CPA [certified public accountant] and you took the route toward the business career.  So can you tell me about the high school preparation for that and then onto your college years?
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well I started at East High School [Youngstown, Ohio] and when we were looking at courses to take liberal arts or business or whatever, my mother [Alma Hill Turner] directed me toward business because she said that you have to think about getting a job is what--is what she said to me.  College was thought about but it was not pushed like we if--you know from almost birth, we talked about college with our children.  We didn't talk about college at that same--with that same force.  When I was--when I was coming along yes, you'll go but--you didn't talk about it all the time.  So when I, I did well at school and I was--I was--I used to--I would always enter in various kinds of competitions.  One I went toward oratory and I did that because when we'd be singing in the choir, my friend, Dorcas Crenshaw, whose dad was the pastor of our church [Philips Chapel C.M.E. Church, Youngstown, Ohio] at the time, who ended up--he was a presiding elder and so--and he's been long gone.  But and I used to be the church secretary, and I was maybe fourteen, he'd say, "Teeny [ph.], I understand you know how to type; I want you to type the bulletin."  And of course on every Friday evening, I'd go over there and Dotty [ph.] and I you know, I would type this bulletin.  I did that for a number of years, but that started to hone--I started, I guess I started honing my business skills as far as ru- when you think about reality, I knew I wouldn't have a chance in--in being an announcer. And then later on you know a television performer; I knew that wouldn't be a possibility.  But I started with oratory because when we would be singing in the choir, Dotty could just see--look at--she'd sing, she'd look at the music and she'd sing all the songs and I--and I have to go, keep going back and forth.  And I said, well can I remember how come I can't remember and there was an oratorical something at school the debate team and I got involved and ended up representing my school with this oratory between people, and did get an award for it.  But that's how that all came about.
Story_ID: 187687
Speaker 1: And then when I was maybe, I was sixteen, I worked for the dean of--I worked for the dean of girls at our high school [East High School, Youngstown, Ohio], Miss Brody [ph.].  I used to work in her office during free periods.  She was always recommending me for things, and I worked as a locker girl I bet that you probably heard me mention I worked at the pool and that's when I first said--I said Miss Brody, "I--I want a job where can I--what can I work?"  Well the first thing I did during the summer, I worked at Chase Pool and then the next year, Bob Crumpler [ph.] who was an attorney in Youngstown [Ohio], I guess had heard about my secretarial skills and asked if I would come and work a couple of weeks when his secretary went on vacation.  And boy did I think I was somebody.  I got all dressed up you know, we had taught--we were taught how you're supposed to dress as a business person, very simple, very classic.  But and I worked in his offices were in Mahoning Bank Building and he told me that when you come in, you're--the first thing you're supposed to do you're supposed to read the Legal News and look for certain cases.  And when he would dictate to me, I went to transcribe and I can remember this so vividly, and I couldn't read what I wrote.  So I wro- I added what I thought it was, when I took the letter to him, of course it made sense to me and he said now listen, if you don't know what I have written, or you can't read it, you are to let me know what--if you have a question.  Then he said, and I will tell you something else, your stroke is not even, you noticed--and he showed me some of the letters are dot light and some of the--some of the typing was dark.  He said you have to have an even touch, which was just invaluable.  And you sometimes you think, children when you tell them something that they think you're criticizing them, I didn't have the sense to know that it was--it could be considered negative, I felt it was constructive criticism, and all that did was make me stronger.  And I--I got to the point that if I didn't--if he said a word and I didn't know how to write it in shorthand, I made up a little language that I could translate it.  And I did that for maybe three summers.
Story_ID: 187688
Speaker 1: --Then when I went off--when I went to school, went to college, I had--I was able to work at the JCC, the Jewish Community Center.  And again, doing secretarial responsibilities and where Youngstown was--Youngstown University [later, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio] was located at the time, it was just around the corner, so I worked there.  And then toward the end of my year, my college time I went to work full-time.  I--well I should back up, I had gotten a scholarship to go to Central State [University, Wilberforce, Ohio].  Do you know my mother [Alma Hill Turner] didn't want me to go down there?  And did not let me go, said no, you have to go to school here and so that's what I--that's what I did.  And then toward the end, when money was tight, to help pay my tuition, I went to work--I worked forty hours a week.  I worked for Century a restaurant equipment supplier and did the secretarial work for Mr. Reich, R-E-I-C-H.  And he would always say not Reich to people it was Rich, you know spelled like the Third Reich.  And he said as long as you get your hours in, you can work however you want to.  Sometimes I'd go at eight o'clock in the morning or sometime--it would just depend on what my school schedule was which was great for me.  When I--I--when I did my student teaching, by that time, I had gone to work at Lordstown Military Reservation [Lordstown, Ohio].  I'd taken the Civil Service test then and passed and have you ever heard of anybody working in Civil Service that was able to take off to go do their student teaching?  Mr. McCoy [ph.] gave me permission to go do my student teaching.  I even made a suggestion and--and got an award that you know, it was time saving and which would save the government money and I was--I wasn't even--I hadn't even graduated from school at that particular time.  So they were really very lenient with me as far as letting me do what I needed to do in order to get my--my degree.
Story_ID: 187689
Speaker 1: After graduating from college [Youngstown University, later, Youngstown State University, Youngstown, Ohio], I applied for a teaching position.  I did not want to live in Youngstown [Ohio].  I wanted to move, but I didn't wanna go that far away.  And there were business openings in Tallmadge [Ohio], in Tiffin [Ohio] and a few other places and I applied.  And I got letters back saying that my credentials were wonderful but their communities were not would-they--they wouldn't hire a black teacher.  And--that's in essence what--what it meant.  So then I went to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base [Ohio], my sister [Alma Joyce Williams] had already gone down to Dayton [Ohio].  And one of my friends had gone and I took an exam again and worked down there from September until June--no until August because while I was down there, I got a notice that I had to come for an interview in the Cleveland Public Schools as a business teacher and that September--that August I left and came to Cleveland [Ohio] to start teaching school.
Story_ID: 187690
Speaker 1: All right, so you're coming of age in Youngstown [Ohio] in the 1950s.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And there all of these tremendous changes happening because of civil rights, and it's--and what year was that then that you come to Cleveland [Ohio] and then you have the teaching position that you've been preparing for now for four or five years?
Speaker 2: 1960.
Speaker 1: 1960.
Speaker 2: Is when I came to Cleveland to teach.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: So in the 1950s then you had white collar employment.
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: And it--and it seems at least in some areas the color line wasn't as rigid as it was in other areas for black women?
Speaker 2: For me--for me maybe not you know many times girls would babysit, I never--I never had a babysitting job.  There were some girls that worked as like maids and some of the girls--or worked in the hotels.
Speaker 1: Now these are African American girls?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Un-huh.
Speaker 2: But now they were not--all of my friends did similar things in their particular areas.  When we--when Christmas one year, we, we did what they call a jingle bell course in Strouss-Hirshberg [Co.], which was a big department store downtown, Youngstown--head girls go.  And I was always looking for opportunity, so when that happened, two of my friends, we went--well my three good friends that are still my good friends.  We went down and took this jingle bell course.  They hired us as--no they didn't hire us as clerks but we were gift wrappers during the Christmas holidays so you know there is situations where you feel and you're aware of what the opportunities are for many of the other girls that were involved.  When I say many of the other ones, I'm talking about not African American girls.  But I--in my classes also there were not, we didn't have large numbers because of the integrated setting.
Story_ID: 187691
Speaker 1: So now you're a college student in 1954 when the Brown decision [Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka, 1954] is handed down regarding the desegregation of the schools.  Do you remember May 17th, 1954 and how that ruling was greeted either in the academic community or in your neighborhood?
Speaker 2: To be very honest with you, I remember it very slightly.  I can--I do not remember it with the vigor and interest that I have now as far as it's concerned.  Time dulls the memory too (laughter).  But I don't remember it with a--today you know you think about big celebration, and I don't remember it as--as a celebration.  I remember it in passing.  You didn't have access to news then like you have today either not to say that, that people were not aware, because we were aware of--I think it was mentioned in church.  I was part of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] youth organization and went to some conferences, I remember they--in that kind of circumstance.  But to think about it to say I remember it jubilantly and--I've got a beard [ph.] and poster that says Brown versus Board of Education.  You know I remember, but I don't remember it as being landmark making a change and or thinking now this is an opportunity for me.
Story_ID: 187692
Speaker 1: So I wanna ask a little bit about your teaching experiences in Cleveland [Ohio].  I mean you've had other communities tell you that they're not quite ready to hire an African American teacher because of the makeup of the community or whatever.  But now you're in Cleveland, which isn't a majority black city but you have this job offer.  What was that like teaching in Cleveland in the 1960s?
Speaker 2: I thought I was somebody if you wanna know the truth.  I was at Kennard Junior High School [Cleveland, Ohio] and it was a wonderful experience.  In typing, shorthand, the thing that I find fascinating about those areas, when my children would come the very first day, when you're doing orientation I always taught them something.  Just always I taught them something, you know these are the home row keys, so it was--it was a great experience.  It was so wonderful that I was only at Kennard for a year and a half and my supervisor moved me to John Hay [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and he moved me there because he thought that I could--I would help to enhance the business department in John Hay High School and some of the teachers said how come--how come I see your department chairman here all the time, are you having a hard time?  And I wasn't--I said I don't know, I'm not having a hard time but he said he enjoyed coming to my classroom.  And I have seen students,  I see them still yeah and they say to me--even though I was a young teacher, I was really strict and really stern (laughter) if you--if you were not in bel- in orientation I told them you have to be in your seat by the time the bell rings.  Your pencils are sharpened and you are ready to go.  I do not allow anybody leave to go to the restroom and on and on and on.  And they'd say, well how would you know how to be so mean, so young and I don't--I didn't call it being mean, I just--I was of the philosophy then it's easier to lighten up than tighten up.  And as time went on--I had one instance though, where a boy wet his pants and I was so embarrassed but he knew he had to--he should've gone to the restroom ahead of time and when he told me he had to go, I said, "You know what the rule is," and he went back to his seat.  If he had said, "Miss Turner, I really have to go," then I would've said some--I said, "You know what the rule is.  You were supposed to have gone to the restroom before"--it was the most embarrassing experience I'd ever had.  One other time, something happened at school and I paddled a boy, twenty-two and you know junior high school I may be ten years older, eight years older, depending on how old the kids are in the grade.  He said, "You just wait till I get home; I am going to tell my mother what you did."  And I said oh my goodness, but I had--I was always in touch with my parents.  I got to know them on the telephone, a week within that first week and I told them what my intent was.  And I told them what their children had to do, and I sent information home, and so when this, he--when he told me what he did, I called his mom.  And I said I--this is what I did to so and so, this is what he did, and this is--and I paddled him and he told me that just wait till I get home, my mother's coming up here to get you.  She said he told you that?  She said I'll be waiting for him when he gets home.  I never had a problem with parents for the discipline that I--that I--my discipline role with their children.  And I really--well I don't know today, parents might be different, but I loved my children and my children loved me from--from Kennard and then to John Hay.
Story_ID: 187693
Speaker 1: And then after that, then I got married [to HM Malcolm Brown] and I started my family right away.  On our first anniversary, Malcolm was three days, we got--Malcolm was born November 3rd, we were married on November 21, Malcolm was eighteen days old on our first anniversary, alright?
Speaker 2: Okay, and what year is this again?
Speaker 1: This is--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Of your marriage and--
Speaker 1: I got married in 1964.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm leaving out some things.  We--I received from Minerva Haywood [ph.] who was the principal--assistant principal at Kennard [Junior High School, Cleveland, Ohio], she recommended me for a counsel on human relations opportunity.  And I have to think about what the name of this guy is because he--he's still around.  They--they would at that particular time when they were having discussions in Cleveland [Ohio] about race relations, and they had--they offered the counsel on human relation--Noble, James Noble [ph.] do you-had--you-if you check the history you'll find his name.  Jim Noble headed up the counsel at the time, and Miss Hayward asked me if I would be interested 'cause she'd like to recommend me, and I said fine, I--you know it sounded very interesting.  So I had a choice of going to Rutgers [University, New Brunswick, New Jersey], Case Western [Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio] or Boston University [BU, Boston, Massachusetts], and I selected Boston University.  That was the summer of 1963, no '62 [1962] it was the summer of 1962, 1960 I came to teach, 1962, was when I went to this--this workshop, a two week workshop there.  And then the following year when I came back, then at that time I was at John Hay [High School, Cleveland, Ohio], when I got back, my friend Linda Wood Williams [ph.], we were talking about what we gonna do this summer?  And I said you know Boston [Massachusetts] is a wonderful city and you know we were on Osgood Hill [Stevens Estate, North Andover, Massachusetts] and oh just wonderful things.  She said well why don't we go to--why don't we think about going that direction, I said fine.  So I took--started working toward master classes at Boston University and Linda was an English major and she went to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] that was the year of the Boston Strangler 1963.  So we decided that we were not going--we were--we trying find apart--an apartment to sublet, we added--I called a young man that I had met in class and his girlfriend went to Bos--BU and so they made arrangements for us to stay in the dorm.  And we made a pact between ourselves that we would not go out on dates with anybody unless they could take both of us and that's what happened.  But that's the year I met Malcolm too (laughter).
Speaker 2: Okay.  And this--again it's 1963?
Speaker 1: Nineteen sixty-three [1963].
Speaker 2: Oh, so there's a lot of history.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Being made in that year.
Speaker 1: Exactly--
Story_ID: 187694
Speaker 1: --'Cause then [HM] Malcolm [Brown] was supposed to--I met him at--I met him at the BU [Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts] dorm--I met him at--no I saw him--you wanna hear this story?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: You got time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I do.
Speaker 1: It's interesting.  I was walking home from school one day and I was always fascinated by tall men and I came home and I said, "Linda [Wood Williams (ph.)] I saw a long, tall and fine walking down the street," (laughter), never saw him again.  My mother [Alma Hill Turner] called me--I was gonna go to the Delta [Sigma Theta Sorority] Convention and my mother called me and said your sister [Alma Joyce Williams] has met this guy and she's talking about getting married to him and she just met him in the spring, she said you need to come home and talk to her.  Well at that time, children listened to their parents, and I said, "Linda I don't think I'm gonna go to the convention."  It was not a situation where today you have to in order to get your hotel, you have to register first, I had just--I wa--it was just a thought to go.  It wasn't--I wasn't all registered to go.  So I said okay, and I said, "Linda my classes are finished I'm gonna go home."  She had a couple more classes, finals to take.  And I said--I told her the whole story and she--and I said to her well--she said, "Why don't we go tell the dining hall goodbye."  I said, "Ooh, that's a good idea; we might see him," (laughter).  So, we go, silly girls and from across I span the room, pan the room is it what--what do you see in town-- say in television lingo?
Speaker 2: Pan.
Speaker 1: Pan the room?  I pan the room, I said, "Ooh Linda, there he is," (laughter).  She said, "You wanna sit beside him?"  I said, "Yeah," well we had been seeing these African guys, my friend was a young Jewish fella, had introduced us to these African fellas, and I said well we been you know we been talking to them, so let's go sit with them.  And as Linda--'cause they were waving, so Linda went to sit with them and because there were not many African Americans there at this school, you know people are far more friendly, from across a crowded room, he waved.  And Linda and I waved back and then he motioned with his hands, you know come this direction.  Women today would go, woman of that era, we motioned to him you come.  He, after he had lunch, he walked over, you know where you from and that kind of conversation.  Linda had to go to class; he said can I walk you home?  And I said yeah, but you see I violated that--that thing that we had about we would not--but that's not a date, that was just a walk home, right (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I told him that--well he wanted to--he wanted to go out that evening, I couldn't go out that evening.  But I said call me and then the next day he did and I said to Linda--she said, "Well now if you wait a couple more days, we can all drive home together."  Well I was--I was telling everybody I met goodbye, and I had all these things, dates lined up anyway, or dinners and luncheons, the rest is history.  I was supposed to meet him at the March on Washington because that's where I was going to go and that didn't pan out.  But when you talk about the history of--of the period, I did go--came home and I did go with Karamu [House, Cleveland, Ohio]--you know I was--we were one of the busloads that went to the March on Washington.  And I was just talking to my grandson about that last month, during Black History Month.  Because I had--was saying Avery do you know about the March--I said do you know who [Reverend] Dr. Martin Luther King [Jr.] is, and he was telling me yes, and I said well grandma heard him give his I Have A Dream speech.
Story_ID: 187695
Speaker 1: You're at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] summer of '63 [1963]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: In the summer of the March on Washington (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Exactly.
Speaker 1: And you said something about a Delta convention, that's Delta Sigma Theta--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --Sorority, so you pledged as an undergrad [at Youngstown University, later, Youngstown State University, Cleveland, Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well I--I pledged not as an undergrad because we didn't have a chapter on campus.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I pledged within that first couple of years that I was in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nineteen sixty [1960].
Speaker 1: While you were teaching?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So again, quite a lot of history--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So you start to teach in the year that JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] is elected president?
Speaker 2: Exactly right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then you're in Washington [D.C.]?
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: For the March, the year--just before he gets assassinated.
Speaker 2: Exactly right and I do--I remember the day that it--I mean we all remember that are old enough to remember.  I was in the hall at John Hay [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] when the--when the message came and I just still--I still get that cold feeling throughout my body.  'Cause you just can't believe it, and then that night, [HM] Malcolm [Brown] called me 'cause he was living in Virginia, and he said did you realize what happened?  And I said I can't believe it, I mean we were all sick.  And I still hold him in high esteem.
Speaker 1: I hear some people refer to the era of JFK as sort of the age of Camelot and with his beautiful First Lady [Jaqueline] Jackie Kennedy and then to see young president for--a Democrat.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: From the North--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: These things aren't supposed to happen (laughter)--a Democrat.
Speaker 2: No, and Catholic.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: So.  Did you have at that time--I'm guessing that you must've had some sense of what a wonderful era it was for history making.  Because you're at the March on Washington, but for the 1960s in general did you get the sense of you know something great is about to happen?
Speaker 2: Well you had that sense but you really don't--when you're--when you're a part of history, meaning living at that particular time, you don't always know that it's a historical or it's as significant as it is until you look back on it.  Do you follow what I'm saying?  His--his election, I remember that I definitely remember that, and how excited everybody was, and how wonderful it was.  But you know you don't know how historical things are until you look back on them, in some instances.
Story_ID: 187696
Speaker 1: We've come to the end of 1963, you've experienced the March on Washington, witnessed, or at least as an American, experienced the assassination of the President [John Fitzgerald Kennedy], we've got a new president now, [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson and he's declaring in 1964 this unconditional War on Poverty.  So he says it's an era where there's gonna be a lot of change.  Do you see the change on the horizon?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  You--you do see change.  I can start with change with me, that's the year I got married [to HM Malcolm Brown].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I got married November 9--November 21, 1964, and became a mother November 3rd of 1965 so change is taking place.  Opportunity I mean you--you read and hear about more opportunities.  You think about--and then you look forward to the [Carl] Stokes era.  I mean change is everyplace; lots of things are going on.  There was the McDonald's fight down at the University Circle [Cleveland, Ohio] get--for blacks to own McDonald's.  Bruce Klunder was killed in the--in the situation with the schools.  I mean just all kinds of things were taking place.
Speaker 1: Can you, just tell us a little bit about Mr. Klunder and what's happening in Cleveland [Ohio] 'cause I know a lot of the local viewers and listeners will recognize his name from '64 [1964].
Speaker 2: All right.  Now you--your being a historian, you might know the facts better than I do.  All I can remember was--where was he when this, when this backhoe hit him?
Speaker 1: We are--we're in this period now where black teachers, especially black women are finding opportunities to teach in the schools.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But they're usually all black or majority black schools and I remember reading about Mr. Klunder and other people opposing the building of new schools in black communities because the school board was reluctant to integrate those all white schools.  And so I remember now looking at newspaper articles, where he's at a construction site, okay, and they're trying to stop this equipment from preparing the ground for the building of a new school, yeah.
Speaker 2: And that's it.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: You see with your being a historian the way you presented it, you put it in the proper context.  And I can remember how upset we were, I had not seen black schools until I come to Cleveland.  And the--we were told that the offerings on the west side were better than the offerings on the east side and I think that's one of the reasons why many of the teachers that were teaching at the time were so strong and had such a forceful commitment to make things happen for their children.  The success of your children was extremely important and--
Speaker 1: And the east side again is where the majority black communities are found?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly right, that's exactly right.  And in some instances I was aware of some of the white teachers, now that's not with all of them that might be in our building.  They didn't--some of them were lax and I guess in some instances that's not uncommon with people in general.  No one common fits everybody but the black teachers that I knew had a very strong commitment to their children.  And their success was immensely important to them.  Similar to the kind of feeling that people've told me about--about black schools in the South with the teachers, even though they worked with--with less materials, many of our people that have made--made major strides in the community, and I'm talking about across the country have been--have come from southern schools.
Story_ID: 187697
Speaker 1: Now, I'm still in 1964. I don't wanna stay there forever (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Okay.
Speaker 1: --but it's such an important year.  In '64 [1964] Reverend [Bruce] Klunder is killed accidentally at a non-violent protest; he's accidentally run over--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --by this, I believe it was a tractor.
Speaker 2: Okay, I said a backhoe but yes a tractor (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Some piece of heavy equipment.
Speaker 2: Heavy, heavy equipment it was.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but with the shovel in front, I don't know the technical term for it.  But apparently there were protestors in the front and he went behind.  The driver tried to back up so he wouldn't hit the people up front and accidentally Reverend Klunder's killed.
Speaker 2: It was awful.
Speaker 1: Something we associate with the Civil Rights Movement or non-violent protestors, often lose their lives because of violence.  But can you tell me if that's something that's associated in your mind with the 1960s in Cleveland [Ohio].  Is that threat of violence always there, or what is it?  When we talk about change being on the horizon, what's really driving that?  Is it the threat of something awful happening if you don't change or just a willingness in Cleveland to open up?
Speaker 2: Oh I think it's a threat of something happening and because of the threat of something happening then, it forces people in some instances to go about making change or some, some--making you think there's change.  Not always does change occur, as we would want it in its full context.  Not always does it come like we want it but change, we have--we did--we definitely did see change come forth as a result of that.  And then you remember the riots what--the year the riots were what, was what?  Do you remember?
Speaker 1: Well I--I remember two in Cleveland.  Now I wasn't living in Cleveland at the time, but I remember reading about these.  There's one in Hough [Cleveland, Ohio] and there's one in Glenville [Cleveland, Ohio].  We're associating both with the mid-1960s.
Speaker 2: Right, yeah.
Speaker 1: But the era of [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson in the White House [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Exactly, exactly.
Speaker 1: And soon Carl Stokes in Cleveland.
Speaker 2: Exactly right.  And you see I was busy having children.  One child was born in '60 [1960]--November of '65 [1965].  Jeffrey [Brown] was born in March of '67 [1967] and Rhonda [Saffold] was born in September of '69 [1969].  So I was in it, but out of it.  You follow?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: I remember the assassinations.  I was home with--[Reverend Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], his year of assassination?
Speaker 1: Sixty-eight [1968].
Speaker 2: That was '68 [1968].  Jeffrey was born in March of '67 [1967] so he was almost a year old.  It was with--it was that next year I was home recuperating when John F. Kennedy was assassinated you just, after had the baby.
Speaker 1: Okay.  John Kennedy (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) I don't mean John Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Robert [F. Kennedy].
Speaker 2: Robert, his brother Robert.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Which must've been '69 [1969] [sic., June 1968]?
Speaker 1: I'm searching my brain now (laughter) for all the dates.  But it was that kind of era.
Speaker 2: It was in that period.
Speaker 1: An era where there's lot of violence.
Speaker 2: Lots of violence.
Speaker 1: At one level and lots of positive change.
Speaker 2: On the other.
Speaker 1: At another.
Speaker 2: But you--I can remember saying my God, what is going on with--with those two major--with those three assassinations, almost back to back with the last two.
Speaker 1: Well you said three.  Do you remember Malcolm X or how was his death--
Speaker 2: Yes, I do (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --greeted in the black community?
Speaker 2: You know what I do re- people were upset.
Speaker 1: Now he was '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: He was '65 [1965].  That's the year my Malcolm was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?  But I don't remember the month, do you remember the month?
Speaker 1: February, I believe.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Well I--Malcolm was born in November of '65 [1965], but it was--it was Malcolm X, you're right.  John F. Kennedy?
Speaker 1: Well Kennedy's '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: Malcolm X?
Speaker 1: Malcolm '65 [1965].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: King in '68 [1968].
Speaker 2: Right, and then Robert Kennedy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I would put it; I believe that's the right order, goodness.
Speaker 2: Right. And so it was a very turbulent period.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you're a young mother.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: And young wife.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: With a family that you've just started in the 1960s and we've got the escalation of the Vietnam War and the escalation of the Civil Rights Movement and like you said, you're in it but you're out of it.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Story_ID: 187698
Speaker 1: Looking back on that period then if you remember where you were in the 1970s.  You know did you believe that it was worth all the bloodletting that we sometimes associate with the '60s [1960s].  Do you see changes then?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Real changes in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, you see opportunities--you do, you do see opportunities happening.  Even within the public schools you see promotions and po- positions of authority and importance in leadership taking place that didn't happen before.  I was offered some opportunities, but because I had three children, I stayed home and took care of my kids (laughter).
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As opposed to many of the--my friends would have babies and go right back to work.
Speaker 1: But you had that option in the 70s [1970s].
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, as an educator.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: With young children.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You could go back.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: So I know that wasn't always the case in Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: I understand that even married teachers without children were sometimes forced out of the classroom in the 1930s.
Speaker 2: That, that--that's very true, as a historian and my history is not--nowhere near yours, but you're absolutely right.  Even when you got pregnant, prior to my time, people hid the fact that they were because the moment they thought you were pregnant or once you became pregnant they didn't want you to be in the classroom period.  And--and they removed you.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But you know '66 [1966], I went back to get more leave time and then I--then along came Jeffrey [Brown] and then after Rhonda [Saffold], I stayed home.
Speaker 1: Okay so in the '70s [1970s] then you're a homemaker and mother full-time.
Speaker 2: I'm a homemaker, mother, right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In the late '70s [1970s] I went back the--the supervisor--oh Joan, Joan what's Joan's last name?  She was this--she was the supervisor for distributor of education and she called me and she said Ernestine.  Joan Butler [ph.] was her name.  She said, "Those kids ought to be ready to go to school now. I need you."  And I went back to work late October of '77 [1977].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was a distributor of education coordinator which meant I found jobs for students.  I taught them marketing, merchandising, PR [public relations], those kinds of things, how to have an interview, just preparing them for the job world.  And then in the afternoon, I'd go out and find work for them, and once I found work for them, do all those things that are necessary to make sure that they were successful.  And that was at John Hay [High School, Cleveland, Ohio] and something else was interesting, they would always take strong teachers, if they were gonna integrate the faulty, they would take strong teachers, African Americans and send them to the west side.  And I was moved to Lincoln-West [High School, Cleveland, Ohio].  And I was at Lincoln-West for maybe a year and we [Brown and husband, HM Malcolm Brown] had always wanted to open an art gallery, and so 1980 we made that final decision.  We had been looking for a space for about two years, but didn't have success--nobody wanted to rent to me in the area where we wanted to have an art gallery.  But in 1980 that June I decided to take a leave because we had found the space that we're in today and went for it.
Story_ID: 187699
Speaker 1: So this is quite a lot of history that you've experienced in Cleveland [Ohio] coming in at the beginning of the decade of the '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: With JFK [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] in the White House [Washington, D.C.] and then having your dream of gallery ownership come true by 1980 the era of [President James Earl] Jimmy Carter--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --in the White House.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And I know blacks were confident at least in the late '70s [1970s] and early '80s [1980s] that this born again Christian from Georgia (laughter) was gonna make a difference--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in the lives of lots of Americans.  And here you are in Shaker Heights [Ohio]--
Speaker 2: Un-huh.
Speaker 1: --Ohio.  Can you tell me a little bit about the history of this area?  Is this where you wanted the gallery to be?  You said you couldn't get folks to rent to you where you wanted.
Speaker 2: I wanted it here because [HM] Malcolm [Brown] taught school, he was at--he was at the high school [Shaker Heights High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio].  He would--he went to teach at Woodbury [Elementary School, Shaker Heights, Ohio] in maybe '69 [1969] all right, the year that Rhonda [Saffold] was born.  And I just wanted to be close to home if my children needed me, I wanted to be able to--where I could get to them.  And in looking around, I had no history, black owned art galleries were not at all common.  And so it--it was not an easy situation.  In fact one of my Caucasian friends and I went across the street to the Van Aken shopping center [Van Aken Center, Shaker Heights, Ohio], she--and the Van Aken shop- well the people won't know that, but it's directly across the street.  And talked with this owner of the--of the shopping center 'cause there was lots of spaces there and--
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No, didn't work.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 187700
Speaker 1: I read some of those stories about Shaker Heights [Ohio] which is a beautiful community.
Speaker 2: It is a beautiful community.
Speaker 1: But has this history with restrictive covenants and housing.  Certain undesirable groups (laughter) weren't welcome.
Speaker 2: We had to sign a restrictive covenant the first house we bought in 1967 and we still have a copy of it, the Van Sweringen brothers, you had to--you had to swear that you would not--you would uphold the significance and importance of Shaker Heights, you would not violate whatever as far as they were concerned.  And that would---that was the covenant that you had to sign.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And it's interesting because those were supposed to be, be illegal by then but they were still out there.  They told me that Senator [Howard] Metzenbaum worked quite a bit (laughter) you know in Ohio to get those kinds of things outlawed and to make them unenforceable in court.  But still people were asked to sign those.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Well we--we have ours. The second house we bought which was in 1971 because we bought two family, I'd filled that up (laughter) but that was not a requirement in 1971, but in 1967--1966 was the year that we bought that house was when it was, right.
Speaker 1: So the housing market is opening up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: And teaching and administrative opportunities in the schools opening up?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  In fact, historically across the country when they talked about Shaker Heights they talked about it being a wealthy community and many people still have that view of it.  Of course, time brings about change, nothing last forever, but its--it's still a wonderful community and the schools systems are supposed to be strong, but you know everything--there's weakness everyplace as well too.
Story_ID: 187701
Speaker 1: Late '70s [1970s] and your--are your children--well they're in high school.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry they were born--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Mid to late '60s [1960s].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So it's late '70s [1970s] they're going elementary school.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, middle school.
Speaker 2: Right, and that's when I decided--well that's when I went--when I went back to work in '77 [1977], Rhonda [Saffold] probably was in second grade. She was born in '69 [1969].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So whatever my math is not that quick and fast, whatever that is. And then Jeffrey [Brown]--they, they were all in--maybe Jeffrey was going to maybe the boys were getting ready to go to junior high or--no maybe high elementary, I--I don't remember.  But then that, that is that time and then in 1980 when we opened the gallery [Malcolm Brown Gallery], the children are still a little older, but you wanna be clo- we wanted to be close to them and this is why--as I said before we designated this particular area for them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For the location of the gallery.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So nearly a quarter of a century--
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: At this location?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Can you tell what that's been like any special challenges and why an art gallery?
Speaker 2: Well, we wanted to do--we wanted to open an art gallery because [HM] Malcolm [Brown] was a painter and he was good and there weren't opportunities for African American artists to show their art work.  And because I had the business acumen I had done business projects--or do they say acumen?  It depends on where you're--how you wanna--where you wanna put the accent.  Because I had done business projects with my children going into business in--in high school, we put a plan together.  We felt we brought very special--a very special kind of expertise to it and he had been a painter locally, well known, that's why we named the gallery Malcolm Brown [Gallery] and we--I--we have said later on if we'd known then what we know now, we would've had a different name on it because it seems as if you are just promoting yourself for those people that know you as an artist.  And for those that don't know you as an artist, they say oh, Malcolm Brown is a painter?  That kind of thing, but we felt we had something to bring to the community.  And we think that we have.
Speaker 1: And what are the special gifts then that you bring to this gallery ownership activity?
Speaker 2: Well the special gifts we brought--we brought were honesty, integrity and the interest in showcasing the works of African American artists at their best and broadest dimension.  We have been told that we have lived longer than any black owned gallery in the country and that is not bragging.  I think that speaks to the struggle that exists in this business.  We were not the first ones to start, but we have been able to persevere at a level that most have not.  And I think some of it has to do with the fact that with Malcolm being an artist and with my being a wife of an artist, you know what the struggle is.  And you know how important it is that art be represented as it should.  A solid collection should be inclusive and if it's not, it's, it's negligent.
Story_ID: 187702
Speaker 1: So we went about showcasing at its best in 1981, we opened [Malcolm Brown Gallery, Shaker Heights, Ohio] in 1980.  Nineteen eighty-one [1981], we have a show of [HM] Elizabeth Catlett's work and you--and you know the world now knows how important she is.  Nineteen eighty-two [1982], we bring Romare Bearden here and it blew the comm- it blew the art world and--I don't wanna--maybe I--I mean I saying it in the wrong way.  But because he had never had an exhibition in a black owned gallery, and his, his gallery in New York [New York] was Cordier [&] Ekstrom, he was only known to have Ek- museum shows.  And our show it came on the hills of his exhibition that traveled to four or five museums started in 1980.  1982 he was here in the flesh.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Which was wonderful.  We started with a lecture at the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio].  At that time, up to that time, they had never allowed an artist to lecture that they did not bring to town.  And we got all kinds of--it was just wonderful.  People from around the country flew in to see the work of Romare Bearden at the Malcolm Brown Gallery.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then we went on.  Hughie Lee-Smith who has Cleveland [Ohio] connections but had not shown here in fifty years, we had an exhibition of his in 1984 and it just kept--it just continued on and on and on.  Everybody that we brought, it was--with the exception of Hughie Lee-Smith, because of his Cleveland connection, but a half century of not being here, it was the first exhibition for the State of Ohio.  And people came and I have people tell me now, say Ernestine, I remember when Romare Bearden came to your gallery.  Or I remember when Elizabeth Catlett came with the exhibition that was at the museum.  In 2002, she opened with us on that Friday, September 20th I believe and then the 21st she went to the museum, people were just amazed when they realized that she had been coming--we had been showing her work all along, but it hadn't clicked as to the significance of this--of this woman.  And then with this recent exhibition [The Art of Romare Bearden] at the National Gallery [of Art, Washington, D.C.]--that opened at the National Gallery of his work and then that will show--will tour, it's very significant.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 187703
Speaker 1: So I hear a lot in academic circles about starving artists and it doesn't sound like you're starving (laughter) so what is the key (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Well.
Speaker 1: --to your success (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Well but now listen.  [HM] Malcolm [Brown] always worked a full-time job, all right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: That makes a big difference and I have never paid myself for my talents and skills here.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And you say--you've nev- I have never paid myself a dime for doing what I do.  Because it's a part of what we're about, and we work practically without staff because you don't know art--what I have here, nobody needs it.  They do need it, but it's not like it's necessary for survival.  And that's how we have survived, you know he's always worked and painted evenings and you know, weekends and so on and so forth.
Story_ID: 187704
Speaker 1: --We were just starting to talk about selling art to the world.  It's something that people might want to be surrounded by but don't--because it's so beautiful--but don't necessarily need for survival.
Speaker 2: They don't need it for survival but art provides another dimension to a person's life.  When you think about you're surrounded by it from the standpoint of everything that you see in the media is art oriented, you know the color, the excitement there.  When you--when you prepare yourself at the beginning of your day, again you--it--it's about art.  Again we're about enhancing your walls; enriching your awareness and hopefully leaving something that you can pass on to your children.  The artist records the history visually of periods, his, his reaction to what's going on around him and art is very comforting.  Art is aside from being comforting, I feel it's very necessary in order to enhance you and your environment.
Speaker 1: I remember seeing some of Mr. Brown's [HM Malcolm Brown] work when I went to see 'Waiting to Exhale' and I was so happy.  I couldn't have been happier if I had painted it myself (laughter).  But you know that's sort of the mass culture, that's Hollywood you know, most of us can get eight dollars together to go see a movie on the silver screen, but I don't have any originals on my walls.  You know it--it's sort of an elite world the world of artists, I think, am I wrong?
Speaker 2: I think so.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Correct me please.
Speaker 2: Art is done at all levels.  You can buy art at all levels.  Now if you're thinking about Ro- starting with a Romare Bearden that might not be what your pocketbook can handle.  But there are young artists getting started and they can provide you with original art work, you see what I'm saying?
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And people are exposed through galleries.  We do on an annual basis or bi-annual basis, we do a group show of the works by young artists [at the Malcolm Brown Gallery, Shaker Heights, Ohio], alright?  That's how they get--begin to get in--come into their own.  They're emerging.  Introductions, sometimes is what I might consider it as, you're introducing new talent.  You don't always have to start at the top of the heap.  You work within what your dollars can afford.  And there are--there is art work there for you if that's what your interest is.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187705
Speaker 1: So if there's something out there then for folks at the grassroots level where they might be able to see some of Mr. Brown's [HM Malcolm Brown] work, would it be in public art?  Where are we likely to see his work in northeast Ohio?
Speaker 2: Okay.  He's in the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio] collection.  The piece that is there is--well they rotate their paintings.  There is also a piece at the Langston Hughes Library [Clinton, Tennessee] a ceramic piece a--that's a--that's, (unclear) I guess it would be called public art because it's outdoors, it can be seen there.  And in many, many collections, locally and nationally, you'll find his work.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187974
Speaker 1: Okay, Mrs. Brown [HM Ernestine Brown] I just wanna talk about again the near quarter of a century experience that you have now as a gallery owner, co-owner and director [of Malcolm Brown Gallery, Shaker Heights, Ohio], and how you got from 1980 to 2004.  It's a known fact in northeast Ohio that Mr. Brown [HM Malcolm Brown] is a world-renowned artist you know.  What did it take?  What combination of factors really made that possible?
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Have to let go with a big sigh.  It's about hard work, it's about perseverance, it's about communication and it's about love of what you do and of each other.  Is what I think, we have been a team from the very beginning and the one thing that I respect about Malcolm--or like about Malcolm is that I think that he respects what I bring and I definitely respect what he brings.  And if there is no respect with what you do, you can't make progress.  Now you say is it always--I would say 95 percent of the time we're in--we're in tune, but my daddy [Isaac Turner] would say, tongue and teeth fall out at times.  And there's nothing any closer than those two (laughter).  But we have been able to work together through the years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 187975
Speaker 1: Can you tell me at what point in your career as a gallery director you started to network with other folks at the national level that would provide the showing for the artwork that's housed here in the gallery now?
Speaker 2: Well, almost from the beginning.  We opened September 18th, 196--1980, September 18th, 1980 is when we opened.  And do you know in October I made a telephone call to June Kelly.  Who is June Kelly?  June Kelly was Romare Bearden's manager.  She didn't know me and I didn't know her but I had high aspirations.  I wanted to show the artwork at its best.  So many times curators and collectors and curators have a strong impact on what collectors buy and what they think about artwork.  They have not always given the works of African American artists the respect that they need, I feel.  And that has a lot to do with being underrepresented in important places, so I called her.  I told her who I was, I told her what I was interested in doing, I'd like to--for her to consider it, I'll send her some information.  I said I have just opened but I've got big plans for the future.  And we developed a relationship and in less than a year, she gave me a date, okay?  Remember I'm talking to her October 1980.  November '82 [1982], we have an exhibition of his and nobody could believe that it would happen, nobody could believe it.  And I asked her after--well I sent her materials, I met her in--at the Virginia Fine Arts Museum [Virginia Museums of Fine Arts, Richmond, Virginia] that exhibition Romare Bearden 19, 19--1970 to nineteen, oh I forgotten--I forgotten the title of the show that was touring at the time.  But it was a four museum tour.  It opened at the--oh the museum in North Carolina.  At the Mint Museum in [Charlotte] North Carolina and it traveled and ended up at--it went to the Baltimore [Museum of Art, Baltimore, Maryland] and it went to the Virginia museum and I've forgotten the other museum.  But we went down to meet her and him at the Virginia Fine Arts Museum.  Malcolm is from Virginia.  And after that, I mean we had---we made the plan, and I said you didn't know me, what made you decide--and this is down the road, I didn't ask her that early on, way down the road.  She said to me that there was a kind of confidence in my voice when I talked to her that made her think that I--that this could happen, and it did.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And she's still my friend, and she now has the June Kelly Gallery in New York City [New York, New York] and we still collaborate.  In fact, the biggest thing that we've done when in the last three, three to five years the Grant Hill Collection [of African American Art], we were--we were involved from idea through acquisition.  His father, Calvin Hill, had been a customer of ours for about fifteen years.  And I told him about some things that I had access to and to make a long story very short, thirteen of those Beardens that are in that show that's traveled the Calvin Hill Collection, that's on exhibit, June Kelly and I sold those to him.  The [HM] Elizabeth Catletts and some of the Hughie Lee-Smiths the bulk of that exhibit, yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So June Kelly's been an important New York connection?
Speaker 2: Oh yes--
Story_ID: 187976
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous).
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Can you tell me a little bit about the arts community in northeast Ohio and some of our nearby neighbors that you work with in this whole visual arts arena?
Speaker 1: I have not worked with a lot of 'em.
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: As sad as it may sound, I have not worked with a lot of them.  We are "for-profit" and sometimes people have not been that friendly to for-profit opportunities.  I have been involved on committees with lots of things that have happened art-wise in town [Shaker Heights, Ohio], but as far as any kind of collaboration, from the Ohio Arts Council on down, there's not been any real connection.  Unfortunately, on my part, or their part, I don't know which to say, but there--there's not been no collaboration.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Story_ID: 187977
Speaker 1: You said Mr. Brown's [HM Malcolm Brown] work is included in the collection of the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: Can you tell me how that came about?
Speaker 2: Oh sure.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was--it was he was in the May--in a May Show there and he's been in several of the May Shows and it was the early 1990s I don't remember the year, is kind of fuzzy in my mind so I won't say the year.  But it was early 1990s and someone--as we were getting ready to leave, someone said Malcolm's painting was just purchased and I said really?  So we turned around and went back, I said are you serious?  And they said yes, and it was one of the large pieces of his jazz art work.  And we went back and we saw it had been purchased.  And we wanted to know who purchased it, and we were introduced to the female that did.  And she told us that she had purchased it, she had come into some money and she was gonna donate it to the Cleveland Museum of Art.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Which meant the painting never hung in her home.
Story_ID: 187978
Speaker 1: Well I know that you're also involved with the women's committee--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --at the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio].
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about your experiences in working with that group or other local organizations in support of the arts, visual and other?
Speaker 2: Well I've been on the Womens Council--in fact they used to call themselves the Junior Womens Council.  And we used to say Junior Womens Council?  I mean some of those women were eighty years old.  They eventually, they changed their name shortly thereafter.  But I have been involved with them working in various capacities on the council helping at the museum doing various kinds of things.  I have not volunteered--I, when I have an assignment, I do it, but to be able to sit on the desk on a weekly basis as some of the women can and have, I have not been able to do that.  Because of my business but I definitely have been involved with them.
Speaker 1: Is that more an educational organization support services in what way for the museum?
Speaker 2: Well, it's--its support to the museum.  It's the volunteer base at the museum.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They do--they do all kinds of things.  The folks that you see at the desk are Womens Council people. The flower arrangements that you see at the museum that's done by the--those people that do that kind of thing.  They're involved with Parade the Circle volunteer activities.  Some of them have become docents.  Only in recent years did they have docents that were not paid staff at the Cleveland Museum.  But some of them have become docents.  It--it's those kinds of activities.  Some of them are involved with the arts where they take it to the schools.  So they do those kinds of support services that would cost money if you didn't have volunteers, and they log huge amount of hours 'cause it's a large group more than five hundred women.
Speaker 1: Okay, I know that Parade the Circle have been sort of an arts festival, community celebration of the arts, visual and performing.
Speaker 2: Exactly right.
Speaker 1: And so and to the schools it's more outreach--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --for the museum--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --that these women provide.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay--
Story_ID: 187979
Speaker 1: In fact my daughter [Rhonda Saffold], when she graduated from [The] Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio], my daughter has a master's [degree] in art history, Rhonda Brown Saffold who lives in Chicago [Illinois]; she worked at the Cleveland Museum [of Art, Cleveland, Ohio] in the education department.  And after graduate- well she was there for a--September until June and then she would--toward to get her master's but there's art around--all around us and our--our sons also have their father's [HM Malcolm Brown] talent.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And we've got Malcolm [Brown] is an attorney in New York City [New York, New York] and Jeffrey [Brown] also New York City.  Malcolm graduate of--our boys went to university school, graduate of University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and then Rutgers Law [Rutgers School of Law, Newark, New Jersey], Jeffrey graduate of University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] and Jeffrey is the vice pres- is president of his own sales and marketing company, and that's our three.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And then my grandson, who is all of five years old as of this moment.  His name is Avery Jacob Saffold.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now were their opportunities for you to combine motherhood and being a wife and having the interest in the arts through any of the community groups, and I know there're many that you've worked with in northeast Ohio.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, oh yeah there were lots and lots and lots of--I co-chaired an Opening Day Committee with the opening of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame [Cleveland, Ohio].  I've been on lots of the arts orientated, RTA [regional transit authority] committee when they were selecting art around the various stations and artists and all of that.  I was the consultant--the art consultant for the Continental's [Continental Airlines, later, part of United Airlines] terminal D at Cleveland Hopkins International Airport [Cleveland, Ohio].  We have--we were guests of the U.S. ambassador to Zimbabwe 19--no let me back up.  I was consultant and, and did that with Cleveland Hopkins in 1999 and then 2002 we were guests of the ambassador, Tom McDonald at--in Zimbabwe.  Malcolm was invited to show at the National Gallery [of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe], six artists from across the country were selected; he happened to be one of those.  His work was also shown at--in the embassy there through the USIA [United States Information Agency], I think that's what the initials are.  They provide art work at various embassies and they do that all over the country and you've got major, major artists whose works go all over.  But there's been lots of en- [National] Coalition of 100 Black Women who we--do our arts thing, The Links, we do our arts thing.  I've been arts and letters chair with Delta Sigma Theta [Sorority]. It's just you know one thing after another always.
Speaker 2: Well I just want to ask a little bit about some of the organizations you mentioned in that last sentence, The Links organization.  What does that about, what's their mission?
Speaker 1: Well that's a women's service organization.  It was--they got started in the--in '46 [1946] and again it was to bring friends together because there weren't opportunities for them to do things outside of their community.  You know that's really the basis for Jack and Jill [of America, Inc.] and Tots and Teens and but it's all, all the organizations are service organizations.  They're not social--there's some special clubs that are social, but these are service organizations.
Speaker 2: And primarily reaching out to African American women--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and their families?
Speaker 1: Exactly right.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Un-huh.
Speaker 2: All right.  And it's true of Delta Sigma Theta as well?
Speaker 1: Exactly, exactly.  In fact we just--just this past weekend we were involved at the library--The Links of Cleveland [Ohio] they're celebrating their fifty-fourth year.  The Links in Cleveland fifty plus four and it was then--their papers are going to be donated the first twenty-five years were donated to the archives at the Western Reserve Historical Society [Cleveland, Ohio] and after this exhibition and with doing--being taking place in March with that being Women's Month, it--that--that's all connected and we've tied in black women's club and the club group movement of women during the--at the exhibit that is down at the Cleveland Public Library [Cleveland, Ohio].
Story_ID: 187980
Speaker 1: Now this is it's a wonderful time I think to be an American in this presidential election year.  I'd like to think that we're at a crossroads and maybe we'll choose the right path in supporting the arts.  I understand the President [George Walker Bush] has proposed an increase, the budget for the National Endowment for the Arts.  But as someone who has been watching this situation for a while now what do you think about the future of support for the arts in America?
Speaker 2: My prayer is that the support will be there, my concern is that the dollars never trickle down or rarely trickle down to some of the smaller agencies.  Usually and maybe justifiably so, many times the dollars go to those that are already up there, out there doing things.  And when I think about the need for our [Cleveland] African American Museum here in Cleveland [Ohio], I'm very disappointed.  And I hope that that the support level comes to the--down to where the money--where the funding can get to helping some of the smaller agencies.
Story_ID: 187981
Speaker 1: And I guess one of my final questions--it's not necessarily the last thing we need to talk about, but something that I'm wondering about.  Is--it seems that your work in recent decades has just been one twenty-five year or twenty-four year celebration of African American culture through the visual arts.  And--do you think that race and ethnicity will continue to--to shape our vision of what art ought to be or be an important part of shaping the visual arts as we move through the 21st century in the same way that it was so important in the 20th century?
Speaker 2: That gives me pause for some deep thinking because race shapes everything in our lives, no matter how we cut it.  I think that it will have, it will be a part of lots of things that happen, lots of decisions that will be made.  We're an equal opportunity exhibitor [Malcolm Brown Gallery, Shaker Heights, Ohio], but our focus has been on the African American artist.  And so many times you notice that when they talk about an African American artist, they're the only ones that they identify. Even when you see abstract work, you'll see where someone or whoever's reviewing the show, they will make some reference to it.  You just wonder will--or my hope is that it will get to the point that art can be evaluated and appreciated for what it presents and not necessarily by who is making it.  Do you understand what I'm saying?  Many times we're put into boxes, and I've had that discussion with folks.  They said, how come it's always oh, that black artist or that African American artist or they're talking about the history or talking about poverty or talking about neglect that seems to be the only thing that they could connect us with, when they get ready to review what we have presented.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  I had the pleasure of working for a little season at the Cleveland Museum of Art [Cleveland, Ohio] and I remember a book they used to sell titled 'The Art of Exclusion' ['The Art of Exclusion: Representing Blacks in the Nineteenth Century'] and it talked about the absence or near absence of African American artists in major collections and major shows.  And if that was the story through most of the 20th century, what do you suppose would be the title of the book for the 21st?  Not 'The Art of Exclusion.'
Speaker 2: (Laughter) A prayer for inclusion.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay?  And prayer would not be the right word to use, but it--it would have to deal with inclusion in, in telling the true story of artistic talent in America.  I think it should be all inclusive.
Speaker 1: Alright.  That's a wonderful note to end on, but I do want to ask are there other things that you'd like to say before we close out our session?
Speaker 2: Well I'd like to say that I have been pleased and honored to have been a part of this and thank you so very much for taking the time to hear our story.  It's a small story but I think it's important to the arts community and I appreciate you and what you have done in and around our city.  You have made a major contribution and I'm most appreciative of it.
