Story_ID: 88868
Speaker 1: Okay. So can you state your name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: Okay.  My name is Keter Betts, and that's, a lot of people put it K-E-E-T-E-R, K-E-T-T-E-R, but it's actually like Peter but spelled with a K, K-E-T-E-R.  And the last name is B-E-T-T-S, real name William Thomas Betts.  And I was born in 1928, July the 22nd, in a little town called Port Chester, New York, which is twenty-seven miles from New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay, and today's date again?
Speaker 2: Today's date is the 28th of May 2003.
Speaker 1: And our location?
Speaker 2: Our location is in Silver Spring [Maryland].  In fact in my home, in my house--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Address?
Speaker 2: Only come when invited, 2205 Quinton Road.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) I'm sorry. You've gotta be (unclear) Okay, and can I have your profession please?
Speaker 2: My (laughing) profession is lying for one, and the other is playing the bass fiddle and that's what I've been doing since 19--when I came out of high school, 1946.
Story_ID: 88869
Speaker 1: And there are five--this is just the beginning part and we'll get over it soon.  They're five questions--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Really?
Speaker 1: They're little "People Magazine"-ish, and just short answers--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Short answers.  I'd like to know what your favorite food is.
Speaker 2: Everything.  Well, I was born in an Italian town, it was eighty percent Italian, so spaghetti is actually one of my favorites.  Seafood, in traveling around the word, I found out that wherever I go, I eat what's there.  And you become, you know, you learn more about food, you appreciate the various ethnic foods and so, I eat what's there.  If I don't like it, I order something else.
Speaker 1: Now, since you've travel so much, what is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I never really had like a vacation; usually I was playing so much.  I did go on quite a bit on Lee Elder's Golf Tournaments, they would be in North Carolina, South Carolina various places.  But I never really had like a real long extended vacation where I did nothing.
Speaker 1: Do you have any favorite color?
Speaker 2: Brown is basically it.
Speaker 1: Time of the year?
Speaker 2: July 22nd (laughter) I love to see that.  Every year I say well, you know.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) and that's when the world became a better place. (laughing)
Speaker 2: For me cause (laughter) I finally I see the light.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying so forth is "Good Morning" and "I'll see you later."  I think that, I can say that to anybody throughout the world and that's, you know.  Good morning or "Thank you," Thank you is really one of the best.  Cause I mean if somebody's doing something for you and can say "Thank you very much." Kindness never hurts.
Story_ID: 88870
Speaker 1: Now let's talk about the-- your name; how you got "Keter," you were getting ready to say--tell that.
Speaker 2: It was a lady who was a friend of my mother's. When I was born, she used to come by the house and she'd say, "Oh he looks like a little Mosquito."  And she'd come by every now and then and say "How's my little Skeeter?" And she started getting an impediment of speech and it went from Skeeter to--no, from "Mosquito" to "Skeeter" and it was shorten each time.  And then it went to "Keter," and by that time the kids in the neighborhood had picked it up and then that was it. So Mosquito, Skeeter, Keter.
Speaker 1: So you were never known as "Billy" or "Tom?"
Speaker 2: Some of the school in Junior High School, I was called Will, Willie, not Billy but Willie but Keter became it.
Story_ID: 88871
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about your mother can you give us her name and tell us about--  what you know about her growing up, her family background?  Do you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, my whole family grew up in Wilmington, North Carolina.  And there was four sisters--no there were seven by my grandfather.  And my great aunt used to do domestic work for very rich families.  And going to the big high places, South Hampton, this and that, the New England states and she started, she had my mother come up to Port Chester [New York City] and then got her established.  You know it was like bringing them up and stationing them with various things, with various jobs.  And that's how my mother got started there--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What's her name?
Speaker 2: Mariah.
Speaker 1: Maiden name?
Speaker 2: Mariah Betts.
Speaker 1: Betts, okay.
Speaker 2: And there was--I had another aunt Isabel Betts, Dorcas [ph.] and Elizabeth but they called her Liza Baby.  She was the one that really kind of influenced me musically.  She had, she couldn't read a note or something, but she could sit down at a piano and hear something say boop, boom, just play it.  Just self-taught, but I mean but no piano to practice with. You know you had some genius people just, I can do that, and do it.
Story_ID: 88872
Speaker 1: And so how I got the music part came was-- I was in the fifth grade and my mother [Mariah Betts] sent me around the corner.  We had an account with this Italian store, she sent me around the corner to get a loaf of bread and bottle of milk.  And when I came out, something came behind and I said, "Whoa, what is that," and I followed it and it was an Italian parade.  And I walked over all over town for about four hours following this parade behind the drums.  And when I came home, I had the loaf of bread squeezed up, milk was warm, you know (laughter) and my mother like to killed me.  "Where have you been?  I have been worried to death, somebody said you followed behind a parade," and I said, "That's right."  And then I was sitting there sniffling and so forth and I said "Mom, I wanna play the drums."  And I guess she figured well, if I give him a licking, he keeps on ticking, he must be serious.  So I got, next month, I got a little snare drum.  And I got a picture of me with shorts, polo shirt and--and that's it.  I realized that the way things, there are that certain things happen in life is that, I guess I coined the phrase, there's two clocks in the world, there's only two.  There's one that can wake you up anytime in twenty-four hours that you wanna get up, you know, but there's another one that can go off inside of your head and point you in a direction that you best suited for, for a profession in life and you must hear that clock, cause a lot of people don't hear that.  So when you hear it, then you became like the captain of your own ship because you, setting up your destiny.  And those that don't hear it, they become row boaters.  They just sit in a row boat and they go along with the tide. Hey can you pull me along, because they have no ambition, no motor, no sails.  But then as you set a goal, when you run into storms, you have to alter the course, but you're going toward that goal, which is the most important thing.  And I knew right from that day, from that parade, when I got that first drum, that's it, I gonna be a musician.
Story_ID: 88873
Speaker 1: Keter, let me take you back a little bit before that time, and I'm wondering if just take you back to the town of Port--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Port, Port.
Speaker 1: Port Chester.
Speaker 2: Port, not Poor.
Speaker 1: Port, Port, I know Port Chester.
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.  We make this distinction because a lot of people say Poor Chester, any, it not--he wasn't poor (laughter)
Speaker 1: But so can you tell me what that community was like.  I mean, I know it was eighty percent Italian.  But can you even just describe the block that grew up on?
Speaker 2: I grew up on two or three different blocks.  Stayed in a private home and then, let's see, we lived, I lived up on Garibaldi Street, then I went to my stepfather's hometown.  A little town called Mountain City, Tennessee, and I spent a couple of years there, which was different, then I came back.  And we lived on South Main Street, South Region Street and I think in 1940 or something, we moved down to South Main Street, and that's where its--from there, but it's a big apartment.
Speaker 1: Did you know your birth father?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't at that time--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You didn't, oh, okay.  So your mother [Mariah Betts] got married--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Later, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  Now, what, so you were really growing up around your mother and your aunts?
Speaker 2: Aunts, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And your aunts' names for, were there three--you said seven?
Speaker 2: Isabel [ph.] -(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Isabel the one who had--could play the piano, right?
Speaker 2: No, Isabel the one who later joined the WACs [Women's Army Corps] and so forth, Liza Baby.  Liza she was a hairdresser.  Dorcas [ph.] she worked in the laundry, they were the ones that, you know, kept me straight and they were like the--well if you want to talk about the mafia, they were the mafia to me.  I mean, they ruled, you know when I want to.  Say like I want to borrow some money or something, you have to go before the board, and they don't say any--nothing was ever said about when you gonna pay back; because you knew you were gonna pay back.  And that was the set family rule.  But the good thing about that was the fact that any time that you needed anything, you could go to your family, and ensure that you paid back.  You wouldn't have any problems compared with to like people now that they have to go to a loan company and they have exorbitant amounts, you know of money to pay.  And the other thing they ruled you up to a point of coming up with excess money.  You don't come in the house with money that you can't--that's not accountable.
Story_ID: 88874
Speaker 1: I remember when I first started playing bass and John Lewis was, not the The John Lewis of Modern Jazz [Quartet], but piano player from South Norwalk [Connecticut] and he got a job--got me a job one afternoon in South Norwalk in a private little Supper Club, I played bass about three or four months, and it's in the afternoon, a Saturday afternoon, and so, we're in there and were playing, just the two of us, in the center of the room and I saw this gentleman come in with a grey-- well you could tell right away, you know, gray suit on. You know, tailor made, white on white shirt beautiful blonde and he sat down and then he got up and he came over and he said "Yous guys know Stardust?"  I said yes, he reached back pulled a big roll, put a ten dollar bill on the piano and said "Play it.  Watch me, I'm sitting over there, every time I do this, yous guys play Stardust."  So we did, and I turned so I could watch him and we played (singing) one chorus, cocktail waitress come, ten dollar bill put in piano.  We made fifty dollars.  Now the job was only paying seven dollars, see this is 1946 and job is only paying seven dollars, we made fifty dollars from this one man.  So we split that, twenty-five and covered the seven and I came in that evening, I had 32 dollars.  And I "Yold you I was going to amount to something didn't I?"  "Where'd you get this money from?"  "I made it doing-" "You said you were making seven dollars." "That's true."  I had to go through the McCarthy Hearings (laughing) I mean you just didn't come into the house with no extra money, unless you could account for it.  And what, "He wanted to hear Body-"  "Yep," "And he paid ten dollars to hear one chorus of Body and Soul?"  Which was unbelievable, you know but she, half an hour before I finally got that through. But that's the kind of bringing up that you had that kept you going straight and narrow, you know.
Speaker 2: So you had lots of mothers?
Speaker 1: You had more damn uncles and aunts all over the town, I mean (laughing) everybody was your uncle.  Mother would say "Miss Masanella [ph.] called and said you and her son were riding a bicycle," and she lived on the other side of town.  So everybody watched--this is what from that phrase "it takes a village to raise a child."  In my hometown, there were 22,000 population everybody raised everybody's kids.
Story_ID: 88875
Speaker 1: Now, do you have an earliest memory at all of sort of growing up, an earliest memory?
Speaker 2: I can account, I just don't remember coming out the womb but other than that, I can account for most (laughter)
Speaker 1: (Laughter) what is your earliest memory?  I mean your ear--you know we all have an earliest memory.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, I mean going to church a lot as a--I guess I can go maybe six or seven years old going to church.  Going down to Playland [Playland Amusement Park], which was a beach and in Rye, New York, we used to do that quite a bit, and kids that I played with we played marbles and different things and so, sure.  And then when I got interested in music, then that was--then I start having a good memory about everything because now I had to grab the hope, the part of life that you wanted to get into and then now you gonna to remember everything. Yeah.
Story_ID: 88876
Speaker 1: Now if you take yourself back just to your--to Port Chester [New York] in growing up, are they are sights, smells or sounds that remind you of growing up, can you tell me?
Speaker 2: Oh, sure, the-- there was a train, the train that goes from Boston [Massachusetts] to New York, oh maybe about 200 yards from where I lived on South Region Street, which is U.S. One, and after a while you didn't hear it.  The trains were going by, that sound (makes train whistle noise), didn't--I went down to visit my great-grandmother, I can say when I was like eight, nine, ten, my mother [Mariah Betts] send me down there in the summer time maybe two months, something.  She lived on a big farm and that was fascinating because living in like this town with a high up fourth floor apartment.  But out there running with chickens and, that was another whole adventure, you know.  And I loved it, I loved the train sound, I thought Washington [D.C.] was--I came through here one evening in the moon was shining bright and it was the Capitol and I said, boy that's a beautiful ci--that look better to me than the Empire State Building in New York [New York City, New York], cause you're always so far from the Empire State Building.  But I can remember a whole lot about that.
Speaker 1: Any smells?
Speaker 2: Arnold's Bread, Arnold's Bread was a--he started a little shop about two blocks from where I lived and he used to bake at night.   And everybody go by and smell, boy that smells.  Paul [Dean] Arnold and then he finally, he made a big hit with his bread and then opened a big factory in Port Chester and that was known [Arnold Bakers].  And also Life Savers, Port Chester was the home of the Life Savers.  It was on North Main Street, huge--passed-big factory.  And so it was well known for Arnold's Bread, Life Savers, the home of Ed Sullivan and also Mickey Finn who drew cartoonist who drew.  No Lank Leonard was his name, who drew Mickey Finn and then after that there was me (laughing)
Speaker 1: That came out of Port Chester [New York] (laughter)
Speaker 2: (Laughter) Yeah.
Speaker 1: That's nice.
Story_ID: 88877
Speaker 1: Now, what were you like as a child, what were you--were you, you know you said that you laughed, you laughed a lot, right?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But were you mischievous, were you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, no, no, no, no, because, not really, you know why?  Because you had a mission, see once that instrument got into me, then fun and games, I mean this is ser--yeah, I'm gonna have fun but not nothing ridiculous, you know.  We didn't have anything like no gangs or anything like that, I mean, none of that stuff.  That was, it was too many governors around everywhere you walked somebody just, you know.  No and then when you're on a mission, you could tell that part of your life because you don't see no need for it in the first place.  I did teach Sunday School to little kids and sang in the choir, and I know that--I remember we used to be in church all day, do the morning thing and then they'd have something after, then 2:00 and then stay around 'til 5:00 or something, you know, so that was it.
Speaker 1: What Baptist Church?
Speaker 2: Methodist.
Speaker 1: Methodist, oh A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, A.M.E.
Speaker 1: And, but were you a person who sort of lived in your head, did you have a great imagination?  I'm just trying to understand what Keter Betts was like.  You know were you introspective, were you a questioner, were you--I mean you say you weren't mischievous.  What were you, what did you dream--you know you said you like cowboys.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, goes to movies, yeah, yeah.  But I think I--main thing I dreamt was--after music got imbedded, and bought me a little radio and put under my pillow at night and I could listen to, oh, the bands coming in from New Orleans [Louisiana] and here's some hotel.  And St. Louis [Missouri] used to have a big hotel, the Roosevelt Hotel used to broadcast, the Apollo [Theater in Harlem, New York] and it was just, it was music all the way.  There was a kid that--we went all the way through school, Chester Ruzio [ph.] and we sat next to each other and he used to draw, he was an artist. And I mean he could draw airplanes and straight lines and some, and I would try that and I-mines would be wrinkly, I used to marvel it.  And we--at one of the reunions I've gone, I don't know, fiftieth or something like that, we were talking.  And I said "You know, I would just marvel how you could draw like that."  He said, "Well you know the difference between you and me?" He said, "I can see and you could hear it."  And I never thought of it that way, you know, because, actually when I went into the band, I wanted to go in to play drums.  But let's see the first year in high school the music teacher said the tuba player is graduating, anybody want to take a tuba home?  You didn't put up my hand did ya?  You didn't--you weren't
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: My hand went up (laughing) and the next thing I know, I'm lugging this big tuba home, I'm still playing drums now.  I'm playing the timpanis Glockenspiel, but I lugged this tuba home and had the beginner's book and I spent that summer learning how to play tuba.  And then in the Concert Band and the Marching Band and of course for all the football games.  Well back then they used to wear those heavy wool suits, you know, and we get a lot of snow up there in that part of New York state.  And I was cold and putting that steel up against your lips and rainy, and I said "Well if I gotta do this, I'll join the team."  So the next year, I joined the team and I played on the second team.  I played a half back and one day Coach brought in a new play and we're trying it out and the fella came through the hole and I nailed him, I mean I just crushed him.  And so then they reversed it and they put me on the first team and doing the same play and when I came through the whole, a gentleman named J. R. DeBruno was about 6 four, 270 pounds.  He picked me up and he came down on me and when I got through I said, I quit.  And I got up and I started walking off the field and the Coach said, you can't quit now, I quit, I'm gonna be a musician, I wanna live (laughing) and then that was it.  Cause I had my purpose in mind, and this was just something different but music is gonna be it, but when I got, I said "that's it."
Story_ID: 88878
Speaker 1: Well let's take you the day you saw the parade, you know, was that your-that wasn't, was that your first parade that you had seen?  What about that parade was different from other parades?
Speaker 2: Because of, the fact is, as I came out of the store, the drums were coming by and that's what that really--if you see from the beginning, you know, somebody's is doing the--what you call it?  And then the trumpets and trom--but the drums are going by and--oh my God, listen to that, and there I went, and that was it.
Speaker 1: And you followed them for--the whole story is that you followed them--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Four hours, all over town.
Speaker 1: But what was fascinating about the drums to your--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was the alarm clock; it was the alarm clock ringing.  And constantly ringing to tell you this is the direction that you going into in your life, that's all.
Speaker 1: Now when you, that's when you were in fifth grade, correct? You were, let's see you were 10, was it 10-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Around 10 or 11 something like that, yeah.
Speaker 1: And then so your mother [Mariah Betts] she goes and gets this snare drum, do you remember how you felt that day she got one--when and got the snare drum?
Speaker 2: It will be like somebody feels today like hitting in the million dollars, hitting the lottery for a million dollars.  That was the--I mean the feeling that I had that this can be the start of something big.  And just that little snare drum, that's, you know, "That's it; I'll take it from here." As they say, the old saying, "Don't need no more help, I'll fix this flat all by myself" and that was it, that was the start.  And it's obsession inside of you that you heard that alarm clock and it's pointing in the direction that you're best suited for.  It knows when you're best suited for it that you can go further than just the basics, you know.  And when I do the clinics, I try to not only to--I don't try to make people become players of instruments and so forth.  I mean to be like professional just to learn a little bit, you find, you see a heavy-- the Asians and a lot of European families and nationalities have their kids learn some music.  Not that they're gonna be professional but the thing is it teaches them discipline.  And then once you learn that discipline, you can go in any other field and you've got that imbedded into you.  So it's almost like an inoculation, you been inoculated, so then you can go into the territory where there's you know malaria and so forth and it won't bother you.  And this is what I know a lot of doctors who are piano players, and some even worked their way through college.  They play different instruments and it helped them when they went into their other profession, because they had that discipline built in.
Story_ID: 88879
Speaker 1: Now when you got the snare drums were lessons a part of it or you were just sort of playing them?  When did you start with the lessons and--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Not until I got a full set, I had to work my way up to get a full set.  The first set that I had, was, was it was sort like a hand me down. I don't know how much I paid for it, but it was--the table all looked like the green felt pool table with the coconuts and all that, and I put a light inside and the light would go around with the moon and all that.  I mean I was, I was hot stuff, I just sit at night and look at these drums in my living room and my--this boy where we lived the last-- the apartment building and everybody in the apartment building would let me practice.   And they say okay go practice, in case anybody's sick, they would say, you know, so and so is sick, usually most everybody worked so when I come home from school, I'd play until about 6:00 and then.  And I had a lot of encouragement from all of the kids some would be standing outside, across the street on the corner, (unclear) that just yelling at me.  Hey Keter, keep going and it was the encouragement that's another thing.  But you doing what you want to do and of course you know that the best way for you to fly some place is that after you take off, you have to go up and to go the next level.
Speaker 1: So when was the next level, was it when you were 13--was it 13, no?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know.
Speaker 1: When did you start taking lessons in New York City, how old were you then?
Speaker 2: I guess I was about, I was about, yeah 14, 15, 16, 17, yeah around in there.  Then I would--see I was playing a lot of little private--well not so much private parties, dances and basket--after basketball games, Italian block dances, you know, and a few weddings, and so I had money.  And I would go down to every Saturday go down and take my drum lessons. I had a guy named Bill West, who was at about 45th or something and Broadway and I would map out, it was at The Roxy, The Strand, The Paramount, The Capitol [Theatre], The Apollo [Theater],  all of the theatres, and see what bands that I wanted to see each Saturday.  So my lesson was 12:30 to one and then I might stay to see two or three different shows, I'm seeing all the drummers.  And I would just the more you see, the more you saying "Send me in, I wanna be in that ring."  And then you walk down the street and you meet some people--I couldn't go in the night clubs.  Sometimes I would be down until about 8 or 9:00 and then go by 52nd Street, but I was too young to go in but you could stand and see Art Tatum and you stand there and look at them playing and hear a little bit.  "Hey kid move on," and then Ben Webster.  Now, I got to do that, I got to do that, and that's it, and you make that determination in your mind that I am gonna be one of those in some way or the other.
Story_ID: 88880
Speaker 1: I was asking about her [Betts' mother, Mariah Betts] and you were saying how--?
Speaker 2: I worked my way to get another bass.  A friend of mine in Port Chester [New York]--I used to play some jobs for him, he was a bass player, but he wasn't really a bass--he was a bass holder.  And he started booking a lot of big block parties and Italian weddings and he wanted to sell a bass and he called me.  He said "Listen, you know come by and look at this bass," and so I bought it from him.  Anyhow around--I went by (unclear) and we have to go out to go on tour, and I would meet him in New York, and I laid my bass down on the suitcase, sort of propped it.  And the wind was kind of strong that morning, and the wind blew the bass over and I just picked it back up and put it on the suitcase.  However, when I got to Washington [D.C.], I found out that the bass had cracked and fortunately I had this other bass, so I'm saying I called my mother and I said listen, can you come tomorrow and bring my bass and I told her, you know what time we coordinated.  What time to get the train and I would meet her at the train station, Union Station.  So she had somebody to drive her to New York City and then to the bass, and all.  Now, the bass could not go inside the cars, and so consequently she had to stand outside in the hallway. Well, you know as you coming from New York to Washington, this side might open here or that side and she would just have to move the bass over to the other--at that time it was like five and half hours to come from New York to Washington.  And I met her at the station, and I had the other bass and I gave her that, put it on for her and she gave me this bass, she went right back.  And I thought about it, that's eleven hours that your mother is making a sacrifice for you and then that's something, that a factor you put into your mind, you say, I am going to make her proud of me.  I am going to make something of myself, because when somebody would do that, you know, remember with all of the encouragement, you know that, you know, you gotta have good results.
Story_ID: 88881
Speaker 1: But that was the selling factor and then, another time, I came home, I was staying a lot in New York City [New York], and I came home, and my mother [Mariah Betts] said, "How you doing with money," I said, "I'm doing fine mom."  She said "I mean are really son?"  "Hey mom, come on mom, I'm grown, now hey, yeah, you know.  I'm doing pretty good," and she said "Boy, did you hear what I said to you?"  And that was like somebody knocking me upside the head, I mean it's (unclear) Yes, ma'am (laughing).  She said "Now, you can do what you want to do, but you send me some money every week, I'll put it in your bank account, here at the bank.  I don't need it cause I got my own, and send whatever you want, send what you can, and you'll have some money.  I'll make sure that you not" I did not--when I looked around within about two months, I had seven hundred dollars, which that would, you know.  Now we went out on this tour, go out on this long tour and gave the itinerary, that's three months itinerary.  Looking at it, wow, yeah working five and six days a week, off one night, figured out what you can save.  And then you get out, and what they used to do is kind of pad the itinerary, this is going back to practice--back in the 50's [1950's] and then you get about--you be out about a week, two weeks, they say "Oh listen, look at that date so and so, they haven't sent in the deposit, that's been cancelled.  And so and so and so," by the time we get out to Texas, we were stranded for a week and I had rented like a little--well it was a little house and we're stranded.  So I asked, I don't even want to call his name, but I asked the band leader, you know, can I have some money or something, and he said "I don't have any money, I'm out here stranded like you are," I said "Okay."  I called my mother and I said "Listen, we're stranded here, I don't know how long I'll be, but I don't--I didn't bring much money with me" and she said "How much you want?"  And I said something.  She went to the bank, sent me something, like a hundred dollars, which was a whole lot of money then.  And that night, I went out to--and it was like the only local bar in that area in Beaumont, Texas.  And there was my bandleader in there setting up the house, just setting up the house and so forth and then he looked around and saw me said, "Oh you need some money?  I just got some money," I said, "No, I'm fine."  "Well you told me yesterday," I said, "I'm fine, I don't need anything."  "Well come on have a drink," I said "No, I don't want nothing to drink;" I just want to get out of the house.  And I said, "Well, I'll see you," and when I walked home, that was the second time I said to myself, that made me know how to be independent to--you know just a few words.  Boy did you hear what I say?  That's all it was, and didn't have to preach a long thing, and I got the message and it's up here.  And you find sometimes, when you, when you listen to the truth, the end results, you get the truth, you know.
Speaker 2: So your mother was a wise woman?
Speaker 1: Very much.
Story_ID: 88882
Speaker 1: And so--let's go back and talk about how you went from drums to bass, you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: When we move to--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: And tuba and a little tuba--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: See when we moved down to South Main Street, which a U. S. One, we lived on--we had a ground floor there, one, two, three, so basically it was almost four floors, no elevator.  Now I've worked my way up to--you see the drum set over there?  I worked my way up to a big set like that.  No, that's not the drum set, that another two floor tom-toms and all of that, and I got three trips, four flights of stairs.  And then you got to go, if you playing dances, it might be some dancehall that's two fights up and so forth, and you got to lug all that up, set it up, and playing here.  And I said I'm strong and I said, oh, this is killing me and something about the bass that I fooled around with it in school for the last year.  Cause I was the (is that rain? Yes) I was the director of the chorus for the last two years at the high school.  And I could hear deeper than from what drums was giving me.  I heard more music cause drums you usually hear sounds, you know, of rhythm but I heard more music and I used to fool around with the bass.  And in school, we had a couple of basses there, and so I decided maybe I wanna play bass and sure enough I changed to that.
Story_ID: 88883
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Now, when you said--well one, you became director of the chorus?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: So who was--who was head of the chorus at that time?
Speaker 1: A gentleman who is the music teacher there.  His name was Clement [ph] Barton, B-A-R-T-O-N.
Speaker 2: So he saw a lot in you.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: How did he influence you?
Speaker 1: He's the one that gave me the green light on the--I guess it was the fact that--it was something that he saw and he says, I'm making you the--I sang in the chorus the first year, and then was involved in music and we had this--the school used to put on--the senior used to put on their play every year.  And they--the kids wrote play, made the scenery, wrote the music and the words and everything.  And I jumped right in with that and I was featured the next year in tap dance thing and the drum solo and so he said you're it.  And we had--I think about thirty-six in the chorus and there was only three blacks and, you know that was up there--there was not a lot of problems compared to other places.  And so the last three years, I was the director of the chorus.  And wherever we at to go outings and so forth and then I started hearing more music through the chorus and that's when I wanted to develop more or less.  And so bass was the next thing that I just loved that deep sound and that vibration, and I said okay, that's it.  And then I only make one trip up the stairs, and one trip down, compared three with the drums.  It was easy to meet girls, with just one trip up and down (laughing).  Cause with drums, by the time you pack it up and everything, but "No don't, wait, I'm almost through," I don't know.  Maybe I was good for me (laughing).
Speaker 2: So when you--you said you started to hear more sounds--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was there other things that developed during that time when you were directing the chorus--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, you certainly a pitch, your pitch and your direction to a certain point of how to go the way you want, the way you hear something that you want to go.  I guess that will be a little difficult to explain to you to a point that when you start hearing more sounds.  Compared to drums, I mean I only heard the sounds of the rhythmic thing.  But when you start listening to, to music--there was one picture that knocked me out and its one little part in it, Hans Christian Anderson, Danny Kaye.  And then one little segment of the kids--he and the kids are singing, and the kids are going (humming) and he was going (humming) and the counterpart goes, and I just said wow.  And I stayed to see the whole movie again for maybe that thirty seconds.  And that made an impression of me, oh wow.  Cause I started to hearing how music develops some--with notes compared to rhythms, which I'd been rhythmically-- for so many years.  And that's when--okay.  You know once you're in the trap, once you go in the trap door, you might as well explore where your are, cause you're caught, you know.
Story_ID: 88884
Speaker 1: You know what's interesting, so you were a movie buff, but you were also listening to the music--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.  I saw--was one thing that impressed me and another one was one of those movies that had dealt with a bar, I don't if it was John Garfield or something.  And they went to this bar--and the trio played was Art Tatum and Oscar Pettiford and I don't remember who was on drums.  And only this small thing but Pettiford took for the first eight bars of this song, The Man I Love, and he (humming) I said, wow, I never heard a bass, because usually you just hear the bass (humming) I said--I want to see--I stayed, saw it again.  And I went another day and saw it two, three times and just little things, you know when you forming your mind--it's just like when you're cooking a big meal, you have to have a lot of other little things that come in to make this meal a grand deal so that I add to it.  And you're grabbing everything that you can grab that something that's important that somebody who's a professional does.  You grab a little bit here and little bit there, a little bit there, and then you actually molding yourself.
Story_ID: 88885
Speaker 1: Now this, the time that you're coming along, is anyone influencing you or that you really like?  You know, you're in high school still.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So who are your, sort of your heroes at that point of--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, with high school band we had--we had a regular band; they used to play stock music, like Harry James and Tommy Dorsey and some [Count] Basie things, and what not.  But there was one guy--in fact I talked to him recently, his name is Jake Pasquale, and he loved Roy Eldridge and he was this freckled faced red headed kid and all he talked about was Roy Eldridge.  And then we use to bring some--we talked about that and we started listening to, you know I started buying jazz records, albums.  And little by little, you know going into that circle then you want to investigate more, then I subscribed to "Downbeat" and "Metronome," you know, and as early teenager still in high school.  And I'm reading about everybody, this and that, and who's going where and so forth in music.  And one day, I was playing baseball up a field and, it was hot and then a couple, we took a break and laid back and looked up at the sky and this airplane went by.  And I'm sitting there, wonder if I'm gone ever be able to fly in an airplane, and it's like a--that's like a--I don't know, just a fantasy thing.  What will it be like to fly in an airplane?  This is not with no musical instrument, just to fly.  And then the next, you know when it came to me, you're going to fly from here--really you're gonna fly, then carry your instruments, oh.  You know see you going up that ladder and what you wondered about, you're achieving it without even knowing you were going to.
Story_ID: 88886
Speaker 1: Now when you-- so you-- when did you start--so you're head of the chorus and you already starting taking lessons in New York.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In New York City, okay.  And you say that, at that time, you know this is Big Bands, right?  Big Bands that you're, that was the Big Band Era right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that was Big Band, but see I couldn't--I was too young to go to the nightclubs.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: See I couldn't go, and you had to be twenty-one to go into the nightclubs.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you weren't sneaking into the nightclubs?
Speaker 2: No because, see I was going downtown to take my drum lesson, I think it was 46th in Broadway, and it was The Roxy, The Strand, The Paramount, The Capitol [Theater], that's all.  I'm seeing every Big Band that comes through, looking at all the drummers.  What happened was, this one time I saw that Cab Calloway was going to be there.  And his drummer was, oh, what's his name?
Speaker 1: Was it Cozy Cole?
Speaker 2: Cozy Cole.  And I said now--it was a big name.  And I said I gotta see Cozy Cole.  So I took my drum lesson then I went over there and a new drummer took--I just joined the man took it so, and I didn't get his name and he was good.  And so when it was over, the first time I ever got that bold, I asked somebody, usher "How you get back stage" and then when I got back stage, a gentleman came out and I asked him I would like to meet the drummer.  And he went in and he came back said he's already gone to lunch.  I said I just graduated from high school last month, and I've been seeing all the drummers and so forth.  He [Milt Hinton] said "Come kid, I'll take you to lunch."  And so went out and I talked how I fooled around with the bass, you know in school and I was thinking that I might want to play that, as a side instrument.  And he said "Well let me give you the name of a gentleman here in New York that if you decide to play bas--" and I said okay.  So I called this gentleman the next week and when I came down from my drum lesson, he gave me the address where he was working.  He was working in the theatre, and he was one of the--you know, I think he was one the second black musician to get a job in the pits in New York.  Because that was really closed off around this time.  But he told me he was too busy and he said "I'll give you the name of a fella in Brooklyn [New York] if you ever decide to play bass."  And so I called this gentleman, and he said "Well come over," I said "I don't have a bass."  But he said well come over and let me see what you can do.  So the next week I came after my drum lesson and I went to Brooklyn and I just played what I fooled around with in school and so forth.  And I used to hear some things and I could pick it out on the bass, you know.  And one was Charlie Ventura's song (humming) and I learned how to do that.  So he said, "I'll give you lessons on that, when you get a bass" so then I went back home to "Family meeting" (laughing). "Mama, I want to buy a bass," "What?"  They said, "Do you intend to amount to something?"  "Yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am, yes, ma'am."  "Okay" and that was it.  And of course all of the jobs I'm playing and so forth, there's a big bowl up in the kitchen that you put the money in there periodically until you paid them back.  And that was--you just paid exactly what it was and whatever time it took, just pay back, that's all.
Story_ID: 88887
Speaker 1: You know how much--do you remember how much your first bass cost?
Speaker 2: It was a brand new bass, I think cost around two hundred dollars or something, yeah brand new Kay Basses.
Speaker 1: And that was 1940?
Speaker 2: That was 1946.
Speaker 1: Forty six, okay.
Speaker 2: And I--I found out that I was doing something that later on I learned is what everybody should do when they buy an instrument.  That everybody--they should do this--it's not so much that they haven't stop practicing on it and so forth it's to get it and put it down and look at it.  And imagine what can you do with this that's different than anybody else out there?  How can you make a name for yourself with this?  You know, it's like--okay, here's an example.  You decide that somebody says to you, I say you--your husband or something says you, "Honey, go get your a car.  I'm buying you, you know, I'll pay for you a car."  Alright, so now when you go to the showroom, you look at a car that you want, what do you do?  I mean you just don't look at it and say okay, I'll take that, what do you do?   Would you get inside?  Better off, tell me, I'm interviewing you, will you tell me what you'd do? (laughter)
Speaker 1: No, I'm interviewing you, you got it wrong (laughter)
Speaker 2: Oh, oh (laughter) I'm sorry (laughter)
Speaker 1: You got it wrong, okay, go on.
Speaker 2: So you get inside and you sit down, you look you adjust the mirror, you look at your side view this, you looking, you investigating the whole dashboard, where the lights are.  Turn the directional signals where, how to adjust the seats backward or forward and you're visualizing you going to be riding down the road and acquainting yourself with it.  This is the same thing with an instrument.  Don't just go grab it--sit down and look at and say "What can I do with this to make it different, what can I do?"  Because when you see a person playing an instrument--at an instrument, understand, you see a person with an instrument, they're not playing it.  It looks to you to you like they're not playing it, but they're not playing that instrument, they're playing themselves, and they're coming through that instrument.  So what I'm saying is how much you get yourself together than to go through that instrument regardless of whatever it is.  If it's a piano, you can take five piano players or you can listen to when they're on CD's, five different piano players play one song, one chorus, of say "Body and Soul."  And of those five there's going to be a different interpretation is one.  There's only one chorus, there's going to be a different tone or touch and a completely different sound, whatsoever, each one has their own.  That's when you realize that person is playing themselves and coming through that instrument because it's five different people.
Speaker 1: Now when you, that day--that's really good actually.
Story_ID: 88888
Speaker 1: But that day, when you got--will you identify the people with the Cab Calloway incident?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, the drummer was, wait a minute, I'll get to you in a minute.
Speaker 1: Panama.
Speaker 2: [David] Panama Francis, was Panama.  I didn't meet him.
Speaker 1: You didn't meet him that day?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't meet him.  But talking to this other guy, this other guy was Milt Hinton but I wasn't paying him no attention as bass player because the drums was the whole thing.  So he was the one who said come on kid I'll take you to lunch.   And later on, you know, as we became friends and everything, but one year on the cruise, maybe it was about middle 90's [1990s] or something Panama was on and Milt was on quite a bit and then they started getting me on.  And we're talking and I say, "You know Panama, it's amazing that how fate is--I said that I came to meet you and I didn't meet you and I met him, and I became a bass player and it changed my whole life just like that."  And he looked at me and he said, "I'm glad you didn't meet me," you know, that was one of the best answers somebody can give me.  That's the best compliment that someone can give me.  And about a year before last or so forth, we nearly ran together a few times a year before last, he passed and I went up to New York to go to his wake and Tommy Flanagan's was the same night.  So there are two very important people, that from--when I first went with Ella [Fitzgerald], and I think Tommy was doing eight years and he taught a whole lot about piano.  And the Panama because I didn't meet him, and I became a bass player and they both were on that same night--the train went up.  And I like to acknowledge and thank both of them for making my life--making me part of-- being a part of my life, you know.
Speaker 1: It's almost like two bookends.
Speaker 2: That's right yeah, yeah, that's right, yeah.  You'd be surprised you have to acknowledge the people who helped mold you, you know.
Story_ID: 88889
Speaker 1: Now when, this is what I find sort of curious.  So 1946 is really when you're sort of introduced--you buy your first bass.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But by 1947, you have your professional gig, and I don't--that seems very quick.  That's, I mean--I'm just--so what you were staring at that bass a lot? Is all, I'm just saying. (laughter).
Speaker 2: Look at it at night, and in the morning I wake, "Hey baby, how you feeling, you ready to play for me?" (laughing).
Speaker 1: I mean how could you transition?
Speaker 2: Determination is for one.  I mean when we started like the picture in Washington [D.C.] that was September of 1947.  That was September 1947 we came down here, the four of us.  Young kids had to get permission to come away from home, but you're molded and you learning now watching bass players and going different places.  And then being right there at Seventh and T [Street], all the acts every week coming into the Howard Theatre, getting to meet all the musicians, you really get into the mold.  And you can only better yourself when you think better, you know.  You have to think better and you have to think ahead.  I've tried to--that you moved-moving up.
Speaker 1: But that's quite--you still are--you haven't really found your style as a bass player, and you're really.  Who are--are you imitating someone, are you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I had a few people that were role models, but I learned that at very early age that if you idolize one person and you do everything that that person does, they say wow, you sound just like so and so.  So who gets the credit?  There was a saxophone player who loved Prez [Lester Young] at one time, you know and he played like Prez, held the horn like Prez, wore the hat and so forth.  Everybody says, "Oh man, he sounds just like Prez, who gets the credit?"  So I realized that you're not doing yourself justice but you do grab different things and so forth.  And molding yourself, you encounter various people that have different ideas and you take a piece of this and it's just like you're cooking a meal.  You just don't, you know, you add some things to it, like a beef stew.  And when I do--one of the clinic things that I used to do when I was doing the clinics was to ask.  I say, if I pass out a recipe to--say four people, for beef stew, and I want each one to go to take one of the stores, one of the big stores-- grocery stores, and get exactly these ingredients and then cook them according to the direction and then bring it in tomorrow, and all four would taste the same.  Because they were cooked exactly like they said.   Now I said now the next day I want you to do and get the same thing only, I want you to put something that you like in there and you to put something that you like in it and buy (unclear) So then when he come back the next day and taste it, each one is gonna taste a little different.  And the reason is because each one put some of themselves in there, see?
Story_ID: 88890
Speaker 1: So--but the question I have for you is--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: What?
Speaker 1: Going from drums to bass, was there any transition at all?  Was there something that--I mean was there any residue of the drums in you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, did that affect your approach--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Not the approach it helped you because the fact that you this rhythmic, you got the rhythmic phase within you.  So then the bass-it's note, but I mean it's rhythmic too.  And I find a lot of people used to play drums didn't you?  They don't know anything, but they can tell from the way that you play bass that you had, you know.  So you find that a lot of people--some horn players used to play piano and this is why they're so versatile because they understand the insides of chords and then when they take the trumpet or horn and so forth.  Learning two or three instruments is a big help, but I think I could never change if I had of just became a straight bass player; I wouldn't have the rhythmic sense to a certain point because the drums, I put that in first.  So I was indoctrinated by drums, and then the bass became second.  I mean that part was the second ingredient that we put in and then you put in common sense is your third degree then go for yourself.
Story_ID: 88891
Speaker 1: Now who were the four that were that were performing, and you know down at--okay, who were the four of you that were performing at Seventh and T [Street], how did that even come about?
Speaker 2: Well Carmen Leggio, saxophone player, but he was stationed in the service down here.  And he used to go up there and jam, cause you have jam sessions all up in there.  And the lady liked him so that she said that when you get out, you know, come back and bring a group I would like to have you in.  So when he got out, he came up, he lived in White Plains and we played some jobs around and so he said, listen I got a job down in Washington [D.C.]  and if you wanna go.  It wasn't much money but first chance to get away from home, you know, so Junebug [Junebug Lindsey] was a drummer from Tarrytown [New York] and Louis Daley [ph.] from New York-- New Rochelle and myself and I was 19, wow, you know.  And Washington was, I mean it was all music from Seventh Street to 15th Street, unbelievable.
Story_ID: 88892
Speaker 1: I was asking you about how you got to know Carmen [Leggio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well we used to--up in that area there was-- are we on?
Speaker 1: Yeah, yes.
Speaker 2: Up in that area there was clubs.  What musicians used to do was--there was a club in New Rochelle [New York], club in Mount Vernon, in the radius of twenty miles, some club would have some type of jam session Tuesday night, Monday night, Sunday afternoon.  And so that's how you, like the street basketball players.  They go around the different playgrounds, they start making a name for themselves and they go around--this is before like they go to college, if they can get in college.  And then you start meeting musicians and you start learning how to, you know, learning, and how to learn tunes, how to sit in and jam.  First when you go, you would, you know like ask if you could sit in.  If they didn't know you too well, they would make you make around, then they would put you on, and then they test you.  And they would test you with various, see if you knew tunes.  And they would test you with tempos, you know, then there some fast tempos that--or some medium like this and then, then some real fast.  And so you go sit in and they would do some things, kick your butt, you go home and work on--see what you're doing, you're finding out your weak points.  So you go home, you work on that, you work on tempos and you do straight scales slow and stuff and a little faster and faster.  Come back in a couple of weeks, they would kick you again, for something else.  You go home, and you work on it, and within about six months or something, you come back again, and then you got it all together.  Now, they say, hey here comes, yeah, let's get him up here.  Because before they make you wait around, but it was just training process, that's all.  It's a learning process for you to use as a training.  And, you know, like you say coach send me in, but if you're not equipped to go in and this is where you find out--you find out what your weakness is.  There might be strong points, find out what your weakness is.  You work-(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Now what were your weakness?
Speaker 2: Tempos, for one thing.
Speaker 1: Tempos, so your talk--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah because see back there then, the strings were up high, they had gut strings and when you talking about (patting)--like 20 minutes, 25 minutes playing that tempo.  Hands be giving out, you go home, start the exercise, start practicing scales going faster and faster and faster.  And then in about three weeks or so, you got that covered then you work on the next thing.  And you really--it's self-improvement, and then once you pass the test, then it becomes, okay, now you can be reckon with.  But you're still always learning, I'm still learning now, you know.
Story_ID: 88893
Speaker 1: So you--your whole area had really been that, the New York area?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Not to say that wasn't a big--it had been New York.  And then you said you got the job, you know with Carmen [Leggio] here in [Washington] D.C. and that opened up a world.  Now what was--and you described the D.C. and I would like to--cause it doesn't seem like the D.C. of today.
Speaker 2: Oh, no, it isn't, no--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So I'd like--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't--I never even went downtown the first time I came.  There was no need to because, uptown was everything best--I mean restaurants and this and that.  When you got on U Street, certainly that--where the Howard Theatre was and there was a club on the corner.  That was the club we went in Gene Clory [ph.], Seventh and T, and next door was the Offbeat and the Club Harlem, across street was the Oreos, Benny Golson was playing in the clubs, Eddie Jones, who later went with the [Count] Basie Band, they all went to Howard [University in Washington, D.C.].  And Charlie (unclear) and go up on U Street, and Charlie Rouse was up there, at the Republic Gardens.  He had a club called "Louis and Alex," which when I first time I saw Oscar Peterson and Ray Brown as a duo, you had The [Bohemian] Caverns, you had The Benghazi [ph.], you had The Club Balley [ph.] on 14th Street and it was just popping.  And I remember the second year we came back; we stayed with the drummer's cousin, who was married.  He and his wife were separating and he lived out in Southeast off of Howard Road.  And so we would--when we got off, we would get the trolley right there at Florida and go to the Navy Yard.  Then walk from the Navy Yard all the way, you know.  Nobody bothered you, nothing-- they just--- it was just four guys enjoying what they're doing, but you learning at all times and making people happy and making yourselves happy.
Speaker 1: So, you know cause you think of Chicago [Illinois] really in those years as popping.  But you say D.C. was popping just--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: They had--D. C. was popping, it wasn't on quite the big scale as Chicago now.  And Los Angeles [California], and but you know, the biggest cities wasn't--Los Angeles, Central Avenue was whoo, that was--to me that was almost the equivalent maybe a little bit better than 125th Street [Harlem, New York].  Cause they had some clubs--one club had about 300 employees dancers, like the one in New York, big chorus line and stuff.  No the entertainment field was very, very plentiful then in most of your major cities.  And Washington, but didn't back down from any of them.
Story_ID: 88894
Speaker 1: Now that year [1947] that you were playing with--well you did, what thirteen weeks and it turned into longer, right that was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: We did thirteen weeks and then we came back the next year and did eight weeks.
Speaker 1: And did you, I mean did you learn things about that, cause that was your sort of first professional gig.  Were there things about getting paid, and you know or dealing with club owners.  Or was it just an all positive experience?
Speaker 2: You always--well you always going to deal with that because up my way in some of the clubs, you know Westchester County [New York], what not.  I played some places that you never even worried about the money, because, you know, the right people in the family owned the clubs and you gonna get paid.  And you go and there be nobody there, and there was no problem with it, they liked that, you know.  So I never had to worry about money and it wasn't until I went out on the road professionally that (laughing) then that's where it was, you know.  But no, that was the point.  The point is that the learning process is so beautiful if you would just sit down and make yourself a part of it.
Story_ID: 88895
Speaker 1: Now when you first saw--what year was it that you first saw Ray Brown and Oscar Peterson, was that around '47 [1947] or '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: I think it was '48 [1948] that I saw them.
Speaker 1: You say '48 [1948]?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to think.  '47 [1947], '48 [1948] he came to Louis and Alex in Washington [D.C.] they were a duo.  It might have been '49 [1949] because Oscar came out with a tune--they came out with a record, bass and piano.  So it might've been '49 [1949] yeah.  Oh, I'd come down here for--I come down to do something with Rick Henderson at the Club Balley [ph.], and that's when [Earl] Bostic came in town and heard me and asked me to go with him.
Speaker 1: So what--you remember that evening, did it strike you, cause those are--I mean the two of them together, had you seen them before?
Speaker 2: No, no, I knew of Ray Brown cause, you know. And I've seen him in New York, but, you just sat and say, you gawk and wow, you know, and then yeah.  And then you know years later, then all of a sudden you become friends, and probably out doing golf, here and there.  The comradery is really, really great.
Speaker 1: It's a profession where you have to operate as a team, really?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: You can't, I mean, when all is said and done.
Story_ID: 88896
Speaker 1: Now so you--it was Rich Henderson, right?
Speaker 2: Rick.
Speaker 1: Rick Henderson, okay.
Speaker 2: He had the Big Band but he later on got the band at the Howard Theatre [Washington, D.C.], he ran that for years, yeah.
Speaker 1: And can you talk about Howard Theatre and its role here, you know, here historically--you know what--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, I mean it wasn't until--I mean I just knew of it as, it was on the circuit.  The circuit, main circuit was The Apollo [Theater] in New York that was the biggest one.  And then when you went out to do theatre circuit, then you went Apollo and then you came to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and that was The Earle [Theatre], Baltimore [Maryland] The Royal [Theatre], Washington [D.C.], The Howard and then you would go to Chicago [Illinois] and do that one.  That was a five--mainly you did these four that was on the East Coast.
Speaker 1: The Regal Theater.
Speaker 2: The Regal Theatre, right, right.  But that was the main circuit.  So you knew that when you doing theatres, then you're going out for at least five weeks.
Story_ID: 88897
Speaker 1: Now Earl-- so Earl Bostic, you--he saw you playing right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And then he--now at that point, where is he in his career sort of, Earl Bostic when you saw--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Well, he's up there, he's moving up.  Because after I got with him, he had about three more hits and he went further up the ladder.
Speaker 1: Did you learn things by working with him?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.
Speaker 1: Cause he an arr--wasn't he an arranger?
Speaker 2: He was an arranger, I didn't learn how to arrange, but I'll tell you what I did learn.  I learn how to--how to watch somebody and how they handle a crowd.  Because it's not so much--it's very important and like if--as far as the leader is concerned of not only just to play but how you play and how you handle the crowd.  And that's--in selection of music you know.
Speaker 1: Can you talk about that a little bit more?
Speaker 2: Okay.  I used to--Dinah's [Dinah Washington] office--Ben Bart, he had a group of people.  He had, like the--I think it was The Ravens, Hal Cornbread Singer, Willis Jackson, Ruth Brown, a whole bunch of people.  Cootie Williams when he left Duke's [Duke Ellington] band, they had his group together.  And we go out with Cootie sometimes and do like a few weeks.  Cootie had a thing that he would--see these were all dances, you know.  But Cootie would go finish a tune and then he might finish a ballad then he would go over to the edge of the bandstand and then say (humming) nobody playing but--now the people standing down there in the couples standing together and they start (humming) and then he start, you know, moving and then, a one, two, three, four, bam.  Knock em dead, now they're out there swinging and so, he set them up.  Just setting them up, and it was most beautifully (unclear)  Willis Jackson, I'm trying to name--the different other bands that we would go out, but this was with Dinah [Washington].  And Earl Bostic--with Earl Bostic and do some things.  Hal Cornbread Singer, Paul Gayten, and everybody--entertainment was real.  Because see, there was no television out then and people loved to be working--especially working cities.  Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Chicago [Illinois], Detroit [Michigan], these were hard working cities and people lived in the cluster.  And so when they come in they want to eat and go out.  When they started moving way out in the suburbs, anywhere people move way out, they don't come back into town for anything.  It just why I like the Japanese, in most of their major cities they have their concerts, if you going to play concerts, you have it at six o'clock.  So when the people get off at four or five o'clock go get something to eat, go see the concert, by nine o'clock, they're on their way home, they don't stay.  They're not going to go all way out and then come way back again, you know, and that's for concerts.
Speaker 1: So, but you were--at this point in time, you're playing clubs more.  You're doing clubs and concerts?
Speaker 2: With who?
Speaker 1: When you were--with Earl Bostic, were you doing--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That was the only main clubs, and not concerts really, but dancehalls.  Yeah, dancehalls was the big thing then.
Story_ID: 88898
Speaker 1: So now how does--the whole story is that Dinah Washington's--you did a one night stand with her right, it was supposed to be a one night stand.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but she just carrying a piano player--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: I was with [Earl] Bostic, and I got Jimmy Cobb, the drummer, and so this kind of piano player, "so you two guys play?"  "Sure no problem," and then that's how that happened.
Speaker 1: And so that started a whole relation--, cause she-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The three of us got along so good that night that she said "If you guys ever leave Bostic, you got a job."
Speaker 1: Now did you heard much about her and working with her, she was legend still at that point.
Speaker 2: True.
Speaker 1: I mean.
Speaker 2: I heard about her, but when I met her she was--I mean it was like wonderful and she liked Jimmy Cobb and so we were going to be in Wildwood [New Jersey] for a whole summer with--I mean with Earl Bostic from Memorial Day to Labor Day.  And she sent a car down, cause she was only carrying a piano player.  So she sent a car down for me to--for us to have for me to teach Jimmy how to drive.  Had this big Buick Roadmaster, you know convertible and we said "Yeah, we're gonna go with her" (laughing) yeah and, you know it was just really different.
Speaker 1: Now was Earl Bostic, was he upset at that point, no?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, okay.
Speaker 2: We didn't tell him.
Speaker 1: Oh, I got you, okay (laughing).  So let's talk about her, because you were with her for five was it five and a half years?
Speaker 2: Almost five--yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So can you tell some of your, sort of favorite, you know Dinah Washington stories?
Speaker 2: Lot of people said, oh yeah she used to be very loud and she was this and that, she knew what she was doing.  She was very warm person, she took care a lot of people and, I mean, you know your family things and sort forth.  She was very interested in that, and she would do things.  She put up a front because that, you know because you got a certain type of dog that he--he'll bark loud but he won't bite, but he barks loud to make people say, "Oh you're afraid of him."
Story_ID: 88899
Speaker 1: But she [Dinah Washington] was very warm, she said to me-when I started going with this girl here and she came up to New York one weekend and Dinah said "Keter that's a nice girl, you ought to marry her."  I said "I don't wanna get married," what happened, she talked to us one night, she said, "You have to get married, settle down."  And so she said, "If you get married, I'll pick up the wedding," so we said okay.  And so she set it up for us to go to her Doctor to get a blood test and then she got in touch with Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]'s church [Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, New York], but he was down in Binimi [Bahamas], cause she wanted him to officiate it.  So we got married four days later.  I closed the night at Birdland, we got married at Adam Clayton Powell's church and had the reception at Birdland.  As my wife [Mildred Grady Betts] said, everybody's invited to our reception, but no gifts (laughing).
Speaker 2: Is that true?
Speaker 1: Yeah, because those people were paying to go--(laugher)
Speaker 2: Oh that's true (laughing)
Speaker 1: Yeah, (laughing) they didn't know nothing bout no wedding, they were just customers coming in for that night. (laughing)
Speaker 2: So your wife at that time, was she--how did you meet your wife?
Speaker 1: Through a friend of mine from my hometown.  It was--you know I had no brothers and sisters, but there was two girls that I grew up with, they were like brothers and sisters.  They used--you now talk, this and that and one of them told me one day, she said that she like to introduce me to somebody who she met in college down in Durham, North Carolina.  And so she had her write me and I wrote--gave her address and I wrote her, and that's how it started, you know.
Speaker 2: Was your wife, at that time, a lover of music?
Speaker 1: Not really, no.  But, you know I don't know how to say how things work out but, you know sometimes the opposite attracts and it doesn't have to be a lot of, not too many people really in music marry--not too many last very long, you know.  But we went until what, two months shy of forty-seven years, and then cancer, you know.
Speaker 2: That's a long marriage, tremendously long, and especially you know, you being on the road for, as much time--and five children too.
Speaker 1: Five, one, two, three and then twins.  'Cause I said if we can just get a girl, and twins.  Throw away the manuals (laughter)
Speaker 2: So she did a lot of raising by herself in her--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yep, yep, yep, yep, yep.
Story_ID: 88900
Speaker 1: But okay, so what--tell me at this point in time though you are, you know that you are playing with Dinah Washington, where were you in your sort of career? And what are you--are you like eating it all up or you know what are--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I love what I do, but I tell you what really was the big factor it was the fact that I'm doing what I love.  I love the idea of travel, but you traveling the world and you're making people happy.  The only thing I was wishing for, I wishing that I could sort of like travel out of this country, cause we're traveling all around and all through the South and all through the heavy segregation thing and so forth, (unclear).  The only time I got out of this country when Dinah was--we went to Hawaii for two weeks in '52 [1952].  And so I said well I guess I won't see you up for anything else.  And then when I went with Charlie Byrd, we went to Europe with Woody Herman and did three weeks in England, Scotland and Ireland and then we went to Saudi Arabia for eight days.  And then with Charlie, we went to South America for three months, every country in South-- Central America, so I'm starting to see the world.  And then when Ella [Fitzgerald] then, that was the whole European thing and we'd go two or three times a year in Japan and Australia and all over Canada.  And you find out that the world is really small.  And the beautiful part is that, as I said of one of those phrases that I coined, is that when archaeologist find ruins going back to thousands, hundreds of thousands of years ago, from the most primitive civilization to the most advanced, most highly educated civilizations, they find four things.  They always find some form of art, dance, music and literature.  And the art that they find, we going back thousands and thousands of years, the dance from the most sophisticated countries, like the Greeks and the Romans, which--when you most advance, you know, back in those days. And The Persian Empire and The Greek Empire--I mean The Egyptian Empire, and then they found all types of art, hieroglyphics and what not.  The human being has always wanted to entertain itself.  And that goes on, because now they entertain themselves and making different types of bombs and guns and what, but still that's always thinking ahead.  But those four things are always there.
Story_ID: 88901
Speaker 1: And back to--I just want to go back to Dinah Washington in some respects, what things did you learn from her?  You know from Earl Bostic, you said, you know--or even before that, you said you learned how to play an audience.  You know, how to work an audience --(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: But, I'm wondering with her, because she--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: You learned with Dinah, excuse me. You learned with Dinah-- she taught me, first of all, what a whole song was about.  Because before then when I'm just playing with the jazz thing and so forth, my job, bass player, is to know the changes, and that's all.  But with Dinah, you had to know, you hear--she was that taught me that there is a whole song, cause there's words to it and there's changes to it, there's melody and then you play the bass parts.  So you all of a sudden, now you hear the whole song, it takes on a different meaning.  And so I said humm, I like, I'm beginning to like, you know, working with singers.  And I decided that I just pride myself with working with singers because you're playing two things.  You're playing, if you have a rhythm section, you have the drums and piano, you playing part drums with time, and you playing part of the cords with the piano player.  So that put you right in the middle and you the judge between the two.  And meanwhile, when you pulling this together--so the three of us are behind that singer, whether it be male or female or whatever or instrumentalist and it propelling that person forward.  And I said, I like this position to be in and then, therefore, I started--just sort of--well simply the reputation I got with being a singers' bass player because I like to play for singers.
Speaker 1: And can you describe the difference, just--I mean I think you've done it but the difference between being a singer's bass player and--let's say just an alto sax (unclear) bass player.  I mean what's the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It's personal, it becomes a personal thing if you decided--if you decided you really like words, and I mean--cause I realized that--I guess, I don't know, I'm sort of a romanticist.  Type of thing, if somebody writes words, love songs or something, they put a lot of effort in that, but you see how some people can--they take their mind and put it into a song and then it affects you.  Just like when you go to church, and you might come into town and go to a new church and it seems like that preacher there might be talking to you exactly.  Cause something he's talking about that hit you right between--and you say, how did he know I was coming?  You know what I mean that's what songs to play that I started finding that I love songs.  Because I love to love and love to be in love.  And I wake up in the morning, it's raining outside, I love it, at least I'm seeing it.
Story_ID: 88902
Speaker 1: Now when you were with her [Dinah Washington], what were some of her hits, did she have--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, "Dinah Jams" [1954] was one of the big ones that we did in L.A. [Los Angeles, California] with Clifford Brown, Clark Terry, Maynard Ferguson and so forth and she put out "I Won't Cry Anymore", I can go through a whole bunch of them, that were big hits.
Speaker 1: Was "I Wanna Be Loved", there was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: "I Wanna Be Loved" (humming) and "Teach Me Tonight" and all of these things, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now who was writing her songs at that point, was there--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, nobody was writing, I mean--these are from different songwriters, but she was one who--she liked to pick her own material.  Usually most singers they have, you know, P and R man who picks out--this is the best for you so forth.  But she remind me of one who like the top singers what they do is they take a song and they take the sheet music and almost make it like a blanket.  Then they wrap themselves in it and when they unwrapped, they are not singing the song, they are the song, you see what I mean?  And when the top singers, when they heard somebody else, they'll say, oh, I'm not going to sing that song no more, cause that's hers, you know.  Cause she put more to it than I can put to it, so that's the way they would do.  They had a code amongst themselves.
Story_ID: 88903
Speaker 1: Give me another Dinah Washington story, anything that you, you know that what sort of memory of one performance or one incident on the road--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, I got a plenty of them.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.
Speaker 2: Let me try to tell you the good one (laughing).  This one, was--we worked this club for the first time, in Indianapolis [Indiana], and the--it was a well-known club in Indianapolis, but the piano was terrible, I mean pitiful.  And at the end the club owner came to Dinah when we finished the last set, and he said "Oh, Miss Washington, big cigar, that was so wonderful.  I hope you enjoyed our club and we hope you consider coming back here again."  And she said "About that dammed piano," he said, "what's wrong with it?"  She said, "You know what you need to do?  You need to tune it," she said, "and then you ought to paint it and then you should burn that sucker."  And he (unclear) said "Count Basie played on that piano," she said, "and that's why he played so few notes" (laughing).  Very apropos because of Basie playing the bling, bling, bling.  That's how bad that piano was and I tell a lot of piano players about that and they said, that's right on the money.
Speaker 1: Now any other stories?
Speaker 2: I can't go there.
Speaker 1: Okay, you can't.  Not even --(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, she would--she had a way, she had a beautiful way, you know like when we go some--you know how the big time guys want to come in and they want to flex their muscles and so forth.  And then, you know we get through with the set, and come up to the bar and then come up.  Queen, yes, come on, can I buy you a drink, you know, show off for the--so she said "Yes, I'm drinking champagne and so is my trio."  Oh, that means I got to buy two bottles, see.  That's eat or, get off the pot, that's one way or the other, that's the way she done about that.  So she would break them down that way, you know.  No, she took really--she was very, and the same with Ella [Fitzgerald], they were very family-orientated, they helped a lot of people.  Some of them were down and out, I mean entertainers and what not, and she treated us as we were family.  She had a front, you know and people would buy it, or whatever.  "Well the Queen was, you know, so and so."  She had a front, but she just--the dog that barks the loudest, the Great Dane dog, might not even bite, but he bark loud.
Speaker 1: And why do you think she got married so many times?  Because you know some people get--don't (laughing), no some people get married, you know--they just, they get married quickly.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Let's put it that way.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Do you consider her a person who got married quickly?  She got rid of them quickly.
Speaker 2: You know, I learned one thing, especially female bosses, stay out of their way, stay out of their business. And you know, I mean cause you don't know what their appetite is.  I'm seeing something like these movie stars, what not and number one, number two, number three, number four.  Those are just like adventures and I think that--you know it's very hard--when I look back at it now, and I look at the women that I did know of singers and so forth and the ones that I did, and the top people.  Women had it rough because the whole business was controlled by men.  If you noticed that in--going back when I used to go down in the early '40's [1940s] and '50 [1950s] to see the shows down in New York City [New York], all of the singers, male and female, they had to sit on the stage the whole show.  And then she might sing two songs out of the whole show, if the shows an hour and a half, they got to sit on the stage.  And they had whatever the men said, this is what they had to do.  And when some of them sort of rebelled, the only way they would really rebel is they had to talk the same language the men talked to get their attention. And that's why some of them, they so--so and so was so hard and she was this and that, so forth.  They had to be that way to get along, and the average person doesn't realize that factor of it, you know.  But some cases, some were just excessively bullies, but in most of the cases, that their background was because of the fact that these people exploited them.  They were exploiting them and using them, you know.
Story_ID: 88904
Speaker 1: But see, you know what's so interesting is that she [Dinah Washington] found your wife [Mildred Grady Betts], you know, and your wife of forty-seven years.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, oh yeah.
Speaker 1: So she had a good sense of what was good for you.
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  But she--you know, she--I think that she was one of the warmest persons, she had me one day in Chicago [Illinois], she called me up and said I got to go downtown to get my mother a TV, can you come over and pick me up?  So I drove over there, picked her up, took her downtown and bought this big black and white TV that was like the hottest thing, Zenith, when it came out.  And took her it to her house, and she said I'll detain my mother and you put it down in the basement somewhere, then I'll hide it, put it down in the basement.  Then I went on back to my hotel and, let's see we were gonna be off--of the day--I think it was two days before Christmas and we were going to be off until New Year's Eve.  And I'm just going to stay out there and then she called me and said you know what?  She said Christmas is coming, no need of you staying here, you can come back.  Why don't you just drive on home, stop by here a moment cause I gotta give you something.  So I stopped by there, the television, she said, that's for you, you and your wife to have.  This was a great big ole nineteen inch Zenith black and white television, which was like--that was first that hit the scene.  Now I got to drive in the snow and rain all the way from Chicago to Washington [D.C.].  But she would, you know do things like that.  And because, I think she and Ella [Fitzgerald] and a lot of them, they considered the people personally around them family and so this how we take care of them, this is way to certain point they would take care of their own family.  Cause their family when we're out there, braving the world, you know, four, five or six people against the world.
Story_ID: 88905
Speaker 1: Now how did Dinah [Washington], how did she differ from Ella [Fitzgerald] though?  I mean they're two strong women, but how were they, you know--I mean, Ella you worked with much longer.
Speaker 2: Yeah, twenty-four years with Ella and five years with Dinah, different personalities.  It's just like, you know, it's just like a person has two kids, have three kids, but two could be the same mother, same father, and yet, this far apart.  Not so much this far apart, but it's just different completely.  And so that's how, you know you have to figure out what they went through and their background. What were the things that affected them, they're parent situation, brothers or sisters or those with lack of.  See I didn't have any brothers and sisters so I had nobody to argue with or fuss with, which was a good thing to me, but it was a lonely thing.  Because, you know, you see, at least they could talk and so forth, so I just had a few friends that--but it also made me more be on the line.  Cause I used to settle a lot of arguments between within families.  Cause they'd say ok, well ask Keter cause he'll tell, you know.  So there's one side is a brother and sister and two brothers and so forth.  Then they both--so then I became a judge at a young age, you know, solving other, other problems.  And masking mine, which I didn't--I just didn't have, you know, but hey that didn't matter, I had the bass and I had the bass.  I had the drums first, then I had the bass.  See the bass actually made more sense, cause you could feel the vibrations when it's against you, you know so.  So that was my sister, my brother, my cousin, so forth, was the bass.
Story_ID: 88906
Speaker 1: And she--I mean she died--hers was more--I mean there two types--you know, they're the Sarah Vaughan's, Ella Fitzgerald and others.  You know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Pearl Bailey.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: With these long careers and then Dinah Washington was like--she got cut short, you know because--I mean really, what she did at 36, 38 [sic, 39]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, at a relatively young age.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: When you think about it.
Speaker 2: Well, it's according to--a lot of it depends on your life.  What you do--see when I went with Dinah and you'll see the pictures, she was a big woman and I stayed there five years and then she started slimming down.  She developed insomnia and so--because we were doing all these one nighters and so when we get through or something, take a sleeping pill and after a while it would be two, and we got to leave at eight o'clock in the morning or something, and you got uppers.  And that's where that started, but you realize that anything chemically to a certain point in your body can start accumulating.  You can start make things happen, and so between that and that.  And you can't drink basically, cause I mean you can name a lot of people, (unclear), a whole lot of people, been a combination between the uppers and downers and alcohol and that combination doesn't work.  She was finally very, very happy with Night Train Lane [Richard "Dick" Lane] and of course I used to see him all the time at Lee Elder's Tournaments, come to the Golf Tournaments we travel around.  And that's how he and I became friends.  And she was very, very happy because, I think she had met somebody who--was had his own name.  Mostly you find with a lot of the singers the other ones become Mr. Dinah Washington or well I won't name any other.  But they became Mr. so and so, Mr. so and so.  So they just, you know, in and out, in and out.  But he down wonders and had his own--stood up on his own pillar.  And so that was--and then--and that unfortunate happened at that time.  From the old habits, I mean, you know, uppers, downers and the drinking, not intentional, or nothing but just-it's funny how you look for happiness for so long and the when you finally found it, fate comes in and takes it--but at least you had that happiness.
Speaker 1: That's right at least she had happiness.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And she lost a lot of weight, cause I went to--my wife [Mildred Grady Betts] and I to see her, she came to The Howard [Theatre in Washington, D.C.] one time, went to see her.  She was down to a seven, she said "Now look at me."  But when you are a big bone person, I mean we forget about all this glamour and stuff and what's supposed to be.  A big boned person is big boned and somewhere you're taking the body through another phase when you go down to try to be of the fashion, you know, but she was--oh it's just unfortunate that she couldn't hit it right.  Cause they put her as the blues category, she was really to a point--wasn't 'til '54 [1954] when that real jazz thing came that we did in L.A. with Clark Terry and Clifford Brown with "Dinah Jams" that people realized that she could through one of the agencies that she had for all those years.  I can't talk about that, when she finally went with Joe Glazer, we started--she started getting better.
Speaker 1: Representation.
Speaker 2: Better representation, yeah.  Cause the other one was only strictly Rhythm and Blues thing.
Speaker 1: You know a lot of people credit her for, you know, R and B, you know being the sort of precursor to modern day R and B.
Speaker 2: To a point, yes, because there was a lot of singers who really, who loved her and Nancy was one of her great admirers.  You listen to early Nancy [Wilson?]; you could hear some heavy Dinah influence.  And of course Esther Phillips was a copycat completely, you know, to a certain point.  But when she was finally recognized it was too late, it's almost like the girl from here, and I did--what's her name?  Who died, the guitar player, the little blonde girl?
Story_ID: 88907
Speaker 1: --Tell me about the-- you know,  profession back there, I mean how--did she get paid--she got paid well for the day?
Speaker 2: Who Dinah [Washington]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  She basically handled her money, you know, very well and, I think she could've gotten more from what she--she had the Rhythm and Blues tag stuck on her that she was beyond that.  But it wasn't until she left Ben Bart and got with Joe Glazer that--but they still kept it sort of in that type, Rhythm and Blues, because she was--she could pop the jazz thing to a certain point, but she wasn't a pure jazz singer, but she had--her ingredients could carry her right into that, but you listening to that thing.  And all the top arrangers really, Quincy Jones, he wrote a lot of arrangements, Marty Paich, you know--it's beautiful about when I said about the archeologist and how they find all of these things, these four things.  And it's beautiful when each person that comes in what they bring on their plate into the world and how their voice can be so different.   But you find you listen to Ella [Fitzgerald], you listen to Sarah Vaughan and you listen to Dinah, Dinah was born in [Tuscaloosa] Alabama, Ella was born around Newport News [Virginia] area and you listen to their diction and you know what that comes from, church.  Because they had these various choirs and these people who were the choir directors, they heavy emphasize on proper diction.  And when you hear, you say--hear Aretha Franklin from the get go, hear one song, you say that's that church sound.  You hear Sarah, Sarah was a different type with that more or less with that sort of contralto (unclear) alto type of thing.  You can hear the church because the diction is so pure, you know.  So then this made them learn how to appreciate the words, because they could speak them so well.  And when they're able to speak the words and put the emphases and sort forth where it belongs, it's the same thing with as an actor, that they can convince you.  That these words has a different meaning--I always say that a real good actor, actress or singer is like a projector.  The more voltage that is being projected, not wattage, wattage is loudness.  The more voltage that this is projected that's in them is more radiant it's going to show on the screen.  And there are people that come out on stage, and they are high voltage and they can just say hello and knock you down.  Or they can just--there used to be a lady named, oh what was her name?  I just had it, she was in from England, and she was very light brown skinned lady and she was one of the top premiere singers in New York Supper Clubs, Mabel Mercer, and she come out and she put on a little shawl and just have a piano player and just sit and start interpreting these songs.  Everybody flocked to see-all the top singers and so forth.  And I worked opposite her here in Washington [D.C.] for two weeks, she got people, even my wife [Mildred Grady Betts] went down to see her a couple of times.  She could sing a song make you cry, she could make you laugh, she could do anything.  Because she interpreted the words in such a way that you weren't prepared for that.  And she say, I think that I should see a tree, and the hand motion and so forth.  That's the projective, the very heavy wattage--voltage projection, soft and quiet, but piercing right through you.
Story_ID: 88908
Speaker 1: Now how was life on the road like then?
Speaker 2: You don't wanna be there.  It was rough, I mean for me coming from the north, born and raised in it.  When I went with [Earl] Bostic on the first Southern tour, I mean because my folks, they talked about--that didn't mean nothing to me.  We had this just a little thing out there, but I was taught by some of the older guys in the band that it's a different way of life we're going to but just remember this that when you go each one of these towns, "You're just going to play, you're not going to stay."  And that was the motto, you're going to play, you're not going to stay.  So be yourself, just the way you are, but don't think of it, don't let it carry a heavy burden, cause you're not gone take up roots there.  And you learned, and it was different, it was--but one thing that really fascinated me was, you play all the dances, West Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina and so forth and they would have white spectators.  They would sell tickets, in fact this lady was writing a big book on Dinah--I got a lot stuff here, it was spectators one dollar, participants, two dollars and a quarter for a dance.  And she wanted to know why was it one dollar; I said what does the word say, spectator.  I mean they could not dance, they could just see, so they would have a rope, and you say the room was yay wide, one fourth would be roped up that way and the rest would be for the dance, they used to cut the rope.  And come over, you know, and the sheriffs and the policemen, get back over there and put the rope up.  I've seen them cut the rope four times that night.  The thing that meant the most to me was the fact that the power of music was so that--like somebody go completely contrary of what the rules would be just to dance, because that rhythm that's reaching them.  So you see that there is something to music that's--as they say music serves, what is it, tames the savage beast, yeah.  And when you go to--when we go to like traveling Europe or behind the Iron Curtain, you know, half or maybe three fourths of--don't understand the words and yet they're fascinated.  I'm talking about like we're behind a singer or even just with a group that be playing and they're fascinated, that is the power of music.
Speaker 1: Now so not-- life on the road never just disappointed you where you said I don't want this anymore, or was it just the comradery or the family or the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, I think that, first of all, the reason I really went with [Earl] Bostic was one, I wanted to see the country--I mean I was pretty good in geography.  And I knew that we had a big country, so I said well, if I have to see it, this is the best way because by then, it was all--everything was traveling by cars.  The Big Bands had busses, and so you got a chance to see the country and see the difference.  I'm fascinated to be driving through Arizona or some place and sightseeing big copper mine, go see this, go see a ghost town.  You know when I first saw the Grand Canyon, oh Lord, because you see that in the movies it just a big--but when you see that in person and standing you can't believe that this monstrous and see the caverns and Jesse James' hideout, Dr. [George Washington] Carver's home where he was born that's, you know.  Now you get the Interstates, you bypass all that, you don't see nothing.  I can get the Interstate---I can leave here and go up here and what three lights or so forth and get on the Beltway and I can go all the way to California.  Probably don't see another light until you get to (unclear). But then it was all by those highways, which was the scenic view, and go up to from L.A. [Los Angeles, California], up Seattle [Washington] and take the coast line and you, get to see the beauty of this country.
Story_ID: 88909
Speaker 1: So you got married when, what year you got married?
Speaker 2: I got married in 1953.
Speaker 1: And then you met your first child in '55 [1955].
Speaker 2: '55 [1955].
Speaker 1: And so those two years--was that hard on your marriage when you're still on the road and your wife [Mildred Grady Betts] is at home.  Cause you made the decision to, you know, when your child, you wanted to come off the road.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I made--but that was--well I didn't come off til, yeah a year later.  Because then I realized there was going to be a problem for her and it was a problem for me wanting to be, you know wanna be a part of a family.  You  got, there's something you have to do so, so I came off and it was rough in the beginning, you know getting a job because, oh sure you got a big name out there, but you're in here now, you know.  And, that was pretty rough, but-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Did you miss the action too, that would be hard too.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't have to do all that driving like I did, cause I was, you know.  But you realize that when times get rough, there's an old Biblical [sic, unattributed] saying, "And This Too Shall Pass."  And so consequently you say, okay, I can endure this, and I did.  And things started working good and life is--I don't care what it's like outside you got storms or got bright days in your life and the outside weather has no affect upon it. Responsibility, you know next thing we had another son, we had another son, and I said well I'm okay, alright, I'm ready to call it quits if I can just, you know, wish we could've had a girl, then we get twin girls.  That's it, that's it, through. (laughing)
Speaker 1: But they didn't, did they come in direct succession?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw, naw, naw naw.
Speaker 1: No.  How many years are they?
Speaker 2: Between my oldest son, I think he's 48, and the girls will be 36, so there's, one, two, three and then the twins came.  It's nine years, almost a ten year span, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay. Now this is the whole thing.  So you said it was rough at the beginning, meaning you couldn't really find gigs here [Washington, D.C.] and people didn't--it didn't translate over.
Speaker 2: Well, everything was locked in here, you know, different clubs, there were a lot of clubs, but they were locked in.  There were the regular people and so forth.  So it was rough to see-I came October, November, December it was in January until I got--but my wife was working for the Coast Guard, so that, you know, that covered that, but it was in January when I really started.  I started at this club Abarts it had just opened up yep, on 9th Street.
Story_ID: 88910
Speaker 1: And was that [Abarts in Washington, D.C.] where you met--was that where the association with Charlie Byrd came about?
Speaker 2: No, I didn't--in that year, but I didn't meet him there, I met him--Eddie Warren took me one Sunday after a jam session on Connecticut Avenue a place called the Vineyard.  And I went up there and jammed and the guy who was running the band, [Richard Gene] Dick Williams said why don't you come up here and they were talking about something and this guitar player named Charlie Byrd, and who else was, Elsworth Gibson and so forth that they were going to open this club, and so that's how that started and it came through.  So from October and then I started January by the next October, in a year's time, it went from this up to there, you know.
Speaker 1: So now, you--this is what your back with the--not a vocalist now?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well right.
Speaker 1: And then this, the interesting thing about the Charlie Byrd experience is that was the whole bossa nova, you know, or was it--maybe I should ask that question.
Speaker 2: Maybe you should (laughing)
Speaker 1: So, I'll ask the question (laughing) Was that an interesting period in terms of the type, you know, well, okay you answer it.  Was it an interesting period?
Speaker 2: Miss Grasshopper (laughter)
Speaker 1: I was on a track but I got--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I know, I know, you got derailed there somewhere down the line.  No we were just playing, what Charlie was doing was just playing some jazz things and classical.  When we went to South America in '61 [1961], we did a USIA [United States Information Agency], we a tour for three months.  Everybody would do that tour, they had the Howard University Choir [Washington, D.C.] there the year before, then they had the Washington Symphony [National Symphony Orchestra] the year before, and they had Woody Herman's Big Band the year before and they had Dizzy Gillespie and his Big Band, it was all done by the State Department.  So we trio and we're following, the symphony one year, then the Howard University with over, about a hundred.  So they said well okay we're going to send you on the same tour but because you're a small group of just three, and Charlie's wife [Rebecca Byrd] was four, we got to play a lot of little small places.  We didn't go to Rio [de Janeiro, Brazil] and Sao Paulo [Brazil] where we got to play like around here.  Where you get to play Fredericksburg [Virginia] (laughing) you know, just name some of those places, but we get to play some of the small things--but we played a lot of the big cities.  And it was in Bahia [Brazil] that we went to a Judge's house and that when we--he had us over for dinner and then after they passed the, you know, like--when the Indians do, they pass the peace pipe.   Well down there, they pass the guitar.  The mother played a little something, then the daughter played, then the father played, and you know, then he passed to Charlie and then the son was over there doing something with the brushes.  And the drummer he said, "What are you doing?"  And he said "That's a bossa nova," he said "What?"  And so the next day they took us to the record store and the drummer and I bought a couple of albums [Joao] Gilberto and [Antonio Carlos] Jobim.  And we listened to some of it in somebody's house where we were recruited you know during that tour.  We got back, they had a big press conference for us in New York and I had done some records with Riverside [Records], Orrin Keepnews and Bill Grauer, and I said listen, you better listen to these, cause this might be something.  And he sent it back to me a month later and said "Naw I don't think much of it" and then the drummer and I started pressuring Charlie to play something to this about six months to get him to start playing something, because he did not like it either.  And then he was playing one night and Stan [Getz] came in and said "What are you guys doing up there?"  I said, "Playing some bossa nova."  Meanwhile Felix Grant had been playing it for years and also Dizzy Gillespie had recorded something and Curtis Fuller had been in South America recorded.  But Stan said why we don't do--make a record of it, so we did a record ["Jazz Samba"] and The All Souls Unitarian Church on 16th Street, there it went and that was it.
Story_ID: 88911
Speaker 1: More money?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they figured-you wish you had much more recognition, made more money, made--boom, boom, boom.  I'm not greedy-
Speaker 1: Right
Speaker 2: --what I've done and so forth, I did it, and loved it-
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --and that's the most important thing.  It's a great business, I mean it's-it can be--it's a whole lot of--but there's a lot in everything else too.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: You could look at the stock markets, but there's a whole lot of--everything else, they all have their up peaks and they have their down peaks and so, you know.
Story_ID: 88912
Speaker 1: So now when you heard the music, you know in Bahia [Brazil], what, you know music on those albums.  What struck you what was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That there was simplicity and the Portuguese language was so beautiful, so romantic.  Everybody always thought that the French language was really the ro--you know, was romanticized by, you know all the different people (singing) "C'est si bon".  There's these things, but--the Portuguese language also is one of those very delicate.  The Germans trying--or Japanese singing a ballad, and that, the language does not have none of that at all.  But the Portuguese was so simple and plus, they had this rhythmic thing.  And I found out that really the northern part of Brazil is where the happenings are, so the Southern part of Brazil comes up and they listen--it's like sugar cane.  They come up and they cut the sugar cane and take it down to refine and ship it out, and it's refined sugar.  But up there, it's raw, and it's rhythmic and it's heavy flavored from African type of rhythms, and it's so simplicity and with it to a certain point.  That it's just like, it's a flow and once you hear, your whole body starts to--cause everybody--I hear people say, "I really wish I could dance, but I don't have no rhythm," I say, "Everybody has rhythm."  "I don't have none."  I said, "You walk in rhythm, you talk in rhythm, you bat your eyes in rhythm.  I said you bat your eyes in time like this, I say you talk anything that you do is in rhythm."  I say "and you still alive, so you do have rhythm, cause your heart beats in rhythm."  And I tell people, to forget all that saying things about how I love you with all my heart, if I tell you I loved you with all my heart I'm lying.  You know, because my heart is an organ just like my liver and my kidneys, I guess I love you with all my kidneys; I love you with all my (laughing). Leave my heart alone because it's got a job to do, this little heart I got up in my brain, that's with the heart I love you--but the little one up there, not this one, keep on beating (laughter).
Speaker 1: So now--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Why you laughing?  I'm trying to talk, trying to interview you and you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: (Laughing) Now, okay Brazil, of all the places you had been was Brazil most fascinating up to that point?  You had mainly been in Europe.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've been all over Europe.
Speaker 1: All--you-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: After, and not that time--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That time, you had been in England and Scotland--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: England and Scotland and so forth, yeah.
Speaker 1: So was this the--was this, you know the most interesting and then you--you said--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, this was compared to that like Amsterdam [Netherlands] and England and Saudi Arabia, but South America--cause we did--it was three months.  See that was a three month tour, we started off in Caracas [Venezuela] and did about three or four days there.  I was a photographer, I brought my cameras and USIA [United States Information Agency] had me take pictures anybody interesting that we met.  So in Venezuela, you had President [Romulo] Betancourt and had this big party at night, I asked the body guards can I take pictures of him and Charlie [Byrd] you know, and they said yes.  And I got the camera case and I put it down and went down to reach, and when I looked up I got three people standing over me with guns drawn (laughing).  Now this--I was scared, this 1961, I was in--cause he had just been in somewhere about a year or so, he had been in a pipe bomb car accident and his hands were like red from that.  But I took pictures of interesting, you know, things that we would meet and take it to a local newspaper and they'd send it back to the USIA, to the country.  And we did three--that was three month tour.  We went to Montevideo in Uruguay and Pont--everyplace and then went all way down to B.A. and then went across from B.A., Buenos Aires, to Chile and we stayed in Chile about three weeks, Valparaiso, Vina del Mar [Chile] and then we--we were in Concepcion [Chile] when they had the Bay of Pigs Invasion [Cuba, 1961].  And we were at the Embassy, you know something the next time I know there gonna have--people outside throwing eggs and what not.  Which was scary when you get that far away from home.  And the next night we had a concert at the University [University of Concepcion], which was hot territory and they decided to call it off, and they said no, let's keep it on and we were scared, I'm really--I was scared when we walked in, cause you had to walk down this long hallway to the stage and they cheered and cheered.  And then, but we went and played. A few people hollered out something and they quieted them down and that was it.  That's a long way to be away from home when something, and then we worked our way up the west side and came all the way up to Central America and I found--Northern Brazil I loved, Argentina, I mean Chile, Valparaiso, Vina del Mar and all, very beautiful and Lima, Peru was the art and the things that the Indians [Incas] can make and so forth, gorgeous things.  And then within what ten years from then, all of that area, Columbia and so forth, another new ballgame, you know.
Story_ID: 88913
Speaker 1: Now when you, this is--I'm sort of curious about this--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Why?
Speaker 1: You know, cause, well, you know, here are musicians here and then at the time all this, you know you're traveling and doing this, the Civil Rights Movement is sort of brewing.  And I'm wondering if you were sort of--was that affecting your industry at all --(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Naw--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: At all or was really not--it was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was not with the things that we were doing, naw.  I told you about at that party, when we were in Bahia [Brazil] with an--from that interview with the radio--but naw that doesn't really, because you're away from home, and I mean.  You're out representing the country and these things are gonna happen whether you are there or not, you know.  So I mean basically you're out representing and hoping that whatever is wrong will be right, not right away but somewhere down the line.  And I've seen the difference from--that now I'll be 75, but I'm seeing the difference from when I was with Dinah [Washington] or Earl Bostic from like '49 [1949] from '49 [1949] to '56 [1956] we travelled all through the South.  To see the difference in when I went with Ella [Fitzgerald] like to Biloxi, Mississippi what that was like, we went there, we were going to play with the symphony and they said oh yes, your reservation's right in the big hotel downtown.  And you used to have to walk by, same thing with New Orleans [Louisiana] and all the different things.  So I've seen the transformation of that whole scene and I think when I get through--the feeling that I get that really gets me is when I go like--to say like down the South to play golf, and play, I like a plantation.  And you go and you stand on this ground and, this was the so and so plantation and what not.  And then you stand there and you think, you think back that 150 years ago or something, people used to get--and sun up and be working laboring on this same land.  And here I am, you're saying to yourself, they were working for me, to make my life better because now it's a golf course and it's a whole different thing and then you appreciate what they went through.  And then you hope people appreciate what you went through when we had to go in to go through all our things and see how it's changed.   And maybe in a slight a way, that music helped when the people cutting the rope and so forth.  Somewhere, that, you know, so what--Casey has this thing that there is a cultural magnet ball that circles the earth and that some type of ways and times it strikes down at the most unusual--that it will strike some little place in India, and some little girl who can add faster than the calculator or something.  We have people with perfect pitch, we have people with--you see all of these different things that--odd people not people, you know just different things and so forth that there's a talent thing that circles the earth because and wherever it strikes, do something with it.
Story_ID: 88914
Speaker 1: Now when you were on the tour.
Speaker 2: Which one?
Speaker 1: I mean with [Charlie] Byrd, I'm sorry.  There were other--your group expanded did it?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Didn't it?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Not when we did it.
Speaker 1: Well, did I do something?
Speaker 2: You did (laughing) we did that three month tour [of South America in 1961] with just the three of us.  Drums, bass and piano and Charlie's wife [Rebecca Byrd] who did a little singing, that's all.
Speaker 1: I see. So when did [Nathaniel] Nat Adderley and Bill Harris-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh now that was going on to--that was in '59 [1959] when we went to England and picked up the-there we go, just a little turnabout (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: So when you first went that was 1950 what?
Speaker 2: Fifty-nine with Woody Herman.
Speaker 1: Okay, I'm sorry and then you went--when was the time you went with the State Department--both-were both USIA?
Speaker 2: No. The other one, the first one was agreement between the American Federation of Music and the English Federation of Music, and they said you had to have an equal exchange.  If you sent there people over there, they had to send three people here.  So what we did was that was the first Anglo-Saxon man ever, and we took over, we wound up with nine and we picked up nine British musicians.  And we toured for three weeks, did a couple things in London, we toured England, Scotland and Ireland and, three weeks, and then we came back.  And then seven of us went to Saudi Arabia that worked for (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And then you went to, then you went on the USAI [sic, USIA, United States Information Agency]?  That was in 1961?
Speaker 2: That was in 1961.
Speaker 1: Okay, I just wanna get--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 88915
Speaker 1: So, okay. You said that you heard in that music, in the music that you heard [in Brazil], you heard a simplicity that's what you were saying, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: It was simple but melodic?
Speaker 2: Melodic.  The Portuguese language is very, very conducive to the love sound.  Usually everybody thought that the only language that was really--was French, you know.  Then everybody is--French is very romantic, but the Portuguese was a whole different--it was almost like smooth running, say syrup or something, that it was just so smooth and pretty and the pronunciation of the Portuguese, as they pronounce it words just flow and I was, oh my goodness, yeah.
Speaker 1: But your instincts were correct all along in many ways in what would be--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, yeah, oh yeah, yeah.  Well I've run into him, I've seen him a few times.  And he says you know I should've listened to you.  I said I gave you two albums, you had a whole month, in fact I saw him year before last.  And that's one of the owners of the record company--
Speaker 1: Now what was his name?
Speaker 2: Ah, you don't need to know that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: In fact, they had to talk [Stan Getz] Stan's company [Verve Records] into doing it too, you know.  But anyhow, like I said Dizzy Gillespie, I done that album, he heard it when he was down there before he did a thing and Curtis Fuller done another album but nobody paid no attention, and Felix Grant, this jock head he hadn't been playing it for years, you know, but nobody paid no attention until that one ["Jazz Samba"] came out--Stan Getz and Charlie Byrd then boom.
Story_ID: 88916
Speaker 1: So now how did that ["Jazz Samba"] come about, that's what I want to know.  Wasn't the story that Stan Getz came in and said "what are you..."?
Speaker 2: What are you guys--what are you doing up there?  I said, "I'm playing bossa nova" and he sat in and it sounded good and he said we ought to record that.  So we went back to Riverside [Records], Charlie called Riverside and they said "Naw, we don't think nothing of it" so.  Talked Stan's company [Verve Records] into doing it and boom. Then it hit the fan after that, you know, a big suit and everything.  But I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: What happened? Now talk about the suit?
Speaker 2: It was a thing that Charlie [Byrd] didn't--one of the contracts he signed, Charlie didn't get any money so forth.  They had to sue Stan's company and then they had this big suit and boom, and there was a drummer.  And I didn't get any money and then (unclear) hey.  You know what, it's passed, you know.  Let sleeping dogs lie and--but same thing happened with Natalie Cole was with a record company and she said, "You know I think I want to do something of my father's," they said "Oh, no, that won't sell," they said no.  So she said, "Well let me out of my contract," they let her out of the contract, she did that album, boom, right?  I mean people who are supposed to know, don't know everything and Bill Cosby went to different TV--I got an idea for something, "Naw, America is not ready for that."  It's one guy was his--Silverman said, let's give it a shot and that was the number one show for seven straight years.  The President didn't evens speak until after The Bill Cosby Show went off (laughing). But I mean see you know some people who are supposed to know, don't always know.
Story_ID: 88917
Speaker 1: So now you worked with--how long did you work--was Stan Getz that didn't--  that was just through.
Speaker 2: That was just yeah, yeah, yeah.  Then he had me come up to--they had a big bossa nova thing in New York City, but a whole bunch of people up in South America.  Stan called me to come up work with him and [Joao] Giberto and Astrud [Gilberto] and Milton Banana.  And I just did that with Stan Getz cause he had tried to get me to go with him for years, even when we were with Dinah [Washington] and I wasn't gonna leave Dinah to go with Stan Getz cause.
Speaker 1: You were with the Queen.
Speaker 2: Oh, that's right.  (laughing)
Speaker 1: And she was treating you okay.
Speaker 2: She was, I mean, you know, we had a thing between Wynton [Kelly], Jimmy [Cobb] and I, because when Wynton we had different piano players, we had Beryl Booker and then Junior Mance [Julian Clifford Mance, Jr.], let's see who else, we had about three other, two or three other piano players, but when Wynton came back.
Speaker 1: Now Wynton, this is what I--I mean I--I mean I know you've talked about it but him being--he was deaf-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Deaf in one ear, yeah.
Speaker 1: So how do you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Not a problem to him.
Speaker 1: You--it didn't affect his--I mean--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: No, no.  He was one of those musical geniuses--he was deaf in his left ear, so if I'm driving, I got to either turn the radio down or talk real loud for the sound to go over to him.  But if he's driving, you know, then he can hear me very--but that was from the Rubella, you know.
Speaker 1: When he was young?
Speaker 2: When he was young, yeah, one ear, so, yeah.  I mean handicaps are no problem, there was a piano player who had something wrong with his hand, when was born, horse powered and it just hey.  It might be, it might look funny to you but it's not a handicap to that person because the fact they know how to deal with it.  When they have their mind set, that whatever they want to be and they gonna do, that is--there is no problem that I'm seeing.  You know the one time in the Europe, there was this thing of getting rid of all dwarfs.  And you know the real handicap people--well played the big festival over there maybe about seven or eight years ago.  And this guy was a dwarf and he mentioned about how during The Occupation and so forth they were supposed to kill him, they were supposed to get rid of them.  Because they are not a "real human being," you know, but you see on TV there's two brothers who multi-millionaires that--whenever people used their handicap as not something against them, but something for them.
Story_ID: 88918
Speaker 1: Now, what--the whole thing with, okay--so you--just let me just understand something with Stan Getz, you are sort of instrumental in taking this--at least the sound [the bossa nova] to him, sort of.
Speaker 2: No, he came in to see us--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: He came in to see you, but he--but he liked what he heard?
Speaker 2: He liked heard what he heard, we were at the show--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah, that song went like fast.
Speaker 2: That he said find out where to record this.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And so Riverside [Records] said they didn't want it and so then that whole album went up place.
Speaker 1: So he--and so he sold on this--then didn't "The Girl from Ipanema" didn't that have--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That was all--that was all on that CD [sic, "The Girl from Ipanema" is on the album "Getz/Gilberto," while Betts played on "Jazz Samba"], yes.
Speaker 1: Oh it was on the same, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah on the CD cause that my bass, but I made up that front (humming "Desafinado") so there was a whole lot of cooperation but when the money came down, it went one way and then, so but hey.   Hey, don't even go there.
Speaker 1: Oh, I see okay.
Speaker 2: I mean you know, that's what did they say, money talks and everything else walks, so.
Speaker 1: Okay, I see.  Was he using drugs around that time too?
Speaker 2: Who?
Speaker 1: Didn't Stan use drugs; didn't he have a drug problem?
Speaker 2: Not during that time, I don't think he did, yeah, but I wasn't when he was--
Speaker 1: Okay, I got you, okay.  Now, so you then--that's sort of a little set back, a little set back.  I mean it could've been a big bonanza.
Speaker 2: Well, naw, naw, but naw.  The--as it went down there was something that really nothing came of it, Charlie [Byrd] sued the company and he got a lot of money and what not.  And so then he hired his brother to play with him then so, you know.  Blood is thicker than water and stay with it leave it, hey.  A whole lot has gone down in everybody's life.  I mean you look at all these people, look at these people who had all this Enron stock and so forth.  I saw one couple that had seven hundred and forty thousand dollars that they had in their account, and they worked for Enron and when the deal went down they got three thousand four hundred dollars.  And they had three quarter of a million dollars in somebody's safe.
Speaker 1: That's true, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Okay, but--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But this had a color issue around it, that's all I'm saying.
Speaker 2: That had a color issue too, green. Yeah, that's green.
Speaker 1: That's true (laughing) but there--(simultaneous) so any way you're over there--are you licking your wounds a little bit?
Speaker 2: Naw.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, no, no.
Story_ID: 88919
Speaker 1: So you don't have any wounds to lick?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: But anyway, Ray Brown comes calling-no, is this-- am I, okay.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, he came by he came in town, he was working--they were, I think out of the car or a van or something and after left Charlie [Byrd]--I went in--Rick Henderson called me to go into the theatre for two weeks and then Tony Taylor said "You want to come in The [Bohemian] Caverns, I got Bobby Timmons coming in."  So I said okay, and went in there and who was it?  Bill Cosby came by and sat in with us and then Ray came in town and said "Ella [Fitzgerald] is going to need the bass player, you wanna go?" and I said "Okay," and that's how that came about, so.  You know, I mean the weather look bad when you look back past over the cloud stuff and all of a sudden, the sun is shining, and it's bright and so forth, you know.  All you have to do, is you have faith in somebody else that's not yourself, you have faith in somebody else to take care of whatever the--whatever the storm is cause it too shall pass.
Speaker 1: Now what did your interaction been with Ray Brown up to that point?
Speaker 2: We been--well I've known him and we used to play golf and every time they'd come in town Oscar Peterson and Ella, and you know.  I knew all of that cause she had different bass players with her, and we played golf and wherever we worked and so that was our thing bass and golf.  And we developed a motto, "bass fiddle, American Express, golf clubs," never leave home without it.  I'm leaving Friday morning; I'm going up to Rochester [New York], bass fiddle, American Express, golf clubs.  Unless I see it's going to rain for two days up there, that's where they usually have us playing a country club every day, you know.
Speaker 1: Now when did you start playing golf, when was--you said that it was on the road and there was not, but what year was that--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I think I started, no I was here.  I started fooling around--when I was with Dinah [Washington], I was trying to do something with golf.  Because there wasn't any--
Story_ID: 88920
Speaker 1: There was nothing to do, we were in so and so city and sort of big city is fine other cities what not and you had quarter machines, TV's came out in a quarter and you had to have a bunch of quarters if you were going to watch something in the daytime and nighttime, while you're in the middle of it, boom. It goes out.  And somebody said you know you should take up golf.  Because see, it gives you something to do, you're getting exercise also but it's a mental thing.  And then, when you really got into it and then, let's say I'm here in Washington [D.C.] and then I'm talking to you, and he said, "Well, next week, I'm going to Cleveland [Ohio]," you said, oh, you call, let me give you a number to call somebody I went to school with and her husband plays golf, you call them and you end with another circle of friends.  And then you start up a different kind of comradery and it--and that's how Ray Brown died.  Just come from the golf course and went to the hotel to get some sleep to go to work that night--best way you can die doing the two things that you want, playing music and playing golf.  Not some car accident or some long sickness or something, you know.  Cause you have to--you look at the beginning, you look how far you come and then you also when you look at the end, if you doing what you doing now, good.
Speaker 2: Cause he died in his sleep, right?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I've known of a--a lot of others Freddie Green, the guitar player; we use--all over Europe, died in his sleep.
Speaker 2: I'd like to die in my sleep that just seems like the best way to go.
Speaker 1: I snore too loud for myself.
Speaker 2: Huh?
Speaker 1: I snore too loud; I'd wake myself up (laughter)
Speaker 2: So it might not be a chance. (laughter)
Speaker 1: (Unclear) to die my sleep, I might, oh man, damn, I almost died (laughter)
Story_ID: 88921
Speaker 1: So now, how do you think you and Ray Brown differ in terms of your technique?
Speaker 2: Oh, because he worked more so with the heavier people in my--you know in the beginning, Dizzy [Gillespie] and then all those years with Oscar [Peterson].  Now we were together a lot with, you know with Oscar.  We were on tour, that's when he and I played a lot of golf in Europe and we'd be on tour, Oscar Peterson, Count Basie and Ella Fitzgerald, we go, we do like five weeks and then we separate and Basie Band go that way, Oscar go this way and then Ella and then we come back and meet for two or three days and separate.  The happy medium is everybody's doing what they do best, what they want to do.  And so you get a fulfillment of your ambition, you working with top people and you bring level up to that level up to that, now if you don't keep--bring you own level of playing up to that and then you're happy.  Unfortunately and in this case, it does take you away from your family and, so you don't have a lot of judgment of things that go on at home, but then, what about airplane pilots, they're away from their families.  What about basketball players and so forth, it's--people in government jobs, they're away from their families.  So you have to function the best way that you can and hope that they can function the best way they can.
Speaker 1: But that doesn't answer my question.
Speaker 2: What was your question?
Speaker 1: My question was, how did your style differ from Ray Brown?
Speaker 2: We had different approaches.  Because you, yeah--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Well let's talk about it a little bit, let's talk.
Speaker 2: Because we had one approach about the time and how important time and the beat was--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: But he played piano, right?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No, he didn't play piano?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Why I think he played piano?
Speaker 2: Well, I think you are misinformed and-- probably, you were confused (laughter)
Speaker 1: I didn't know he was born in Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I read something that he played piano before.
Speaker 2: He might have, he might have, but I took piano lessons for a year from a lady at church, you know and I played on Saturdays and I be getting in there I'd be (humming) I hear the door and I (humming) and I said, naw, this not working. (laughter)
Speaker 1: How did your--just some--I'm just wondering different people have, you know, signature sound, that's all.
Speaker 2: No, we had the time, we talked a lot about the same ideas far as that sound, you know.  In fact, we talked about, like I said about the five piano players, each one gets their sound out of the bass.  I worked on getting and being the fact that I was a drummer that helped because you heard the sound of the drums, so that was able to transfer that into the bass.  Then the melody--the melodic part is like from the choir, and you know and singing in the church.
Speaker 1: And did--was he a mentor to you at all?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We would talk a lot about strings; we talked about this and that, you know, compared some technique when we be out together.
Story_ID: 88922
Speaker 1: So you started with Ella in what year?
Speaker 2: 1964, October.
Speaker 1: And what was it that she you know when [William Henry "Chick"] Webb died and she inherited the Big Band what year was that?
Speaker 2: Oh that was way.
Speaker 1: That was way before?
Speaker 2: That was in summer of '38 [1938],'39 [1939], something like that. [1939]
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: She had a rough time, cause I can tell you it was a man's world, you know, all the bookers and everything.  But the gentlemen we had told me a heck of a story.  I played--they used to have a festival [Manassas Jazz Festival] down in Manassas [Virginia], Johnson Mccree and Ole Dixieland Guys. It was a big thing every year and this trombone player came down, this gentleman, he told me, he was a musical conductor.  He had the band of the [International] Sweethearts of Rhythm and they weren't doing too good right at one particular time.  So Ella didn't want them to disband so she let part of Chick's band go, because you know the guys could work at almost at any place.  And she fronted them, the one that fronted---but she did a thing to keep them working.  And one of the girls, Judy Comarodee [ph] was the trombone player, was always very dedicated to Ella.  In fact I got a letter from her just recently but she lives out in [Las] Vegas [Nevada], she and her husband.  But she talked about how--you know Ella, Sammy Davis [Jr.] and a whole bunch--Bill Cosby, Nat King Cole, they-- Redd Foxx, would help the people that they knew and in this business, when you know some got raw deals or some bad deals, or having a hard times, they would help because of the respect that they had, you know.  The love and the respect at what that person did as far as in show business.
Speaker 1: So, if I understand you right, you're saying that group--there are cases of them individually helping someone else in hard times?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  They used to do that out of the goodness--they got the money, they do it out of the goodness of their hearts.  Cause they had respect and they appreciated, you know, but what those different people did or how they performed and to keep them going.  Cause this is a very rough business and they have a motto, and you've seen it--well you're probably not aware of it, but they have a motto that you know you can--it's a government things, but it's also in the music business, you can stain yourself and one will call two, and two will call four, four call eight and you're off, you're off, that's it.  And nobody will hire you, nobody--I knew of this one lady, one hell of a singer and my wife [Mildred Grady Betts] and I had thirteen albums by her and she got blackballed and way down the line she came to Washington [D.C.] and was called "The Reunion."  I knew the three guys that were working with her, that worked with her for this reunion.  And she told how she didn't record for nineteen years cause she got blackballed.  There was another singer who was one of the best acts that I ever saw in my life, and I was with Charlie [Byrd].  We worked up in New York [New York City, New York], The Village Gate and she was one of the big stars there, and all she said was "I do," that's all, she married somebody.  But who she married all of a sudden, that was it, you know.  Very unfortunate, I mean her whole career she was one of the best acts that I ever seen.  And she didn't say nothing against the country, she just said "I do."  And, now I'll tell you later what that was about but it just, you know.  That's how the control is, so that's where the cloud is there, so I'm trying to stay under the cloud.
Story_ID: 88923
Speaker 1: Now when you start working with Ella [Fitzgerald] though, you were a different person than when you originally, you know worked with Dinah [Washington].  Dinah, you were, still you know, almost--not a snot nosed kid, but you were--but you were relatively young.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  When I went I was the oldest--when I went with [Earl] Bostic, I was the youngest guy in the group, like 19 almost 20 and when I went with Dinah, I'm the oldest group and I'm just 23, I said, gee whiz, you know.  But it was, it was--you learning all the time, you observing, you learning, you know.  And I think from my bringing up and so forth, that you find a lot you can learn more by listening than talking.  Because if you talk all the time, you only hear yourself and but you listen.  Now I remember when you told me to tell you about the train.  I learned something about on this train ride that really made me realize, put into perspective what we were doing.   We played Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York]--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Tell me what year this is.
Speaker 2: This had to me maybe '86 [1986] or '87 [1987], somewhere in there we played Carnegie Hall, and I'm coming right back that night, so I can get done--in fact I kept my tuxedo on and I--because I checked out of the hotel and I had a bass in my bag and I got this train and this guy sat down beside me and I had the bass laying on across where the bass lays right on the--this space where two seats that go--and so we started talking and he told me he was with the circus.  So I said "Well you know what you perform in the circus?"  He said, "No, I don't perform in the circus," he said that circus came to his house, I mean through his town when he was about seventeen and he was fascinated with that, and he ran away from home and joined the circus.  And I said "You don't perform or nothing?"  He said no, he says he's a tent setter, they set up tents.  And I'm trying to figure out how really important that is, but I can't say that to my friend.  How important, then he explains to me.  He said the thrill that he gets, is coming--they come to this huge big field, it's empty and then they set up this three ring circus and a tent and so forth and to see if they're there for a week.  You see the joy that the people get from the animals and all the entertainment and everything clicks for that--let's we'll say a week.  He says when it's the last night, they have to break that down and pack up everything and move on and the next day, he says when you look back, the field is just like it was when they went there.  But one is transpired since they were there.  And then I thought about it.  You know I'm saying, well, hell, that's the same thing that we do.  We go to a concert hall and its bare--I mean the seats are there, it's dark and so forth and then we come and perform that night and the place is jam packed and boom, boom, boom and the people are ecstatic and when it's over with, the people are gone.  And then the place look just like it was when we first got there.  So you go in--in other words, you going to area somewhere and you given an injection to each and everybody that's there and that very self-same thing.  And happiness that you get fulfillment of your job, of doing it, that's it.
Speaker 1: You know while we're on that, how-- that feeling that you get when you're sort one with the audience, can you describe that feeling?
Speaker 2: No.  It's indescribable, it's really something that makes you proud of what you do, you know makes you very, very proud that you say, I've come this far, I went through all the stuff at the airport, there was nobody there to pick me up, boom, de boom, boom, boom.  And so, you know, whatever that was, that's downgraded, and then you come and you do this and when it's over with and everybody's happy, and you.  It was worth my while to go through all of this.  It's going to be worth my while to get back home but, you get back and you say, mission accomplished, and that's a great feeling.
Speaker 1: But it's a feeling though.
Speaker 2: It's a feeling.
Speaker 1: You know--when you're with the audience?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  It's a feeling, but that's the joy of making people happy and making people happy, you make yourself happy.
Story_ID: 88924
Speaker 1: Now did you--okay, I wanna get back--let's just establish things in sort of historical context with your career with Ella Fitzgerald, okay?
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: To do that, I'd like you to sort of talk about the Ella before you came, sort of on the scene.  Cause you were saying--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I didn't, but I didn't--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Or with even what you heard.
Speaker 2: Well, I heard of things--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: It was rough, you know for her when she inherited the band [Chick Webb's band] and that was sort of rough--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: I didn't know any of that at all then.
Speaker 1: But you heard about it afterwards?
Speaker 2: Oh way after, yeah, after I was with her though. But I didn't know anything about that because; I mean that like early '40's [1940], late '30's [1930s], early '40's [1940s] so forth.  And I didn't know anything about that until I came with her in '64 [1964]. But then--after you know, run into these people that tell me these various things and so forth.  You looking--you see what a magnificent life that some people lived.  Her I--I know so many of, Cab Calloway, Lionel Hampton, so many of them that they lived for the moment of being on stage.  It was the obsession to go and perform, Sammy Davis [Jr.] them, I mean cause some many music--blood's not in their veins, music notes are in their veins.  And this is the only time they can get this out and you see some of us as we're getting older that they come to stage and they getting ready to go on, and hard times and soon as they call their name, they lose 40 or 50 years, just like that.  Because this is what they know this is what they love to do and it just--you stand there, and you're looking at a miracle.  And you say oh, my God, that's how important music is.
Speaker 1: Now, but--at the time that you came on, I'm just saying the whole-- cause you--you started your career in the Big Band Era.  You know, but in the--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: But I wasn't playing a big band--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: I know, but I'm saying, I know, I know, I know.  But I'm just saying, I didn't say you were playing in the band, we never said you were playing in the Big Band.  I said when you started okay (laughing).  But you know when you joined her, it's a whole--you know sort of a whole different time and it's a transitioning.  And it's also--artist at that point, you now you have the whole "Motown" thing so, you know, starting to sort of peculate, R and B thing.  But isn't this a time of transitioning a lot into more concerts?  I mean, I'm just asking for you to put into historical.
Speaker 2: From me, that what I was doing?
Speaker 1: No, no, no, I'm saying what was happening with music, you know jazz music at that time and especially with people like an Ella Fitzgerald.  That's how I'm trying to.
Speaker 2: She didn't like working clubs; with Ella she never really did much of like jazz nightclubs.  When they took her bonus we started doing the hotel chains and what not, The Fairmont Chains, the big hotels, being [Las] Vegas [Nevada], you now every year Vegas, Flamingo for like four weeks and then we started Caesar's Palace, you know, they be [Frank] Sinatra and [Count] Basie Band for three weeks, Alan King.  I'm trying forget what exactly what you're getting at?
Speaker 1: Well, I'm trying to understand at the time you joined her, where was she sort in her career, that's all I'm saying-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Big, big.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know (laughing)
Speaker 2: Grande, grande. In 64? [1964]
Speaker 1: No I was just trying--sort of--because she had--the reason she had played in a lot of clubs, that she had inherited that band, you know.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, but that was over--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That was a long time ago, that was over. But I'm just saying, that's why she never sort of played in the chicken--was it not in the Chicken Circuit--I mean she never played in that.
Speaker 2: The Chitlin Circuit?
Speaker 1: Chitlin Circuit.
Speaker 2: She did the theatres way back.  But then Norman Granz took her out of that element and put her into singing the pop tunes and so forth, which put her up in a higher--she got to do a few movies when the little bit that they could do, you know.  Cause even not too many of them got to do the Hollywood as a whole different ballgame.  But--about the only jazz clubs that she would do was in maybe in--I think we did do Basin Street East [New York City, New York], I worked that in '65 [1965], but mainly it was concerts and the big hotels.  That was her big thing and it was wonderful.
Story_ID: 88925
Speaker 1: But tell, can you give me some favorite stories, some things maybe you haven't told a lot of, you know.
Speaker 2: A favorite story.  I try to forget every story I hear.  One of the funniest ones was, we're on a tour, we went over eleven weeks in one nighters, we took Roy Eldridge and [Eddie] "Lockjaw" Davis, we went to Europe, we did eleven weeks of one nighters, and, no it was 13 week tour but 11 weeks of one nighters and the last two weeks was a week in London [England] at Ronnie Scott's [Jazz] Club and a week in Sheffield, England.  And Roy and Lockjaw came home.  But we're doing and five and six one nighters a week and some double headers, you know like go on at six o'clock, and then finish about eight something, and do like a nine thirty, sometimes we come on in at three o'clock in the morning and get to the hotel, and they say bags seven thirty, body seven forty five, that mean have your bags downstairs at seven thirty, have you down there seven, you know, oh it was rough.  But it was--I guess one of the funniest things is one night, she had this black sequins dress, gorgeous dress, and we went--we had to play Tommy Flanagan, Bobby Durham and Joe Pass, we would go on and do the instrumental for forty five minutes then Norman [Granz] decided to put Ella [Fitzgerald] right on and boom, and then that would be one show.  Well when she came on, and it was just her, and they come on near at the end to do the finale. She had this black sequins dress, and some kind of way a string began to come loose, so a couple of beads are falling so Roy comes in, "You got a string hanging in there, let me get this, turn around."  So she's turning around and turning this way now, beads starting to fall down here and he says here comes Lockjaw to help with this and the next thing you know, the string is all on Roy's trumpet and valves and some of them and the floor is getting black like somebody spreading pepper, and she's turning around like a little marionette (laughing) oh God, it was the funniest thing in the world.  This went on for about five minutes and when it's finally over, somebody just brought a scissors, cut the string and the whole (laughing) and Roy was trying to get the trumpet out of the (unclear) trying to get out of the horn it was a classic.  The Three Stooges couldn't done no better than that (laughing) and this is a jazz concert.  Oh boy, yeah, I've seen some funny stuff, I have seen some funny stuff, but these things happen, you know and it's a joy when it happen because it just breaks you.  Just give you some relief, but that was about the funniest thing that I saw with Ella.  There was one with Charlie Byrd, but I can't tell that one, I mean just--
Speaker 1: Any other stories, I mean twenty-four years, you can't give me about ten or twelve-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, but see you got, I don't divulge in things, you know--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: You don't want to betray anyone.
Speaker 2: No, I don't yeah, I don't. That's not my style.
Story_ID: 88926
Speaker 1: But, okay well let me ask this.  What made you stay?
Speaker 2: With who?
Speaker 1: With Ella [Fitzgerald], I mean what made you stay in that way?  That was longer that you had stayed with anyone.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  I loved it, I guess in the beginning I mean to the point after, it became family, it really became family and we changed--they changed a few times, they changed piano players, and changed drummers two or three times and so, but she would always depend upon me.  And if we got new people--cause we had--she had three books.  One book that was a Big Band book, one book that was symphony book and one book that was a small, small group of which was like a lot of head arrangements.  And most of those head arrangements, were not written--were not written out, but after working with Tommy Flanagan, cause I knew them all, so then I would have to teach them to the other people.
Story_ID: 88927
Speaker 1: --So and so earrings. And then he'd go up to her, "Oh Ella, oh that red sequined dress, it's blinding me (laughing) and the shoes (laughing) anybody stand by would think that he can see, you know.  It was a lot of fun and games that went on (laughing).  He used to do that; he scared the hell out of me one night though.  Mr. Henry called me, yeah, and he said listen, I'm bringing in, we're gonna do three months of singers and I want you to back--I want you to work for me for three months, and  give the group the backup all of these singers.  So we started off with Chris Connors, she brought her own piano player and she did three weeks, and then he brought in Esther Phillips, I kept the piano player for that, and she did, I think a week a couple weeks, we had Grady Tate, Johnny Hartman, Letta Mbulu who was the protege of, the one who [HM] Harry Belafonte brought over here.
Speaker 2: You're talking about--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Miriam Makeba.
Speaker 2: Miriam Makeba right, okay.
Speaker 1: Let me try to think you now.  We had singer after singer coming in and it was really--I love that old place, because--I'm trying to think did Joe Williams come in too.  Each one, each singer had a different thing that they brought to the table, you know, and that's the joy of performing with different ones that you accept what they have.  You get some eccentric ones and you get some--there was one lady, I won't even tell her name, she passed, but--not there, she worked a club in Georgetown [Washington, D.C.] and she was a fussy bit, you know, just, loo,loo,loo,loo.  So we just had piano and bass and we backed her up for two weeks, and the sound system was over here by me and so she said, "Well yes, Keter come, testing, testing, can I get a little bit more bass?" and I'd say, "Is that enough?"  "Yep, that's better, that's better," I never touched it for two weeks, I'd go, "You want more? Less, less, okay" (laughing).  Two weeks, I never touched it, I just put-"How's that?"  "Testing, oh, yeah, that's much better."  You run into people like that you know, you learn how--I know exactly how to handle her because, see I'm doing the right thing and I ain't done a damn thing (laughing) but you know, cause you bring the people--a lot of them bring their--they bring their clothes with them.  I mean they bring their clothes on stage with them.  I call it whatever you have at home, so are clothes.  You get ready to go to work and you ran into heavy traffic, and so forth and so your attitude are your clothes and you get to the club and you got an attitude now those are are clothes, take them off at the edge--go on the bandstand with a naked mind so you can fulfillment what you do, fulfill on the bandstand and then put those clothes on.  You know you had an argument with your husband, or your girlfriend or whatever, your kids, don't bring that on where you have to go to work at, leave that some place and then come and get it.  But she would, every night, something must, "Get me a little bit more."  "How's that?"  "That's good, that's good."
Speaker 2: And you don't want to give her name?  See you know Keter you're not giving a lot of names in this interview.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: Okay (laughing) you're giving stories and no names, -- (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And the names will make it really-(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Really?  No it wouldn't, just put it as, just put up there blank face people, cause they had--I mean we're talking about people, and there are some very strange, you know, pretty far out people, and some that are very, very nice, so.
Story_ID: 88928
Speaker 1: But Keter, let's talk about the family that was created, you know with your years with Ella Fitzgerald and Tommy Flanagan.  Okay, cause you were talking about, you know, he was, he left right or the--wait-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: He, '78 [1978], I think he left, yeah.  He was with her way before I went, and then he left her and went to Tony Bennett for a while.  And then he came back with her, and I came in '64 [1964] and her group then was Gus Johnson on drums Tommy Flanagan and Roy Eldridge.  And we started a place called Sparks, Nevada, which is right outside of Reno and there was a club called John Ascuaga's Golden Nugget [sic, John Ascuaga's Nugget Casino Resort]  used to be like a little gambling thing and you open this huge, monstrous place and it was big.  And it was two elephants on this show, Bertha and Tina.  They were the headliners, anybody else, they were the--cause they'd been on the Ed Sullivan Show and what not, and the funny part about that was when we, after we found out--I think, well the year after it opened.  But the architects had forgotten about the--cause the show was built around the elephants, so they had forgotten about the band.  And they built the seats and everything right up to the edge of the edge, you know--the opening day, they said, "Oh, where we gone put the band at?"  So they had to put the band up in the (unclear) up there to play.  Cause they can't have the band on the bandstand with the elephants on the show.  They had the elephants to do their bit and then they brought out some dancers and the dancers do their bit and then they closed the stage.  Eddie Peabody, the guitar player [sic, banjo player], well-known, would come out and play intermission.  That time, the band can come down from up there, set up the stage and so forth, and then we would come on, you know and the Ella Fitzgerald show.  And I was up there was up there in nowhere with nothing to do, I mean just stay right at the motel there.  And that's when I really wished that I played golf then because I just-said okay the only thing I do is play keno.  And, you go to sleep at night and you wake up in the middle of the night and you see numbers up on the board.  You saw them on the wall, there was no numbers on the wall, but in your mind, you know, you become addicted to that. And I said I got to find something else to do and that's when I really--when I came back from that, golf something.  But it was a learning process and--Norman Granz said "Now, it's going to be different with Ella," I said "Naw, don't worry.  I worked with Dinah [Washington] I can handle it," it's whole different, whole different thing.
Speaker 1: In what way?
Speaker 2: And it was different style of singing.  Ella was more of a technician, inside the thing.  Dinah was more like gritty you see, so you had to start to adjust to that and--plus they had been together, she and Tommy, and Gus had been together so long, they had all kinds of little things that, nothing was written out and so I had to earn that is by over a process.  We didn't really never had no rehearsal, just for the small group thing.  And that was little rough too for a few months, until I got it down.
Speaker 1: Was she patient with you, at the beginning-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, no, no, no.  No she was pretty cool.  We really, let's see I stayed, I did that and she--usually in the summer she would take a vacation.  And she took a vacation in July, and we're gonna go back in September, October.  And Tommy Gwaltney called me from Blues Alley [Washington, D.C.] and said "Listen my bass player just got sick, what are you doing?"  I said that "I just got home with Ella--from Ella yesterday and she's got a couple of months off." So he said "Could you, could you come in and help me out for you know for the bass player," and I said well okay, starting the next night.  And then another fellow had Mark Russell and (unclear) had a show, channel four, it was like a local "Today" show and they had a trio with (unclear) had a trio and their bass player also played in that so.  All of a sudden I got six nights at Blues Alley and five days at Channel four, and I said hey, now we can get a house or something.  And when Ella them called me, will I go back, no I'm gonna stay here because, you know this is what I'm trying to do.
Story_ID: 88929
Speaker 1: The two between Dinah [Washington] and [Ella Fitzgerald] you know, they were-- it wasn't an issue of talent; but it's just that she was operating at a much higher level.  Talk about the technique and you--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, the technique, one was this way and was the other way.  Dinah was more like earthy, to a certain point, Ella was little more technical.  So you made the adjustment from this to that.  And always when you're--if you just starting out brand new, with a person, but everybody starting new, they're all are learning.  But when you going to something that is already set and there's really a lot of things that's not written out, then you got to put listening ears on and you got to put your ears on to retain.  In other words, you're recording is to record it of the way that I explained to students.  That if you don't know a song--if anybody go to a jam session or something and you don't know the song, you say--you can't say well don't play it, cause I don't know it, you know, just say go ahead and play it.  And then what you have to do is, you have two minds.  You have a conscious mind and subconscious mind and so you take your subconscious mind and turn it into a tape recorder.  And listen with your conscious mind as you going through the song, the first time and then when it comes back from the next chorus, you can almost play it on instant replay until you get to the part that you want that you're not sure of. Then you erase that and then run it through and say, okay now I got it and the third time, you got it recorded in your mind.  And people say oh boy that person, he's got big ears, it has nothing to do with the size of your ears, it has to do with your memory and your mentality.  And so I had to bring that up most--you know with Ella because it was a different whole bag.
Speaker 1: Well you hadn't been challenged that much--I mean for a long period of time--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, well that was, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean this--first of all you had to get into the groove, like you said--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they were set, see you're the, you know, the new kid on the block and you got to get in with that, and it was a challenge and it kept you on your toes.  And I mean it was--and it was--and finally you loved them.  When you really got it all down, and so forth, then loved it.
Speaker 1: But when did you--do you remember that moment when you got it down, when you knew you sort of had it?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah cause I even, yeah, I remember.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were?
Speaker 2: I'm trying to remember where was I.  I was in heaven when the song was over; I know that (laughing) that was one song that was--oh Lord, I'm telling you everything. There was song that-cause see she used to make up stuff.  I mean she had during a song and she would make up things and we go this way and that way.  I mean we be zinging around and we just made or followed behind her.  Now when Tommy [Flanagan] left and somebody else--I got the show all of this and all of that, you know.  And that's why as a groove that she started to depend on me and I enjoyed doing it and I guess in a way, that I did the thing that--when you enjoy what you doing after you worked probably to a certain point neglected home, I'm talking about neglected home, not in a financial way or nothing, and not in a love of home, but stay out so much away from home because, we're touring.  I knew that his record 13 weeks, I went to South America with Charlie Byrd for 12 weeks.  The 13 weeks, we go back for five weeks, and so forth, but you're doing what you do.  I think about like that the guy at the circus that you come to and you see it and then you go and your little part is a big part of what you contribute to it.  When you leave, it's back like that; you've done something for mankind.
Story_ID: 88930
Speaker 1: Now how long-- I read--were you often out for 36 of the 52 weeks?  Was that very often that happened?
Speaker 2: Not, well in the beginning.
Speaker 1: In the beginning?
Speaker 2: In the beginning I think I did something like 42 or something.  I got some itineraries, I got to find out from a friend of mine with, she put them in an envelope and I showed them to her that she knows.  I got some itineraries that show how we were everyday all over Europe, I mean just back and forth, up and down and what not, and we loved it, I mean--when you're doing what you love, you don't get tired.  That 13 week tour that we went on, I came home and lost 18 pounds.  I had to buy suspenders for my pants; I started to buy suspenders for my underwear, because I'm telling you, 18 pounds and that was from doubleheaders and all this.  It was a rough 11 weeks, but we did it, you know.
Story_ID: 88931
Speaker 1: But do you remember the moment that you were just in that groove, that's what I'm saying that you got it, do you remember what concert, what city, what?
Speaker 2: I couldn't, you're moving too fast.  Moving too fast and too much, you know.  But as it start melting in, it starting going on, then you really, I love this.  Now that I mastered all of that, and now we got at a point that wherever she [Ella Fitzgerald] wants to go, we can be right on her tail and boom, boom, boom boom, boom.  Well that was the joy of doing, I mean it's like any professional of, say for instance an athlete or golf or basketball player or if it's a doctor and he learns how to operate and he learns on certain things, and then after a while, he becomes so efficient at that, that he can anything that comes up that's unusual, he can handle it.  That's the joy of learning your profession to the nth degree.
Story_ID: 88932
Speaker 1: Now did you and Tommy Flanagan get along--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Very well.
Speaker 1: Or was she [Ella Fitzgerald] disappointed when he left?
Speaker 2: Yes, she was, she was kind of hurt then.  See that was another matter of something else.  And so we had different piano players and I have--and sometimes I'd have to go out two or three days early and then rehearse the piano players, all to show them all little things and what not.  And that was on the sheet, you know, but I don't mind doing it.
Story_ID: 88933
Speaker 1: [Laughter].
Speaker 2: I'm just trying to get you to tell some more anecdotes.
Speaker 1: That anything stands out?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: I don't know, maybe--there was one thing that was kind of funny, when I first--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Can we start, can we start with like you know maybe the first five years of your--(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Yeah.  What I was getting ready to say, when I first went to Europe with her [Ella Fitzgerald], and we [Betts, Fitzgerald, Tommy Flanagan, Roy Eldridge, Eddie "Lockjaw" Davis, and others] toured England and Scotland, we were up in Scotland and I don't think she had been to this town or maybe once.  Anyhow, the big sign outside of it--it was a theatre, big theatre-it says "Fitzgerald Flanagan." big (unclear).  So, I'm sure there's a whole lot of people who said oh this, so when the curtain opened up you know (laughing) applause started up (laughing) and then and by the time she got through with them, you know by the end of the concert, you know, but it was funny.  I can think of, let me try to think of other things that was pretty interesting.  There's different things that you're going from night to night, its wear and tear on your body though.  But she, after a while she wanted to travel all the time.  She as to a certain point, as she was coming down with ill health she wanted to travel, she wanted--you know these people they were raised, they were born, they were bred with performing.  They started very young and this is know the best, I mean talk about, you got a whole of movie stars, I looked at, I something the other day on  Buddy Ebsen, the Beverly Hillbillies, he was a hoofer and I saw him playing and everything.  A little teenage boy tap dancing and so forth, this is their life.  This person is a farmer, this is his life.  He doesn't care about anything else but farming, grow up in the fishing family.  And these entertainers that are, they live to go right in front of that stage and they lose, as they get up, the lose 20, 30, 40 50 years cause this what they know how to do and they know they can do it good.  And it's self satisfaction for them.
Speaker 2: So when you say they lose 20, 30, 40 years, of their life?
Speaker 1: Of their age.
Speaker 2: Of their age, okay.
Speaker 1: Age.  And when they come on that, you would see Hamp come out he would take those little steps.  And they would say "Ladies and gentlemen, Lionel Hampton," hey, bam.  Just lost forty years. (unclear)--Cab Calloway, his daughter would get some medicine for him and he was walking back slowly, you know, back stage.  And they say, Cab Calloway, "Hi De Hi De," this is what they are.
Story_ID: 88934
Speaker 1: Now during that time, is it sort of an-- not unwritten rule just because she's [Ella Fitzgerald] keeping you employed and she has a lot of dates and things like that, that that's who you're working for and no one else.
Speaker 2: No.  Doesn't deal with so much no one else, no one else when it comes important to do your employer's date.  Cause I did a lot of things when we were off, you know, I worked--in fact, I went out with Pearl Bailey and I did--in fact I did Pearl Bailey's last date in New York [New York City, New York].  She did it on a Wednesday and then Ella did it and my wife [Mildred Gladys Betts] and I stayed up there and she did it that Friday.  And Pearl left Thursday to come down to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] to get the operation on her knee. And then she wrote us a letter because we had some more one nighters that I was going to do with her and then she sent me a book of my book that she's got and she said and then she died of a heart--cause she always had a heart problem.   And she died of a heart attack while she was rehabilitating from the knee.  No you could work with somebody, but just don't, not with their dates you know.
Speaker 1: But she had all--I mean you're saying that you're were working anywhere from what, 35 to 40 weeks?
Speaker 2: Well, it slowed down after she had a few operations, you know.  She had one on this and then she got sick here and had one on her eyes, and I think we had six months off.  And I was working around with various people, then the cataracts operation and the this we worked Wolf Trap [National Park for the Performing Arts in Vienna, Virginia] and the next morning the road manager called me and she passed out that night at the hotel and they had her down in GW [George Washington University Hospital in Washington, D.C.] and my wife and I went down to see her that morning.  They sent her home in a couple of days and what not, but this is all a part of life and I think that the best thing that person can do is appreciate your own life.  You appreciate it to the point, when you working for somebody that you do your best that you can do for them and because, if they look good, you look good to a point.
Story_ID: 88935
Speaker 1: But you enjoy like that gentlemen about looking back at that field and seeing that field just like it was.  But what have transpired when they went to work in that field, that's a happiness.  I say to a certain point, you know I've had people come up to me and say religious zealous and some of them say "When you start playing for God then-" "I am."  "Oh, no, no, no, you playing for man," "Well why did he give me the talent, why did he give these people this talent?  Can you sing, can you?" "No," "Well then you didn't get any talent.  Why did he give it, to send them forth to show that they are a product of his."  And this is just is what we're to do, just like sending the disciples out, what he send the disciples out for?  They don't wanna hear it, they think that you're doing it for your own personal gain, well I mean those it's not the money aspect of it.  It's a fact that this is what I do the same thing with somebody whose an engineer or you know, an architect and they would draw this big monstrous (unclear) because he's got a good eye and this should be.  I love what I do, I loved it from the day I followed that parade and that was the ambition that I wanted to be and when I became it, I said "Thank you."  Now when I go away from life, I have no regrets, none whatsoever.  I did what I wanted to do I didn't get rich, I didn't get poor, but I got a lot of satisfaction and it made you walk down the road of life, it's who you touch as you go on that road.  I do a thing on the cruise and I would tell people, I been around the world three times and spoke to everybody in it, everybody in the whole world.  And they say, well you didn't say nothing to me, I did you didn't hear me, you know.
Story_ID: 88936
Speaker 1: How did you know when you were pleasing her, I'm talking about Ella Fitzgerald?
Speaker 2: She turn around and say "yeah."  I would--we had to do a concert here at the [John F.] Kennedy Center [for the Performing Arts in Washington, D.C.] something with the bass and band and what not and I had book something previously, because this came up at the last minute and I booked and I told her I say, "Ella, I can't, but you can use, you know get a bass player to do that."  And it didn't work out right cause one of the songs or whatever, she had all the little things to do and the bass player couldn't follow her on that.  So then she resolved she said down told her office, "If Keter can't work I don't wanna, you know don't wanna play it until-"  So there was one thing came up in Canada, and she made them change it to the next week, because I had previously booked something, and I think it's just a fact that, it's like you have a car that you keep your car in perfect shape and you know that when you are in that car, that nothing is going to go wrong with that car, cause you know.  And so the more secure that you feel, the better that you can operate and she really was hurt when Tommy Flanagan left because of the fact when Tommy left--but this was something else between the office and Tommy and so forth.  And Tommy was really the one of the best accompanists that she had because he not only played, he played the Big Band.  You know when he played the Big Band he would play the Riff's [ph.] Big Band as a trio. So she always knew in the song where she was, that was most important.  I think that--I mean I worked with a whole lot of other singers, that'll be Joe Williams that a lot and [Billy] Eckstine when he would come here.   But there's been some other singers most interesting and very, very good and I just like the fact that with singers it's you hear the words and it's just like meeting people and talking, you know.  Then you have some people that talk with such a distinct and so forth type of accent and some have no accent but they make so much sense in what they say.  And I heard some people that talked that country as they could be and smart as a whip, you know.
Story_ID: 88937
Speaker 1: Now so did you--cause I remember someone that talked about Joe Williams and they were saying how, you know the audience, you know they were thinking for someone singing ballads they should look like Billy Eckstine.
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  I was the messenger for Eckstine and Joe for when they come to Washington [D.C.].  Joe would work every year on Mother's Day week and "B" would come somewhat later but they had me sending messages to each other, giving them (unclear) you know.  Joe would tell me when bring "B" come, you tell "B" so and so and "B" would be you tell Joe so and so, you know.
Speaker 1: So that's how they would communicate?
Speaker 2: That's how they communicate, through me. (laughing)
Speaker 1: So they weren't communicating then?
Speaker 2: Naw, naw, naw.  Unless they ran to each other out on the road but I always leave a message with me.  Tell "B" so and so and I would, and he would say, you tell Joe, so and so and so, funny.
Speaker 1: So did you have a favorite of the male vocalist yourself?
Speaker 2: All there was a lot that I heard.  Johnny Hartman was really one of my, but I mean--Joe had his thing, "B" had remembrance because remember when "B" was out with all those big hits, you know, that he had and so forth.  Then he was a great guy to work with for and let's see who was--well like I said Johnny Hartman that I really loved.  There was a couple others, Al Hibbler, no because Al's voice had gone then.  And then that was very sad for me to deal you know with that because I had--I got a bunch of his albums, that my wife [Mildred Grady Betts] and I used to have his albums, but his voice went.  Jimmy Witherspoon too, I liked working with him but his voice was on--he went his voice went out.  I like [Frank] Sinatra, I like Sinatra very much.  I used to go--I did seven years with the band, we'd go down and do go down here to Duke University [Durham, North Carolina] to do, Perry Como.  Perry Como would have a big thing for years for Duke University and then have golfers and tennis players and so forth and the band would go out of here and have the one show that night.  In fact one night Arnold Palmer and Sam Snead came up and sang it was pitiful; they should've stayed with golf (laughing).  But they had a lot of Perry Como was smooth, very smooth, very slick.  Jesse Belvin I thought that he had a great, great future, he died early.  And I like (singing) "Sitting on the Dock of the Bay," Otis Redding.  And Eddy Arnold did some one nighters. That was a country star used to wear the black suits with that cowboy hat (humming) easy, beautiful, you know.  I find music like food, you know and not to say he's a jazz player but that means I just eat one type, like I just eat soul food and nothing else I find music like food is a good variety and you spread yourself around and you learn some this and that and what not and you have a much more enjoyable life.
Story_ID: 88938
Speaker 1: Now Keter why did you stop in '93 [1993] when she died [sic, Ella Fitzgerald died in 1996]?  I mean is it because her--I mean- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Stop what?
Speaker 1: Stop working with Ella Fitzgerald in '93 {1993].
Speaker 2: Because she couldn't work no more.
Speaker 1: I thought she.
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: No, you stop when she stopped then?
Speaker 2: I stopped, yeah.
Speaker 1: I mean you didn't stop working I mean you stop working with her.
Speaker 2: When she stopped when she had the amputation.  She had taken the toe off but when she had the amputation--she did a few record deeds and so forth and that what is August or November something of '93 [1993].  It was at the Kravis Center way up in the--The [Raymond F.] Kravis Center [for the Performing Arts] down in [West Palm Beach] Florida it was Loni Anderson and Burt Reynolds were the host of this.  And what they did, they did a whole week of stars, but that Saturday night they did like a cameo appearance, you could only do three songs.  Itzhak Perlman was one and Ella, and I'm trying to name all the different ones and each one is going to have a night, you know and that was the last one.  When she went back to L.A., I think she did some records dates and then it started from there and then they, you know. And I guess I felt so bad I pretend I saw--Martha Raye too had had both legs amputated and what not and she was--worked a week with her at the Shady Grove fascinating, I used to see her in the movies all of the time.  But you can't let that you know affect you about how to go down, it's about what did they do while they were up, that's the most important.
Story_ID: 88939
Speaker 1: Okay but really in the '90's [1990's] you lost both, you know--would you consider Ella [Fitzgerald], was she like your mother in sort of a way?
Speaker 2: She was more like an aunt.  I lost my mother too.
Speaker 1: You lost your mother and you lost your wife.
Speaker 2: And then I lost my wife in 2000, I lost my mother [Mariah Betts] in '94 [1994] and I lost Ella in '96 [1996] and I said in that span in six years the three most powerful women in life that did so much for me and I could've gone to become an alcoholic or something, because the kids are gone and so forth and I had much better sense than that.  I lost a heart a lot but I just kept on working and what not and this soon will pass but it's rough, it's really rough and so I lost my heart for the house, cause this was a live house at one time, you know.  Seven people and a dog and so forth.  But that is--you look tragedy in the eye and you say, okay, I'll be back and you come back.  Still love music, will always until the day that I die. And--
Story_ID: 88940
Speaker 1: Wait, no, no. But, okay, so, but during--just recently you developed your own CD ["Bass, Buddies, and Blues"]; some people would say that you had sort of ignored our own autonomy during this period of time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So in that whole process has that been somewhat of a healing process or a retrospective process, or?
Speaker 2: I guess I didn't look at from either, either, either, either, either, see you already got me covered.  Like the diaper, I got you covered baby (laughing) It-- no, you take your time about certain things.  And I think that--well I finally did it because my daughter talked me into it.  She wasn't paying for it, but she just talked me into it.  But then it was satisfaction of getting something that from within out.  I guess when I look back from--what I came out of high school in '46 [1946] and this is 2003, and I'll be going on 75, I have nothing to say except that thanks it's been great and it's gonna be great as I can possibly make it.
Story_ID: 88941
Speaker 1: Now you're described as one of the best journeyman bassists, well that's what the press clippings say.
Speaker 2: They lie.
Speaker 1: They lie (laughing) but why is that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Oh come on.
Speaker 2: I have no idea why, I mean, why they would say that you know.  I think, you know, we had an attitude--we had an attitude that I grew up with it, it was something "I came, I saw, I concurred."  That was the attitude you had to go about in daily accomplishments.  The same thing is not like with some sports people, just one, once day or the week or two or three days of that week and so forth but you always--always I know is better this way whatever it is, whether it is a small affair or big affair you always play at this same attitude and at the same dimensions you going straight ahead, yeah.  You don't underplay in a note and you don't try to go way above your head you play with little bit you go straight ahead.
Speaker 1: What does Keter Betts still want to do with his life that he hasn't done musically, let's talk about musically.
Speaker 2: What I wanna do with my life musically that I haven't done, quit. (laughing) quit playing.
Speaker 1: That's not true, you can't quit.
Speaker 2: I can quit.
Speaker 1: I would like to quit, but you can't.
Speaker 2: I would like to now take these last whatever you this--what you call it, in the gray years and so and do some things that I wanna do.  Because I've been going and performing for man, woman and child all over the world.  With all of the schools and Head Start things and all of that and it does gives you this gift to go in there. But now I would like to just sit back a little bit and do something that maybe I would like to do other than playing music.
Speaker 1: And what's that?
Speaker 2: I've been wanting a boat so bad, and just to go out--I'm a water person.  Not to speed, not no go out party, just go sit and relax and you seen the whole world so now I just look at a part of the world that you can enjoy.  I wouldn't even fish, I'd throw a line over, make people think, I wouldn't have no bait on the hook, you know. Stay down there, you born and raised there, don't come up on the boat.  But just to relax, play some golf a little bit and constantly and go to church as often as possible.  And thank God for the life that I've had.
Story_ID: 88942
Speaker 1: But in this whole discussion about retiring, you won't miss the bass and the vibration?
Speaker 2: I didn't, wait now, you asked about retiring.  You didn't ask me what I was retiring from.  Do you think that I'm gonna take this bass fiddle and don't touch it again or any of the others one and don't touch again?  No, you said retire, that means I'm retiring the bass from the outer world, but in my world, it's still going to be with me to play.  In fact, they need rest, they're like everything else.  They need to be retired, you know, they retire horses, they can't stud, you know.
Speaker 1: It seems to me that the best thing would be to take that bass out on the boat (laughing).
Speaker 2: Oh yeah and in case you start sinking and the motor don't work, you can use it as a big oar, sure. (laughing)
Story_ID: 88943
Speaker 1: You know?
Speaker 2: When you think back on your life and time, as you have occasion to do at this time in your life in many ways.  Do you have any regrets?
Speaker 1: Yeah, sometimes, sometimes you think about that, you think about that did I stay too long out on the road, maybe I should've--  You know, I guess the maybes.  Maybe I should've did more into the classical thing and practice on the classical so I could be doing both classical and this far.  Maybe I should've done this, I should've listen to people when they offered me, I guy offered me in '64 [1964], land ten dollars an acre in [Las] Vegas [Nevada].  Because from Caesars, not Caesars Palace, there was no Caesars Palace and all of that and the chance to buy some property in Palo Alto, California and I said no.  You can't go back to that.  You can't say I should have or why did I so forth, that's passed.  What you did and whether if you made mistakes that so forth, as long as you didn't make any mistakes as far as getting in any trouble, I've been arrested, never been put behind bars, that's the most important thing then.  The other mistakes maybe not buying in some things in real estate somewhere far away that would be very valuable.  Money is not--my family was really not one to always be so uptight about money.  Because of the fact that you never see a Brinks truck behind a hearse.  I don't care how rich that person is, you never see a Brinks truck behind a hearse.  So the only thing I do like Redd Foxx saying just bury my money in the backyard, and you can't take it with you but you can pick it up on your way down, you know.
Story_ID: 88944
Speaker 1: Now your mother [Mariah Betts], do you remember her seeing you perform, I mean but at and being very proud about it?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  Of the little things there, the dances we would play this and that.  And when I went with Dinah [Washington] and I had her come down to Birdland [New York City, New York] and I had her come to, where else, Bop City [New York City, New York].  She would come to the different places and when I got with Ella [Fitzgerald], Carnegie Hall [New York City, New York].  She never thought she'd ever go to Carnegie Hall, and there's her son there and there's Ella preaching and the things and what not.  And that was her reward for what she did for me.  And then after she retired and moved to Wilmington, I came down there and played a couple of festivals.  And her and my aunt come to that as with friends, that's the give back, you know.  That's the give back, you know they always say the pay back, no, it's a give back for all that was given to you for the wisdom and the knowledge of life and then you make them proud, that's all a parent wants, you know.
Story_ID: 88945
Speaker 1: And your legacy, what do you your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: "He came, he was here, and he's gone," that's it, that's enough.
Speaker 1: Your musical legacy?
Speaker 2: Did the best he could, that's it. And I think that's all, they just did the best they could.  I'm gonna have to think about that.  Give me another fifteen years and then I'll call you and let you know.
Story_ID: 88946
Speaker 1: And the new people that you see is there anyone that you, you like, you think, you know-(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh yeah.  There's some old and some new, yeah.
Speaker 1: Can you give some names?
Speaker 2: Oh there's some many young guys that I haven't really met but I heard them on records and what not.  And then of course Christian McBride is a monster.  Let me try to think of this, they had this--out of New York City [New York] I think--you know Sam Jones and I, we're very, very close and what was the other bass player?  I think that he was just in town last week and couldn't get to go see him. (singing) Yeah, I'm trying to think what his is name was, he is, he is very, very fundamental.  He used my bass at "BET" and I'm saying whoa my bass and, that's my bass and he's playing like it was his.  And Cachao [Israel Lopez Valdes], for the Latin things, Cachao the old man from Cuba, something.  No there's a lot of young bass players, it's much easier now.  See back when we were coming along you had to go see it.  Now you have CD's that you can hear, you got videos that you go and watch and so forth and you can sit down and practice in your basement in your house for two or three months and when you come out you got everything was a given to you from the CD's.  But back there then, you just had to go see it and try to see what was done and that was it, so it was much easier.  Plus the kids are going to special colleges and music schools and they have the pros coming in so it's a lot easier now.  And I'm glad of that you know.  And I can't say I wish it had been around-no I don't wish it had been in my time because everything has to take a slow progress to go to a point that where its go elevated.
Speaker 1: And the legacy of jazz and --
Speaker 2: The legacy of jazz is that it's being pushed out of the living room and being pushed in the closet to a certain point, you know what I mean?  Some people come out of the closet, but it's been pushed because of the new type of music and financial thing was what's making money.  And so, therefore, they pushing it back and but it still the people the purist who are here who are playing it and the people who listening and appreciate it like you.  And your work is involved around this type of thing.
Story_ID: 88947
Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: (unclear)
Speaker 2: How does it sound?
Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: I don't think it's the best mic in the world for bass, but it's not too bad.
Speaker 2: Well, what do you want me to do?
Speaker 1: What does it sound like?
Speaker 2: It's a high impedance mic, for the bass you need much lower impedance.
Speaker 1: Matthew Hickey: Right.
Speaker 2: Okay. We'll put it back on me, and I'll sing while I play. This is impromptu and suggested by-
Speaker 1: Yes, it's impromptu.
Speaker 2: You sure now?
Speaker 1: Yes, it is. (unclear) recording.
Speaker 2: One of the things-- this bass is getting ready to go in the shop in Arizona, and it's gonna stay about six months, and gonna get reconditioned. But, one of the things that I teach students on what it is to sing what you play so that you take your subconscious mind and your conscious mind and put it together as one.
Speaker 1: Didi, didi, that's all, folks.
Speaker 2: Okay. That's it. That's great.
Story_ID: 88948
Speaker 1: --Now, I want you to just describe who's is in the picture, give your wife's name who you never gave before and the date and the circumstances. Just real quick descriptions.
Speaker 2: Well the circumstances was marriage.  That was a-(simultaneous)
Speaker 1: Is this your wedding day?
Speaker 2: No, this was not my wedding day this was about a month after.  My mother [Mariah Betts] gave us a party in Port Chester, New York and this is the dress that Dinah [Washington] bought, the pearls that Dinah bought for my wife.  She took her down to Saks Fifth Avenue and picked out the wedding dress and so forth.  And I didn't see her for three days which is the normal, I think wedding thing.  And we had a reception, we were closing Birdland [New York City, New York], so we had a reception in Birdland.  And all the people there were guest and had a cater come and bring food and all of that.  As my wife said, well we have a full house, but no gifts, cause the people came to come see it. (laughing)
Speaker 1: Give her name and spell it.
Speaker 2: Her name was Mildred, M-I-L-D-R-E-D, Mildred - (simultaneous)
Speaker 1: She had a nickname?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Pinkie, yeah.
Speaker 1: Betts?
Speaker 2: Well yeah, there she was Betts, that's right.
Speaker 1: And Keter?
Speaker 2: K-E-T-E-R and Pinkie so we had five letters and we were married [born] two years apart and three days apart.  I was the 22nd and she was July 25th.
Speaker 1: This was 1947, we had been working around the Mamaroneck/ Harrison/Port Chester/New Rochelle/White Plains [New York] area.  He was stationed in the [U.S.] Army down here and he used to go, Carmen Leggio and he used to go and jam at this club called Seventh and T [in Washington, D.C.].  So when he got out of the Army, he--a lady asked him if he ever come back and bring a group that she'd like to have him, so we went down there and this is Louis Daley [ph.] on piano and Junebug Lindsey on drums.  And we went to do four weeks and we stayed thirteen weeks there at this club.  And stayed at the lady's hotel right around the corner.  And that was in sometime in October of '47 [1947].
Speaker 2: That looks like on a stage.  This was a different bass all together.  But I'd like to say that I'm older cause I got--my hair's is longer, I got a grey mustache, hands are older and thicker than when I was young.  That was a graduation ring, I never seen it since.  That's a difference.  You got something else you can see.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Yes.
Speaker 2: That's Jennifer [Betts]; she is the youngest by 12 minutes.
Speaker 1: Keter, are any of your--did-how about any music--(simultaneous)
Speaker 2: That much time that I had spent away from home and doing they said.
Speaker 1: That was taken from the new carbon fiber bass that I have that is downstairs.  It's made of carbon fiber.
Speaker 2: That's a nice picture.  I'm being careful, I'm trying.
Speaker 1: I noticed.
Speaker 2: I'm balancing here.
Speaker 1: I'm sure that's that bass it has to be somewhere in the last year and a half.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Adam Clayton Powell [Jr.]'s church [Abyssinian Baptist Church] in New York [New York City, New York] and there's Dinah Washington who gave us the wedding.  And that's the wedding dress that she picked out for us, Saks Fifth Avenue.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Who's that?
Speaker 1: That lady is--she is the wife of the owner of--the gentleman who was the Superintendent of the Board where Dinah lived.  But this was at the Abyssinian Church at that time yeah.
Speaker 2: 1999, Linowes [Leadership] Award. This is at the--now this is an organization here in town that picked five people a year and they more or less unsung heroes.  And the year that I was picked there was a lady who led one of those big low rent apartment houses.  And the dope dealers and what not had taken over the place and she was able to drive them out and get the tenants to buy the apartment and own the apartment building.  So she got an award, there was gentleman, doctor who had a very outstanding business and he gave up his business to open up a clinic for AIDS victims.  There was a lady who was a preacher and she used to go to the prisons and teach the prisoners painting and have them painting.  And what was the other one?  Oh the other lady was a Chinese lady who would help the ones coming from China and what not and he had--and teach them the American way and how, you know.
Speaker 1: Do you remember her name?
Speaker 2: No, that was a little boy that was taken at Wolf Trap.  You amount of money and also you keep one part of it and the other part you donate to your favorite charity.  So I donated, I split that in half and gave Whitman-Walker Clinic [Whitman-Walker Health in Washington, D.C.] half of it and the other half went to Children's Hospital.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's off to the golf course.  This is Ken Kimery who is head of The Smithsonian Jazz thing this is a trombone player that used to live here [Dave Steinmeyer], he moved to Florida, he's on my third CD and this is Ron Craymon [ph.], piano player local whose been here forever in Washington.  And this guy here with the big stomach used to be me.  I got rid of all that stuff.
Speaker 1: You sure did.
Speaker 2: Dinah.
Speaker 1: No.  Dinah, but also with Stan Getz or also.
Speaker 2: No I never had any taken with Stan, now Charlie Byrd?
Speaker 1: Yeah, Charlie Byrd.
Speaker 2: Somewhere around here, I will.
Speaker 1: Men don't have pictures.
Speaker 2: See, my wife used to get--my wife was-
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  This a photo of Ella?
Speaker 2: No I was behind her.
Speaker 1: Okay, yeah, of course.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  What was the occasion for this proclamation?
Speaker 1: Day? My hometown, Port Chester, New York, they gave me a key to Bastager [ph.] and then we got a parade and drove all over town, all the places I used to walk and everything, played on by the schools, went to the schools and had a big thing at the playground.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  That's incredible.
Speaker 1: And there's a cap up there.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Yeah, it's Keter Betts Day.
Speaker 1: We had been associated for years. Singer. He used to sing with Harry James.
Speaker 2: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  So Larry Anders [ph.]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And those are the CD's.  The one on the left is the last one.  That's the one with Etta Jones.  And that tall fellow on the trombone that's Dave Steinmeyer.  Dennis Mackrel and Mike Jones on piano and Etta Jones guest on two songs on there.
Speaker 2: And that was in 2000 what?
Speaker 1: 2000.
Speaker 2: 2000, okay.
Speaker 1: She and my wife is sitting talking about chemo, this and that.  And this one 2001.  "Bass, Buddies, Blues & Beauty [Too]" and that was Ethel Ennis when she sang two songs on here.  "He's Funny That Way" and "Summertime"
Speaker 2: And that's "Bass, Buddies and Blues" and that's the last one.
Speaker 1: OFF-CAMERA VOICE:  Last or first?
Speaker 2: This is the first one, 1998.
Speaker 1: And then there's one other which is around here somewhere, which is Pinkie's Waltz--.
