Story_ID: 3924
Speaker 1: I'd like you to first state your name and spell it for us, and the date of your birth, the district you represented and the dates you served.
Speaker 2: Okay, my name is Howard B. Brookins, Sr. Howard H-O-W-A-R-D, middle initial B, which stands for Beaman B-E-A-M-A-N Brookins B-R-O-O-K-I-N-S.  I was born on June 6, 1932.  I'm sixty-eight years old.  I try to pass for seventy--or forty.  I was born in--.
Speaker 1: The district you represented?
Speaker 2: I represented the 36th Representative District when I was a state representative, and the 18th Senatorial District.  I served in both the [Illinois] House [of Representatives]  and the [Illinois] Senate.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Lets, I'd like to start--are you from Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 2: I was born and raised in Chicago.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's what I remember, okay.  So--.
Speaker 2: And don't want to leave Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay, good.  Okay, no problem.  I understand it.  I feel like it's my home, too.  I've been here twenty years, as of last month.
Story_ID: 3925
Speaker 1: I start out by asking five questions that are actually on our questionnaire.  They don't serve any purpose except that I ask them of everyone.
Speaker 2: It's all right.
Speaker 1: And that is, what's your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Black-eyed peas and neck bones.  I love soul food and I find--well, I love beans.  I eat all beans, red beans and rice with a ham hock in it.  I like black-eyed peas and neck bones.  I like the big butter beans.  You know, the dried butter beans?  And when you cook 'em right and drop a ham hock in 'em with some corn bread, a little greens on the side--that's good eating.
Speaker 1: What is your favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I really don't have a favorite vacation destination.  When I do travel, I go to every hobby shop in town.  I have been to Africa three times.  I just loved it, but that's not a place that I've been able to go back just to say 'on vacation.'  I want to get back to Abidjan [Ivory Coast, Africa].  Abidjan, I think, is almost equal to, to, to Vegas [Las Vegas, Nevada], but I have not been able.  And I hear that there are problems there now in the last three or four days--in the last month or so--but I'd love to go back to Africa on another just vacation, as you say.  But to say that I have a favorite vacation spot--I would say Chicago [Illinois].
Speaker 1: What about your favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.  I think most men like blue.  I have not ran into a man that don't like blue.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Summer.  I love the summertime.  I'm happy.  It don't get too hot.
Speaker 1: Favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Hello, how are you?  You're looking good.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 3926
Speaker 1: I want to know about your parents and what you know about them, and maybe even your grandparents.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: You know, I would like to know what your parents' names were, you know, where they were from and, you know, and anything about your grandparents.
Speaker 2: I'll do the best I can.  My father was named Howard Percy--Howard P. Brookins.  He came to Chicago [Illinois] and attended [Wendell] Phillips High School.  He attempted to play basketball.  During the [Great] Depression, as you know, the jobs was hard and therefore he did what he could to get a job.  He ended up, as I can remember, working at the Ford Company [sic, Ford Motor Corporation] for years.  There he developed a heart condition. And he helped build the Ford plant--that's the one was at 71st [Street] and Cicero [Avenue]--we know it as Ford City now.  And he then switched and got a job, obtained a job as an insurance agent and therefore he sold insurance for the Chicago Metropolitan Assurance Company, which was a black owned and operated insurance company.  I think you know that most of them guys was very well dressed and very--well, they was well dressed and presented themselves well in our community. And that's what I remember.  He passed when I was thirteen years old, so he died in 1946.  He was actually raised by his auntie, but his father was in Mississippi.  And during one of the trips that I had an opportunity to go on--I went to Mississippi twice in my life--I ran into some of the guys that remembered his grandfather, and went on to say that he dropped dead right over there.  So they could remember.  Strange about the older folks--they can look at you and tell who your parents was and etcetera. And sometimes they would startle you with that.  His--my grandmother, his mother--was named Allora and she was married and she gave my father to her sister to raise and they brought him to Chicago.  And that's how that happened--how he got to Chicago ahead of his brothers.  On my mother's side, her mother was named Delia--I can remember seeing her.  We called her Cass and she was here in Chicago.  My mother [Leona Myles Brookins] was originally--she's from Yazoo City, Mississippi, and that's famous because [U.S. President] Jimmy Carter went there, also known as 'Yessuh,' Mississippi.  Her father was a blacksmith--Charlie Smith--Charlie Holmes--her maiden name was Holmes.  And I can remember her grandmother as a little boy here in Chicago and she was in the wheelchair and she would give us ginger snaps when we came by.  They lived right there at 56th--50th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue, Chicago, Illinois].  I can remember that just as vividly.  That's about the extend of the remembrance.  Her father was a blacksmith in Yazoo City.  I can remember her telling stories about her being a little girl and living on what they call Brickyard Hill.  And her job was to empty the slop jar.  And Brickyard Hill, as she told it, faced the cemetery and she would be afraid.  So she would get her uncle--my uncle, her brother--to walk out with her to do her tasks as a little girl.
Story_ID: 3927
Speaker 1: Mama [Leona Myles Brookins] was a good cook and a disciplinarian, but not really what you would call a hard disciplinarian, but we mind her.  She passed two years ago now.  And I was the last to leave home.  I have two brothers--two sisters [Earline and Evelyn] and a brother [Donald].  I left home at twenty-five years old.  I was on the police force even when I left.  So we were very close.  And she loved company, and all our friends was always welcome by our house, and there always seemed to be something to eat.  As I told you, my father died when I was thirteen, but she went to work and we knew to come home, not to have kids in the house when she wasn't home.  But when she was home, they were all welcome and was all treated kindly.  My father [Howard P. Brookins] was very--I think--dignified, and I think that we got along well.  I can remember he died of heart trouble.  And as I told you, he was an insurance man [Chicago Metropolitan Assurance Company], so he attempted to dress well on the salary that he had, and that was not a lot when you had four children to raise.  But I can remember that he told me--the last thing that he told me was that, "Howard, I want you to take care of your family."  And he asked me not to smoke until I was twenty-one years old.  And I didn't light a cigarette until I was twenty-one years old, in the [U.S.] Army.
Speaker 2: (interviewer and videographer confer and adjust camera)
Speaker 1: Tell me what--who you would say you're most like--your mother or your father? Or what do you have of both of them?
Speaker 2: I think I have the personality of my mother--outgoing, reaching people.  I hope I--I think I look more like my dad in some of his mannerisms.  I tend to love clothes as he did.  And wanted to preserve the name, that was important to him--that his name was respected.  I think that I have attained that.  I have the respect of my name.
Story_ID: 3928
Speaker 1: So what was growing up like?  Can you share any memories?
Speaker 2: All kind of--all kind of  memories.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)  Okay, like what?
Speaker 2: We had a good time here in Chicago [Illinois] during them days.  We could go anywhere.  We could go to Washington Park.  We could swim in the park.  We could shoot marbles and play the games boys played--baseball, pitch horseshoes in the alley.  We had fights, but normally it was just a little fisticuff fight, no violence or great violence as you know them today.  I can remember that we just slept with the doors open.  No one bothered you.  We lived in what is called a kitchenette.  Do you all understand this since you are young?  Kitchenette is a one-room apartment--usually a large apartment--with seven or eight rooms in it.  One family would stay in the front and had two rooms, another family in the middle and another family at the end.  You shared the kitchen and you shared the bathroom.  So the men would get up and get dressed and go to work and they would use the bathrooms first.  And then the mothers would clean up the kids and send them off to school.  The kitchen--you had your shelf in the icebox, the other family had their shelves and the other family had their shelves and no one bothered the others' food or what have you, and you just shared all them things.  And you thought that them buildings belonged to you and you took care of them and you cleaned them and etcetera--not like today.  We could go out in the park and just--in Washington Park and in the midways up and down, [Dr. Martin Luther] King Drive as you know it now, and Garfield Boulevard, 55th Street--and just put a pallet on a hot day and just sleep.  And you would stay there until the time to get up to go--the men went to work and the women would take you home, clean you up.  If it was still school time, they would send you on to school and etcetera.  So we had a beautiful time here in Chicago during that period.  I can remember my playmates.  And some of the pictures that I happen to bring was one of my kindergarten picture and I told the guy at Burke [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], which was at 53rd [Street] and King Drive, still there.  We have a meeting, class meetings--graduating class meetings, school meeting and we'll be meeting this month there and we will then present to the school a present of some kind--something that we will deem that the school will need.  So we'll take it over to Burke School.  We're one of the only elementary schools in the city of Chicago, I think, that still have meetings and class meetings.  A lot of them--kids,for lack of another word, pupils--are still living. Some go to my church--I'm at Trinity Church and some are there--and I see them over around the city of Chicago.  Raymond Fanning (ph.) and some of them became quite industrious and quite beneficial to our community.  But some have passed, but quite a few are still living.  I have really fond memories of Chicago.  I love Chicago.  But we had our bouts with racism.  There were streets we couldn't go on.  We didn't go past Cottage Grove [Avenue], east of Cottage Grove.  We didn't go south of 63rd Street.  We didn't go west of Wentworth [Avenue] at that time.  So we had our problems with racism. We could only go downtown.  When we went downtown, the penny arcades--I can remember wanting to go in them and play, but we didn't.  The movies we could go to in the downtown area, but we had our own movies.  We had the Regal [Theatre], we had the Tilden [theater]--so we was very happy in our own communities and trading with each other.  We got opportunities to see businessmen and people, doctors. Next door to me lived an architect.  So we had people that we could emulate and say that that's what I want to be when I grew up.  The respect in the community at that time was great.  The janitors--you would see them getting up and cleaning--their overalls would be clean and starched and they were proud people.
Story_ID: 3929
Speaker 1: Now what was the young Howard Brookins like?
Speaker 2: (Laughs)  I was devilish.  I was mischievous.  I loved to shoot marbles.  I went to school.  I was fair in school.  I wasn't no genius, but I wasn't, I don't think, the dumbest guy there.  I was just next to the dumbest guy.  You always find somebody in the class dumber than you, so--(laughter)--so you can feel good about yourself.  I went on and I finished at Burke [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois] and went in to DuSable [High School, Chicago, Illinois] and really enjoyed it.  Was in the ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps] for a while.  Me and my brother, we worked.  My brother was really my best friend--Donald--and we worked.  I started work when I was five years old.  I was a paperboy and I worked for Darnell Hawkins.  And one of the pictures that I brought here, he's on that picture.  And he went to Springfield [Illinois] with me when I was sworn in.  Darnell is still living.  I was five years old when I became a paperboy working for Darnell Hawkins.  We had one of the largest paper routes in the city of Chicago at the time, and we made money.  I sold snowballs in the summertime and you see the kids now with the snowballs on the street--but me and my brother made a business out of it and we made large sums of money for young guys.  We made a hundred dollars a week or so or better and that was more money than our parents was making, in some instances.  And therefore we would pay our sisters to do our house chores for us so that we didn't have to do 'em.  And we would go to school.  And tricks we'd like to play on the teacher--on days when they are collecting for the Red Cross or the different little funds--and you'd have a nickel or two cents to put in, we'd ask them for change for a ten dollar bill.  For the school too change--so little tricks like that.  A couple of times they had our parents [Howard P. Brookins and Leona Myles Brookins] up to see where we got so much money from, but--we were industrious and we worked.  And I worked all the way through both grammar school and high school as a paperboy, selling trinkets and selling snowballs and earning my way through.
Story_ID: 3930
Speaker 1: Let me ask--now how many kids in your family, who were they and where did you fit.
Speaker 2: There's four kids, I mentioned.  I had twin sisters, Earline and Evelyn; they are two years older than I am.  One has passed, one is dead.  Evelyn is still living.  Earline died six years ago now.  I had one brother, Donald, who was a year younger than I am, so that's why we were so close.  Actually, about fourteen--twelve to fourteen months younger than I was, so we were very, very close.  When you saw one you saw the other, nine times out of ten.  He died last year--(correcting) two years ago and it kind of hurts.  And my mother passed two years ago.  So I've had quite a bit of death in the last six months in my immediate family.  And as you know, as a funeral director [Brookins Funeral Home, Chicago, Illinois], I deal with death every day.  But it's different when it's personal, when it hits you.  It's different--and it affects you and affects everybody, so I'm kind of still trying to get over that portion of my life.
Story_ID: 3931
Speaker 1: You went to DuSable High School [Chicago, Illinois].  Were there people that we, you know, would know that were classmates of yours or anything like that?
Speaker 2: No.  I know that you would know my school teacher, who was my division teacher, Dr. [Margaret] Burroughs. And I happened to have her as a school teacher in fifth grade.  She was my fifth grade art teacher, Dr. Burroughs.  She was Margaret Goss at that time--G-O-S-S--she was not married.  And the funny part is that when she was at Burke [Elementary] School [Chicago, Illinois], she wore hair in a 'natural.'  That was way back before the 'natural' was a 'natural' so we would run home and tell our parents, "Mama, mama, we got a teacher that don't comb her hair."  (Laughs)  Later on when I graduated she had moved on to DuSable and became the art teacher at DuSable and she was my division teacher and art teacher at DuSable.  We're very close today.  She went to Springfield [Illinois] with me when I was sworn in and encouraged me, even attempted to get me to run for [U.S.] Congress against [U.S. Congressman] Gus Savage.  I had that thought for a while, but other folks came to me and said, "Howard, don't do this, we need Gus in Spring--in Washington. [D.C.]"  And so I did not run against him.  But Margaret Goss, Dr. Burroughs, would be one person that I know we would know.  None of the other classmates, to my knowledge, are in anything very, very famous.  Raymond Fanning operated a school in this area--Raymond Fanning.  Theodore Wright worked for the Board of Education--became an assistant superintendent or something.  Oh, Walter Perkins, Walter Perkins [jazz drummer]--Three Point [MJT+3, Modern Jazz Two plus Three]--what do they call his band?  The drummer--famous drummer, Walter Perkins.  And who else?  Harris--Eddie Harris [jazz saxophonist], the musician, was a classmate of mine.  But those are the ones that are really outstanding and famous.  Prior to my time, as you know, that [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington graduated from DuSable and Dempsey Travis [entrepeneur and historian] and Nat King Cole [composer/musician] and Dorothy Donegan [jazz pianist] was there for a while.  Those folks, but they were way, way before me.  I was--those are the people that are there.
Story_ID: 3932
Speaker 1: Now, I--were there things in your teenage years that influenced you? Or, can I say were there people that you really admired at that time?
Speaker 2: I mentioned my branch manager Darnell Hawkins and he was such a patient guy.  I admired him.  I just really thought that he was, he was it.  He had his own business.  At that time the distribution of newspapers was owned by the person that owned the branch.  He owned the branch. He had patience with young guys and I just thought that I just wanted to, to do that.  In our community, I think you know that the grocers--small grocery store owners--were mostly African American.  We had very few white establishments in our community.  And I just--those guys--I just kind of wanted to be my own boss, work for myself, and they worked for themselves, and they seemed to be respected by the community, and those were the type of persons that I admired.  I met doctors.  Dr. Jones, Dr. Jones was one of the doctors in our community and he offered to send me to medical school, but he died before that materialized.  And I ended up going to college and wanted to be an accountant.  And then I got drafted into the army, and--I was only going to college part time.  What's strange, and I often think about that, and think back at the time that I graduated from high school. We didn't know about scholarships.  No one told us about scholarships.  No one told us about ways to go to college other than to go and to pay. So I ended up going to Wilson Junior College [Chicago, Illinois, later Kennedy-King College] and--part-time, as I worked, and then Chicago State [University].  After I come out of the service, I did go back to school.  But it would have been so nice if it would have been like today and you just go get your scholarship and go to school.
Story_ID: 3933
Speaker 1: Did you have a positive or negative--did you have a short experience in the service?
Speaker 2: Two years--two years in the [U.S.] Army.  It was two years in the Army.  I did my time.  I was scheduled to go to--well, when I went in the Korean War was raging.  And I did my training in Seattle, Washington--Fort Lewis, Washington. And they was bringing them back in body bags and half a man and etc., etc.  So I said, this ain't for me.  So I signed up to go to OCS [Officer Candidate School].  By being a graduate of high school [DuSable High School, Chicago, Illinois] and having some ROTC [Reserve Officers' Training Corps], I passed the exam and was accepted.  I ended up going to Camp Roberts [California] to school and, in Camp Roberts, that was the prelude of going to OCS. But I got lucky and the war ended.  So I told them, "I don't want to go nowhere  I want out."  So then I was able to go back. In two years of service, I was out of the Army.  I was an infantry soldier, so I was in the field and we was training all the time so that was rough.  We stayed stateside, and I went to Colorado and took mountain training, and they taught us how to put on clothes at fifty below zero up in the mountains there.  I saw my first gold mine up there.  They taught us how to shoot mortars and different things.  And I don't know if I should say this on your TV camera--but in learning, we bombed everything.  We bombed Indian villages and everything so--just through mistakes.  No one was hurt, but that was the training that we went through in the infantry.  So it was not really a pleasant time as some soldiers can say that they were in cities--in Berlin [Germany] and Germany and etcetera.  I was in the infantry, I was training other recruits in the beginning and after that, we turned what is called T-O-N-E and did this mountain training.
Story_ID: 3934
Speaker 1: I came back to Chicago [Illinois] from service [U.S. Army] and looking for a job.  I had enrolled in Cortez [W.] Peters Business College, taking accounting, thinking that that would be my way to the future.  I was also working part-time at the Chicago Post Office.  One day I was sitting on the front with a group of guys and we was having a little libation--a little wine for thy stomach's sake--and one of the fellows came up and said, "They're giving a exam for the Chicago Police Department.  Let's go take that exam.  It only costs us three dollars to register." So I said, "Well, I don't want to be no policeman; I don't want to be nothing.  I want to sit here and enjoy this wine."  He said, "Come on.  We going to buy another bottle."  I said, "Let's go."  So we all jumped in his car and went down and registered with the City of Chicago and bought the little stamp.  They had the exam at Lane [Technical] High School [Chicago, Illinois], which was way on the North Side.  We went there and out of the five guys that went with me to take that exam, I was the first one to go on the police department.  The others did not either pass the exam or had to get going later.  That was kind of amazing, because I was the main one that didn't think that I wanted to be a policeman, or would go on the policeman.  But that was a good experience and one of the best experiences of my life.  I met other young African American guys--black guys--going on the police department.  Some of them from CTA [Chicago Transit Authority].  Most of them a little older than I was, so they were able to kind of guide me and say, "Settle down, Howard."  I was only twenty-two at that time.  I took the exam at twenty-one and went on at twenty-two--and they all thought I was their age so we would go to the different clubs and different things and they thought that I knew what was going on, but I didn't know anything and that was really a fun time for me, an enjoyable time.  And I learned a lot from them and gained, I hope, their respect.  And I still have that today, I think.  We went to the different--in our community I guess you know that policemen were well respected.  I worked in some of the busiest police districts in the city of Chicago.  The Wabash District at one time was the most crime-ridden district in the nation--and I survived there ten years, under Captain Bluitt.  Yes, we arrested people.  Yes, I arrested many a person.  But I think I treated them as I would want you to treat me if you were arresting me, so it worked well and we never abused our authority.  I never abused my authority, I should say--and I didn't allow any of my other partners or anyone else to abuse their authority.  We treated people like we would want to be treated if you were arresting me and therefore I think that I got along well.  And to this day, after leaving the police department, I never felt the need to have to wear a gun, etc.  I can go anywhere in the community unarmed.  I don't think that I need to do that.  I was in one shooting incident and I shot one person once.  He was robbing a store and I shot him as he jumped a fence and captured him.  I think it hurt me worse than it did him, so I visited him in the hospital.  I was just so glad I didn't have to kill him--I didn't kill him.  And I was in another shoot-out once at 39th [Street]  and Calumet [Avenue] and was pinned down, but the heavy equipment guys came in and they made the arrest on those.  So I was fortunate that I was never hurt--seriously hurt.  Oh, we had scuffles, and we had these things, but never seriously hurt.  That was kind of our experience as police officers--giving tickets and this.
Story_ID: 3935
Speaker 1: What about law enforcement as a career--in African Americans--in that whole arena--do you think it's an area that offers a lot of opportunity and people should pursue or--?
Speaker 2: I think there's also a lot of opportunity and we need to pursue it.  As you know, the Superintendent of [Chicago, Illinois] Police [Department, Terry G. Hillard] today is an African American.  He actually went on the police force a little behind me.  There's opportunity to go to school, to get your education.  They will pay so much for you to go back to school.  You meet other folks and it gives you a taste and an opportunity to see how others live--and then seeing how they live, you then can pattern yourself.  Certain places I would have never went, never been or had an opportunity to go, had I not been a police officer.  I got a chance to see the insides of hotels.  I got an opportunity to meet [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], up close and personal--delivering messages to him--and get a chance to talk with him.  I got an opportunity to go to ballgames.  Opportunity to see fights and to see some of our champions-- Sugar Ray Robinson,  Joe Louis [professional boxers]--and these guys which I would have never been able to see other than possibly on TV or etc., or in the movies during those periods of time.  Being a police officer gave me that opportunity to meet politicians, elected politicians--Dawson, William Dawson, [U.S.] Congressman Dawson; Kenneth Campbell, your [Chicago] alderman, these folks--in another light--rather than from afar as a constituent, but up close and personal.  I think that a police officer in law enforcement gives you a wide range of things and gives you an opportunity, not only to remain in law enforcement, but also to go further and reach out in other things and prepares you to deal with people.  Living with people is an art and talking to people is an art and you just don't just learn this.  It's--you have to be taught it.  The superintendent of the Washington, D.C. Police Department [Charles Ramsey]--an African American, out of the Chicago Police Department.  So, so many things you can do.
Story_ID: 3936
Speaker 1: What made you leave the [Chicago Police] department?
Speaker 2: I thought that I would be a captain of police.  And that was my dream--to become a captain of police in the city of Chicago [Illinois].  At that time, I would've made somewhere around twenty thousand, twenty-five thousand dollars a year.  I thought that was all the money in the world.  I met Reverend Rawls--Dr. Lewis Rawls--who is pastor of the Tabernacle [Missionary] Baptist Church [Chicago] at 41st [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  He had been robbed and needed some security and a bodyguard and I volunteered to do this for him.  So I would chauffeur him around and take him to different appointments and his sick calls.  One day--Dr. Rawls also owned the Brown Funeral Home at 38th [Street] and Indiana [Avenue].  It's been torn down since.  But he said, "Howard, why don't you drive on a funeral service for me and make some additional money."  I told him, "Fine."  So I drove on these funeral services with him--for him--and he liked the way I handled his people and talked to them and the consideration that I gave to them.  So one day when driving him around he said, "Howard, what do you want to do in life?"  And I told him my dream, that I wanted to be a captain of police.  And he looked at me and said, "Son, say if you was the captain of police, how much money would you make?"  I told him I'd make twenty-five thousand dollars a year and said it proudly.  Twenty-five thousand dollars a year.  If you can imagine at that time as a police officer, I was only making about forty-five hundred dollars a year, so twenty-five thousand dollars a year was a lot of money--in my mind.  He said, "Well, look."  He said, "What if you went in business for yourself?  You could make a hundred thousand dollars a year.  You could make two hundred thousand dollars a year."  I said, "That do make sense."  He said, "But you'd have to go back to school.  You'd have to become a funeral director and etcetera."  So that evening I went home and talked with my wife [Audrey Mason Brookins] and said, "Baby," I said, "I think I'll go back to school and become a funeral director."  She said, "Well, go ahead."  So I went back to school, became a funeral director and worked another three years at the police department.  Took my pension money and what money we had saved and what money I could scrape from friends and relatives and bought the Brookins Funeral Home at 70th and--(correcting) in 1970 at 93rd [Street] and Ashland [Avenue].  I had been walking that beat in the 6th District for some time and I met the owners and I just said, "This is the funeral home I'm going to buy."  The community was changing at that time and I would camp out and protect the property and just be there and be there.  So one day the owner came out and said, "Officer, why are you here?"  I said, "I'm going to buy this funeral home."  And he smiled and we got to be friends.  He said, "Why don't you bring your wife by and let's meet--let us meet her."  So I brought my wife by and at that time we had the two children, Howard and Andrea.  We took them by and we got along fabulously.  So when they got ready to move, he enabled me to buy that funeral home.  But I had to quit the police department because I had to take my pension money, and the little money that we saved as down payment.  And he arranged for me to take a second mortgage and that's how I bought the funeral home.  That was a proud day.  September 1st, 1970 we moved in the funeral home, so this September 1st we'll celebrate thirty years in the same location.  And we still live upstairs over the funeral home.  It's been a pleasant adventure.  We raised the kids--the children.  They all are college graduates.  Howard, Jr. is a lawyer.  Andrea is working on her master's, but she has her bachelor's and she's also a licensed funeral director and manages the funeral home.  Rhonda graduated from the U of I--University of Illinois [Urbana-Champaign, Illinois].  She works downtown for one of the--IBM [Corporation] or something--but her main thing is she is attempting to become a singer, and she's singing at different clubs and different places around the city of Chicago.  So we have raised our children.  We're in the twilight of our years.
Story_ID: 3937
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about the role--what do you think the role of the funeral director is?  Because it's directed towards the African American community, what is the role?
Speaker 2: Role of the funeral director is to--and I'd like to go back in years and tell you our history as funeral directors, where we were really the prime movers and businesspeople in our community.  I think you know every community in the state--in the country--there was an African American funeral home with an African American funeral director.  And they were well-respected people--church members, pillars of society.  Normally the leading businessman in the community, because they would handle monies and the cash.  They would see that the young folks went to school, give the scholarships and etcetera.  As I say, they were leaders in their community.  They would give advice to the community.  They were second none to the minister.  They were leaders and today that role still should be played--not as much, somewhere along the line with the laws of respect for everyone, but the funeral director still counsels families because we're there when they need our counseling.  We're there when they're hurting.  We're there when the chips are down.  They've lost a loved one, they've lost a husband.  So we must be trusted people.  We must be trustworthy people and we must be people that want to give good, good advice. So that's the role of the funeral director.
Story_ID: 3938
Speaker 1: We've lost that [community trust and respect] and I think all our professionals have lost that.  Our attorneys, our doctors, our schoolteachers.  I ran into a school teacher and she was really down, saying no one respects and what have you. When I was young, the greatest respect that we could have was for a schoolteacher.  But I think that some of our problem is that our schoolteachers and our professionals moved away from us in the community.  They no longer walk the streets of our community.  They no longer are the persons that we know, that we can talk to.  I am kind of unique, I guess.  I still live in the community that my business [Brookins Funeral Home] is in.  People come by and are able to talk to me about personal problems.  Sometimes I can help them even with their law problems without them going to lawyers.  I can advise them about medical problems without going to doctors, and these things that we do on a one-on-one basis.  I can remember--and here going back to a kid--we'd be out shooting marbles and walking down the street would be the schoolteacher going to school and she would just grab you by the ear or hit you on top the head, and you'd take off for school.  We've lost that because our professionals left their communities and left their base of strength.  And that's some of the problem that we're facing and that's why we don't have the respect that we--they--we once enjoyed.
Story_ID: 3939
Speaker 1: Now, I want to ask you how you got involved in politics.
Speaker 2: How what?
Speaker 1: How you got involved in politics.
Speaker 2: Here again, as a funeral director and a man of the community--in helping people, you're contributing always to different causes, you're aiding people to obtain different positions.  One day my bell rung and there stood [U.S. Representative] Gus Savage, running for office again and asking for help.  So I attempted to help him.  I must also go back just a minute and say that as a funeral director you have time because you're not working all the time.  You're only working when there is some work to do.  And therefore you're in organizations.  You're in block clubs.  You're attending their meetings--PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings--and therefore you get to know people.  You're working with the Boy Scouts and the little leagues and your church organizations and therefore people respect you and will follow your advice.  And therefore, when you endorse or support a candidate, naturally these people that know you say, "If Howard is endorsing him, he have to be a good person."  And therefore, politicians and elected officials seek you out to aid and help you.  I helped a lot of politicians.  Niles Sherman become alderman in the 21st Ward.  I invested time and energy and finance in it.  The first time we lost and I suffered because of it.  I suffered because I was fighting the establishment, Mayor [Richard J.] Daley, and when I say Mayor Daley I mean the real Mayor Daley, 'old man' Daley--Bennie [U.S. Congressman Bennett] Stewart.  And we defeated them in our second run and Niles went--Sherman went to become the alderman of the 21st Ward [Chicago, Illinois].  Gus Savage came and knocked on my door one day and I supported him.  I lost friendship because of that, but I thought that he would make us a good congressman and it turned out that he did.  I think he was a great congressman and we endorsed him.  But you know it's a funny thing--you endorse and you support, you give these people the finance and when they get in office, they become different people.  Niles became a different person than the Niles Sherman I endorsed and supported as alderman.  Gus Savage became a--really a different person than the person that knocked on my door that day and asked for my endorsement.  So I just decided to say, "Look, Howard," say, "I'm sending all these people and supporting all these people for elected office; I need to go and run myself to see what changes you."  What makes me become, not Howard Brookins as you know me, but a big muckety-muck that you must bow and kow-tow to.  So I ran for [Illinois] state representative and won on the first time and then I decided to run for [Illinois state] senate and I did run for the senate and won.  I served ten years in the legislature.  I think I'm the same person--I hope I was the same person--that was originally there in the beginning.
Story_ID: 3940
Speaker 1: Now tell me about your time in the [Illinois state] legislature.  Why do you--why do you think the [Illinois] General Assembly--why is it an important governmental body?
Speaker 2: It is the main governmental body.  It governs your life from the time you're born to the time you die.  They're the ones that issue the death certificates.  They're the ones also that issue the birth certificates.  They tell you what age you're going to drive an automobile at.  They tell you what classes you're going to take in grammar school and high school.  They're going to tell you what college you're going to.  They govern your lives and that is very, very important.  I know that for a fact.  We passed bills that required licensing for some of the dumbest things that you ever seen, but you must have a license to do these things: a license to put a roof on a building, a license to build your steps on your back porch.  And therefore you can't just go out and start building your back porch or putting your roof on, you must have a licensed roofer.  You must have a licensed person to build the steps.  These things we did or you did or our parents did when they built their own houses and etcetera.  That's important.  It's important that you have to take or understand or take Jewish classes in grammar school and high school and then we tacked on the bill so that you also would have to take African American subjects and that's how that bill was passed.  That's what we did in Springfield [Illinois] and that, I think, is important.  I passed a bill to allow persons to register people anywhere in the state of Illinois, so now you have what is called a deputy registrar.  He can go to the Jewels [Jewels Stores, grocery chain] or the A&P [Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company grocery store], etcetera and register people to vote.  I passed that bill [Deputy Registrar Bill].  I think that was important.  And with that bill we registered more people in the city of Chicago--African Americans--than ever before and they went to the polls and they voted and we obtained our first black mayor, Harold Washington.  That's important.  The legislation in the state of Illinois or any state legislation, is the most important body of people ever.  They divide up the county, the state and the country so that you can elect congressmen, so we can elect the president.  We passed, in the [Illinois state] senate, a bill which divided Cook County up into what was called judicial districts, and we elected more African American women judges, more African American judges period, more Jewish judges and yes, we even put some Republican judges in.  That's important because judges rule your life.
Story_ID: 3941
Speaker 1: Tell me what--what are some of the little known facts about the Illinois General Assembly that people would, you know, don't typically know, but that, you know--in terms of its annual budget, in terms of--you know--.
Speaker 2: The budget is passed in a funny way and we have been told here in recent years that pork is bad, but pork is what makes the state run.  When the budget is passed, a legislator wants to know, "What's coming to my district?"  The things that are brought to his district are the things that are called pork.  Meaning that we're going to pave so many roads in the 36th Legislative District. We're going to put in a library in the 36th Legislative District.  We're going to put swimming pools in so many parks in the legislative district.  That is what is the biggest secret, that the only way that you get them things is that I'm able to trade off with the legislator sitting next to me because I have found out that he needed a bridge in some little town somewhere where there's no bridge--and the bridge might not be going nowhere, but he need a bridge.  So I can go to him and say, "I'll vote for you to get a bridge, if you vote for me to get a swimming pool in Brainerd Park [Chicago, Illinois]."  And that is called pork.  And I don't do that unless the budget reflects that, so I won't vote on the budget if these things are not in the budget.  Budgets have been held up and we did that in--I want to say '60--(correcting) '86 [1986] or so.  And we ran past--usually at that time it was adjourning the 4th of July, the 1st of July--and we stayed in session ten days past that period because we refused--we meaning the black caucus--refused to vote on the appropriation budget because they did not give or put in any of the budgeting for Illinois and for the mayor of Chicago, who was Harold Washington at that time, to do the things that he needed to do so that he could obtain things for the city of Chicago.  So that's how, and I think that's a little known thing that people don't reflect on.  How important the appropriation committee is; how important the budget for the city of Chicago and how it is passed and where the money comes from to actually run different programs in the city of Chicago.
Story_ID: 3942
Speaker 1: Now what do you think--how knowledgeable are you about the history of blacks in the, you know, Illinois General Assembly?
Speaker 2: I have just a general knowledge of them.  I know that Adelbert [H.] Roberts was one of our first African American [state] senators.  I can tell you that the first black that served in the [Illinois] House of Representatives was a guy named John [G.] Jones.  He was a Cook County--well, he actually was a tailor by profession and his tailor--he became very wealthy because he was a tailor and he bought property in the downtown [Chicago, Illinois] area where Harold Washington Library sits.  John Jones once owned that property.  He is the only African American in the Chicago Historical [Society] museum--him and his wife.  He was also a mason--he was one of our first grand masters, and he went on to become one of our first legislators--John Jones.  And very wealthy.  Brought Masonry [Freemasons fraternal organization] to--to Illinois and as you know, I am a Mason so I know from whence I speak on that portion.  Delbert Roberts was one of our first senators.  They tell me that he was a very eloquent man.  Could very--speak superbly--and was just a good talker and he come from the South Side of Chicago, around thirty-forth and thirty-fifth Street--Delbert Roberts.  I worked with Senator Margaret Smith and we have a statue of Delbert Roberts in the rotunda in the State of Illinois [capitol building] and he's the only African American in any state capitol that is not in chains.  All the others are in chains as slaves or yokes around them--no other.  Some of our famous guys that I like--I like [Illinois State Senator Charles] Charlie Chew [Jr.].  He was a character.  I think everybody have told you some Charlie Chew jokes.  If you don't know a Charlie Chew joke then you--(laughs)  He was a character.  That's about it with--the deacon.  Also, they tell how they went to Springfield [Illinois] and could not sleep in the hotels in Springfield and had to stay in private homes even though they were state representatives and senators, but they could not stay in the hotels in Springfield.  So we had quite a few that paved the way for us and I always thought that that called you to a higher standing.
Story_ID: 3943
Speaker 1: The reason that I said I was independent more or less, I did not come out of a political organization--the 8th Ward, the 6th Ward [Chicago, Illinois].  We formed our own political ward when I helped elect [Chicago Alderman] Niles Sherman by beating the [Mayor Richard J.] Daley and the Daley machine in the 21st Ward.  The 21st Ward then became my base and was one of the strongest independent wards in the city of Chicago.  The people went to the polls and voted.  There was more homeowners, African American homeowners, in that ward, and therefore they did not depend on politics for a job.  Therefore, there was not a lot of patronage in there, and therefore I could run as an independent and run on my name.  I could stand and debate anybody because the organizations could not hurt me because of name recognition and etc.  To that extent it's still a little true.  The people that inherited my seat is [Illinois] state representative Monique Davis, who sits in my representative seat.  And what they did was to merge and to (unclear)--that's why I can say to you that the state Senate, the legislature is so powerful--my district into the district with Senator Jones, Emil Jones [Jr.], and ran me against Emil Jones.  Well, Emil Jones came out of the 34th Ward, which is very well controlled and when they moved it into the 19th Ward--therefore, those two wards could combine to beat me as an independent.  So that's why I went on and actually left politics and retired.  I believed in speaking my mind.  I believe in bringing back things to the community, which I felt or feel--that would benefit the community.  That's why I was so much and so proud of the judicial bill that I passed.  I held the Senate up for four days--I kept them at bay.  I combined my caucus, the [Illinois Legislative] Black Caucus, with the Republicans and debated the Senate President Phil Rock, on the floor.  I brought Judge [R. Eugene] Pincham to Springfield [Illinois] and therefore, we did not let the Black Caucus move or lose even in the threat of powers that be from their ward organizations.  And we held the line and therefore we could pass that judicial bill which elected these African Americans to judgeships.  That's important, I think.  I think it's important that our young folks, when they go into a courtroom, that everybody in the courtroom is not white.  There will be at least some African Americans in there that understands the plight of how they got there.  I think that that's the type of independence that we talk about.  I know that you must work with others to get these things, which I mentioned before, back to your district:  the libraries, the swimming pools, the streets paved, the overpasses, etcetera.  Also, you must work with them to see that the least ones in your community not suffer.  I always was dismayed at the way we treated the mentally ill and I am still dismayed with that and I think that if I was in the legislature today, that would be what I would champion.  We're not treating mentally ill right.  We see people walking down the streets of Chicago, not only Chicago, but all the suburbs, eating out of the garbage cans, talking to themselves and walking backwards.  We know there is something wrong with these people.  What happened was that in the [Illinois] General Assembly, they decided that they were going to treat the people in the community and send the mentally ill money to the community to deal with.  And then they cut the money off going and there's no treatment for these people and now we are at this point, I think.  So if I was there today, this would be one of the causes I would champion.
Story_ID: 3944
Speaker 1: Is there anything you want to say about politics and African Americans?
Speaker 2: I just am very disappointed at where we are today in our political stance.  I'm dismayed and disappointed with the aldermanic elected officials.  I'm really dismayed with some of the stance that I see that our legislators are taking in Springfield [Illinois] and etcetera.  These are the things that hurt, you know.  I just think that we need to be stronger, we need to seize the opportunity and our caucuses must be stronger.  We must meet as caucuses and stand together as caucuses in a central point and get what is best for our community back to our communities and I don't see that being done.
Story_ID: 3945
Speaker 1: What are your hopes for the African American community--hopes or fears?
Speaker 2: I fear the push for the crime and not understanding that just passing laws will not correct the crime and make life better in our community.  We can't just pass laws for that.  Yes, we must pass a certain amount of laws, and yes, they must be enforced--but yes, we also must pass educational bills for the schools.  We must pass bills for the mentally ill and for health bills, etcetera.  And we must see that the money is in the budget to do them things that will create a better living condition in the African American community and that's what I would churn our legislators to do.
Story_ID: 3946
Speaker 1: What do you want your legacy to be?  I'm talking about, because--you know, you were a police officer--I mean you've had--worked at the post office, police officer, funeral director, politician.
Speaker 2: I just want to be known as a good guy and I just want my name to be respected.  And I have a Howard, Jr. and I have a Howard III and I just want them to be able to say, "Hey, the old man did something and the name is good."  I've talked to Howard, Jr.,  I've told him whatever he does, do not corrupt the name Howard Brookins.  And I hope that he will tell his son that and it will always go back that Howard Brookins was somebody.  That would be my legacy.  Nothing special.  No great 'I am anything,' just a good father, a good community person.
Story_ID: 3947
Speaker 1: Who would you say that--this could be a politician, non-politician--I mean, who has most influenced you in your life?
Speaker 2: I would say Dr. Louis Rawls [pastor, Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church, Chicago, Illinois].  He really played a part when I was vulnerable and sensitive to that and could have followed someone.  He was--he really was--is a great person.  He's 96 years old now.  I have not done all the things that I should do to show him how much I appreciate what he did for me.  Not financially, not--just through guidance and through talk.  He--he helped a lot of folks.  I would say that Dr. Rawls was a great influence on me in my life.
Story_ID: 3948
Speaker 1: That's my brother [Donald Brookins] and I sitting under the Christmas tree.  We were five and four years old and that was one of our first Christmases.  And if you can see our little train in the background.  And that was prior to starting grammar school [Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois].  That's me on the right and my brother Donald on the left, which has since deceased.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (right) and his brother Donald Brookins at Christmas time, Chicago, Illinois, December, 1937.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3949
Speaker 1: And this is when I first started kindergarten.  And that's us at Burke [Elementary] School which is located at 54th [Street] and South Park [Boulevard], then, now [Martin Luther] King [Jr.] Drive [Chicago, Illinois] and this is me sitting here.  Quite a few of the children which you see on the picture are members of my church and still live in Chicago and in the neighborhood.  As you can imagine quite a few has died and have gone on but there are still quite a few of our grammar school kids still in Chicago and we still have reunions, get-togethers, and one is scheduled for this August in Washington Park.  And we do that every year and give to the school, presents.
Speaker 2: (Background discussion)
Speaker 1: This is me here.  (Points to himself in the photo.)
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (front row, second from right) and his kindergarten class from Burke Elementary School, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1938.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3950
Speaker 1: That's me as a young police officer.  I served on the Chicago Police Department from 1958 through 1970.  That's me on my three-wheeler as I patrolled the city of Chicago [Illinois].  I worked in some of the worst districts in Chicago--the Wabash Avenue station.  I was there and I was out at the 6th District with is at Eighty-fifth [Street] and Green [Street] for ten years.  I left the Chicago Police Department in 1970.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins as a member of the Chicago Police Department, Chicago, Illinois, ca. 1958-1970.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3951
Speaker 1: Jack Brickhouse was one of the [radio and television] commentators for the [Chicago] Cubs [professional] baseball team.  At that time we had thirty-two little league teams in the Chicago [Illinois] area and he came and helped us with a fundraiser.  So this is me here on the right and that's Jack Brickhouse in the center and Alderman Niles Sherman to the left.  Niles Sherman who later became Alderman in the city of Chicago.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (right), Chicago Alderman Niles Sherman, and broadcaster Jack Brickhouse, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3952
Speaker 1: I was an Illinois State Representative for four years [1983-1986].  This is the class of the elected officials with the other state representatives. You can see there that there's Bill Shaw--[State Senator] William Shaw and [State Representative] Nelson Rice [Sr.].  There's [State Representative] Sylvester Rhem.  There's Barry Olds (sp.) who later became an assessor in the assessor's office.  And there's [State Representative] Robert LeFlore.  This is our class that went into the election.  Here I am standing there.  This is the class that was elected in 1982 to the [Illinois] House of Representatives.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (standing, center) with other elected officials for the State of Illinois, Springfield, Illinois, ca. 1982-1983; Also pictured are: Senator William Shaw, Representative Nelson Rice, Sr., Representative Sylvester Rhem, Barry Olds, and Representative Robert LeFlore.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3953
Speaker 1: This is my mother  [Leona Myles Brookins], my children [Howard, Jr., Howard III] and other supporters, my wife [Audrey Mason Brookins], my brothers and sisters.  All of us went to Springfield. And we had a glorious time, and they enjoyed being in Springfield. For some of them, that was their first time ever going to Springfield, the state capital of the State of Illinois.
Speaker 2: And that's the one on the stairs?
Speaker 1: On the stairs here. And here. This is inside the rotunda, and this was out on the front steps.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins with family and friends who attended his swearing-in ceremony at the Illinois State Capitol, Springfield, Illinois, ca. 1993.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3954
Speaker 1: The one on the extreme left--is the gavel being passed.  I was president of the Illinois Cook County Funeral Home Owners Association so the gavel was passed.  As you can see there's [Illinois Attorney General] Roland Burris in the picture with us here. And this is past president.  This is myself who became president and that is Jim Couch who is also a past president.  Those are the board members around me as they gave the gavel. That's me here as you can see.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (second from left) and others present at a passing of the gavel, not dated; Also pictured are James Couch (far left) and Roland Burris (far right).  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3955
Speaker 1: [U.S.] Senator Carol Moseley Braun when she was running and my group supported her and that's her in the middle with me and the president of the group that represented the group that endorsed her.  And later she came on to win.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (right), Carol Moseley Braun and an unidentified man, not dated, from the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3956
Speaker 1: The next picture shows pictures of my [Illinois State] Senate colleagues, [Senator] Dick Newhouse--Richard Newhouse, [Senator] Earlean Collins and Senator [Margaret] Smith and myself here.  That's when I came back from Africa on a trip and I brought all of them the souvenirs which they are wearing.  Which are scarves, African scarves. And I had--I went to Zaire to meet with the President Mobutu [Sese Seko]. There, we attempted to open a African trade bank. That attempt is still being tried.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins and other Illinois state senators after a trip to Zaire, Springfield, Illinois, ca. 1983-1986; (L. to R.): Richard Newhouse, Earlean Collins, Margaret Smith and Howard Brookins.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3957
Speaker 1: This is when I was signing a bill and attempting to pass that bill, and that's at my desk in the (Illinois) Senate.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins at his desk, Springfield, Illinois, ca. 1983-1986.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3958
Speaker 1: The one you see where [Rev.] Jesse Jackson is endorsing me here on the left and supporting me for my run.  I was also running against an opponent and his name was Jesse Jackson.  His real name was Jesse Jackson so I had to have--make sure that Jesse did support me and endorse me publicly so that they would know that I was not running against 'the' Jesse Jackson but a person named Jesse Jackson.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (left) receiving a campaign endorsement from the Rev. Jesse Jackson, Chicago, Illinois, ca. early 1980s.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3959
Speaker 1: There I had a tough opponent at that time also Glen Dawson.  There they thought he was kin to our great congressman [U.S.] Congressman [William Levi] Dawson who had died but it was not.  So [Chicago, Illinois Mayor] Harold [Washington] endorsed me for the Senate and I went on to win in that [18th] district and become the first African American senator from that district.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (left) receiving a campaign endorsement from Chicago Mayor Harold Washington, Chicago, Illinois, 1982.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3960
Speaker 1: The photos on your left showing me arguing various bills before the [Illinois State] Senate.  I was fortunate enough to pass two, I think historic, pieces of legislation.  On is called the Deputy Registrar Bill and that enables deputy registrars to go out and register people all over the state and the county prior to being--the election day.  And I think that during that time we elected quite a few people--registered quite a few people and Harold Washington was elected [as mayor of Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins speaking before the Illinois State Senate, Springfield, Illinois, ca. 1982-1983.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3961
Speaker 1: The other is me arguing the Judicial Reform Bill which divided Cook County [Illinois] up into judicial districts.  There we have elected more minority judges than ever before--women, Jews, African Americans and also we did elect some Republicans.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins speaking before the Illinois State Senate, Springfield, Illinois, ca. 1983-1986.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3962
Speaker 1: That's her playing with the mics and trying to talk on the mics in the Illinois Senate [Springfield, Illinois].  Arifa Brookins Hinton.  That was a very proud moment--my first grandchild.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins with his granddaughter visiting the Illinois State Senate, Springfield, Illinois, 1983-1986.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3963
Speaker 1: The first is just one of my bills and it just says, "Vote for me," and that was during one of my first runs that was for [Illinois] State Representative and I just thought that that would be interesting to see.  It was in 1982.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins's campaign poster for Illinois State Representative, 1982.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3964
Speaker 1: This is the wife here [Audrey Mason Brookins]. this is my son Howard, Jr. who is an attorney, adopted daughter Cheryl, my daughter-in-law and my daughter Andrea.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins (center) with his family at a political fundraiser, not dated; (L. to R.): Howard Brookins's daughter-in-law, daughter, Andrea, Howard Brookins, wife, Audrey Mason Brookins, son, Howard Brookins, Jr., and his adopted daughter, Cheryl Brookins.  From the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3965
Speaker 1: The next is one of my Masonic--I am a Shriner.  I'm also a Scottish Rite Mason of the 33rd Degree and a past Master of the Blue House.  That just shows me in my Shrine dress.
Speaker 2: [Portrait of Howard Brookins wearing his Masonic lodge fez, not dated, from the collection of Howard Brookins.]
Story_ID: 3966
Speaker 1: I'm into trains.  And as you can see I have a layout which is at home in the basement.  I actually have Michigan Avenue [Chicago, Illinois] and the Illinois Central [Gulf] Railroad station in some of the pictures.
Speaker 2: [Howard Brookins showing off his model trains, Chicago, Illinois, not dated, from the collection of Howard Brookins.]
