Story_ID: 16529
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I am the interviewer today for the History Makers.  Our videographer is Scott Stearns.
Speaker 2: Ma'am, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 1: My name is Katie Booth.  K-A-T-I-E, Booth, capital B-O-O-T-H.
Speaker 2: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 1: Oh, my place of birth was Gulfport, Mississippi.  I am now, ninety-five years old and at the last year to get some--because the records are utterly ridiculous but anyway, some give me exactly ninety-five.  Some give me the ninety-six but so it's not recorded in the--for the Mississippi area or age at that time.
Speaker 2: So your birth date was not recorded?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's right.  So I don't--I have many historical things in my family at that time we were--because I have some memories of World War I.
Speaker 2: So it's either [May 23] 1907 or 1908?
Speaker 1: Yes, yes, that's right.  So I'd rather say to get a little piece of this if they can get it straight, I don't see how they could possibly, but, you know.
Speaker 2: And ma'am what is your occupation?
Speaker 1: My occupation at this time now I am retired, and I work as a volunteer in this particular area trying to fulfill that quote that they use "acting to make your community different."  And, as you came in, you might have seen some of the things that we're getting done to make the basic things to make a city better.
Speaker 2: And, what did you do as a career?
Speaker 1: As a career I was--I worked as a chemist in the industry the latter part of my life and the earlier days I just worked the regular high school in public development through the Presbyterian Board of Education.
Speaker 2: Yes ma'am.  Okay.  Now what is today's date?
Speaker 1: Today is the twelfth,  November twelfth.
Speaker 2: Thirteenth.
Speaker 1: Oh, the thirteenth, November the thirteenth.  Today is November the thirteenth and I--I'm here, here in the year of 2000 and,  I work practically everyday.
Speaker 2: 2002.
Speaker 1: 2002, yes.
Speaker 2: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 1: We are in Magnolia Grove.  This, this is a subdivision of Gulfport, Mississippi and it is called Magnolia Grove.  And it received its name because of the beautiful magnolias that used to be here.
Speaker 2: Okay, this is the,  Magnolia Grove Community Center?
Speaker 1: This is the Magnolia Grove Community Center.
Speaker 2: On Twenty Sixth [Street] and Hewes [Avenue], right?
Speaker 1: Twenty Six and , well, Twenty Sixth and Hewes, yes.  Twenty-Six and Hewes.
Story_ID: 16530
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: What is your favorite food?  I would say, I'd better say some fish because we are on the coast.  I would say, my favorite, dish that I would like from the coast here would be like crab gumbo.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Yes, my favorite color is,  yellow.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Well, I was born in May.  So I like the spring.  I like cold weather.  I don't like it--I don't care much for the hot, but I like cold weather.
Speaker 1: Okay, and when is your birth date in May?
Speaker 2: May twenty-third.
Speaker 1: Okay.  I don't think we got that--
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't think you, I don't think you did either.
Speaker 1: All right.
Speaker 2: Well that's my thought so you can stop cutting me off when you want to.
Speaker 1: I might want.
Speaker 2: Thank you (laughter).
Speaker 1: And,  do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I hope to, to continue to--I want to see the total United States.  I've, I've saw Mississippi since I've been an adult because I went and I travel through the--but there are states that I want to see.  So, my ambition, is to get out and see how the South have been able to stay together.  I--there are areas in the South that I haven't visited yet, but I hope someday to visit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because they're unbelievable.  Magnolia Grove [Community Center] takes up all my time.
Speaker 1: Now, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: My, my, my favorite prayerful that I use daily when my getting up in mind of going down.  I'm not a long-range person, but I am a person like I, I must have an end point.  I can't go trackling along.  I cut off some and do, so, my favorite saying would be "Help me through this day."  That would be my favorite, and if I accomplished something that day, it doesn't necessarily have to be what I planned, but if it's something worthwhile  That's what keeps me going.
Story_ID: 16531
Speaker 1: Can you give us the names of your parents and their birth dates and, if can give us their birth dates and where they were born and if not the date then at least around the time they were--?
Speaker 2: I could give you my parents name.  My father is Joseph Patterson.  I know he's from Alabama.  He came out of Alabama as he use to tell us stories about his escape.  And he must have come out of there around right after the Civil War, as we would--could work in out now he must have been young--
Speaker 1: Tell us the story about how your father,--?
Speaker 2: Yes, my father was, was--must have been a young man when, when he came here [to Gulfport, Mississippi].  And, he came down through the Alabama, I guess, the process of the coal mines getting popular and other iron industry and he, he liked down here as most people, the climate--and the opportunity for work and my mother [Ida Coffye] in the meantime, was her first husband, was--it was during the time of , when the yellow fever was--they had a period in history that they had a epidemic of yellow fever, and, my mother's first husband was a victim of the yellow fever and like many people at that time he, he did not survive.  But they had several children and my half-sisters and brothers we grew up as real sisters.  So I had a very pleasant childhood, and my mother married my daddy--why he just took the whole, you know, he had the philosophy that men use that, "Look, I'm head of this house and what I say goes.  Don't tell me about no half sisters or brothers."  They one family, this what we going to be and that ends it.
Speaker 1: Now what is your father's name again?
Speaker 2: Joseph Patterson.
Speaker 1: Joseph Patterson?
Speaker 2: Um, hum.
Speaker 1: And he was born what--what--what--?
Speaker 2: He was born in--well, he must have been born in the--I would say--when I looked in the book and when I went and they were putting it together they had quite a bit of information in the library.  So it must have been, about the 1760s [sic, 1860s] because it had so many years in there and the census--type of census taken, and of course, I am sure you are familiar with, it kind of cut out the American African and did not consider him as what we say "a whole man" had to take one and a half and that kind of, status that was found in the history books, but I think to correct--because he must have come out of Alabama right after slavery, so I would put him around, right after slavery around nineteen or eighteen--1867, 1865 right in there, right in that area I would use because this is when they had--then that next test.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) When he met your mother he was in his forties or fifties?
Speaker 2: Yes, he must have been in his, in his forties, because he left from over there evidently from--he used to tell us he must have been a very youngster--a very young boy.
Story_ID: 16532
Speaker 1: What about your your mother?
Speaker 2: My mother, my mother had much more--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Well, give us her name and spell it.
Speaker 2: My mother's name was Ida Coffye and--.
Speaker 1: How did she spell that?
Speaker 2: Sure, F-F-Y-E.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And where was she born?
Speaker 1: She was born and reared right here in Gulfport [Mississippi], my mother and all of her--all the relatives on that side came to here and they went to the areas of, like what they have Turkey Creek, and they named all of these places according to what they found there so that was, that--and--they had a large--my grandparents had a large family, and I guess we must have twins in our--running in our family if there is any such thing as that, because I have about--I have at least seven sets of living twins right now.  I have three in Gulfport, and seven in California and maybe even more than that.  But my mother's side of the family, she was closer to the, to the Indian side.  My--the name Coffye. And they did the kind of work that they were taught mostly with my parents from their cohorts that they found here--Indians, and some French, French was pretty--and we were always on the coast so we always had a turning over traffic in Gulfport.
Story_ID: 16533
Speaker 1: As kids we saw people from all over the world.  So it was always that way, way, because they were trying to get the transportation by water, because after they began to follow the advice, I guess of the interest from the Indians who were here--and I don't now how and how long they've been here and that stuff, but they began to work on the docks.  We'll call it docks now because they began to transfer stuff down the [Mississippi] river, down--so it could come and they could put it right into the Gulf--and go out into the Gulf of Mexico and save a lot of time because now we were beginning to look at people where they began to transfer cotton and some vegetables and some fruits and everything was very plentiful because everything was virgin territory--on my mother's side.  I live now, in the land grant that  my parents got when they brought up the land grants and they began to, make a dummy railroad through here, and, they began the, the--what they call that thing?  The creosote dipping all these were various kinds of labor jobs and they would do things from the sea, you know, from the fish--fisherman were here from all over.  I think some of the first people that I knew, that I remember as a child coming up, not being black Americans, were the Alfonsos they were the first Italian family that moved right here near us and they had their, you know, the same thing and we would--all the neighborhood would go out fishing, and we had huge nets so it would take fifteen or twenty men to drag them in and then everybody--.
Speaker 2: So they had to work together?
Speaker 1: They had to work together and they grew up very--I have one of the younger--Alfonso girls now, she's--it's like she's old (laughter).  She could be called young, she could be my daughter.  But it was that kind of original relationship and exchange ideas.  My father [Joseph Patterson] knew was very much, he was just--I always say he was too--since I've been grown and look at it, I always say I think he was born way before his time. He was a farmer.  He never worked for anybody as a labor hand, and this is what he said he never wanted to do.  And I can hear his voice now telling his boys, "You better get you some land so you will have some place for your wife and your children."  And, this is, this is what he instilled in us all to be independent and to do well what you have as a job, when you take anything from the earth, give it back.  He--my father was doing crop rotating before they even knew what--he didn't know he was doing crop rotating himself.  He only knew that that if you planted the peas over here this year and the corn over there next year and exchange it--he would bear a better crop.  So, soon everybody was picking up--patch crop.  Everybody called my daddy 'Uncle Joe' just like they me 'Aunt Katie'.  They aren't my aunts--my nieces they just called me that and I like it.  It doesn't bother me.
Story_ID: 16534
Speaker 1: Did your father [Joseph Patterson] or mother [Ida Coffye]--or did you have any stories from your grandparents about what your family was doing during the nineteenth century during slavery and that sort of thing---?
Speaker 2: Well all I know that--,
Speaker 1: How far back do your parents go?
Speaker 2: --my parents, my parents go back to the Indian settlements throughout here.  They would--could tell many stories about digging for the wells and that the Indians came through and they were running from the white man and all that to be.  There were many stories they told.
Speaker 1: So you have ancestors that escaped from the plantation--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh, yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously)--to live with the Indians.
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Lived with the Indians.
Speaker 2: Live with the Indians, and other groups of people who may have been through here a lot because the Indians were but there were other--there were huge groups of gypsy people people, you know, we would see the gypsies coming in every year at a certain time they would come with their big wagons and horses and we, we remembered that, and we remembered the, the, the trading that people would do.  We never had cotton in Gulfport [Mississippi] because the soil and the air did not--it was not conducive for it to grow but they would try different things and they had beautiful flowers, beautiful plants.  All kinds of  wild--eating things like, all kinds of grapefruits and--I don't mean grapefruits I mean grapes, wild scupperdines (sic, scuppernongs) and all those things.  We knew about those things from very early age.  And kind of the way we built--they built our houses.  They would get together.  You know this group would together and help him build his house and that one would get together and build our house and they just had an inter--more of an inter-relationship and when trouble came they all would have to do something to stop it.  So, this is the way I came up.
Speaker 1: What kind of troubles ?
Speaker 2: Well, we had, we had racial problems and as they as the expansion, you know, everybody fighting for gravy and I guess we were doing the same thing.  And sometimes it would be very unpleasant and the big, bigger man, would--the one that had the most, he would try to get a little more not anything fferent from to what they are doing now.  I would say all truth that if you--I think if you were to analyze and put--but I think that only anything if people that with children that would be my age group.  Why we would have a very embedded principle into us to work be independent, be decent and respect everybody.  See that was just--that was carried on in the house--at home.  You didn't get away with doing things, you know, this is, this is, "I'm your daddy and if your mother say you not goin' do it, you not goin' do it and don't come to ask me."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: No more discussion on that.
Story_ID: 16535
Speaker 1: In terms of racial conflict down here, did--do you remember any lynchings or anything like that?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes I remember, I remember once--one, I remember one, one lynching and--at least what the children heard, you know, they--in my day people tried to keep as many of the unpleasant things from the kids as possible, and that's what, that's what we had--unpleasant things kids never knew know it, but a lot of things we--it did affect us because I remember this, this man was, his name was--they said he was found under a ditch, I mean up under--hung under a ditch.  I never saw it and right here in Mississippi City [Mississippi], which was the county seat at the time, it is said that they hung many people out there right, right on Courthouse Road, that's where all the central things of the courthouse use to be right there on Courthouse Road and the trains would stop there, that was the little dummy trains--New Orleans.  See you had that whole--that coastal line.  You could go New Orleans and come on through the [St. Louis] Bay and then to Gulfport [Mississippi], Biloxi [Mississippi], go around that to Alabama--that's good transportation and then the back waters were very good, you know, they said for transportation and for fishing and while--other while my father [Joseph Patterson] always caught, wild animals you know, different kinds of  of things, put them in there and keep them until they get cleaned out and then we'd eat whatever it was. (laughts)
Speaker 1: So he would catch them and then keep for a while--keep them alive--feed them--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, yes, feed them, shoot them--give them--they die so, so many times, so may days he had to stay there and the moon had to be in a certain place and everything had to be set for that particular--preparing that pig, rabbit, squirrel or whatever.
Speaker 1: Now, now where did he get that, that --?
Speaker 2: They were just--this was virgin territory, loads of things, nature--.
Speaker 1: No, no, I mean where did he get the idea that you could kill them at a certain time of the moon?
Speaker 2: Yes, a certain time of the moon.  Yes, because the way that the people reacted when something happened.  Like in--when I was coming along in my family, if you had a bad toothache, the first thing my daddy would look at--would want to see the calendar, what date it is, what is it?  So then if the moon isn't in the right position, why, you would have to wait a few days and then you would go and get your tooth pulled.  I--that's what was in my house now in some other houses it may not have been.  They may not have believed, but--.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) What is he--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  (Unclear) the pressure--my daddy felt like the water and the wind and the sunshine and all affected us.  Now, what science you'd call that, I don't know.  But I've noticed that we are back to using a lot of the herbs and things of sort, now but they use to use years ago.
Speaker 1: I just wondered if he ever, he ever talked about where he learned that, that kind of thing and what and what it was?
Speaker 2: It was out of, out of, out of necessity.  It is said that necessity is the mother of invention.  This--when he banked his potatoes, when he planted his corn, if certain kinds of bugs came in or whatever, he--.
Speaker 1: But he ever talk about where he picked that up or where he figured out how to do--?
Speaker 2: No, he just figured with us how to get out there and keep them bushes down.  That was the biggest thing--(laughs) that's what happened you know--it happened.  And--.
Speaker 1: So he didn't learn that from his parents or grandparents or nobody, nobody taught him--?
Speaker 2: Not my father cause my father was not around his parents or grandparents.  Sisters or brothers I don't, I don't know, and so it was with many, many families.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Have you ever heard anybody else talk about that?  About using the moon and--?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  I've, I've read, you know, stories and books and things and had people to tell us things about the past and all that.
Speaker 2: But did he use the almanac?
Speaker 1: Almanac, that's what he used the almanac, that was his bible, the almanac.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So--but he--they weathered the storm.
Story_ID: 16536
Speaker 1: What kind of person was your mother [Ida Coffye] and what did she do?
Speaker 2: She was, she was just a typical--by the time--had the babies and kept them clean and cooked and stayed at home.  That was the biggest, biggest thing you had--in Gulfport [Mississippi]--in the early days, wasn't much for women to do 'cause all the work was very, you know, heavy work.  Everything had to be made from scratch and they experimented with making a lot of things and just made--like foods.  Many of the foods that they used--that we use now were originally experimented with our foreparents in proportions, you know--there's not enough baking powder, a little bit more shortening, and we not gonna use that kind of ground flour anymore, he has to grind it again, or something like that.  That was the kind of a life we had.
Story_ID: 16537
Speaker 1: What were some of the highlights of growing up?  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up here in Gulfport [Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Well, I think maybe--growing up in Gulfport, people always stopped here.  That's just like now, people always--Gulfport as long as (unclear) there would be a high point, a progressive point and then it would drip, drip down and then we'd have a depression and a certain number of years we'd have--go up again, but as we improve in education and family relations and neighbor relations and family, family ties and understanding and support has been a very good factor in the black (unclear)--the way it has affected me.  We were always taught that--well, you can tell from all our generation, we've kept it--keep it--my mother [Ida Coffye] said, "Don't ever turn anybody down because it may be your sister or your brother out there."  If, if people, people just come along--we call them tramps, you know, they come along and we would always say, "Momma why he always stop here?"  Momma said, "He get--put a mark on the fence."  That's the story they would tell, that if a man was traveling or walking or something and if he marked your post or your fence that means that was a good place stop.  Stop at that place 'cause you'd get some coffee and some bread and stuff to eat, and then you go on to the next one and maybe you get something there.  That was basically the kind of early childhood I had.  'Cause we had some educational advantages because people, you know, began to come into--migrate into here and come here and offer more and I think the parents were very, very happy that they would see their children educated and with some experience of wanting to go farther.
Story_ID: 16538
Speaker 1: Now what kind of a little girl were you, and what were you interested in when you were a little girl?
Speaker 2: Well, every--in, in, at my house we always had certain--my daddy [Joseph Patterson] always set certain rules he--everybody could have something live to raise if they wanted it, you could have a pig or chicken, a dog, a horse, a cow, for that was your--that was yours.  You feed them, you keep them clean, you see that the other animals does not hurt them and you grow it and when it get up, we will use it for whatever.  If it is a cow, we are going to (unclear) if it's a little old donkey--you know, everybody wanted to get a donkey cause they could keep--'cause they say he slip off one night (laughter), you know things like that.  But, that was, that was my daddy always gives--try to teach us ownership and I think it shows in our family down to the teachers--this--you go out there and that's yours, and no one could take it from you.  And I think that is a good thing to teach your children, that you like to do something--if you want to do something, do it and you do it for the people and that's your biggest ownership when you see grow it and develop in your own sisters and brothers and he use to say, "Now how would this house look if just so and so could read?" He say, say to my brother, "How would you feel if couldn't anybody read but Jake?"  That's my brother.  And so some of, you know, smarty ones would say, "I'd feel good." (laughs)  But you know what he got, don't you?  But that was not the intent.  But it stayed with us, you know, it stayed with us.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that everybody got an animal to raise.
Speaker 2: Yes, you did.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you get?
Speaker 2: What I got?  I got a little old sow, pig, you know, every little pig she has is always a small one, so I got a little one.  The littlest one in the group I took it from--because it stayed little a long time, see.  And I kept it for a long time and then all of us began to play with it.  The whole--we became such good friend with this old (unclear), and she grew so big we were amazed at how grew she--how big she was and in the meantime my daddy just get ready to kill her.  But when he killed her, boy did he have something on his hands.  He had some hollering children and they wasn't gonna eat that pig. (laughs)  But--.
Speaker 1: Was the pig was kind of like a pet?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't no kinda like, it was a pet.  We--she would follow us around and play and everything--it was just your friend and then when they killed mine, why I just almost died, but I learned better and grew better.  It didn't bother me, it didn't bother me after a while, because then you could have a--you could take a choice --you could have a horse or something like that--my daddy had everything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So you ate the pig and--what were some of the things, the other things you did for fun when you were coming up?  What did you do?
Speaker 2: Well, the general fun unless you'd be very creative because everything was so limited.  For an example, it would take my brothers maybe three or four days to make a wagon, so it was rolling and then it would fall apart by the time you got--because they would go in the river looking for those things you know, those axles and all that stuff and then have to look for everything that they wanted, they had to get out and make it and fix it and everybody had a different idea, you know.  I've seen them just break up over those things that they would make but this is what they wanted, they wanted the wheels to be a certain way and this to be and they would work together for hours on that--days.
Speaker 1: But what about you though, what did you do?
Speaker 2: I was, I was a--I don't know what it was but when I--we--when I was very small I never cared too much for sisters and brothers because they--I was always being pushed out a little bit and when there was another one, and I would blame them--I didn't have too much--I didn't want to have too much respect for them, so every time I would get a chance to do something nasty to them I would do it, and if they tell--and I got paid for it (unclear) enough in the right way.  But, basically I guess when I got to be around maybe ten or eleven I began to make friends with my neighbors and my children--the children.  Before I would not have hardly anything to do with them as a little child.  I would go climb up in the tree, hide behind a bush or something like that.
Speaker 1: Did you feel, did you feel kind of odd because your father was different from the rest of the children or--in your family or what?
Speaker 2: No, see they sheltered--one thing that was, they sheltered the children from anything that was unpleasant when you are coming up.  You know you may have never heard about the terrible things until you were grown.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but did, but well, what asked was did you feel different from your sisters and brothers because your father was different?
Speaker 2: No, he was not different to us.  We thought he was the best man on the block and--.
Speaker 1: Yeah, but you said you didn't play with the other children.
Speaker 2: Not the other children.  It was just the children.  This is just a children's decision. This was not--and if he's see you do it he'd break it up right away.  Right away.  But if you just say you're making a face at me I would tell him and he would--if you didn't give him a good reason why you were making that face you may have to pay a little price, but he would tell you, "I don't want to see you making that face at your sister again."
Story_ID: 16539
Speaker 1: My daddy [Joseph Patterson] was so masterful. You see when you grow up under security where you feel like if you come home and you tell daddy--he's gonna straighten it out, and the same thing if you come home and tell daddy and you been awful, and somebody else come to tell him, you're gonna get a different kind of straightening out.  But, it was such a security.  My mother [Ida Coffye] could walk out of the house and--the time, at that time they'd be going to downtown you Gulfport [Mississippi] to one store I guess, and she would leave all of us home, and she would tell the oldest sister, "Now, I don't want anybody to go out that gate, I don't want you to let the children in here," and she'd holler and tell the neighbor, "I'm going downtown.  I'll be back soon," and so she would go on, and she would leave the oldest sister in charge.  Now, I don't say that my oldest sister was always the best judge to leave that responsibility, because I think we got some good tannings on what stories she would tell, but it didn't matter.  It taught us one thing, to respect authority.  And I believe that if you take children through the process of being thoughtful, and forgiving and not questionable about everything, I think you'd have a better child.  I really do, because I, I think people who learn to like people when they were--to love people when they are coming up, most likely when they get older they will learn to love and still love them.
Story_ID: 16540
Speaker 1: I guess I must have been about twelve--must have been about maybe ten or eleven because my father [Joseph Patterson] died when I was between twelve and thirteen, but anyway this was an odd situation.  Somebody had done something--I don't know what it--to this day I don't know what it was.  But a group of people were rooming out here in Magnolia Grove [Gulfport, Mississippi], I guess about ten or twelve families out here at that time.  All of them had five or six children.  And we had a little beginners school in the church.  That's that same building right there now.  That's the church building and we would--just the biggest ones would take the little ones in the morning and go on down there and we'd learn to sing songs and to learn poems and all that kind of stuff.  That's what we did, and, and we just went on and did as you were told and did the best you can and that was the first time going through a certain development of your mind, of how you would like to see things done, and you began to listen to what other folks say, and affected by, by your surroundings.  I think we are very affected by the--"Gee, I wish I didn't have to fix this like this.  I'm going to try to change it," and your mind was, you know, wanting to go.  And, so, something had happened and that evening I guess when all the men were coming, coming home--my daddy always had a horse and a wagon and a buggy.  So he would pick up the people who didn't have a--and bring them on out here.  And Mr. William, Mr. Corner went over here, Mr. Smith over here, and Mr. over here and that--home.  So that evening they come and--telling my daddy that the [Ku Klux] Klan was going to--well, we didn't know what the Klan--what they mean the Klan?  So, the Klan is going to ride because of so-and-so happened to so-and-so.  It could have been something very serious--it could have been--not been anything, but that was my first time and my father was known for his temper.  Yes sir, and his mouth.  They say I have one just like him.  He would say some bad words and he would--could say some.  So he told them--and he was--he was a home person, and, and it wasn't difficult to get those men and the older boys of this neighborhood together.  Some of them had had experiences of very racial--but you see it was hard--it was harder to have a kind of a racial hatred in a way, in certain groups because we were so interdependent, and we were interdependent to the extent that the one doctor, he could not--he would not refuse if he had any--he would not refuse, Dr. Donald I think, or whatever his name was--he would not refuse.  I remember he gave us the first, vaccinations--when they were talking about vaccin-, I don't know what it was smallpox, measles or something, but all of those things after--and then we heard about the Klan--say, the Klan is going to make a march, my father said to us, "I don't want you to go out.  Ida [Coffye], don't you let them children go out tomorrow to school or what--the ABC school or whatever it was."  Say, "Don't let the kids go--don't let those children go out there."  So, she said, "Alright."  So far as--she might have said something else to him, but as far as we knew that was it.  So the next evening, the rumor is that the Klan's gonna make a raid.  They are gonna come through and burn people's house and do this, and do that.  Well, we just said, "We going home and tell daddy.  He'll take care of that."  And sure enough we went home and daddy was already prepared for it, 'cause it was some unusual to see him home before late in the evening 'cause he'd get--he'd finish work until almost dark and then get in his wagon and pick up his other friends and come on home.  And he worked right out there at, at--where you gave the--did you give the interview this morning at St. Mark [Episcopal Church, Gulfport, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yesterday.
Speaker 1: Yesterday. Well, right at that big field across from there.  That's where my daddy's--my daddy's farm land and that's where we'd go.  All the kids would be out there picking up peanuts or turning over potatoes or whatever it was.  So anyway, they, they said they was going do, and my mother was more emotions, she was just all to pieces and she was talking to him because she was thinking about him getting hurt.  She wasn't thinking about the Klan.  "I don't want you to--sit down, you don't know--!"  Daddy got his gun.  And got on our fence, cause everybody had to face his fence.  And, he--and my mother just had conniptions.  She went over to some friends--the same Hewes family now that lives right on the corner--she went over there, and she told them, she said, "I can't do a thing with him."  Said, "He's just craz-, what he'd do if those people come in here marching."  He said, "Oh well."  Did you ever know--?  No you wouldn't--I guess--Finley B. Hewes is the one.  His daddy was the first, postman of this town.  So he went to--and he and my daddy were really, real good friends.  If black folks and white folks can be good friends, I don't know, I can't say that.  I hope ya'll don't record that, you'd better cut it. (laughs) So anyway he said, "I'm going to stay here--and say he told him--and then the word got on the beach you know--and two or three times, so Mr. Hewes brought over a group of people and he asked him, "What's the matter--?"  Say, "What in the world is wrong with you all over here?"  He said, he says, "Not a thing wrong with us."  Say, "There's a rumor that they gonna blow--the Klan is gonna come over here and do this and that."  And he said, "I'm not saying what they gonna do or what they not gonna do, but I am telling you--," he say, "If one start--even start across that fence, that's gonna be my first one--," and said, "--thereafter, I'll get as many as I can, 'cause I don't care about going."  He said, "I'm not running with my children and wife no place."  And I guess Mr. Finley B. went on back and had a meeting and that probably settled it.
Speaker 2: So, they didn't come.
Speaker 1: They never come and I never heard any more trouble or even mention of Klans until I came home--when I retired and came home.  They, they were about to--who was the mayor then?  Youree (ph.), was the mayor then, a little short guy--I'm talking about Gulfport here.  I'm coming home.  My sister's ill and it's just the two of us now.  So I came home and I must have been--then you want to--what happened with the Klan then?
Speaker 2: No, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the Klan, so we--they were doing an interracial religious thing and all and everybody is--everybody's studied how to get along and all kind of racial meetings.  You know, it was in that area, and, your grandma and your grandpa and all that  kind--just as much history as people could crowd in at that--right after the Civil Rights Movement, people moving this and moving like this, everything was--you know how it was.  No, no you might not have been old enough to remember.  Anyway, I came home and everybody is talking about the interracial--going to other's people's church and some times they wouldn't let them in and all that basic stuff, you know it was the area when a lot of that was going on and it was about this time of year because they celebrate this monument they have that day, at the county building downtown Gulfport.  And, they, they were going to so--and when we went to that meeting, I said, "Well what are we going to do about this Klan report here?"  Someone said, "The Klan is going to march on Sunday evening from so-and-so."  I said, "Well--." they were just beginning to talk about the casinos, that what they were going to open Gulfport up to the casinos and this, this was going to happen and all that.  So they said, "Well I don't know we just should talk with the mayor.  So they talked with [Gerald] Blessey, the mayor of Biloxi [Mississippi] and he said, "I have already told them, so you don't need to come to me."  Said, "They are not going to march in Gulfport.  I've told all about the police force, blah, blah.  They are not going to march in Gulfport and Biloxi."  So all right, the next day, we said, "We'll call a meeting and we are going to ask Hewitt Youree," about this and what he's going to do.  Well some--a lot of them got cold feet and didn't want to go. They said, "You know that guy's a racist from his heart and you know, so-and-so is down there and he's a racist from his heart."  Well I said, "We just gonna have to deal with the racists."  Well, my sister just reminded me of my mother. (laughs)  She was just torn to pieces.  Because she never had any problem--you know, she had the basic things, but she didn't think too much of it.  When you don't have to depend on it, that's a different story.  So, I said, "No, no, no, not going--," I said, "I'm going to go down to Youree if I have to go there myself," and that's where I went, by myself.
Speaker 2: Okay, what do you---?
Speaker 1: And they didn't--didn't have (unclear). I said, "You, you gonna have to think fast," I said--.
Speaker 2: You, you met with the mayor by yourself?
Speaker 1: By myself.  And we had a gathering and so he said, "You know, a gathering is good, anytime we need to have as many public gatherings for the sake of the children to see how parents get along that we do talk to people, and we not gonna--and you're not going to turn black, and we are not going to eat you up, so you just gonna have to accept us."  You know, we went through all that for the sake of a little fun.  And then, I went home, my sister said, "Well, if they come in and burn up the house, just don't say nothing to me."  I said, "Well if one--if the Movement is not worth one burning of a house, then let's just forget it."  So, it's, it's--you can get that issue of the paper.
Story_ID: 16541
Speaker 1: Who was the chief then?  Was it Payne or Joe?  I think Joe Price--when I first met Joe Price, and several of them was said, "We're, we're with you."  Said, "We're--," and on the verge of something like this opening up a (unclear) you don't want to come in this kind of atmosphere.  So that ended that, and that Sunday we had a big interracial there in Jones Park right there on the beach.  We had the Catholics, the Jews, the Blacks, the Chinese, the Japanese, we had the whole thing.  It was beautiful, and they did a big coverage of it.  The lady whose in there, she, she's--Katie--Kate--what is her name? Katie?  You know the woman who works in there for the Sun Herald?
Speaker 2: [Kathleen] 'Kat' Bergeron.
Speaker 1: Kat?  She could give you copies of that and, and I was there.
Story_ID: 16542
Speaker 1: I want to go back to when you  were in school.  Can you--let's talk about your education.
Speaker 2: Okay, we had just at the beginning, I guess the usual primary stuff that was popular with these children at that time, and we went through it like nothing, you know, and then as we got--I think at the eighth grade was the big happening in Gulfport [Mississippi] for black kids, because you weren't going any farther than eight grade at that time.  But, I think the Tuskegee Institute [later Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama] of Education for the South had some kind of a program going and they were--it went to all the boards of education, I think throughout the South, south land and got pledges and things to make--because they claimed they didn't have any money, but that every child--they tried to have some ruling about every child going to get a basic education.  And, that would be to the twelfth grade.  And that's when we began to try to build schools and that's when that guy who gave so much to the, oh God, I his name escapes me.  He has--they have a corner in Chicago [Illinois] and Michigan where he has a--.
Speaker 1: [Julius] Rosenwald?
Speaker 2: Rosenwald, Rosenwald was giving a lot of money for the--for schools and it was supposed to be used predominately for the South and that was when we really began to be exposed to different things in advanced education, and they had a couple of junior colleges that came out there--of schools like--churches like the Presbyterian, United Methodist and, and that sort--and then we went on the upward trend, but now this, some of the worst--some of the more insulting things of not admitting to things like that, I had a lot of that in Chicago, night and day, up fighting to get on--to live on the North Shore and all that mess (laughs), and people going to jail.  That was just a big political thing and it was the--it finally broke some of the barriers, but not all and, of course, a lot of people's hearts you will never change, so you would--and then came on the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Well, let's go back to school.
Speaker 2: Well, my school, my schooling was--.
Speaker 1: When you were in school, who were the--what were you favorite subjects and who were your favorite teachers?
Speaker 2: My, my favorite subjects were math at the first because I had a, and history--stories like history and things they weren't too much--didn't bother me too much because they were no challenge to me.  All you had to do was read and remember.  See, when I was going to school there was--you read it and remember--when they said remember, they mean that you remember 1492 when such and such a condition--you did the whole history of whatever you had you gave it.  Remembered it, not look in the book, read it off of your mind.  If you didn't you stayed in that classroom until you learned it and I've heard teachers tell them, "You can stay, you can stay here in this fourth until you're twenty-five.  If I'm here you're not getting out of here until learn that paragraph or whatever," and she meant that.  She was--to her the education was a process--learning you got some books and things, "You got some things in these books you got to learn, so learn them.  That's, that's what I am here to see that you learn them.  You are gonna do it."  So that was the kind of teaching I had, but I would always be--I always wanted to be ahead of the teacher and ahead of the class and all because I, I liked to read, I spent time reading.  People gave me good books.  People gave me dictionaries and things like that.  So people were, people were always good to me.  That's what I always say to myself, I don't care what (unclear)--and I said, "Yes, people, people like me."  I said, "I don't know why."  I said, "I never have felt mistreated, never felt unloved and that, I just feel like they loved me, that's all."  And I'd be very--I know it would be hard at my age to tell me now you don't love me.  So, I've had the better of the whole mess. (laughs) But, it was rough.  It was very, very rough on certain--on, on people, 'cause as I told you I had my had mother's [Ida Coffye] baby sister--was with those people who left the South, Gulfport, Mississippi, in a box car just for the purpose of just getting away from here.
Speaker 1: Now, now what is the name of the school--your grade school--?
Speaker 2: It's called--well, we, we--they didn't have any--it was--this is a church thing right here.  That's come over to go to the, to the church to the school.
Speaker 1: So you didn't really have a formal name--?
Speaker 2: We didn't have no formal--didn't have a building, didn't have anything, we were going into the church.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We were having school in the church.  The church use to be where we had everything.
Speaker 1: Were the teachers paid by the church?
Speaker 2: No, the teachers, the teachers--well I'm sure the church gave us extra money to help her out, but, but we didn't have to pay anything, and then, a lot of the schools--a lot, lot of the churches around here--there was a Baptist church opened up an academy and some other--up in Handsboro [Mississippi], but things like a neighborhood academies, you know one-room, one-room schools.
Speaker 1: Now, you, you went to high school at Thirty-Third [Avenue High School, Gulfport, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we, we finished high school.  We were would be--we had went--well we went--we took the test when we went in--we had--I don't know if they had to take it but we had to take it, and there was a man there from one of his schools in Texas.  I don't know if it's Texas A & M [Agricultural and Mechanical University, College Station, Texas], but Texas was known to be a very highly educated African American constituency and who had Fisk [University, Nashville, Tennessee], but not Fisk, but yeah, and those places.
Speaker 1: Texas Southern [University, Houston, Texas] and Prairie View [Agricultural and Mechanical University, Prairie View, Texas]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Prairie View and the other one opposite Prairie View.  Those schools were coming right along and people were just rushing to get their children in there.
Speaker 1: Now, now, wait now, this is--I wanna to go back to your, your life in high school--,
Speaker 2: And I--.
Speaker 1: --before we get out of it.
Speaker 2: Well, we were--in, in--.
Speaker 1: Thirty-Third,  ma'am, at Thirty-Third Street [sic, Avenue] High School?  Is that what it is?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: What, kinds of things did you there when you were in high school?
Speaker 2: Well, when I was in--when--.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in activities there or?
Speaker 2: Yes, we all--we were very much involved and our first experience of really having a class relationship and what a real classroom would be like.  We had it at that school, and I showed it to all those teachers and things this morning.  And we had like football games, they started having teams, football teams.  I played basketball.  This was maybe like in tenth or eleventh grade, and then after that I was gone.  After '29 [1929], I left, I left Gulfport.  But I left Gulfport [Mississippi] because this Presbyterian Board of Education gave me that opportunity to leave and took care of expense, and I went to the school and was accepted, and worked there year around.
Story_ID: 16543
Speaker 1: You graduated from Thirty-Third [Avenue High School, Gulfport, Mississippi]--,
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --in 1929.
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Right.  Okay.  Well--.
Speaker 2: Then I went to Arkansas.  Arkadelphia, Arkansas.  And you know Arkadelphia was known as the college town of Arkansas, and it was right at the foot of Hot Springs [Arkansas], and we had a great time but I was there the year round.  I only got off two weeks to come visit my family.
Speaker 1: You were working for the Presbyterian Church?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  It--you weren't getting any money but you were fulfilling a position that was needed, if you had the ability to do it.  Like if that--you taught the small--that family might--that community family may not have anything for a fourth grade or a fifth grade level and you came to that school, that academy [Arkadelphia Academy, later Arkadelphia-Cotton Plant Academy] and got that training.  But now in the next couple of years the state [of Arkansas] began to, you know, issue money, and more money and pay teachers and things of that sort.
Speaker 1: So, I'm sorry, I, I don't understand it.  Were you there to teach or there as a student?  Which one?
Speaker 2: I was a work student.  You talking about Arkansas?
Speaker 1: Yeah
Speaker 2: Yeah, as a work student.
Speaker 1: What was the name of the school?
Speaker 2: Arkadelphia Academy.  Did you see the picture--did you see the--I have one of the four flyers there.
Speaker 1: We'll, we'll look at that later.
Speaker 2: Okay,  well I just wanna know it, it was really neat--that's what it was.
Speaker 1: Arkadelphia Academy.
Speaker 2: That's right, and see this--Arkadelphia Academy was the Presbyterian and the Baptist's might have had one, and the Methodists and as the economy was getting high-, you know, higher and higher, they got more books, more teachers and--.
Speaker 1: So you studied education there basically, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, basic education I studied, right. That was it.  That was absolutely it.
Speaker 1: And so--.
Speaker 2: But, now remember a lot of universities and other places going along very well, but I'm just speaking along the [Mississippi] Coast.  I think Biloxi [Mississippi] was supposed to have the best high school for kids from this area.
Speaker 1: So, how long were you in Arkadelphia?
Speaker 2: I was in Arkadelphia until a year before [attack on] Pearl Harbor [Hawaii], and Pearl Harbor you said was 1941.  So, it must have been 1940.  I stayed there from--I says ten years.  But it was a busy, it was a busy time, because they built, they rebuilt a new school while we were there--built a new [Julius] Rosenwald, had a Rosenwald School given to them.  The Presbyterians extended our school with a--like a preparatory course for high--for college for those who hadn't had a chance to do certain kinds of things.  I stayed all summer taking them around to different--two weeks at all the Presbyterian churches and an exposure to different cities, like we'd go out to Oklahoma City [Oklahoma] and there we met with the Indian population and got the history of--what's the name of the place in Oklahoma?  Well, just historical things, that they see something that could touch and feel and the Presbyterian--different people gave this--these amounts of money to help these children.  And I think we were one of the first groups around there that had a bus--a school bus and we went rolling along.  So, I had a--I had pretty good--should have been better--I should have had the exposure of doing certain things, but you could learn it but you couldn't practice it.
Story_ID: 16544
Speaker 1: Do you remember the newspapers in those days?  Did, did you all get--did you get the 'Chicago [Illinois] Defender'--?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Oh yeah, we got those, yeah.
Speaker 1: --'Pittsburgh [Pennsylvania] Courier', the 'Negro World'--?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Now, it was similar along the line of--I don't know what it was, but they did have some problems with, with the 'Pittsburgh Courier'.  They didn't want it to be published in here.  They didn't want it to be delivered.  Who--what was the guy head of the Pittsburgh Courier?
Speaker 1: Robert [Lee] Vann?
Speaker 2: Maybe that's who is was, because that was the one--I don't think we had too much trouble with the 'Defender', unless it was not during my time.  But I do know that they did have some feelings about certain articles, but personally in my age group people, people were able to go to various pretty good high schools and then into pretty good colleges because we had some excellent college work going on at that time.
Story_ID: 16545
Speaker 1: At that time I went to Philander [Smith College, Little Rock, Arkansas], my in-, into--if I had any--at that time they would give you, just like as if you had a Masters and you wanted to get a Ph.D., they would give you a certain project, and you did this project which you took you a year, year and a half and did every--took all the exposure at your--they knew it would not be a quick thing, but they know it would mean a lot to you and may have give you six weeks off to go to some university and study in certain courses and what have you.  I think it was pretty good because some excellent people came--in fact our biggest educators came out through that system.
Speaker 2: Now, now you you said you went to Philander Smith?
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Where's that?
Speaker 1: That's in Little Rock [Arkansas].
Speaker 2: Little Rock?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that was a Methodist school, United Methodist.
Speaker 2: Now what did you study there?
Speaker 1: Chemistry.
Speaker 2: Chemistry?
Speaker 1: Yeah.  General chemistry.  Not just--when I went to Damen [sic, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, Illinois] it was industrial, industrial setting and you had what we call--what was and still is, a great resource thing there for different chemicals--.
Speaker 2: Now, Damen.  Where is Damen and how do you spell that?
Speaker 1: D-A-M-E-N.  Right there on 35th [Street] and State [Street].  Right, 35th and--.
Speaker 2: That's in Chicago [Illinois]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, that in Chicago.
Speaker 2: We were in Arkansas.  I (unclear).
Speaker 1: No, that's where--when I went over to Arkansas that, that was the school that I went to when I left--.
Speaker 2: Don't, don't move, move me too fast!
Speaker 1: Oh, I'm sorry.  I've, I've been accused of that so don't feel--I don't feel anything about it.  My mind leaves my body sometimes and I just be going--doing one thing and thinking another.
Speaker 2: Okay, now.  Now, after you went to Philander Smith and studied chemistry--.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Was that about the time you went to Chicago after that?
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: So why did you come to Chicago?  What was the--?
Speaker 1: Just friends, all my classmates were there.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: All my friends were there and my family was--some family was there.  At this time in my life, I'd lost my mother and there were just sisters and brothers and, I felt I'd be just as well there as any place else.  And it sounds so exciting when people are telling you all the things they got to do and the money they could make and so, I said, "Gee, maybe that's a good place for me."  And when I went--when I first went to Chicago it just--every weekend was just like old home.  Everybody (laughs) from down in Mississippi--you met a lot of people that you knew--some in school, past family--.
Speaker 2: Did, did many people stay here? (laughs)
Speaker 1: Not many.
Speaker 2: Not--okay.
Speaker 1: Not many.  Not many, the older people who had homes, and lot--a lot you can see how many--I bet there right today if you were to counts tickets--a real good statistical thing of central Gulfport [Mississippi], which was out in that area where you, where you do doctor--did you Dr. Mason over here in Gulfport, well you did it in a Methodist church.  Well, that was just that group.  You've met Reverend Beasley I'm sure, the pastor the church.  Alright, Reverend Beasley's age group, his parents feel with--he would have a much better secure feeling for an education to become a theologian than his whole--in his lifetime.  That would be the group.  Then his work would be tops among the African Americans where they would have money to pay their way and afford a good education.
Story_ID: 16546
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about, finally the oysters (laughs) and the seafood.
Speaker 2: The seafood.
Speaker 1: Briefly talk about--.
Speaker 2: Well, you see they had this--I use the term "virgin", this is virgin territory no one had done anything much around here so commercializing on seafood, except that I think the Italian families.  I know they had done a lot, but beyond that I don't know.  But I would--what I talk--tell the children--I sometimes take them to the beach, I show them how that we use to get oysters, and so they just can't hardly believe it, you know.  Oysters come in the bed and you're picking this--like a reef, you pick it up, big lot, a big thing of oysters--look like shells and you take them to the shore and you have a special knife and you open them and you get the oyster out there--out of that shell unless you want to eat the oyster raw on the half shell.  So, then, then if you take them out and you take off all of those big ones on the outside then you can't go any further in a certain case, you have to put that reef back into the water so that they'll get ready for the next, next staff.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you never eat all of them, you eat the big ones and then you put the (simultaneously)--.
Speaker 2: If you like, yeah, if you like or you know, its just a novelty knowing how to eat a raw oyster and have your hot stuff, and your pepper and everything.  That's the way they can tell if you're from the Mississippi Coast.  When they give you seafood, if you say, "Do you have any hot stuff around."  Say, "What do you mean hot stuff?"  "Some pepper sauce--Tabasco."  That's our favorite brand, Tabasco sauce. (laughs) So, then they give you Tabasco and they know you're from here because most people don't ruin the thing with Tabasco and all that hot pepper.  But we are so off we just do anything them rights down in Gulfport, Mississippi.
Story_ID: 16547
Speaker 1: Let's talk about when you came to Chicago [Illinois].  Let's talk about Chicago.  So, so when you got to Chicago you saw a lot of people you already knew.
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: And, and--.
Speaker 2: I had a lot of relatives and a lot of  friends and jobs were plentiful.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Okay.  So, so your impression of Chicago was favorable compared to the [Mississippi] Coast here or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, compared to the Coast, but it was not favorable to me because people were--it was just a big fun town.  Just a big party.  Just a big fun town, you know, from where I was, but I found it was--had all kinds of  places where you get to go to special school, and if you were interested in a subject you'd get counseling and people were very helpful, and I--when went for this job, you know, you could read the jobs in the paper and you could go there--now you got turned down sometime, sometime I was too old, but it--you know, sometime I was too young, you know.  "Oh, you're too young, you can't handle whatever."  "Oh, we wanted someone a little more mature."  "You're alright, Miss, but we don't think we better use you in that."  And they would have all kind of reasons for not employing you at certain places.
Speaker 1: You were about thirty-one or thirty-two then?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  They, they would, you know, they would try to think up a difference for management.  So, finally after we got--people began to explain to me and said, "Look girl, don't pay attention to that," said, "When they tell you that, say, 'Who's the manager of this store?  I'd like to talk with him and see what I can--see what he can do for me cause I need a job.'"  Sometimes that would be all it would take, and sometimes it would take marching and everything else, and I don't know if they even stop today.  But that's a, that's a--was a hard pill to swallow because you would--you were so sure of getting a darn good job, but you didn't get a darn good one right off.  It's just like it is now, you get a good one if you're over-prepared, over-dependable and want to get the work, then you can get it.
Speaker 1: And, so, so where did you work when you first came to Chicago?
Speaker 2: When I first came to Chicago--you ever hear of Riverview Park?
Speaker 1: Yes, a big amusement park.
Speaker 2: A big amusement--a huge one, yeah.  The man who owned that park was name--was George Schmidt, and it was just he, his wife and one son, and they lived on Damen Avenue right off of Broadway [Street], and they had been there I guess as long as they wanted to be.  He was a wonderful, wonderful man and he owned--they owned this Riverview Park and then there was one other man who's--Glabman (ph.).  Did you hear, hear Glabman Wholesale Furniture up in Mishawaka, Indiana?  You ever been to Mishawaka?  I will never forget that name, Mishawaka, and those were my most experiences of trying to get into the kind of work that I was going to continue my education and, George Schmidt, well he lived in Illinois.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you do at Riverview Park?
Speaker 2: This is what I am (unclear).  They had year round work at Riverview, you know, you could do a lot of different things.  Not anything--you could do clerical work, you could give ideas, you could, you know, just go out and go to different kind of rides and give your opinion--that kind of thing.  And, his wife was,  was losing her--she had some kind of disease at that time 'cause she was going blind and we made, we made good friends cause I put in a lot of time with her, and she helped me kind of open doors for doing different things to get in, because it was not easy to get into the--for women at that time and being an African American.  The first job I had was up on Damen--I mean the first chance of going to school was up on Damen.  And, I was the only color--or member there.  So, the guy who was teaching, he wasn't so much on my being there.  He was furious because he was mad with everybody in Germany, and he takes--he would take some of it out on the student at some time.  But I learned a lot of tricks too, so finally, all I wanted him to do was just let me stay in that class.  I'd do the rest.  So, I came out through that and after that I didn't have any more trouble, because they had industrial chemistry classes going on downtown on Michigan [Avenue]--they had them both way west and Apollo Works--I worked there for a long time and that was west.  And if you were interested, it would be you and the chief chemist and that was your level which was much easier than going through the whole range of (unclear) trying to find the person you'd think would be the most--but you have to be dependable.  If you don't you lose too much money for the company.
Speaker 1: So, who did you work for as a chemist?
Speaker 2: His name, his name was Sefrantic, [Joseph] Joe Sefrantic (ph.) was his name.  He was a--he was--.
Speaker 1: Can you spell that?
Speaker 2: I don't know.
Speaker 1: Don't know? (laughs)
Speaker 2: How dare you!  (Laughs).  (Laughs).
Speaker 1: Just about to tell you,  I could never spell his name when I was working there with him every day.
Speaker 2: Can you say it again slower?
Speaker 1: His name was Joseph Sefrantic and he was a--he was Jewish, but he--I think he was a Polish--would they have (unclear) Polish Jew or something like that, but this is what he was.  He was a--he was--I think he's still working at Chicago Medical School [later the Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois] now.  He wasn't as old, as old as I was at that time.  But he was working for his doctorate and he had a, a thesis he was going to do.  And this opened the doors for you to get a chance to get in and get a lot of experience, and I didn't mind doing the extra time and all, you know, you know, I was just--I had to get an end point there someplace and I had--I was just lucky the Lord blessed me.  I'm going to take the Lord blessing me, you can call it luck.
Speaker 2: Okay, so--.
Speaker 1: And that--I went through all that and I got to the job and worked all through the war, for Doehler-Jarvis Die Casting Company--supervisor of a shift as a Industrial Chemist, and I have those pictures too, and  it was right out, right off of Western [Avenue] on Forty-Third [Street] over there where they use to have a big railroad--wheel thing, where they made train--fixed train wheels, and it was very popular and so I think it's--if, if it's not Clearing it's Nearing, an areas of there where they call Clearing, Illinois where industry, all kinds of factories and things were over there.
Speaker 2: Deering?
Speaker 1: Deering?  Maybe it is Deering [sic, Clearing].
Speaker 2: Southwest side?
Speaker 1: It is on the Southwest side.  That's right and, there was a Western it was not close to McCormick, but not too far from the big McCormick thing that use to be there, cause I had a offer to work with them also, but it--the lifting was too heavy there, as the--the war grew on why they were hiring women in all of those areas.
Speaker 2: I was going to ask you if there are any, any other black women that you knew that, that were chemists, you know?
Speaker 1: Oh, yes.  After a while we, we had several, yeah, we had several, and now it's just as nothing, there are a lot of people.  Well it's--you don't have that heavy, you know, at first you'd have a lot of heavy working because they would have certain--just depends upon what's--what was going down, the size and everything else.  So you had to have an interest and you knew if somebody with some experience would give you some guidance in doing because most of the stuff was research that was going to hopefully get into an industrial payoff thing, and that's was what the people--that's what Doehler was looking for.
Speaker 2: So, do you any interesting stories about the job, about the--about being a chemist in Chicago?
Speaker 1: No stories.  Just fun, lots of fun.  It was, it was really nice.
Story_ID: 16548
Speaker 1: You worked with nice people?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked with--I don't know if they were nice or not, they were nice to me so that's all I tried to cover.  I wasn't working in the Civil Rights Movement then, I was working and--to try to make a living. (laughs), no I did--but, they did a lot in the Movement.  Chicago Medical School [later the Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois] did a lot in the in the Movement.
Speaker 1: In the Civil Rights Movement?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they were one of the first that began to take black students in the medical department.  They did an excellent job in there and then they--in addition to opening their doors, they had some special paramedics that I think they still use now, pre-medics.  That's what it is, pre-medics.  They had some special pre-medics that was very important for students who came from certain places, certain backgrounds which would make it very difficult and perhaps at that time, they had four years, but now I don't think they have four years, before you can go to your practice or something.  But at that time they had four years, and now they can go there and do three and take that first year up in some other kind of more like technical stuff in the field.  And then they have so much modern equipment and modern computions.  Like it use to take you forever to get complete blood, now you're able to get it in ten minutes, sometimes less.  So, that, that is what was you see now, but it's interesting to see how it is changed, how it is changed.
Speaker 1: Now, a lot of what you've done in your life has been civic activity or, or activity?  So how did you get involved in that kind of activity in Chicago?  I mean did you, did you--?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't if there's a place that would be better to find than in Chicago.  Chicago has such a level of personality--believe it--you just can't hardly believe it.  There's so much--such a level of everything in Chicago.  Well, maybe it's just my interpretation, but just levels and levels.
Speaker 1: Did you know some of the, politicians and activists in those days, like did you know William Dawson or did you know of him or--?
Speaker 2: I knew Danny Davis real well.  Real well.  I knew--.
Speaker 1: He's now a [U.S.] Congressman.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Did you ever know of that priest they called Father Jenks (ph.), the 'Rebel Priest' or something?  I worked with him.  We (unclear) a lot of projects together.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, there were some very, very rare young--only thing those guys and those women who came down from, the east out of the east, they were so young and so ambitious you had to be very careful 'cause they would've turned the United States upside down and burn it on both sides.  They were very, very into things and I had never seen such things and didn't believe it was true--.
Speaker 1: Now what, what are--,
Speaker 2: I'm talking about the--you said my experiences working with the civil--you know, working with people who were--.
Speaker 1: --What time period are we talking about?
Speaker 2: We are talking about after the war when they were going back to, to the regular--what do you call it?
Speaker 1: After World War II?
Speaker 2: Yeah, what do you call that?
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, after World War I--World War II, that's right, excuse me.
Speaker 1: Cold War days?
Speaker 2: Yes, Cold War days, and of course they had that terrible attitude and that terrible thing about that war in Vietnam.  That was a terrible thing we lived through that, and we knew so many people personal and  that was a rough time.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me how did you, how did you get involved in community activism?  I mean, tell me the first time you got involved in--.
Speaker 2: I guess I was always an activist, and always saw things that--but.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Tell me some of the things--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Officially, I was the first, the first thing I, I think it's the first time I was really, really got involved into it was when they were doing the drive for the children who were--had sickle cell [anemia].  See I was working over there and I had no idea--.
Speaker 1: This was in the '70s [1970s]--early '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, this was the sickle cell.  That was my first--I was--what was I doing at the time?  I can't even remember what I was doing at the time (unclear), but whatever I was doing this just hit me as something, I said, "This must not be true," and there were several of my friends and we talked just like we talking now, and they gave us--asked me did I--because there were a group of people they called the 'Rebel Priests' use to come down there from up there in Oak Park [Illinois] or some place and going West and every Saturday we would give it to kids, you know, from around there and we really got to know a lot of them, any number of them.  Then there was someone who owned a building, right next to the building where I was living, he gave us the use of that basement of that building for the project and--to collect--at that time they collected the urine, they didn't do the blood, and this was all sickle--all of that lead poisoning and sickle cell that what we (unclear).
Speaker 1: What is this for testing?
Speaker 2: Yeah, all testing.  And what was the interesting when you began to look around and you found how many kids were suffering from this thing and then to find out that when you really began to go into those homes and test, what they were living with.  It kind of changed your idea.  You say, "My God, I can do something for this right here under my feet," and that was living on--that was when I was living on the West Side over there on--you know where Madison [Street] where that big park on the West Side what's the name of it?
Speaker 1: Central Park?
Speaker 2: No, no, no.  Where is the--?
Speaker 1: Garfield Park?
Speaker 2: Garfield Park.  You know that hotel--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) The golden dome?
Speaker 2: You had the golden dome, you know that, that famous hotel where the boxers use to stop over on Madison and something?  The, the--what do you call it--the boxer Joe Louis use to be over there when he was getting ready for a fight.
Speaker 1: Was it--?
Speaker 2: Midway, Midway Hotel, that was the name of it.  Anyway, that was where I first became in, you know, in--really involved with the whole thing.  The picture came from the health and that was, that was what we launched it on.  On the health, the health of the children, and in the process of doing (unclear) I discovered so many other things that were going on and the services were needed to give the young parents some guidance and especially the smaller children.  It was terrible, you wouldn't believe it existed in a city.  So, that, that's what--and I haven't got out of it to this day.
Speaker 1: Now, now you work with Nancy Jeffers--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, Nancy, I know her very well and what was that boy's name, I think he went over to--Republican now, he took her place.  Because someone had given him quite a bit of property and money and stuff like that, I think.
Speaker 1: I'm not sure.
Speaker 2: No, no you wouldn't, you wouldn't know him (unclear), but it's beautiful now, how they cleaned up the West Side.
Speaker 1: There's still a lot of work to be done.
Speaker 2: Well, I imagine it is.  But right there at Damen and--where the hospital areas stop, you know the University [of Illinois at Chicago] and all that stuff, it's really, really come a long way.
Speaker 1: Oh yeah.
Speaker 2: But like you said, there's still a lot to be done.
Speaker 1: So what are some of the other organizations you worked with on the West Side?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I worked with everything that was there.  I worked with the housing, we got that--let me see--we got a big donation from the Sears Foundation when I was Chairperson for Sears (pauses)--board over on the West Side.  We had--they gave us--how many years was it?  So many years they gave a certain amount $75,000 and like that--I have that picture too and the document and all, things like that and I just kind of gone from one thing to the other.  You know I retired from Chicago Medical School.
Speaker 1: And still, still kept working on things, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I worked on things.  You know how they want you to worked on things, but when I came home [to Gulfport, Mississippi] I had been--it's just like starting all over again.
Speaker 1: Well, let's not get you home yet.  I want to talk about [Chicago Mayor] Harold Washington.
Speaker 2: Oh, well yeah, Harold--but you see my cousin--I told you Al Raby, you know he's a very good friend to, to.
Speaker 1: Al Raby is one of the legendary civil rights figures in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, that's my first cousin.
Speaker 1: He was the one that brought Dr. [Martin Luther] King to Chicago.
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right he's the one that brought Dr. King and I was in--.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was into everything that was going on with the Civil Rights Movement.
Speaker 1: Were you involved in Operation PUSH?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.  I was with--I was a good friend of Dr. King's and [Rev.] Jesse [Jackson] and that preacher.  We stayed up all night trying to keep them--not to divide but they did it anyway.
Speaker 1: Not to do what now, I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: You know when Dr. King passed, everything--they assumed that the power would go to [Ralph] Abernathy.  Well--and Jesse would remain in second player and let him have a couple of years and it would a nicer quiet thing, and then Jesse was much younger and probably could have carried them better and faster, but he didn't and they kind of split up the group and some very good people just--.
Speaker 1: Split up the Southern Christian Leadership Conference?
Speaker 2: That's right, that's right, and some of them just, just stopped.  Just stopped giving--and that changed (unclear), and Jesse changed his aspect of, you know, leadership and everything else so--but I was never unofficial or nothing, I would--there would be a project in a certain area they would ask me to take and I would take it.  Mostly, it's been voter registration.
Story_ID: 16549
Speaker 1: Now, were you involved in the big voter registration campaign for Harold Washington?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I have that whole thing, that whole thing.  I have the picture (unclear) it was quite a thing, and , because so many people were so anxious for him to be the Mayor of the city [of Chicago, Illinois].
Speaker 1: Did you think he had a chance when he started?
Speaker 2: Well, I knew if he ever got certain people behind him he wouldn't, he couldn't miss it, but he wouldn't take it unless he got what he wanted before he even took (laughter) the nomination the first year, the first time around he wouldn't accept it.
Speaker 1: Well, what did he want?
Speaker 2: Well, I don't know what he wanted but whatever he wanted he didn't--they said--you know his theme was 'We want Harold'.  So he said, "Okay, this is what you have to do to get Harold," and those that  couldn't see him getting it, he just wouldn't put his name in the ring.  But this time I don't know who it was, see I wasn't that close to them.  I wasn't that close to the inner circle I was just out there working, they would give you a certain report to bring it on if they asked you to, and then that's when they gave me use that building down State [Street] and Twelfth [Street].  I think--some reason--it was a big building, but  it was a lot of work but you learned a lot and learned a lot about people.
Speaker 1: Did you attend the Plebiscites thing they had in the city, they had a couple of Plebiscites to choose a candidate before they choose him--Washington.
Speaker 2: No, I didn't.
Speaker 1: Do you remember those?
Speaker 2: I know what you are talking about, but I never attended that because we had--my, my area of work was more or less the YWCA [Young Women's Christian Association] and that who they had paid for the usage of the and if we get all those ladies out we would have a good--so that's what we did (unclear).
Speaker 1: (Unclear) turned out all the ladies from the YWCA?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, they had a good system of telling what percentage of votes you gonna get and who is going to really come out there and do what they are supposed to do.  That's the, that's campaigning, you know.  Yeah.
Speaker 1: Is there anything about, else about Chicago that's a highlight that you want to talk about?  That we haven't talked about?
Speaker 2: Oh, I don't know, I been to Chicago in what, about a year--did I go last year or the year before last?  Well, there are a lot of things that I'd like to say.  When I went to the Loop the last time I was in Chicago I couldn't believe my eyes.  Not for good but, but (unclear) rundown--had all those sleepers in the park and on State Street and all this and, "What's happened here?"  (Laughs).  But I--when I went back, I went on the West Side only I didn't get a chance to go on downtown.  But they said--and I went to the library and I think that's a very, very good one--that's what thrill is.
Speaker 1: The new library?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I went to the library--Harold Washington Library and it's beautiful, wonderful.
Story_ID: 16550
Speaker 1: Now when did you come back to --?
Speaker 2: Gulfport [Mississippi]?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: I came back to Gulfport--I been here about ten years, ten or twelve years.
Speaker 1: Why did you come back?
Speaker 2: It's just down to the two of us, my sister and all of a sudden she discovered that she can't trust nobody but me. (laughs)
Speaker 1: All of a sudden?
Speaker 2: (Laughs) All of a sudden.  So I came and stayed.  She lasted about six years longer after I got there and well she just wanted somebody to be with her all the time.  We both had always been very independent livers you know, but I came because she--I knew she'd knew I would come, she didn't have to put on all the act, and she went out just as she wished.  She said, "Oh, I don't want to be sick a day."  She said, "Lord, I want you to take me when you're ready."  She died coming out of the doctor's door.  She stood there just a minute and argued with him, come on out and said, "Well, I think this is it," and she was gone. So, it's just--you have faith, and she (unclear).
Story_ID: 16551
Speaker 1: You have been involved in quite a number of activities here in Gulfport [Mississippi].
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Too much stuff.
Speaker 1: We just walked around a room and looked at tables full of awards and plaques and--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Isn't that ridiculous?
Speaker 1: --pictures of you in the paper and what--letters from the President, the Mayor of Gulfport, the Governor of Mississippi.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah. I'm telling you.
Speaker 1: What have you been doing down here?
Speaker 2: That's what I learned in Chicago [Illinois] when (unclear) said go right on to the top and tell them.  Said, "Just for your nerves--," sometime they give it to you, "--she might do something crazy, you better give her what she's asking for." (laughs)  You learn that there.  You learn, you learn that--when we got so we(unclear) about a thousand women, sent five hundred in, but [Mayor Richard J.] Daley when he was living, you know, he was saying, "Don't mess with my Chicago.  I don't care what you do, don't mess with Chicago.  Don't say anything about Chicago."  So we had been--so that morning we had--when he came up there, he asked, "How many would you let come in the day before?" So we told him, "Aw, about five hundred," 'cause he knew we wouldn't have five hundred.  But when five hundred was standing over there with a white glove on, and more--the rest of them were standing over there with a black glove on, took his breath.  He said, "Let them come in.  Who, who are those--?"
Speaker 1: This is--you all went to Daley's office?
Speaker 2: Yeah, that's when we were trying to get sanitation conditions about things on the West Side.  They were living--it was all housing and he said, "Come in, what's, what's this about?  What's all this about?"  And then he--you know he can--he was an actor.  He could put on something and call all those employees in there and rip them down, like he didn't know what they were doing. (laughs)  He'd blow them away like (unclear), because then Charlie Pitt (ph.) was there--oh boy, it was really funny.  But, but it all began with that that lead poisoning thing, you know.  It had lasted all down through the years and they had done the medical (unclear), yeah.
Speaker 1: (Simultaneously) Took a action--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously) Yeah, we took action, that's right.  Took action, and he never thought that we would that many little old folks out there.
Speaker 1: Now, tell me this,  have, have you ever had the community organized in training?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.  Okay.
Speaker 2: I had it out there in Chicago, inform-, not officially. (laughs)  Not in the classroom but you talking about on the job, and we had it good, because there are a lot of people who liked to work at my level.  They like to work where they have confidence and where they can express themselves and their ideas be accepted sometime, and when they are accepted, everybody jumps in and help them.  They have to have victories, you know.  They just--can't just work, work and never know what happened or whatever.  And that group of people on the West Side really were great with that.
Story_ID: 16552
Speaker 1: Can you give us some idea, just a quick run down on the number of different civic projects you worked on here--,
Speaker 2: (Simultaneously)  Gulfport [Mississippi]?
Speaker 1: --since you've been here?  I know there's a lot because I see all the awards over there.  So, just how many are there? (laughs)
Speaker 2: I guess about (pauses) maybe seven or eight.
Speaker 1: Seven or eight?  I think there are more awards in there than there are seven or eight projects.
Speaker 2: But there are some, some of those could be repetitious because--(unclear) an example of--I don't mean to say that in, in a wrong way.  I hope I shouldn't said that maybe.  (Pauses) Awards are alright.
Speaker 1: Okay, well--.
Speaker 2: The rewards are right--the principal and I guess everything behind them tends to make you feel very--because people come to me now and they say, "We're waiting for you to come to church.  We want you to come over, we want our children to see you, we want so and so," and well I just can't get that together, all I'll say.
Speaker 1: What have been some of your favorite projects here?
Speaker 2: This has been one--this has been my baby right here.  I have--.
Speaker 1: This is the Magnolia Community Center [Gulfport, Mississippi]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  This--because they can come here after school and have tutors and come here and have a lunch or snack and they can play some games too, games and they can play some outdoor games.  But we like the supervision for the whole thing to go in the right direction.  See, that's--I think that's one of our mistakes in America.  We throw so much money and we never know what happened to it and never try to--if I--if they get theirs they gone and they don't care about what happens.  That--that's failure within itself.
Story_ID: 16553
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what some of your hopes and concerns are for the black community?
Speaker 2: I--I'm family-oriented.  I, I just think that the families can be straightened out, if the husbands can work and know "This is my family, these are my children, I'm going to work and make a living." I'm a family person and I think that most of the things--if these things had been caught at the right time, and delivered the right punishment regardless, I think we'd have been way out in front.  I, I just almost could just take example after example, but I know so personally could have been so different.
Story_ID: 16554
Speaker 1: You're still working on projects, but can you tell me, what do you see as your legacy?
Speaker 2: Well, I think with--I would say maybe a couple cause black with a legacy, as far as my immediate family is concerned, I think we've done--I think that they've done pretty good.  They've heard it here and there and they have made wonderful things like the girl I told you from California this morning--who lives in California.  She has a history within itself of how she walked to school from here and how she didn't have books--anything--but she went on and she has this highest degree and whole thing of teaching principals and they--she goes all over giving instructions and examples and her books and all that kind of stuff on education.  You would think it wouldn't be necessary with all the modern communications and transportation and everything we have you think it would not be--but it's something lacking there that they--you have to come with all these--.
Speaker 1: Are you saying that you see your legacy as, as being able to help--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, to, to set a goal and don't stop until you reach it.  I mean set a goal and name it just one, two, three--when one is over, two over is over, and that's the end of ten years.  These must be finished with a meaning and every person connected a different--something thorough, something they can hold onto.
Speaker 1: So you believe in planning?
Speaker 2: I sure believe in planning and sticking to your plan.
Story_ID: 16555
Speaker 1: Do you think your, your parents would be proud of you?
Speaker 2: Oh, yes I know my parents would be proud of me, yeah, very--both of them, you know, I was very smart--my daddy and all let me know that very (unclear).  He always knew I could do it the best and I would do it the best because he always told me--there could be five around children, and he used to call me "Come here sister" and go do (unclear) and she, "He don't never ask me to do nothing." (laughs)
Speaker 1: And he didn't get a chance to see you become a chemist and --.
Speaker 2: No, he didn't live, he--I was about thirteen when he died. Uh-hmm, but there were so many things about him that will be lasting with me.  "Your word is your bond."  "If you can't do it, don't say you gonna do it."  If you say try, you say, "I'll try to do the best I can."
Speaker 1: You were kind of a 'Daddy's girl'.
Speaker 2: Yeah, and, and you have to live with so many things--and nowadays, ooh!
Story_ID: 16556
Speaker 1: How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I would like to be remembered as one--was be happiest to know that things are completed for good.
Speaker 1: You want to see things done.
Speaker 2: Well done!  And, and it makes the whole thing better.  We've got to do better. Because we have too many repeats of the things that we don't, we don't have to do, and you shouldn't do them and you know we shouldn't do it before we do it. Something should be in there from somewhere.  I don't know if it's from the church.  I don't know if it's from the school or from the family, but I am the family person so I think if it's properly dealt with in the family.
