Story_ID: 97910
Speaker 1: All right, my name is Larry Crowe.  I'm the interviewer today with The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your full name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Harry Darnell Boomer, D-A-R-N-E-L-L, B-O-O-M-E-R, as in "baby boomer."
Speaker 1: Okay.  Darnell is--
Speaker 2: Yes, D-A-R-N-E-L-L.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Middle name.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: September 4, 1953, Turkey, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Alright.
Speaker 2: In Sampson County, the largest county in the state.
Speaker 1: Now, is there a significance to the name, Turkey North Carolina?
Speaker 2: Not that I'm aware of.  You know, it's just where I was born and raised.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the butt of a lot of jokes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, I thought there might be a story behind it or something, but okay.
Speaker 2: There may be, I'm not familiar.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just glad to get out when I got out.
Speaker 1: Alright.  And what is your title and occupation?
Speaker 2: I am a TV anchor for the CBS affiliate in Cleveland, WOIO.  Also, for its sister station, WUAB My 43.  We're the first two stations in the country to do what is called the duopoly--two stations, same talent, same news, on both stations--the first two stations in the country to do that, back in the mid-nineties.
Speaker 1: Duopoly, huh?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 10, 2014.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Cleveland, Ohio, at my address, 6615 Quimby Avenue, Cleveland, 44103.
Story_ID: 97911
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, before we go into depth, there are five lightweight questions we always ask as sort of a warm-up, and they only require a short answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Chicken.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I love chicken--fried, baked, otherwise.  You know, yeah.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue.
Speaker 1: Alright.  A favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Springtime.  The earth comes back to life, and being a farmer, a former farmer, I like to get out and put my hands in the dirt and watch it, you know, grow.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: I don't know if I call it a vacation, but I go home to see my daughter and my grandkids.  They live in the [Washington] D.C. area, in Prince George's County, so I go there most often for what I call vacation.  But when I go on vacation, I actually drive to Chicago [Illinois] for the Jazz Festival on Labor Day weekend, and hang out there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And the last question is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have a couple.  One from my father, and it has served me well over the years, and I hope I get it right. It's been a long time since I've heard his voice and heard him say it.  "It's better to be thought a fool, or to open your mouth and remove all doubt."  And being a man who speaks for a living... that rings more true sometimes than I'd like.  The other is from my mom [Lucy Jane Boomer], who was very, a very religious person... my father, a Baptist minister.  But Mom used to always say, "Keep your hand in God's hands."
Story_ID: 97912
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I'm going to ask you about your family history.  Now, your mother's side of the family and your father's side, but separately.  Can you give us your mother's full name, and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: Her full name is Lucy Jane, J-A-N-E, Boomer.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: B-O-O-M-E-R.
Speaker 1: Lucy?
Speaker 2: L-U-C-Y, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Actually, I don't know her--off the top of my head, her date of birth--because I wrote it all down and everything.  But she was born in Turkey, North Carolina as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what can you tell us about your mother's side of the family?  How far back can you trace them, and what were they doing?
Speaker 2: Actually, my mother was raised by her uncle and aunt, Aunt Mattie and Uncle Eddie.  Uncle Eddie was in the, was in the war, World War I; fought in the, under the auspices of the French Foreign Legion, because at that point America would not let blacks wear the American uniform.  So, he went to France and fought in World War I.  And he came home and raised my mom with his family.
Speaker 1: Now, what happened to her mother and father?
Speaker 2: Her mother died shortly after she was born.  And her father... don't know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I know a little bit about him, but not a whole lot about him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was--okay, so her Uncle Eddie and--
Speaker 2: Aunt Mattie.
Speaker 1: --his wife--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: --raised her.  Is there any history on that side of the family--I mean, any stories on that side of the family about what life was like in Turkey?
Speaker 2: Yeah, just hard times in the South, you know, black families trying to make it.  Uncle Eddie had some land that he farmed, a rather nice size piece of land, actually.  He did pretty well for himself.  He had probably seven or eight kids, and raised Mom as one of his own.  And beyond that, there's not a lot that I know.  Because being the baby of the family, everybody was grown almost by the time I came along, and most of that history was with them, and not necessarily with me.  And so, as I grew up--we kind of all moved away from home as we grew up, and most of my siblings were gone, except for a couple of brothers and maybe two sisters.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did your mother, did she have any stories about growing up?  She grew up around Turkey, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, yeah.  It was a pretty hard existence for her, being not of the, biologically of the family.  But she had a strong will and lots of faith, and she was able to get married, I guess when she was like 16 or 17, and Dad was like 16; he's a little younger than she.  In fact, I think they got married on his birthday.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, was your mother born in the twenties... sometime...?
Speaker 2: Nineteen Twelve [1912].
Speaker 1: Nineteen Twelve, [1912], okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: She was older when she had you, I guess, then?
Speaker 2: Forty-two.
Speaker 1: Forty-two, okay.  Nineteen Twelve, [1912], okay.
Speaker 2: Dad was also born in 1912, but he was a few months younger than she.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  So, did your mother have a chance to go to high school in Turkey?
Speaker 2: Both she and my dad, I believe, if memory serves me correctly, only went to the third grade.  Each of them learned how to read on their own pretty much.  They became prolific readers--Dad reading the Bible, Mom reading the Bible.  Mom used to love to read the Star, the magazine.  And they, you know, they taught themselves, really... the way it was back in the day.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you end up going to the same school that they went to when they were growing up?
Speaker 2: No.  I don't know what school they went to when they were growing up.  A lot of the family history, again, is with the older siblings.  But I went to first a place called Hargrove High School in Clinton, North Carolina.  It was eleven miles in one direction.  When I graduated from what was then called the "black school" to the "white school," I went to Union High School, which was eleven miles in the other direction.  So, we got bussed eleven miles, respectively, to school.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well--
Speaker 2: There was a school in Turkey, but we were not allowed to go there.  So--
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  I'm going to ask about that a little later.  I was just wondering where they went.
Story_ID: 97913
Speaker 1: Did your mother [Lucy Jane Boomer] have any...?  I ask you if there are any stories, or any specific stories, about when she was growing up.  But she, she lived through the Depression, the Great Depression.  I don't know if it, it made that much difference, you know.
Speaker 2: Being born, being black, and being in the South, it was rough, no matter what.  I just remember, the only thing I can remember--and not something that she necessarily said--but just being a young boy on the farm, and how she negotiated the race issue--how she would on occasion...  when people would come by and ask for my father [George Boomer], knowing he wasn't home, how she would handle that situation, you know.
Speaker 1: Tell us.
Speaker 2: Essentially, they would come by and say, "Is Cousin George home?"  And she said, "No, no."  You know, my father was a Baptist minister.  He worked on the farm in the summertime, but he worked in Washington, D.C. during the fall and winters to help support the family.  We had a house on the farm in Turkey [North Carolina], and a house in D.C.  And we would go visit him for a couple of weeks, then go back to the farm.  He would come home every couple of weeks on the Greyhound or the Trailways to visit.  And I remember as a little boy, being able to hear the bus coming.  And when it would stop on the road, we'd call it... we could hear it stop... we could hear it pull off.  And we'd run down this wooded path to the highway, and would greet him.  And he'd have a, just arms full of bags and sacks of stuff he brought from D.C. back to the family, to help sustain the family.  And we'd lug it back to the house, and he'd put us to work doing something, no matter what it was.  But there was always something to do.  It was never "job done."  It was always something that needed to be done.
Speaker 1: You said there was a way that she handled visitors.  You were just starting to tell us about that.
Speaker 2: Well, essentially, if somebody came on to her, how she would deflect that, without being nasty about it, you know.  I can only imagine the times that she may have had to put people off.  I never saw anybody physically touch her.  But I can tell by her demeanor, she was not pleased at the approach.  And this is just a young boy's observation.  I mean, it may never have happened, but just from me being a little boy, hearing her respond to "Is Uncle George home?"  Or, "Cousin George home?" or whatever it was.  The--not fear, but probably indignation in her voice, probably said a lot to me.
Speaker 1: Yeah, now, that's a, that's a question that's got a lot of, you know...  Do they want to see him?  Or, do they want to find out if he's not there?   Or... there's a lot of... when somebody's asking you--
Speaker 2: I think they kind of knew he wasn't there.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then to try to see...  Okay, this is a--
Speaker 2: Again, I have nothing to back that up, except a boy who is watching his mom respond to any given situation.
Speaker 1: I think in any part of the country, in a rural situation, that's an issue, when somebody asks if the man of the house is home or not.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Or, you know, or implies that...  Then the people have decisions to make, and ways to keep themselves safe.  I mean it's, that was a--
Speaker 2: It's a real life situation oftentimes.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah... anywhere.
Story_ID: 97914
Speaker 1: So, let me go to your father's side.  Can you give us your father's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: George Atkins, A-T-K-I-N-S, Boomer.
Speaker 1: And what is his date of birth and place of birth?  Oh, he was born in 1912, too?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And it's all on the paper.  I don't have--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --the information in my head.
Speaker 1: And was he born in Turkey [North Carolina], as well?
Speaker 2: No.  I think he was, he was born in, in the New Bern, North Carolina area.  In fact my brother and I, year before last, went down and found what I call a whole road of Boomers, people who didn't know my dad, because he was older.  And most all the old folk had died off, and that kind of thing.  But they had the last name, and something we call the "Boomer nose."  But he was born in Pamlico County, in Pamlico County in North Carolina, in the New Bern area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, now, what about your father's side?  What are the stories from that side?  How far back can you trace his side of the family?
Speaker 2: We have not, and I have not, unfortunately, done a lot of that kind of work in terms of knowing his history.  I know that he had some folk in the family who were from Norfolk, Virginia, New Bern area, I guess along the water leading east and north.  But I remember visiting my grandmother in Norfolk, when I was a little boy, at one time.  Transportation was difficult back in those days.  We didn't have a family car, so--at least not when I was coming up.  We had one that actually sat in the front yard, and we played on it and in it, but it never moved, you know... kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, you said your father went to about the third grade as well.  This is in New Bern?
Speaker 2: I think by then he was...  Yeah, because he was born and raised in the New Bern area... had five or six siblings, only one or two that I actually met.  My Uncle James was the one I knew best, because he and my father didn't live near each other, but not that far apart.  They lived in the same region, and our families visited on occasion.  We worked together sometimes in the fields, and that kind of stuff.  But... yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did your father come to leave New Bern?
Speaker 2: I guess out of necessity.  I don't know why he ended...  I think there was somebody in the family who actually owned the land in Turkey that we lived on.  And he gained access to that, and built a house there.  And I think all of my siblings were born in that house.  I was born there, and I was the last of ten.
Speaker 1: So, that's the land that he inherited from other members, family members?
Speaker 2: It may have even been from his father.  I'm not sure how that came into the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My brother and I, my brothers...  And I have three; two now living.  We pay taxes on it every year to make sure it stays in the family.  Mom and Dad said, "Don't ever give it up."  So, we do what we can.  We lease it out, to let somebody else farm it for...  But we still maintain it in the family.  It's only fifteen acres, but some is better than none.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, I'm guessing if your parents were born in 1912, that they, their grandparents were probably children during the slavery period?
Speaker 2: No doubt, no doubt.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories about that that are passed down at all?
Speaker 2: None that I'm aware.  And again, this is--again, most of my siblings were grown and having kids of their own.  I actually have a niece and nephew older than I am.  So, they were out doing their own thing, raising their own families, away from where I was at the time.  Most of them--as most of us did as we grew up--we moved from the farm to our father's house in [Washington] D.C., and then out to our individual lives.  And so, most of my sisters especially--and my older brother who was in the U.S. Army, a Korean war veteran--were starting their own families, having their own children, right along with me, you know, quite honestly, in terms of my age and that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: A little older, mostly younger.  But I actually had a niece and a nephew older than myself.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97915
Speaker 1: Now, is there a story about how your parents [Lucy Jane Boomer and George Boomer] met?
Speaker 2: If it is, I don't know it.  I know I'm very vague, but again, this is one of those situations where, you know, we just never got into it.  I never even thought to ask.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Because Dad was away from home most of the time working, and Mom was there taking care of the kids.  And they would, you know, cross in the night, as he came home to visit, or if she went to [Washington] D.C. to visit.  Or we would go visit him in D.C., and he would come home.  It was a commuter family.  They weren't separated out of not getting along, they were separated out of necessity, for him to support the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And now, what was he doing in D.C.?  He was--
Speaker 2: He was a cement mason.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And he was a Baptist minister.  I remember as a little boy, riding around D.C. in a taxicab or on the bus.  And he'd say, "I helped pour that street."  Or, "I helped build that building."  And I wish I could remember the buildings and the streets, but as a little boy you just hear it and you don't hear it.  But he would always point out some project he'd worked on--very similar to what I do when I drive my daughter around Cleveland [Ohio] or friends.  When I drive around here, I say, "You know, I did a story there last week."  Or, "I did a story on that one over there."  And you know, to them, it's just... I'm talking.  But to me it has some relevance.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Now, did you feel like that when your father was telling you? (Laughter)
Speaker 2: Yeah, it's like, "Okay."  You know, "Thanks." (Laughter), you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is...  Alright, so, now, this is a strange--so three months out of the year, he wasn't home at all?  Or--
Speaker 2: Well, he'd come home.  But he spent a fair amount of time away from home, supporting the family--working, sending money home, coming home... we'd go visit him...  We always went for a little while during the summer, because that was, of course, the work season.  And all of us had to work to help support the family.  I remember growing up having to work to help buy school clothes for myself, and that kind of stuff, which we all did then.  So, you know, it was nothing unusual.  A lot of families didn't have their dad away from home, necessarily, that way, but it was the best way he could support the kids that he made and loved.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, how far is Turkey [North Carolina] from D.C.?
Speaker 2: Six hours.
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's quite a distance.
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: That's like--yeah, six hours, that's--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: --like from going to Cleveland to Cincinnati, or--
Speaker 2: Or from Cleveland to D.C.  When I go, when I go to Turkey, if I just drop through D.C., it'll take me 12, 13 hours.  So, I drop in D.C., and then go on down to Turkey or...  You know, because I always go through D.C. to see family or to pick up family.  And we always sort of, you know, ride with each other.  It's company... and that kind of thing.  So, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, so, alright.  So, so, your mother just tried to maintain the home?
Speaker 2: (Nods head.) Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you have older brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I am the baby of the family.  There are now... there were ten.  There are now nine.  I have an older brother, George Artis Boomer, who passed away a few years ago.  And everybody else is still alive.  My older sister, Charity, lives in Fayetteville, North Carolina.  Everybody else, except for one brother, lives in and around D.C.  I have one brother who lives in Hawaii.  My nephew, who's a family doctor down in the Norfolk [Virginia] area, and I, are going to hopefully going to go see him in Hawaii.  The next couple of months, actually, we're planning to go see him.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so, you're the youngest of ten.  So, the farm work was largely carried out by your siblings, once your father was in D.C. for a long time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, pretty much.  I mean, Mom kept a pretty firm hand on it, and the older siblings kind of knew what needed to be done.  Being a farmer, you kind of know what needs to be done.  You take what the weather gives you, and you make the best of it.  And do what you can do, as long as the rain fell and didn't wash out the crops.  Or, you know, we plant the tobacco beds and we transplant it to the field, and do whatever it took to make all that happen.  And we raised tobacco and corn and soybean and peppers.  And we would grow potatoes, sweet potatoes, for family consumption, that kind of stuff.
Story_ID: 97916
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you think about your parents' personalities, their dispositions, their sense of humor, what they look like, how they walk, talk, what their interests and talents were...  Who do you think you take after the most?
Speaker 2: I have my father's [George Boomer] speaking ability.  When I...and my mom's [Lucy Jane Boomer] temperament.  Somehow, my hands are my mother's hands.  We used to sit and push hands together, and exactly... the same size, the same... everything.  I found--I always found that interesting that I would have my mother's hands, my daddy's voice...  And I looked a lot like my father.  In fact, as a little boy, they used to call me "Little Rev"  They'd say, "Little Reb," but they meant "Little Rev," as in little Reverend.  But I may have been a rebel, too.  I was, you know, a young boy running up and down the fields and roads... and the back roads of North Carolina.  But I think I have... my father had a good sense of humor, kind of a wry sense of humor.  But he was joking a lot, you know, a good disposition.  My mother had a good sense of humor, too, but she was the disciplinarian.  She had to keep us on the straight and narrow, and she did a good job.  Always out of love, but she did what she had to do, to keep her sons alive and her daughters alive in the South.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 97917
Speaker 1: Do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think a couple.  But the one that I remember earliest is when my sister, Charity [Boomer Morrisey], first got her television set.  Because we didn't have one in my house, initially.  And we lived probably, oh, better than a quarter of a mile down the road, on the farm from her house.  And they used to wrap me in a blanket and take me home at night.  We'd go down to Charity's house and watch TV.  And when it was time to go home, my mother [Lucy Jane Boomer] or one of sisters would wrap me in a blanket, and they'd carry me right back to the house.  I remember that.  I remember having a little, there was a John Deere tractor with little pedals on it.  My mother would take a tobacco stick and put in the back of the tractor, and she'd push me down the road, and I'd be pedaling, that kind of thing.  So, those were the kind I remember.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 97918
Speaker 1: How close were your nearest neighbors in Turkey [North Carolina]?
Speaker 2: Well, my sister, Charity [Boomer Morrisey] was the closest.  She lived about a, a little bit of a quarter of a mile on the same farm.  She lived on the road; we lived deeper into the farm, right beside some railroad tracks.  There was a neighbor across... the Wilsons... maybe, I don't know, a thousand yards or so this way.  The McCullough family that the boys I grew up with, and the girls--they lived maybe a quarter mile around the woods that way.  And then there was a railroad track that ran in front of my house.  There were some people down, about a mile down the track.  So, it, you know, you could...  And my cousins, the people that helped raise my mom, lived next to the McCulloughs, across the highway, Highway 24.  So, that was maybe a half mile or so from my house.  So, on a good day, we could holler and they could hear us.
Story_ID: 97919
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, alright.  We always ask this question.  What were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I remember hearing the frogs croak from the pond we had on our farm.  It wasn't a really big pond, but it was pretty big.  And every night I'd hear the frogs croaking, the crickets creaking, or whatever they, whatever they do... and the dogs that we had on the farm barking... the buzz of gnats and mosquitoes, and that kind of stuff around your head.  Just stuff you get when you live in the country.  You know, we didn't have a lot of--we had lights in the house, but we had no--what I call light pollution like you have in major cities--you know, where you can't see the stars.  I remember many a time looking out at the stars, looking up at the stars, climbing on top of the house using a ladder--much to my mother's chagrin--and lying up there watching the stars at night.  She didn't want us up there... figured we'd fall and get hurt.  We never did, but it could have happened.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, who were you up there with?
Speaker 2: My brother, or sometimes by myself.  I'd be up there until the mosquitoes ran me down, or whatever.
Speaker 1: This is the brother closest to you in age?
Speaker 2: My brother, Joe.
Speaker 1: How close was he in age?
Speaker 2: Two years, just about.  All of us... all the way down the line--one and a half, two years down the line--from my oldest who's now...  My sister, Charity, is 80, I'm 60.  So, we fell almost two years--year and a half, a little bit better... sometimes a year apart... all the way down the spectrum.  Joe, who ended up being a Cleveland [Ohio]--a [Washington] D.C. police officer--for 27 years, is retired now and lives in Dale City [Virginia] with some of his grandchildren.
Story_ID: 97920
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, was church a big factor in growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Every opportunity, as my mom [Lucy Jane Boomer] would say, that God gave, we were at the church.  Being a preacher's kid, it was mandatory.  And we lived in church, whether it was--whether it was Sunday school or church, or Baptist Training Union, or revival.  If there was a day that God sent, that church was being held someplace, we went.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the name of your church?
Speaker 2: First Baptist of Turkey [North Carolina]
Speaker 1: And now, did your father [George Boomer] play any significant role in this church?
Speaker 2: When he retired, he came back and became an associate pastor of the church.  But he was, most of his preaching was done in [Washington] D.C. and around Maryland.  D.C., that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He was a, I guess an associate pastor of Springfield Baptist Church in D.C.  And what I remember, had a really big pipe organ that sort of filled the church with the magnificent sounds of the pipe organ.  I remember that as a kid.
Story_ID: 97921
Speaker 1: Well what about school?  What was the name of your first school, again?
Speaker 2: Hargrove High School.
Speaker 1: Hargrove High School.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In those days, the whole school was called high school, right?  Even though--
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --they weren't--
Speaker 2: Because I went there from first grade.  And most of the people, until integration came along, went there from first all the way through the 12th.  Most of my sisters and brothers--I think my brother Joe and I were the only two that didn't go from grade one all the way to 12.  Because we, he went to Union High School a year ahead of me, with integration.  I followed the next year.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, how did you like school?
Speaker 2: It was cool.  I remember as a little boy, crying a lot, believe it or not.  And there were only two people who could quiet me--my best friend, Dwight, and my sister, Mattie.  If I saw either one of those, I straightened, I would straighten up.  But for some reason, I didn't like just being in school.  I wasn't a bad student, I wasn't an A student.  But there was something about not seeing somebody that I cared about a lot, right there.  She would walk in the room, and I'm cool.  Dwight would come over and say "Hi" or whatever he would say, and I'm cool.  But that didn't last long.  But I remember that they would be the ones who would quiet me.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Just my comfort blanket, I guess.
Story_ID: 97749
Speaker 1: Did your father [George Boomer] serve in the war, World War II?
Speaker 2: No.  He was not, he was not in the military.  My Uncle Eddie was the only, one outside of my brother, George, who eventually went to the U.S. Army.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Your father would have been almost right at the age where he might have been too old for World War II.  I don't know, but--
Speaker 2: I'm not sure.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  He'd have been over 30 when the war started... so... or about thirty.  Yeah, just about 30 years old in 1941.  He'd have been 29, I guess, heading on 30.  Okay, do you know if there's any reason why he didn't serve?  I mean, did they draft him, or did--?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I don't know that he ever applied or went down to enlist, or just figured he'd raise his family.  I don't know.
Speaker 1: He might have just fallen under the radar, we just don't know.
Speaker 2: It's a possibility.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah, but they were drafting.
Speaker 2: Yeah, not being in one place all the time may have helped out, too.
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.  He's splitting time between Washington [D.C.] and Turkey [North Carolina].
Story_ID: 97750
Speaker 1: So, now at Hargrove High School, were there any?  What were your aspirations as a youth?  Did you have an occupation that you wanted to fulfill when you grew up?  Or--
Speaker 2: I just wanted to not disappoint my mom [Lucy Jane Boomer] or my father [George Boomer], not get into any trouble, wanted to, I guess learn.  I wanted to be one of the jocks, which I wasn't; I was a short guy.  I didn't come into my own until probably seventh or eighth grade.  I remember pretty well standing in the line, washing our hands to go to lunch.  And some of the pretty boys--the athletes, the stars, cut in line.  And that didn't please me too well.  And I, I don't know what I said, but it took me about 40 seconds to a minute...  And when I looked up, all the girls were like, "Harry, is that you?"  I just, I didn't curse, but I stood my ground, and they were impressed by what I said.  I can't tell you to this day what came out of my mouth, but they were pleased by that.  And I was pleased by the fact that they were pleased.  So, that kind of helped me out a little bit.
Speaker 1: So, you--
Speaker 2: I knew I could talk, so I just kept talking, kept talking.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, did you have a favorite subject in school?
Speaker 2: P.E. [Physical Education] (Laughter).  I, I liked reading, but I didn't like history, because it didn't seem relevant to me.  I wish I had paid more attention to history.  It just didn't seem like it had any bearing on who I was or what I was doing.  Now, I know better--that the people I was learning about had a profound impact on who I would become and what I would become, and if I could become.  But to me, they were just pictures on a page in a book.  But I don't know if it was the teacher didn't bring them alive for me, or I just didn't see them as being that important in my everyday life of just trying to live... being a black boy in the South, you know, negotiating what that all meant.  It just never, it was irrelevant.
Speaker 1: You know, was there any special curriculum being taught in the black schools then?  Because you're in a segregated school, I mean a black school, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  There was nothing like Black History, or anything like that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That didn't happen until I was actually at Union High School, probably my junior year, that that became a thing to talk about, or to teach or to demand.  In fact, I remember my brother, my friend, Dwight and I, were at Union High School.  And we protested the lack of black teachers and black curriculum, and that kind of thing.  And that's--if you want to get into that at some point, we can.  But, yeah, I--
Speaker 1: Okay.  We'll make sure we talk about it when you get to high school.  But as a young kid, you didn't have a favorite subject, or...  Now, did you have access to reading materials of any significance growing up?  I mean, in home or in the library, or--?
Speaker 2: We used to go the library, it was part of our day.  They'd send us to the library, you know, to get us out of the classroom or to quiet us down, or just to go there and pick up a book and read.  I can't remember being fascinated by books that much, you know.  I would do my lessons as best I could.  I wouldn't, I mean, I didn't want to be a dummy, I remember that.  I didn't want to be picked at or talked down to, as if I didn't have any intellect. But there was nothing that sort of said, "This is your calling."  I think, probably if I think about it--my older brother, Khaled Mujtabaa, whose given name was William Earl, was into poetry, reciting poetry, and he became fairly good at that.  And I emulated him in that.  And my other brother, Joe, who's closest to me in terms of age, emulated my other brother, George, who was in the military.  So, he sort of became like George, and I kind of became like William.  And so, he went to the police academy and did the police thing, and I went to broadcast school, and did that; traveled a lot.  My, the year I graduated from the eighth grade from Hargrove to go to the ninth grade over to Union, I recited [Reverend] Dr. [Martin Luther] King's "I Have a Dream" speech at school for the graduation.  And some folks from my church heard me when I said it... my church from First Baptist... and somebody from another church was there.  And I did it five or six or seven or eight or nine or ten times, until I just said, "I forgot." (Laughter).
Speaker 1: You didn't want to do it anymore.
Speaker 2: Didn't want to...  It was a long, 18 minutes.  For a young kid, it was just a lot.  But in thinking back on those words and what it has meant to society, and what it now means to me, I wish I had not done that.  But you know, you're a kid, and you get tired of doing stuff, so you just un-do it.
Story_ID: 97751
Speaker 1: So, you were ten years old when the March on Washington took place, right?
Speaker 2: My father was at that March on Washington.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I was there twenty years later, in '83 [1983].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: For... when Stevie Wonder and everybody was pushing to make [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] Dr. King's birthday a national holiday.
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: And I went down for the anniversary of Dr. King-- I think it was the 40th anniversary of Dr. King's assassination.  And then I went, of course, to other events.  I went, you know, to sort of stay in the Civil Rights Movement.  In fact, when I was in high school, my friend Dwight and I marched with Ben Chavis [HM] and the Wilmington Ten, from... they came from Wilmington [North Carolina], and marched into Raleigh [North Carolina], a 120 mile trek.  We joined them in Clinton, which is a big town in our area, and about nine miles east of Turkey.  And we joined them there, much to my sister Charity's [Boomer Morrisey] chagrin.  She called my father on the phone in [Washington] D.C. and told him.  And he's, "Well, when he gets back, have him call me."  So, I did.  He said, "Well, didn't I tell you... didn't your sister tell you not to go?"  I said, "Yes sir."  He said, "Why did you go?"  I said, "I had to go."  He said, "Okay."  That was it.  He understood I had to go.  I could have gotten killed, like so many others could have gotten killed, but we didn't.  That was an experience in itself.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we're getting ahead of ourselves, but we'll get to that again--
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: --and follow-up a little bit more but--
Story_ID: 97752
Speaker 1: --but in-- at Hargrove--  So, you're, you're there when Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] assassinated, when you're ten years old.  Now, and you were saying your sister [Charity Boomer Morrisey] had a television set?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And by this time, did you...?  She was the first to get one, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But by this time, did you have one at home?
Speaker 2: We eventually got one.  That was in my mother's room.  We had a wooden heater.  And my brother, William, who was thought to be, and is, the smart one of the family, would fill the heater with wood so everybody would get sleepy.  And then he could watch whatever he wanted to watch when we fell asleep.  And so, he told us that later, but we never figured out.  But it was kind of interesting.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But yeah, we would watch television.  My mother used to love "I Love Lucy" and things like that.  I remember sitting at the foot of the bed one night watching Chet Huntley and David Brinkley on NBC.  And I said to her that I wanted to do that.  She said, "Boy, be quiet" you know.  It was, I mean there was nobody on television that looked like us, outside of Amos and Andy.  That wasn't a very good role model.  But it was just not something that she, or even me, at that time really believed was possible.  And here I am now at this point in 2014, 42 years in the business, on two TV stations and on the internet, seen and heard around the world.  It's phenomenal.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, now what about radio?  Did you, you know, follow the radio programs?
Speaker 2: Actually I listened to the, to the news about Dr. King's assassination, on a little transistor radio that we had.  We all had these little transistor radios that was RCA, or something.  I can't remember now, it's been so long.  And I remember hearing that, lying across the bed the day he was killed.  And I remember my mother's admonition to me, saying--and I can remember as plain as day--"Boy, don't you go to school and start no trouble."  That's what she said to me.  And when I went to school...  Actually this was--I had to have been older than ten, because I was actually at Union High School when this happened.  I had already graduated from--
Speaker 1: Oh sure, yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: The March on Washington was when you were ten, but--
Speaker 2: Yeah, I'm talking... yeah, the assassination of Dr. King.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So, the assassination is--
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: In fact, the assassination should be in--
Speaker 2: Sixty-Eight [1968]?
Speaker 1: Yeah, you would have been a senior or a junior in high school?
Speaker 2: I was probably a junior in high school.
Speaker 1: Junior, okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Because I remember that very well, and her telling me not to get in any trouble.  And--
Speaker 1: Because you were at this integrated high school?
Speaker 2: I'd gone to Union High School at that point.  And I remember--well, we'll get to that if want, at some point.  I don't want to--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --step too far ahead again.
Speaker 1: So, we're getting ahead...  But--
Story_ID: 97753
Speaker 1: But--now, at Hargrove High School, were there any significant teachers or role models, you know, at that age?
Speaker 2: I remember our principal, Mr. Smith.  We called him "Yogi" for some strange reason.  I think he, in the war or somewhere, had part of his nose blown off and sewn back on.  And kids being kids, we used to pick and laugh at that.  He was a stern disciplinarian, and had this big wooden paddle with holes in it, and all that kind of stuff back in the day, and ran the school with an iron hand.  And never, to my knowledge, abused anybody.  But, you know how it was back in the day.  You know, everybody... every teacher had the right... and did liberally if they felt the need... used the paddle.  I remember my math teacher, Mr. Lee.  There was, I think Mrs. Musgrave, I believe her name was.  And there was a Mr. Monroe, I remember.  He was a, I think must have been a history teacher.  But, yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, right.  But you, you decided that you wanted to be on television, and--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, I thought about it... said it... never really thought about it much beyond that, until much later in life.  I guess that's where the seed was planted, just wanting to do that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know--
Speaker 1: So, okay.  So--
Story_ID: 97754
Speaker 1: When you come out of Hargrove [High School], this is like 1966, I guess, right?  You're thirteen--
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: And you're going to--
Speaker 2: --going to--
Speaker 1: --going to Union High School.
Speaker 2: --for my freshman, year, yeah.
Speaker 1: Now, how, were you the first group that integrated Union?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, my brother went before me, I think a year before I did--he and about five or six other African-Americans, and then we followed.  It was tumultuous.  I mean nobody ever got shot or killed or anything, but it was, it was tense.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Were there threats or--?
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  I mean we used to actually--we had these pocketknives that were really long.  And when you opened them up, they were about this long--pearl handled knives.  And when you fold them up, they're about this long.  You open them up, they're like this long.  We all carried those.  We never had to use them, we never cut anybody.  We pulled them on occasion, but we never had to cut anybody with them.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, all the black students, the black males, carried them?
Speaker 2: Most of the black males had something like that-- that or a Hawk Bill knife... Hawk Bill knife.  You know, where you can just reach in your pocket and you know... there it is.  But I think most males carried some kind of weapon.  Whether black or white, we had...  They had guns on the gun racks on the back of the truck, and we had Hawk Bill knives and those thunder knives... and just stuff to, you know, to protect ourselves should the need arise.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, North Carolina has a tradition of being like a neutral state during the Civil War.  I mean, I don't know what the race relations are like there.  But they're not like...  Are they?  I mean, are they like Virginia or--
Speaker 2: Well, let's just say that North Carolina is the state that spawned Jesse Helms.  Another one of my motivations for wanting to be in broadcasting, quite honestly...  I grew up watching him on WRAL and his very racist commentaries... and said "I want to grow up, be in television, do editorials, and run against Jesse Helms for the U.S. Senate.  I remember that being one of my major motivations.  Never got into politics, but I got in television.
Story_ID: 97755
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any--when you were growing up, were there any African-American media personalities that you remember on radio or television that you--
Speaker 2: Radio in [Washington] D.C., but nothing in North Carolina.  The only person I remember in North Carolina was a local guy by the name of "A Country Gentleman," 88.5... very down to earth kind of guy.  In fact, I met him when I went to the radio station--it's probably where I got part of the bug, too--to recite for Black History Month--or for a black program, Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech.  I did a little portion of that at that radio station.  I walked in the studio and sort of got the bug, too, I think from having just been there and seeing that.  But, yeah.  And I used to listen to John R. from WLAC out of Nashville... the Horseman, those guys.
Speaker 1: Right.  Now those, that show was broadcast all over the South and all over the Midwest.  We used to get it in Dayton, and I know they got it in Chicago.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I guess they must have been a 50,000 clear watt channel, you know.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And so, I used to--and my mom used to...  I could barely hear it under my pillow at night.  But she could hear it as plain as day.  "Boy, turn off that radio."  And I could--I'm lying there like, you know, barely hearing it.  But she could hear it.
Speaker 1: That's mothers' ears.
Speaker 2: Yeah, caught me every time.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  But you liked [Chet] Huntley and [David] Brinkley?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean, it was something that was not...  I mean, I don't know that I really understood a whole lot of news.  But I just saw that and thought, "I'd like to do that."  I was still a young kid, fascinated with, you know, watching the tube.  It was the thing to do.  You probably remember how back when TV used to go off at night, and come on in the morning.  And folks would literally turn it on in the morning, and sit and watch the test pattern, waiting for the TV to come on.  I remember how they used to sign off about, you know, about "I have slipped the surly bonds of earth, and reached out and touched the face of God."  You know, that kind of sign-off.  And I think the world was probably a better place then.  I make my living in television, but this is my own philosophical thing.  It was good to go to sleep at night and get up the next day and start another day, rather than 24/7.
Story_ID: 97756
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, '63 [1963], has been pitched by people, especially last year, as being a pivotal year in American history because of the 50th anniversary of the assassination of [President] John Kennedy, and all of the major civil rights struggles--
Speaker 2: March on Washington.
Speaker 1: --Medgar Evers and March on Washington, all that happens in '63 [1963].
Speaker 2: And the Emmett Till deal that--you know, 50 years later as well.
Speaker 1: But--
Speaker 2: I'm sorry, go ahead.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  But in terms of the assassination of John Kennedy, I think it was the first time that the news was on for so long.  I mean, they covered the whole thing from, about three or four days of solid news.
Speaker 2: I remember my teachers crying.  And I'm a young kid, I mean, I knew something was up.  They said what it was, but it didn't resonate with me.  I mean I don't even know if I knew he was President.  Probably did, but it wasn't something that... I'm a young kid on the farm.  I... you know, I knew something was going on--that the world had turned a corner that wasn't all that good, and there was a malaise across the country that made a lot of people sad--a lot of my teachers cried.
Speaker 1: So, your family wasn't glued to the television set during that period of time?
Speaker 2: They may have been.  But you know, I availed myself of every opportunity to run up and down the road and play with my boys and, you know, chase the dog around, or go sit in the trees in the woods and hunt sparrows with my Daisy B.B. gun, or whatever, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay. That makes sense.
Story_ID: 97757
Speaker 1: So, well at Union High School, how did the teachers treat you? Did--where you--
Speaker 2: Eventually, okay.  I remember one of my teachers sang to us in the classroom, integrated classroom.  And I respect him for this doing this:  He said, "I'm going to tell you now.  I'm prejudiced, but I'm going to try not to let that show."  You know, it's frightening, but enlightening as well.  At least then, I knew where he was coming from.  And I think over the years, he made a lot of progress, and I learned to respect and trust him.
Speaker 1: Well, what was the percentage of black students at Union?
Speaker 2: Initially, very, very small--three, four, five percent.  By the time I graduated probably seventy, eighty percent.
Speaker 1: So, it changed rapidly?
Speaker 2: Rapidly.  When I first went there, there were very few of us, you know.  And we had to sort of be together, so that we didn't get in trouble, or people couldn't take advantage of us.  By the time I left, I had been Student Body president, Senior Class president, President of the Future Founders of America, the FFA--the Bellwood Manor Chapter.  I remember my freshman year reciting the FAA creed--FFA creed--Future Founders of America creed, and winning the contest, and I won a ring from the Bellwood Manor Chapter.  And that was not too well-received by some of the guys.  And I ended up fighting, actually, to defend myself, because of that.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, it wasn't popular to be popular in that school--
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: --for you.
Speaker 2: And to be a young black boy at that point was not exactly healthy, you know, if you had any gumption, or if you stood up for yourself.  And my brother and most of my friends were athletes.  I was an athlete myself, played a little basketball.  Being short, I couldn't... I was...  I'm not going to go the NBA or anything.  But, you know, I did alright for a little guy, you know.  I remember complaining to Coach Gay about, "Man, I wish I was 6'2."  He said, "Boomer, you're never going to be 6'2.  Just use what God gave you, you'll be alright."  And even though I never became that basketball star, that stuck in my brain about... whatever is, whatever else I do, "Just use what God gave you, and you'll be alright."
Story_ID: 97758
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, were there any particular mentors or, you know, role models at Union that--
Speaker 2: Mr. Williamson, he was one of our agricultural teachers, an African-American gentleman.  In fact, he said to Dwight and me, "I can't tell you to do this.  But if I were your age, and I was in school, I'd march with Ben Chavis."  So, we did.
Speaker 1: So, this is when you're a senior, or when--
Speaker 2: This was probably junior year.  It may have been junior/senior year.  Some of these years get kind of mixed up in my head here.  But I remember that very well, his sort of saying, "Stand up, join the movement.  You have a fight, too.  You know, there are other people out there fighting for you.  You need to, you know, make your own way."
Speaker 1: Okay.  And of course, [HM] Ben Chavis was part of the Wilmington Ten [Wilmington, North Carolina].  They were accused of--what were they accused of doing?
Speaker 2: It's kind of, it's been so long now.  You know, I can't remember.  I meant to look that up before you guys got here, too.  Because I knew you were going to ask me about that, and I was going to mention it, but I forgot what the Wilmington Ten...  But they had been falsely accused, and he was sentenced to decades in jail, and he was able to get out.  And that's when he marched from Wilmington [North Carolina] to Raleigh [North Carolina], there were ten of them.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this was a celebrated story covered by "60 Minutes," a national news story, eventually.  It wasn't in the beginning, but sort of became one at the end.  So, you were part of history, in terms of--
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I just remember joining in Clinton [North Carolina], and marching from there to Raleigh... and marching so long... and holding your hands down... and washing...  My hands would swell because of the blood... you know, the gravity pulling the blood down... and sleeping outside on the ground at night.  We were supposed to stay inside of a black church.  And word came, "If you stay in that church, we're going to blow it up."  So, we had to stay outside on the ground.  They brought us sandwiches from Hardee's in the middle of the night.  We ate cold sandwiches, burgers, and that kind of stuff.  And Dwight recalls, one of my best friends, recalls a gentleman sort of from the Black Panthers being there.  Nobody knew, he was just in the crowd.  He had been sent to sort of be there.  And somebody drove by and shot, like, in the night.  And of course everybody jumps up and, you know, scared, and whatever else.  And he kind of quieted everybody down, and said, "Don't worry about it."  And he and some others were spread throughout the crowd, to sort of, to be watchful.  And Dwight recalls this, and recounted it to me years later.  Because he ran into him again in Washington, D.C.  He said, "You look familiar."  And they talked, and it all came back.  But I remember that.  I remember, I think it was in Newton Grove, North Carolina.  As we were marching, there was a big sign, as big as any billboard today, that said, "This is Klan country.  Love it, or leave it."  I remember that sign.  I think that was in Newton Grove, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 97759
Speaker 1: So, now, was there a radio station in high school [Union High School]?
Speaker 2: Not at the high school.  There was a radio station uptown in Clinton, the one I mentioned, with The Country Gentleman.  They played classical and country and folk.  And on Sundays they played black gospel, you know.  That was probably what we got in terms of--it was a couple of hours on Sunday, and they had black programming.
Speaker 1: Did you have an occasion to ever be on the radio in those days?
Speaker 2: When I visited the station as part of a school program--as I graduated from the eighth grade to the ninth grade, I visited WRRZ, I believe it was.  It was a long time back--and trying to remember those call letters--it was a long time.  And I said part of Dr. King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] speech then.  And that's when I first physically walked into a radio station, and kind of got...  "Oh, this is neat."  And again, not dedicating to that proposition at that time, but just another seed planted that would find its way to germinate and spring... bear fruit at some point.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, you were on the verge of graduating from high school.  Now, you've got--I assume you had pretty good grades--you're a student body president and all that.  Did you?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could run my mouth.  And it was really kind of interesting when I went back to my class reunion about three or four years ago.  One of my former classmates said, "You were our Barack Obama."  I was taken aback by that.  I'm like, "Really?"  (Laughter).  You know, it was kind of nice to hear.  I don't know that I was that, but it was nice to hear.  I ran for offices.  I did a fairly good--I did fairly well speaking, back in the day.  And in fact, I would write my speeches-and I would write my opponents' speeches as well sometimes--not quite good as mine, but I would write them.  And they'd come to me and say, "Can you write my speech?"  And I said, "I'm running against you."  "I don't care."  You know, okay, so--
Speaker 1: They wanted to look good. (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah, so I'd write my opponent's speeches.  I write speeches now, and give them, you know, in local churches and colleges, and things like that, even today.
Speaker 1: So, were you in a college prep course at Union?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was just glad to graduate, Man.
Speaker 1: Were you, you know, encouraged to go to college by any of the counselors, or--?
Speaker 2: My brother had gone to A and T.  He was the only one in the family at that time who had gone to college.  And I was, of course, emulating William, "Khaled Mujtabaa, his name now.  And I thought about it, but not really.  I remember upon graduation, my principal, his last name was Crow.  And the last year, the last couple of months, Dwight and I and about eight other people formed what was called "The Black People's Voices."  And we demanded some things--black teachers, a black curriculum, more fairness, just generally speaking.  And we, in effect, we took over the school, but no violence.  We didn't threaten anybody, we just sort of...  There was--one day, we were out in front of the principal's office.  The principal's office--the lunchroom was over here.  And there were four or five African-American girls standing in the lobby.  And one of the teachers came out screaming to them, "Get out of the lobby.  Get out of the lobby.  Get out of the lobby."  They said, "Well, all these white girls are in the lobby, you know.  Why should we get out of the lobby?"  "I said get out of the lobby."  So, it became an issue at that time.  And so, Dwight... I said, "Dwight, we can't let this stand."  I said, "You go that way.  Stick your head in every door, and tell every black person in school to come to the principal's office, to the front of the lobby.  And I'll go this way."  And we went literally, every door, and said, "Go to the lobby.  Go to the lobby.  Go to the lobby. Go to the lobby."  And in a matter of minutes, the place was full of every black person in the school, in the lobby.  And it became contentious for a minute.  Nobody got arrested, but it took a minute to quiet it down.  And from that was born "Black People's Voices," where we started to sort of demand some stuff for ourselves.
Story_ID: 99460
Speaker 1: All right.  So, Black People's Voices.  So, you were a co-founder of that?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: All right.  And so, did you get what you--
Speaker 2: Yeah, we did, we did, eventually.  Because it was my, it must have been my junior year--no, actually my senior year--because I remember then leaving and going to Washington, D.C.  And I remember saying to my principal at the time, Mr. Crow, "I'm leaving, I'm graduating.  But don't make me have to come back.  Don't make me have to come back."  And I guess he didn't listen.  Because I got word in [Washington] D.C. that things were...  So, other students, who were following in our footsteps who did not have the history of protest, and had not--who were sort of on the fringes watching--tried to step in to fill that void.  And they got mishandled--expelled, and that kind of stuff.  And so, word came, and Dwight and I came back from D.C. in a couple days.  And one of his buddies, one of our buddies, was in the U.S. Army.  And he stepped off the Greyhound bus--or the Trailways bus--and he still had his fatigues on.  And I said--and we said, "Kojak, we got to go up to Union, man, they're going crazy up there."  So, he had a car, and we, you know, jumped in his car and went up to Union High School and asked to see the principal.  And he wasn't pleased to see us.  And in fact, refused to see us.  We kind of kicked in the door, and went in and saw him anyway.  We didn't, we didn't carry any weapons or anything like that, but we were determined that we were going to talk to him.  And he eventually talked with us, and that kind of stuff.  I remember even actually stepping back a year, as I graduated.  It was so contentious that when I walked across the stage to receive my diploma, I didn't shake his hand.  I took my diploma and kept going.  I have a picture someplace, essentially of that.  But, yeah, it was pretty rough.
Story_ID: 99461
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, as--in your senior year...  So, you're not taking a college prep course.  Did you have any advice about college at least?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I mean I have learned, in the years following, just how important education is.  I am essentially self-educated.  I tell people I graduated from the "university of hard knocks, oh, my Lordy."  Because I went to the Columbia School of Broadcasting [Arlington, Virginia], which is kind of a trade school for broadcasting... taught me what I needed to know... how to spin a record, how to cure a record, how to read, how to write, how to do whatever, do commercials and that.  And got a job before I graduated, got my Certificate of Completion, and just kept going.  Forty-two years later, I'm still going.  Went, took a few courses at the Columbia--at Northern Virginia Community College--some writing and English courses.  Came to Ohio, and took some more courses at Cleveland State University.  And in effect, I am self-taught.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, but I'm trying to think...  At that moment, were you considering college, or did anybody give you any advice or counseling about it?
Speaker 2: They probably talked to me about it.  But it was, for me, it was just trying to get out of Turkey [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, this is, this is a feature of one of the interviews I heard on line--that, you know, if...  What would have happened, do you think, had you stayed in Turkey?
Speaker 2: I would have married my then fiancee.  I would have gone down to the local hog-killing factory, Lundy's Packing Company, and probably would have lived my life killing hogs, like most of, many of the guys who stayed.  Honorable work, you know, nothing bad about that.  Except, I had been exposed to other things, by having visited [Washington] D.C. over the years, visiting my father [George Boomer] and that kind of stuff.  And I knew there was something beyond the farm, and killing hogs for a living.  There was something beyond picking cotton.  I often tell kids now, "These hands used to pick cotton.  Now, they help pick presidents."  That's one of my messages.  "You can achieve beyond your wildest dreams, if you dedicate yourself to the proposition."  That's kind of what I say to kids now.  But education, I've learned, is crucial, which is why I bury my head in the newspaper and television news now.  When I go home to visit my daughter, they won't let me watch TV, because all I do is watch news.  I have to watch Sponge Bob and the Square Pants and everything (Laughter) with my grandkids... and Disney and that kind of stuff, which is fine.  I mean, that's fine, but I am a news junkie.  I live, eat, and breathe the stuff.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, you just--unlike a lot of people in your hometown your age, you had someplace to go in D.C., or someplace to go outside of Turkey.
Story_ID: 99462
Speaker 1: So--
Speaker 2: I knew that I wanted to leave Turkey [North Carolina], and I had to get out--
Speaker 1: Did you immediately leave after graduation?
Speaker 2: Actually, I tried to join the [U.S.] Army.  And I went up to Raleigh [North Carolina] and took the test, and did very well on the test.  In fact, I out-scored almost everybody in the class that had taken the test that time that I took it, and was on my way.  And I kind of went because my fiancee, who had a brother in the Vietnam War, said, "If you go to the Army, don't come back.  I don't..."  Because, it really kind of... She didn't like that, because her brother was gone, and you know... how the Vietnam War did, and that kind of thing.  So, she was really very much against the war, and the Army and military, and that kind of stuff.  So, being stubborn, I'm like, "I'm going to go."  So, I, I went up there and I scored well.  But I have flat feet, flat as pancakes.  And I'd heard about the Army not liking flat feet.  So, I'm standing there in my skivvies, and the doctor is walking down the line.  And all the guys... and I arched my foot a little bit, and he walked by.  He backed up, and he said, "Relax that foot."  I did about that much.  He said, "I said relax that foot."  It pancaked.  He said, "Get your clothes and go, permanent deferment."  So, that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 99463
Speaker 1: So, now, in [Washington] D.C., now what did you do in Washington [D.C.] when you got there?  This is in 1960--
Speaker 2: When I graduated from high school?
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Nineteen Seventy-One [1971].
Speaker 1: Seventy-One [1971], okay.
Speaker 2: In 1970, the year before I graduated, Dwight and Larry and couple of--that was Dwight's brother and I and some others--lived in a one bedroom apartment--a bunch of guys who grew up in the country together, just sort of hanging out.  We worked at the [U.S.] Navy yard, in the kitchen, cooking and cleaning--
Speaker 1: In D.C.?
Speaker 2: In D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: The notorious shooting not so long ago...  Yeah, I worked there years and years ago.  But then when I graduated, we were sitting around one day in the apartment watching television.  And a Columbia School of Broadcasting School [Arlington, Virginia] commercial came on.  And they knew I liked to run my mouth; I'd done a lot of public speaking, and that kind of stuff.  And they dared me to go down and try.  So, I did.  And they took me, and I said okay.  I thought it was more of, "Well he qualified for the financing, so we'll take him."  But like I tell kids today, "If you get an opportunity, you take that opportunity."  And I made of it what I could.  I made them teach me what I wanted to learn, what they said they were going to teach me, and what I was paying for.  So, I was able to get from that experience, more than the foundation that I now stand on, to keep me on a steady footing for my broadcast career.
Story_ID: 99464
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, now, is this--did you go to Columbia School [of Broadcasting, Arlington, Virginia] before you started speaking in the clubs, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  It was, actually, it was really around the same time.  I've always been a workaholic.  I've always had two or three or four jobs, doing...  I've never...  This one job that I have now is probably the first time in my life I've only did one thing.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  But when I was in broadcast school, my brother, George, and his roommate...  My brother's--George's roommate--was the manager of the Mark IV Supper Club.  And so, there was a gentleman there who was the MC [Master of Ceremonies], by the name of James Shotgun Slade.  And he was the MC, and I befriended him.  And he got caught up in one of those--and I didn't know it at the time--none of us did--one of those pyramid schemes, called Holiday Magic.  And he trained me for two weeks, and walked out.  And I just kept going from there.  I was 17, too young to legally be in the place, but I had a bush, a beard, and a deep voice.  And they said, "As long as he can do the job, let him do the job."  So, I just kept going.
Speaker 1: Okay. So, this is Mark--
Speaker 2: The Mark IV Supper Club.
Speaker 1: --IV Supper Club.
Speaker 2: It was on 13th, in downtown D.C.--since burned down.  I remember seeing the flames on my way to work one day, thinking, "Boy, that's a big fire."  Had no idea it was my club that was burning down.  But, hey, that's life.
Speaker 1: Wow.  Okay.  Now, where did the nickname, "The Burning Boomer" come up?
Speaker 2: Just a play on the name.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I was the Burning Boomer, the Mighty Boomer, the Boomer on Wheels of Steel, the Boomer, Harry Boomer... just progression throughout the years.  Part of that was part of the super disco jocks.  I have a picture, and I'll show you at some point here of...  There were like twenty of us who were in the clubs.  And we had ten of the eleven black clubs in D.C.--Mark IV, Sagittarius, French Underground, The Room, different places we'd all play.  And we'd go visit each other and spin, and give the guy a break; and spin an hour, and let him go mingle with his folk.  And we'd play music, you know, for the groups.  When was 17, this is, this was actually around the time that Soul Train started with Don Cornelius.  In fact, he came to the Mark IV.  But we had--my first show that I emceed was with Sam and Dave.  And--
Speaker 1: So, this is big time.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Sam and Dave were big stars then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I had no clue what I was doing, except I could say, "Here, Ladies and Gentlemen, here's Sam and Dave... I'm a Soul Man," or whatever it was they were playing at the time.  And so, my job was to play music when people first came, let them dance a little bit, set the mood, clear the floor, set the microphones up for whoever's going to be there.  And then when they finished their show, take the mics down, put them on the side of the stage, and play more music for people to dance, bring on the show again, take it down, let the people dance until closing.  We had people that come, that would come through there--Sam and Dave, the Delfonics, the Dells, the O'Jays, the Temptations, Lou Rawls, Jerry Butler [HM], The Stylistics.  You know, I worked with these guys all the time.  And had I had enough sense, I would have taken a couple of cameras and stuck in the corners, and recorded this.  I'd have been bigger than Don Cornelius.  I had two shows a night, six nights a week.  But I was just glad to be in the number, man.
Story_ID: 99465
Speaker 1: We interviewed a couple of people from the same era that was associated with Howard University [Washington, D.C.] Radio--Dyana Williams [HM]--
Speaker 2: I used to listen to Dyana.  I was reading about her last night on the HistoryMakers, in fact.
Speaker 1: --and [David] Oggi Ogburn [HM], the photographer, who photographed all the celebrities that came by WHUR, you know, for Cathy Hughes [HM] when she was the program director.
Speaker 2: I worked with Cathy.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah, a wonderful lady.
Speaker 1: So, you know...  I mean, WOL, is it, that--
Speaker 2: I worked at OL, I worked at WOL as her news director, for two years.  And I subbed for her show, "The Cathy Hughes Morning Show" sometimes three, four, times a week.
Speaker 1: Now, you were also a sub on "Evening Exchange" too, I read in here?
Speaker 2: Yeah, at WHUR.
Speaker 1: That's...  We're probably getting way ahead of where we need to go.  But well, we're not far ahead of it, you know, this is...  Okay, so this is... you've got Petey Greene in town?
Speaker 2: Petey Greene, believe it or not.  And somebody just brought this to my attention not long ago.  When I lived on 4th Street in Washington, D.C., Petey Greene lived across the street from me.  I had no clue who he was, no clue, until somebody the other day said, "You know, Petey Greene used to live right across the street... my niece."  I said, "You're kidding."  And it ends up that Petey Greene-- I ended up being roommates with his nephew, Clayton West, who was--I don't know if co-founder is the right word--but very close to co-founder of Def Jam who was Russell Simmons [HM]--married Petey Greene's niece.  Clayton West and I were roommates in northeast D.C., and did clubs together, spinning music.  We went to Yonkers, New York to visit Clayton's family.  And so, that's how we kind of--we knew who Petey Greene was when he was on radio, but never really drew that connection, until years later.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is...  Kojo Nnamdi [HM], we interviewed week before last.
Speaker 2: I know Kojo very well.  The brother never takes a break, (Laughter) because he's smart.  He knows that if you let somebody in there, and they sound good, he may be out.  He's excellent at what he does.  But I remember--because I was to sub for Kojo at WHUR, Evening Exchange.  I got one shot.  I think I remember one other person getting one shot.  He would never take off, smart man.  But good people, very good people.
Speaker 1: Yeah, yeah; yeah.  So, this is a time when D.C... this is Chocolate City--
Speaker 2: I loved "CC."
Speaker 1: --they said 80 percent black in the city.  I mean, it hadn't started gentrifying yet.
Speaker 2: I remember when that started to happen.  Yeah, I was there.  Yeah, Chuck Brown, and the Soul Searchers, and Donald Byrd and the Blackbyrds.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: Those guys, yeah.  Marvin Gaye, all that, yeah.  Those were the days, man.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Story_ID: 99466
Speaker 1: Did you know Dewey Hughes?
Speaker 2: I knew Dewey, in fact, when I was at WOOK, WOOK Radio, which was AM at first, and WOL was our chief competitor.  This was before FM really became popular.  WHUR was the college station.  WOL was the power house AM in town, with Mr. C, and Bobby Bennett [HM] and that.  And then WOOK, WOOK Radio, was the chief competitor, and I was over there.  And then at some point, there was the FM, WOOK.  WOOK was being programmed Hispanic.  But when FM became dominant, the broadcasting company took the FM and made it urban, and gave the AM signal to the Hispanics.  So, they sort of did a flop.  I remember when I graduated from high school, I went to work at WPGC.  It was the number one top 40 in Washington, D.C., located in Morningside, Maryland.  Actually, yeah, Morningside--Bladensburg, Maryland, licensed in Morningside.  I remember going there at WPGC and learning from those guys, while I was still in broadcast school.  The woman who graduated before me was working at the post office, working in government, at the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and didn't want to leave her good government job.  So, she said, "Harry, why don't you go try?"  And that's how I got at WPGC.  And those guys set me down from day one, and taught me how to be a radio announcer.
Speaker 1: So, now, this is about what year, WPGC?
Speaker 2: PGC, it's got to be '71 [1971], '72 [1972], maybe early seventies.  I was there for maybe, about a year, maybe a year and a half.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  In fact, they told me that if I didn't leave, they were going to fire me.  And I said, "Why?"  They said, "Because you've learned as much as you can learn, you know.  You need to go out there and do this, you know.  You can't stay here and practice in the studio."
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: They didn't fire me, I left.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Good terms.
Speaker 1: So, did you go to WOOK then?
Speaker 2: Actually, I went to North Carolina, to my father's hometown, New Bern [North Carolina], WRNB.  And then I went across town to WSFL.  And the reason I left--I was at WRNB for three or four months, and then a friend--
Speaker 1: What happened there?  I mean, were you the only black disc jockey on the station?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was the only one there at the time.  And there was another station, FM, coming on the air across town, and they wanted to hire some black jocks.  They had one guy, Chris Whitfield, "Super Chris."  And they, he asked me to come over.  And the only reason I went is because my fiancee at the time could hear me back in Turkey [North Carolina].  Folks could hear me in my hometown.  So, I left after three or four months at WRNB, and went over to WSFL.  And that's how I sort of... so they could hear me back in my hometown.  Mom [Lucy Boomer] and Dad [George Boomer] didn't like the music I was playing, but being a preacher's kid--
Speaker 1: Too secular for them?
Speaker 2: Oh yeah, they thought I was going to hell in a hand basket.  But, oh well.
Story_ID: 99467
Speaker 1: What was the popular... now, this is '73 [1973].  This is the beginning of funk, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it was still R and B.
Speaker 1: Still mostly R and B?
Speaker 2: Yeah, still mostly R and B.  They were singing, and that.  It was still the Delfonics, and the Dells, and those guys, and the swooners and that kind of stuff.  Yeah, it was, they were singing then.  And we did get, you know, some funk in there.  But--
Speaker 1: Is James Brown considered a funk musician?
Speaker 2: Yeah, oh, yeah.  James was always big.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, yeah, yeah.  There weren't... yeah.
Speaker 1: And I think maybe by that time, you know, Parliament Funkadelic had started up.  But we didn't have like--it wasn't the middle of the funk explosion, but it was like--
Speaker 2: The beginning of it, yeah.
Speaker 1: I guess the beginning.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so, they didn't even like the love songs, and that sort of thing?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: My mother [Lucy Boomer], I remember--and I don't know this for real--but she didn't like the saxophone.  She said it was sinful.  And I think she didn't like it... and this is just... just her son...  I think it moved her in ways that she didn't like, so she called it sinful.
Speaker 1: You know, when they have sex scenes in movies, they always have the saxophone.
Speaker 2: Maybe that was it.  But I think she liked it, but didn't like it, if you get my drift.  And, you know, a very religious lady, and was not real happy that her son was playing that sinful music on the radio.  And I remember--and I'm going to get in trouble here--my sisters telling me that "You're going to mess up Daddy's [George Boomer] name."  And I said, "Let me ask you something.  If I'm over here sinning, playing all this sinful music, and somebody who goes to Daddy's church is listening to me, who's backsliding?"  They didn't like that too much. (Laughter).  But being a smart mouthed kid, I, you know...  So, they kind of left me alone.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, here you are today--you know, respectable, distinguished, gray beard and all, you know.  But, you know, in those days you're playing the cutting edge of black music, basically?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.  I was the music director, too, and I was in the clubs and on radio at the same time.  And loved that, because I would take what I learned from the clubs--and watching how people responded to the music--and brought it to the radio.  We had a playlist, and I played what everybody else played.  But West and I, the gentleman I mentioned earlier from Def Jam, put it together so differently, because we were club jocks.  We would see--you could play a record that had 90 beats a minute, and then go to one that played 120 beats a minute... people would break their legs trying to adjust.  But if you took one at 90 and mixed it with 95, and then up to 100...  And how you did it... there was a transition.  And people would relate, they wouldn't go through those changes.  So, that kind of helped us a lot.
Story_ID: 99468
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have a favorite performer in those days, or a favorite musician?
Speaker 2: I really loved The Temptations, and I loved The Dells, especially.  I remember growing up listening to The Dells, "Oh, What a Night" and "Stay in My Corner," those kinds of songs.  I remember--I really shouldn't say this because somebody might see it in the family--going down to the juke joint, and slow drag to The Dells, (Laughter) you know, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: But the message of the songs...  I mean, it seems funny now... that in light of the kind of music we have on the air today... that something like "Stay in My Corner" would be considered like too secular for--
Speaker 2: If it wasn't gospel or country, we weren't supposed to listen to it.
Speaker 1: Country was acceptable, huh?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I could listen to a little country.
Speaker 1: Back home--
Speaker 2: In Turkey [North Carolina].
Speaker 1: --in Turkey?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Country music was considered okay by your parents [Lucy Boomer and George Boomer]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  I mean, I don't that anything else outside of gospel was okay; they tolerated it a little bit.  But the secular music--R and B and the funk, and that kind of stuff, no, they didn't like that at all.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that's okay.  I mean, that's what they didn't like, and I did.  And I did what I did, you know.
Story_ID: 99469
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, alright.  So, moving forward.  So, you were at WSFL, and then where did you go after WSFL?  Did you--
Speaker 2: Then I--
Speaker 1: Is that when you go to WOOK?  Is it?
Speaker 2: I went back to [Washington] D.C. and sort of--and at that point I was not, I was not on radio per se in D.C., before I went to North Carolina.  And I went back to the clubs, and there was a disc jockey "Cowboy" who was on the radio.  And he had visited the club, was visiting the club one night.  I said, "Man, I really want to do this again.  You know, I was down in North Carolina..."  He said, "I'll tell you what.  Come up and see me when you get off, and I'll let you make a tape, and you can give it to Mr. Holland in the morning."  He was the, he wasn't the general manager, but the manager of the station.  And so, I went up and he showed me, helped me put the other... what do you call them... audition tape, a spec tape.  And I played it for Mr. Holland.  He said, "Well, I'll tell you what, Boomer.  We'll try you this weekend.  If you work out, we'll keep you."  I was there for ten years.
Speaker 1: Well, that's a long time.  So, basically, did you play the same role when you were doing music, or did you start getting into news?
Speaker 2: I was playing music most of the time.  And then--I'll tell you what kind of made me want to transition out of music so much.  Well, the first thing, I was working the graveyard shift.  And the FCC [Federal Communications Commission] deregulated broadcasting, and they then put most of the news late night.  I was ripping and reading more news copy than our news people during the regular broadcast day.  So, I got sort of caught up into doing that and started liking it, that kind of thing, and just sort of transitioned.  And then I remember in my own brain how distasteful it was for me when...  Some of the songs that became, in my situation, a little overly lascivious, too risque.  Prince, loved the guy.  But "Soft and Wet..." and some of the things that he would say in that song...  It was, you know, I don't know, I guess the preacher kid in me came out, or whatever.  And I'm no holier than thou, I'm no angel, you know.  But I just couldn't--I used to say to people, "If I sit on the radio and play certain songs that conjures up a certain image in kids' minds, I'm a star.  If I reach into my pocket and pull out a picture, a pornographic picture, and show it to the kid, I'm a pedophile."  I couldn't square those two.  So, I had to start finding a way to transition out of playing music into something that was more positive, or at least something more educational, something that took me away from what I saw as a slippery slope.  And then when rap came in--and I loved rap initially.  But then it became misogynistic and dangerous, and "I'm going to shoot you" and, you know.  When it was, "I can out-rap you," that was one thing.  But when it got to be, you know, calling ladies names, and using all kinds of language that was disrespectful, I just couldn't do that anymore.
Story_ID: 99470
Speaker 1: So, you were there through the disco era too, right?
Speaker 2: I pre-dated disco.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I remember at the Mark IV, as a matter of fact, we had one turntable and one microphone and a Suremaster mixer.  And we'd put a record on, and we'd intro it until they started to sing.  And then we'd stop, or rap.  You know, how we used to rap and rhyme, and that kind of stuff.  When the record was going off, we'd turn it down, put the next record on... put the needle on, turn it back up.  And when it came on, we either continued the rap or just let it play.  And then we got the two turntables.  And we'd put the needle on.  When one came on, we'd turn the other down.  And then we got the headphones, and the slider.  And we would listen to the music, and we would... okay, it's about to come on, now.  We'd slide it over, and bam, there it was.  And then it got to, well, we could start it when you wanted to.  You know, you could do that, and start it on the beat, and then start mixing the beat.  So, I was in that generation where, even though I was not the pioneer of that, I was in the forefront of mixing music on the beat in [Washington] D.C.  They were doing it a little more ahead of us in New York.  But in D.C., I remember being at the Mark IV during the mid-day party.  Every Thursday, we had a mid-day party, from 12 to 2.  People would come, not spend a dollar, and get in and dance for two hours, and go back to work.  Jimmy Castor Bunch had a record.  And, speaking of funk... and I had two... with the little 45 spindle.  And I said, "Well, I got two of the same records here, let me see."  So, I put it on, and I started it over, and I slid it over.  And every, all my fellow disco jocks, looked up, "What was that?"  They knew something was different.  Because they knew every beat.  We knew every beat, every breakdown... every twang of a guitar.  We knew everything about every song, because that's all we did.  And they said, "That song is not that long, something's different."  So, they all rushed over to the turntable, "What did you do?"  I said, "I don't know." (Laughter).  You know, so we ended up... they said, "Do it again."  So, I messed around... and bam.  "Oh, cool."  And we were off and rolling, off and rolling.
Speaker 1: So, what's the name for that?  I mean, how do you, what do you call it?
Speaker 2: Well, it's you know, mixing on a beat, slip curing, you know--
Speaker 1: Slip... okay.
Speaker 2: --that kind of thing.  We would literally count the beats per minute, and then we'd put on the little--put a little red dot or orange dot--and we'd put 90 beats per minute, or just 90, so you'd know.  Or, 85 or 100, or whatever.  And so, you could--even today, I can hear songs and say, "That would mix well with that other song, and this song, and that song."  Even in my head now.  I still have my Macho turntables.  One is in the basement... technique 1200's... the old workhorses from the disco era.  I have one in the basement that I work out to, and one upstairs that I use in conjunction with my, my DVD player to mix music--not like that, but just to play music.  I have still have them, they both work really well, right today.  And I had those before my daughter was born, and she's thirty-six years old.
Story_ID: 97771
Speaker 1: Okay.  We just wanted to add something about George Boomer.  Tell us about him.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  A buddy of mine, Dwight, that I mentioned a couple of times, was doing some genealogy, and realized that his family and my family, at a particular time, we ended up living close to each other, we thought just by happenstance.  It comes out that somebody in his family, an ancestor of his, was in the war, Revolutionary War, and somebody in my family was in the Revolutionary War, in the same regiment.  And somehow or another, we don't know how, they ended up living not far from each other.  George Boomer is a quarter master.  I did some tracing him all around.  You know, as he fought... actually, it was the Civil War, not Revolutionary, Civil War.  And it was just kind of interesting to see that history.  And there was an old musket that we had around the house.  Nobody ever thought twice about it.  And we, my brother who is closest to me in age, Joe, has that in his possession in Virginia.  It almost ended up at the bottom of the well.  The ladies in my family didn't necessarily like guns too much.  And so, they were going to toss it down the well, as we were all leaving the farm.  And Dwight just happened to be there, and stopped them.  And they, you know--
Speaker 1: That's quite a story.  So, somebody watching us later on--the children at least--have that link, you know, to that story.
Speaker 2: And there is a monument in [Washington] D.C. from the, it wasn't the Buffalo Soldiers.  But I think... and I haven't been through it, because I've been doing some research...  I believe his name is on that monument.  People--it was called the Colored Soldiers--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --Regiment.  It was like, yeah.
Speaker 1: It's not too far from Howard [University, Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 2: Yeah, exactly.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I never knew it existed, until I started doing this research.
Speaker 1: Right, right.
Speaker 2: So, his name is on there somewhere.
Speaker 1: It's fairly new, it hasn't been up long.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Is that... It's near one of the subway--
Speaker 1: Right.  That's right, exactly, right.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Yeah, the man who started it, I think is a--runs it, basically.  He's there, you know, as a curator of it.
Speaker 2: I'd like to go find out about him.
Story_ID: 97772
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, this is--so, we were talking about all the music, and your career in music, as we approach the eighties.  Now, you were at WOOK until '84 [1984]?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And so, I was asking you off-camera about--when we were off--about E.U. [Experience Unlimited] and the go-go...  I mean the go-go era stuff, with Chuck Brown, and then--
Speaker 2: Chuck Brown, the father of go-go in [Washington] D.C.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah, he recently passed away, a really good guy.  Could have been huge, just never wanted to travel.  He didn't want to leave D.C.  He'd play around... he played at Anacostia Park forever, would never go any other place, really, but Anacostia.  And they would pack it every summer.  But he just didn't want to travel.  I guess maybe his wife wanted him closer to home.  But he could have been as big as anybody.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Chuck Brown was...  He had that one record everybody knew about.
Speaker 2: "Bustin' Loose."
Speaker 1: Bustin' Loose.
Speaker 2: "I feel like bustin' loose."  (Laughter).
Speaker 1: He was like the James Brown of D.C., you know, yeah.  [singing]:  "Da, da, da...  da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da, da."
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, and E.U., you think they were like a younger... I mean--
Speaker 2: They were an off-shoot of Chuck Brown.  They were heavily influenced by Chuck Brown.  Even the music I hear coming out of D.C. today still has that undertone of go-go, even today, in 2014.  It's amazing.
Story_ID: 97773
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.  So, so, this is... as you're spinning records, black people are making some headway in the news.  We've got like, we have Bernard Shaw, we've got--
Speaker 2: Max Robinson.
Speaker 1: Yeah, Max Robinson being the first black network--news anchor--on network broadcasting.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  I used to watch him with wonderment, and think, you know, "I want to do that."  I remember Bernard Shaw, obviously, a little later.  I remember hearing about Max talk about how difficult it was for him when he was anchoring.  A lot of people didn't want him there, and they made it difficult for him.  Being a man who reads a teleprompter for a living every day, I can tell you, that if that prompter isn't right, you're doing this--reading and looking up.  And I heard that folks would intentionally speed the prompter up, so it would go so fast you couldn't keep up.  Or, slow it down so much, you just literally, you just go like this [speaking slowly].  So, he had to learn his copy so well, that he still could be professional, and look as if he knew what he was talking about.  Because he was being set up to fail.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Now, this is a story.  Some people may say today, "Who would do that?  You know, there's no discrimination.  The Civil Rights Movement is over with by the time that he comes on the air."  But this is--
Speaker 2: It's real.  And it's still real.  Yeah, we don't live in a post-racial America.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: We're not all judged by the content of our character, not even today.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Carole Simpson [HM] said that they set her desk on fire when she was on the radio in Chicago [Illinois].  But did you, what kind of experiences...?  I mean, well, you were still--now, you're still playing records, until '84' [1984]?  Or, when did you start transitioning to the news?
Speaker 2: Probably in the mid-eighties, early to mid-eighties.  I remember speaking of trying times.  I was in the South at WSFL, as a matter of fact.  And I wanted to do commercials.  But the program director said, "You can't do commercials."  I said, "Yes, I can."  He said, "No, you can't, you sound too black."  I said, "Really?"  He said, "But I'll tell you what you can do."  He said, "You can take out trash in the morning."  I climbed across the console at him.  He ran out screaming.  I was fired the next day.  Good thing, because I would have probably been lynched the next day.  But the thing is, is that I ran into that, dealt with that... probably could have sued.  It was very early on in my career--actually, my first year, because I'd left WRNB and gone to WSFL.  But I had a choice to make, very similar to one that Cathy Hughes [HM] made, in another sense.  Do I sue in the South, and maybe win in five or ten or twenty years, and never have a career in broadcasting?  Or, do I suck it up and move on, and achieve my agenda?  I decided to move on.  Prejudice was nothing new to me, I grew up around it, you know.  People looked at me, and wanted to hang me the next minute.  And would have, if they could have gotten away with it.  So, it didn't--it fazed me, but it didn't discourage me to the point that I said, "Let me sue."  Because I would stymied my career right then and there.  And I mentioned Cathy Hughes in another sense.  When she and Dewey, her husband at the time, were going to buy WOL, their first radio station, she recalls this, recounts this story:  How she was sitting across the desk from the owner, Sunderland, I believe his name was Sunderland.  And they were talking business.  And Mr. Sunderland said something, and she went to answer.  "I'm not talking to you, I'm talking to your husband."  Now, if you know Cathy Hughes, you know she's no shrinking violet.  But she said--and she's recounted this on the radio--that she had to think for a second.  "What's most important?  Me standing my ground, or Dewey and me getting this radio station?"  They got the radio station.  And now she is the biggest African-American owner and media... you know, in America.  Has her own TV network, TV One, Radio One, Radio Network.  So, you know, those kinds of things to me are instructive, but I try to pass those on when I can.  Because, you know, you can make a good decision or a bad decision, but you're going to have to make some decision.  'Yes' or 'no' is cool, but 'maybe so' will kill you.  But she made a definitive decision at that moment, to say "What's most important?"  And I think she made the right decision.  I think I made the right decision.
Story_ID: 97774
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, as we were talking about Max Robinson, you know, Ed Bradley, Bernard Shaw, others who--
Speaker 2: And others in [Washington] D.C. that I was watching--Jim Vance [HM] at WRC, and Paul Berry [HM], Maureen Bunyan [HM], K.C. Haywood.  You know, listening to people on radio, like Night Hawk and Bobby Bennett and Mr. C, and Cowboy, and Soul Papa.  Those were the guys in radio when I was there, the guys I listened to.  You know, they all had a major influence on me.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, so, you started making a--well, tell us about the...  I guess in 1982 there's a major shift, when you start being a producer and host of the Harry Boomer Show, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Storer Cable, in Prince George's County.  D.C. did not have cable at the time.  I was in radio; I was at the Columbia School of Broadcasting as an instructor.  I'd gone to school there, but I went back as an instructor for five and a half years.  I would take students who showed a certain eagerness and propensity to learn, and want to do...  I would take them from the Columbia School of Broadcasting [Arlington, Virginia] with me over to Storer Cable.  And we, because of public access, they would train me to do everything that I needed to do, from...  They take your concept and make it television.  So, I would take my students over, and we would make television.  I would host, and they would run the camera.  Then they would come off camera, and they would do a report, and we'd go shoot.  I remember--speaking of Robinson--I remember Randall Robinson covering the South African Embassy and the apartheid, anti-apartheid movement.  I had Randall Robinson on my show.  I had Michael Steele on my show.  He was Prince George's County Commissioner.  I think it was Commissioner at the time.  I had him on the show.  So, back in the day, the Harry Boomer Show was news and information, and entertainment as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: On Storer Cable.
Speaker 1: Alright.  So, let's see.  So, the Harry Boomer Show is like a cable--
Speaker 2: Public access.
Speaker 1: Public access cable show.  Now, Storer Broadcasting, that sounds suspiciously like Storer College, the black college, that I guess closed its doors in 1959.  Is there relationship between that?
Speaker 2: I don't, I don't think so.  There's a Storer Cable, like Adelphia and Time Warner.  It was a local cable provider in Prince George's County at the time.  I don't even know if they're still there, it's been so long.
Speaker 1: It wasn't black owned or anything?
Speaker 2: No, no.
Speaker 1: Okay, alright.  I wondered, Storer College was a black college in Harper's Ferry, right?  Harper's Ferry, West Virginia.  Okay.  So, alright.  So, you're doing the, you did the show for six years?
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: From '82 [1982] to '88 [1988].
Story_ID: 97775
Speaker 1: One of those many jobs that I had.  I'd do the, you know, the radio, the cable TV show, the instruction at Columbia School of Broadcasting [Arlington, Virginia], clubs, 'one-nighters' as a disc jockey.  I got a hernia, loading a bunch of records and those big old speakers and stuff around, you know.  Back in the day, there wasn't a laptop, you know.  You had big... you know, JBL speakers, and sub-woofers, and amplifiers, and records in music crates and in milk crates.
Speaker 2: So, what was a typical day like for you?  Would you get up and?  What would you, I mean, what were your hours?
Speaker 1: Whatever the shift was I was working on the radio... that almost always took precedence.  Because that was radio, that was something you wanted to do.  And I worked everything from late night to mornings, to mid-days.  I did news at WOOK.  I was the news director for Cathy Hughes [HM] at WOL for two years, and her fill-in host, if you will, for the Cathy Hughes Morning Show.  And eventually, I left there and went across town to a news station, with the promise of great things that didn't materialize.  That's when I left [Washington] D.C.  A friend of the family brought me to Ohio, back in 1988.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: And that's--
Speaker 2: So, so, there was a time when you were doing like maybe four things at the same time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I was always busy, very enterprising.  Never making any great money, just busy.  You know, honing the skill, learning the craft--growing in ways that I hadn't even realized would someday, in some way, blossom into whatever it is I'm doing now.  Every little thing added to who I am today, good and bad.
Story_ID: 97776
Speaker 1: So, were you married by this time in [Washington] D.C.?
Speaker 2: I never got married.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Never got married.  I jokingly say, and it's, I guess I really shouldn't joke about it.  But, I was the wrong man for the right woman at the wrong time.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any children at this point?
Speaker 2: I do have. No, well, I have a daughter, born in 1977.  And in fact, I met her mother in a club.  I, she was talking to me and I was, saw her and I went out and talked to her and asked her what record could I play.  And it was a Patti LaBelle record, "Isn't it a Shame."  She had just broken up with her fiance.  And as she was leaving, I stuck it on the jukebox, on the turntable.  And she turned around. Yeah, so, and I gave her my number.  And believe it or not, she walked outside and threw it on the ground.  Then she stopped and picked it up.  And she called.  And forty, almost forty years later, we're best of friends and, you know, love each other as co-parents and as human beings.  And she has done a magnificent job raising my daughter, and doing an even more magnificent job helping to raise my grandkids.  I owe her a lot.
Story_ID: 97777
Speaker 1: Alright, okay, alright.  So, 1988.  Now, this is the move here to Cleveland [Ohio].  So, what happened in Cleveland?  You've got a friend of yours that had a radio station in Canton [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Well, what had happened was in 1988, Mr. Ingram was my brother's roommate in law school at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].  They were both at Howard, in law school.  He's from Akron [Ohio], and he bought a station.  He and another doctor friend of his bought a station in Canton, home of the football Hall of Fame.  And he, of course, knew about my being in radio in D.C., and listened to me for years, and all that.  And he asked me to come out here to Ohio, and to program WBXT 900 AM in Canton.  And that's what brought me out here.
Speaker 1: Now, this is a Dr. Ingram?
Speaker 2: Well, he was, he was a lawyer.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: He had a doctor friend, I can't remember his name now; it's been so long ago.  But his partner was a doctor.  I mean he may have had a couple of partners, but I remember one in particular.  And they brought me out here to program WBXT, called it "The Soul of the City."  Just like WOOK that was in D.C. ... they had Soul of the City.  We had, you know, we used both--we even did the Daily Drum.  If you remember WHUR, the Daily Drum...  I did the Daily Drum down in Canton, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, I guess they can't copyright anything in your television... because they're using the same--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --sign on, and all these things all over the country.
Speaker 2: Exactly right, yeah.  And it's sort of a testament that if it works, people will take it and use it.  So, it worked out okay, I guess.
Speaker 1: In different locales.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.  And no one's ever going to hear about it anyway, probably.
Speaker 1: Okay, so the Daily Drum.  Okay, a one hour live call-in talk show?  Okay.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: So, this is--yeah, this is the show that Kojo Nnamdi [HM], I think was doing in D.C.--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --too.  So, you're in Canton.  Now, this is an area that, you know, is, a lot of black people live in northeast Ohio.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: It's a metro area.  You've got--you know, Kent [Ohio], Canton--
Speaker 2: And Canton is like 55 miles south of Cleveland.  I used to drive it seven days a week for two years, working at WBXT, a little bit for the city, when I needed to find something to do in order to eat.  I'd work in the clubs there, work for the city for a quick minute, work for the radio station, drive up to Cleveland... going in the hole every time I drove up here.  But somehow or another, God made a way.  And I volunteered at WUAB Channel 43 for about six months, until they hired me part-time in the public affairs department, initially, and then just kept going from there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so, well, what--did BXT go off the air, or what happened?
Speaker 2: It eventually went off.  Well, actually, this is one of those heartbreaking stories.  Mr. Ingram, and I won't give his first name. I don't want to embarrass him anymore than that, kind of walked away from the venture... from the venture.  I think it was a couple of things.  He didn't have the money he needed, and the banks kept nickeling and diming him to death.  "Give me one more piece of paper."  "Here's a little bit of money."  Just enough to fail, not ever enough to make it.  And he got discouraged, and he walked away.  I remember coming off the air, and going to the streets and selling advertising.  Me and one other gentleman sold over $18,000 worth of advertising in two weeks.  And before we could get those commercials cut and on the air, they pulled the plug.  Because there was so much money in arrears that they pull what is called the loop, from the transmitter to the radio station.  They cut that connection, the electricity.  Whatever the bill was, hadn't been paid, so they just... we went off the air.  I called the phone company, and said, "Hey, look, I've got $18,000 worth of billing here.  Give me, give me a month and a half to put these things on the air to collect some money."  Blah, blah, blah.  Well, I didn't have the authority, I was not general manager.  He had walked away earlier, you know, trying to make a living.  He left.  So, I was basically there by myself.  Mr. Ingram was in Maryland someplace doing whatever it was he was doing, discouraged, whatever.  And so, had he answered my phone call, and had he made a phone call back to the phone company, we probably could have saved the station.  But I didn't have the legal authority to make that work.  So, I called him on the phone, and he didn't pick up.  And I said, "The baby has died."  And I hung up, my last communication with him.
Speaker 1: So, you were with it to the end?
Speaker 2: To the end.  Brokenhearted, discouraged, broke, but not defeated, you know.  Bloodied in a sense, but not defeated.
Story_ID: 97778
Speaker 1: And so, I ended up just putting more energy into trying to get to Cleveland [Ohio], while working the clubs in Canton--working for the City of Canton  [Ohio] and the Youth Development department for a quick minute--to make a little bit of money so I could eat and pay the rent, that kind of thing.  And so, I long ago forgave Mr. Ingram for all of that.  Because had he not done--had he not done what he did, I wouldn't be doing what I'm doing.  It wasn't our plan to have it work out this way.  But as my mama used to always say, "God will make a way, he will see you through."  So, I found just in not giving up, and keeping my, keep putting one foot in front of the other, I found a way to succeed.  I often tell students, "As long as you do the right things, and keep heading in the right direction, and don't stop, you'll get to the destination.  You're going to run into stumbling blocks and stumbling stones, and everything else.  But make those stumbling blocks stepping stones, instead of the things you fall down and don't get back up from."  So, I used my dissatisfaction with where I was, to motivate me to be who I wanted to be at that time, to do what I now do--not knowing that all of that would come together the way it has.  I've been blessed.
Speaker 2: Okay.  So, it was a lot of determination.  You, now, you started working in 1990 with Cleveland Public Radio?
Speaker 1: Uh huh.  I can remember driving up from Canton... and I had my car... as fast as it would go... breaking some speed limits, getting up here.  I dashed up the stairs at Cleveland Public Radio.  It was East 30th and Chester at the time.  And I was running just a little bit late.  I wasn't late, but I was close to late.  The general manager told me one time, she said, "If you have a 9 o'clock appointment, and you show up at 9 o'clock, you're late.  You need to be there ahead of time."  But that was years later.  But so, I dashed up the stairs, and I was so out of breath, "Can I speak to Annabelle Sang?"  He said, "Okay."  So, I took a minute, calmed down, got my breath back together, and we had the interview.  And she said, "You know, I was so impressed with your getting here, and your tenacity, that..."  So, they gave me the job as a reporter/producer at the time.  I ended up becoming the assistant news director.  And one of the years that I was there, our news director became ill with cancer.  And I, in effect, ran the news department at that point.  And we, at that--we won that year the number one public radio news operation in the state of Ohio, under my guidance.  And my general manager said to me, she said, "I didn't know you had those skills."  I said, "Well, I don't have a degree, but you never gave me a chance."  And she said, "Well, I know you have the skills now," and so forth.  So, we worked it out.  We're still very good friends.  But that's just one of those things that life throws at you.  You've got to dodge it, or deal with it.
Speaker 2: That's one of the struggles that Randall, I mean, Max Robinson, had to deal with--the fact that he was not a trained journalist.  They would often say, "Well, you can't do this because you're not--
Speaker 1: Uh huh.
Speaker 2: --a journalist."
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And you run into those roadblocks all the time, and I've run into my share.  And I've gone under them, and around them, and through them sometimes.
Story_ID: 97779
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, so, you also began working as a morning and noon co-anchor reporter for 19 Action News in 1990, right?  Is that true?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I was--I don't think it was right in 1990.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But over the years, I've been there for, this is my 24th year.  I am the longest continuous on-air personality at both channels, 19 and 43, of those two stations.  Now, there have been people who have been with one station a little longer, one with the other.  But not continuous, with both.  So, nobody's been there longer than I have, let's put it that way--on air.
Speaker 1: So, this is, this is simultaneous with--
Speaker 2: WCPN.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, you're working--
Speaker 2: I was working full-time radio--
Speaker 1: --radio.
Speaker 2: --part-time television, full time television, and part-time radio.  And so, probably three or four or five years ago, when I just decided I needed to concentrate on television...  I was now making enough money to survive, not getting rich, but enough to survive.  So, and I wanted to find a way to use some other skills, and I started working myself to death.  So--
Speaker 1: Now we, well, there's an article about you in your living room--about how hard you've worked, and how you always have worked--these four jobs going at once.  It reminds me of Hal Jackson [HM] in New York, who had TV shows, I think, in New Jersey, New York City, and in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] at the same time--or radio shows.  But, so, what was your day like in these days?  What were you--well when you go to PBS, and when would you--?
Speaker 2: I'd go to the--depending upon when I was working at which one full-time.  If I was doing WCPN, it was basically a 9 to 5.  And then I would go to WUAB Channel 43 on weekends or evenings, after I got off work from the radio station.  And then when I started working full-time television, I'd work on a freelance basis with WCPN doing reports and that.  When I left, if my recollection is correct, I had won more awards than anybody in the history of the radio station to that date.  That was at WCPN.  I remember the general manager, Kit Jensen, saying to me one day, "Harry, I want to hear your voice.  I want to hear what you have to say, in the confines of good public radio.  But I want to hear your voice."  That was such a liberating thing for me to hear, it opened up a whole new world for me.  And that's when I did one of the programs that won me an award, "Black Power Redefined," where I went to highly placed African-Americans in Cleveland [Ohio]--the Mayor, the president of the local community college, other people of note in the community--and said, "Tell me, where were you when you heard "Say It Loud, I'm Black and I'm Proud?"  And how did that song, how did that song impact your thinking and your actions, to motivate you, if it did, to where you are today?"  And that is how Black Power Redefined came out.  And I remember Kit saying to me, she said, "Harry, I notice you didn't have any black, any white people, in Black Power Redefined.  I said, "Well, Kit, it wasn't about white people, it's about black people."  And I said, and she wasn't saying it in a negative sense, but just an observation.  She said, "Well, you know, okay.  See, it was hard to listen to, because it was just there.  But I understand, and I appreciate what you're saying, you know.  It was about where you were, and where you are now, and how that...  What was the thread that got you there, the road that led to there?"  And she said, "But, I'm glad you did it."  And it ended up winning an award.  It was important for me to find my voice, and she gave me that opportunity.  I will always be grateful for that.  And that stays in my brain, even today--not that my voice is some angelic kind of wisdom...  I've been blessed in how I've been blessed, as we all have our own individual blessings.  But just having somebody say, "I want to hear who you are," that's so-- it's such a liberating thing.
Story_ID: 97780
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, at WUAB--WOIO...  Was this your--now, this is your first job on a major network television station, right?
Speaker 2: Commercial television.
Speaker 1: On the air, commercial TV?
Speaker 2: Uh huh.
Speaker 1: Because you had been on cable in Washington [D.C.].
Speaker 2: Right.  At WHUR, under WHMM, at Howard University [Washington, D.C.].
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: With Kojo Nnamdi [HM] and those kinds of guys, just a little bit.  I had also somewhere in there worked at Channel 45 and 49 down in Kent, Ohio, Kent State University for summer, doing some stuff with them, interning.  And then worked as a reporter there.  But yeah, this is my first commercial operation--news, public affairs, that kind of thing.
Speaker 1: So, how did you start there?  Did you start doing like weekend stuff?  Or what was going on?
Speaker 2: Well, actually, I started as a volunteer.  I was down in Canton [Ohio] at WBXT.  A very good friend of mine, Ron Ponder, knew the news director at WUAB.  He called him and said, "Hey, I've got this friend down here who's in radio.  He wants to do television.  He's done a little cable stuff here and there, but he wants to do television.  And can we come up and visit?"  He said, "Well, Ron, I've got about 15, 20 minutes on Thursday.  If you guys want to come up and spend 15 minutes, drive 55 miles, 110 ten miles a day... you know, come on up."  We went up; we spent three hours. And as I was leaving Dan's office, I turned around and said, "Hey, Dan, do you mind if I come back?"  He said, "Boomer, come back anytime you want."  I was back the next evening, and I've always been there, 24 years now.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And they started paying you right away, I mean, when you came back?
Speaker 2: I volunteered for... it was really funny.  I was, I tell people that I was a star in D.C. ... radio, disc jockey, news, Radio One, WOL with Cathy [Hughes HM].  Came down here to Canton to run a radio station, didn't work out very well.  But I was still working in Canton at the time, doing the morning show.  I was called "The Morning Mover."  I don't know why Mr. Ingram wanted me to be the Morning Mover.  I didn't like that, but anyway I was doing the Morning Mover.  And I was also then coming back...  I would then go out and program the station during the day, and then do the Daily Drum in the evening.  And then on some evenings, I would come up to Channel 43 to volunteer.  I was, as I said, a star in Canton, but getting coffee in Cleveland.  I was a coffee czar.  I would collect money from those of us who drank coffee, go down to Sam's Club and buy coffee and creamer and sugar every month and a half or two, depending upon when it ran out; write these little memos, and everyone would donate, and I'd go buy the coffee and then I would, that's what I'd do.  I was in the house so I was there, I was seeing, I was learning.  And then they started me on the assignment desk, a couple of weeks I was doing that. And then they said, "Okay, it's yours."  You know, listening to the scanners, making rounds, calling police, the fire departments all around northeast Ohio to see if there was anything happening.  And then there was a program called "Uniquely Lorain, a public affairs show.  The predecessor of the show that I am now the executive producer of...  I now host, I write and research and book, even today, on top of being the morning co-anchor and the noon co-anchor and reporting during the day.  Still, that's three or four jobs (Laughter), even now.  But they made me, then, the news director at that time said to the Public Affairs director, "If you can get him on the air in Public Affairs in time, I'll find a way to ease him into the news department."  He saw in me the desire, the ability, I guess, whatever.  And so, she put me on the air with Uniquely Lorain.  And over the last twenty-plus years, I went from being the volunteer reporter to now hosting the show every week, you know, so.
Story_ID: 97781
Speaker 1: Well, there's a message in there about getting--being there, right?  Being on-- being there...
Speaker 2: I can look through the window inside the house, but I'm just looking in, you know, in the house.  I am warmed by the heat, I am comforted by the conversation, I am learning by being at the knee of.  Outside looking in, versus being inside participating.  And that's where I was.  And that's why I tell everybody I talk to, who wants to do this: volunteer, internships.  You're not giving away your time, you're getting paid in experience and exposure and contacts.  Go do some internships, they are invaluable.  You cannot pay for that, you just can't.  "I can't afford to give away my time."  You're not giving away your time, you are learning, you are growing in ways you don't even know.  Every job I've ever had has come as a consequence of my telling somebody about my dream, who was doing what I wanted to do, or near somebody doing what I wanted to do. Every job I've ever got, somebody said, "You know what, Harry Boomer wanted to do this.  Give him a call."  "Hey, Harry, Cathy..."  A job with Cathy Hughes [HM].  A buddy of mine, Wes Johnson, who I was mentioning... with Def Jam... was in Cathy's Hughes' radio station promoting records, and just happened to hear her say, "I need somebody to do news."  "You know Harry Boomer from the OK 100, right?"  "Yeah."  "Well, he wants to do news."  "So, have him call me."  Two years, her news director.  This was five years after I told Wes I wanted to do this.  But it happened.  So, you have to be grateful, and you have to pass that kind of stuff on.
Story_ID: 97782
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, now, there was a--I have a note in here about a special you did in '92 [1992] for WCPM FM, called "A Separate City, Race Relations in Cleveland."    Was that--?
Speaker 2: That was an important piece of work.  And I think--and a lot of people worked with me on that.  But essentially--and this is something a lot of people don't either know, or want to know.  But, Cleveland [Ohio] is among the five most segregated cities in America.  There's a west side, east side divide here even in 2014.  I live in an historic and/or infamous Huff neighborhood of Cleveland that burned in the late mid-sixties, late to mid-sixties, like so many cities in America.
Speaker 1: This is the one they made the movie, "Uptight" about.
Speaker 2: Yeah, this it.
Speaker 1: Back in 1967.
Speaker 2: I live in Huff, I live in the hood by choice.  And so, but what I said--and what we did in that was to point out that there is--there are problems, and there are solutions.  And we have to find a way to bridge that gap... west side, east side.  This is Metro Cleveland, this is Greater Cleveland.  Cleveland cannot be as great as it can be, if it's divided.  No house divided can stand.  And so, we looked at race and those kinds of things, and tried to bring some clarity to it.  Some people heard it, some people didn't.  I mean, they heard the words, but they didn't internalize the words.  And that's both black and white.  You know, we all have our crosses to bear, and we all bear our share of the blame for whatever is happening or not happening.  It's not that white people were so bad that they kept us back.  Sometimes we keep ourselves back.  I tell people all the time, in another venue, that people that look like me kill people that look like me more than anybody else in America today.  The [Ku Klux] Klan's [KKK] job is done; we do it to ourselves.  And why?  So, I don't want to get too far or get too ethereal on you.  But you know, that's... you know, kind of where we went with that.
Story_ID: 97783
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Let's see.  So, so all through the nineties, you're producing award-winning broadcasts for public television, I mean radio.
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: And you're making your way as a, you're getting more and more ensconced in television.  So, where did you first anchor a TV news show?
Speaker 2: In the mornings, I used to anchor--it must have been like eight or nine years ago.  I did that for a couple of years, and then they took me off the mornings.  Why?  Your guess is as good as mine.  They put me back in the mornings about four months ago.  I was anchoring the noon for maybe a little better than a year with my current co-anchor, both morning and noon, Catherine Bosley.  I don't know why I was removed from the morning show, years ago.  And I'm there now, and I'm going to make the best of it.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, do you get a chance to do special reports for the, for WOIO?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we do, I do...  I'm the general assignment reporter, at least I was a lot more than I am now.  I still lead a report every day, or every other day, even now.  When I anchor the morning, I get off the air and find a story, put it together, leave it for later, anchor the noon, try to get up by up 1 o'clock, 2 o'clock, you know, whatever, kind of thing.  But yeah, I've been--I'm a general assignment reporter, so to speak.  Whatever comes up that day, I do, whether it's shootings or fires or something happening at State Hall.  Like, just recently here in Cleveland [Ohio], we got a brand new police chief.  You know, we covered that.  You know, just whatever is going on, that's my bailiwick; I just do it, you know.  One of the things that I enjoyed very much was the contact with people.  And I haven't said this to anybody.  But I have, I've been having to some degree, contact withdrawal.  Because, if you're out there, you're used to touching people's hands, and talking with them about their lives every day.  And then all of a sudden, you're inside and insulated, and you don't get that kind of, that kind of food anymore.  For me, it was nurture; you miss it.  And I still report, but I just don't get out as much as I used to.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  In the mid-nineties, you did--you were one of the people that helped organize Cleveland's showing of the movie "Sankofa" by Haile Gerima.  Did you know him in [Washington] D.C. when you were--?
Speaker 2: Uh-uh.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Because I know he's now like director of film at Howard [University, Washington, D.C.], you know.  But--
Speaker 2: Yeah, and a lot of that came as a consequence of my work with WCPN, and all.  That was absolutely... I call it... working for WCPN was like getting a PhD degree every six months.  I talked to the experts about everything.  And you know, what I put down on tape and that eventually airs...  And public radio isn't a long form... so five and a half, six minutes.  There are two hours of stuff you never even get to put on television or on radio, you know.  So, you learn all that stuff, and it's in there.  And when you need it, you can pull on it, you can draw from it.  You can't use what you don't have, and if you have it, you can't use it.  So, I really enjoyed that whole thing.  And so, a lot of the cultural things that I ended up doing was as a consequence of my being at WCPN, one of the best experiences in my broadcast career.
Story_ID: 97784
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  So, who else is?  There's been articles written about the dearth of African-American faces in Cleveland [Ohio] broadcasting.  Who else is on the air?  Is there anyone else at WOIO?
Speaker 2: Yeah, our main anchor, Romona Robinson, started the 10 o'clock news at Channel 43.  She was there for probably ten years, a little better.  She left and went across town to our competitor, came back a couple of years ago.  She is the most beloved broadcaster in Cleveland... anchor person.  There's one guy who is a weather guy who's been here forever; who is revered, you know.  But... and he's an African-American.  And then there of course is Leon Bibb [HM], who has been around for a very long time, longer than I've been in this market.  Leon played a very significant role in my being able to get into television in Cleveland.  He had come down to the Urban League in Canton [Ohio] to speak, when I was working down there.  And he is a phenomenal speaker, phenomenal anchor, just a wonderful person.  And I went to Leon, I says, "Hey, Leon, I want to do what you do.  If I send you an audition tape and a resume, will you look at it?"  He said, "Sure, send it to me."  So, I put together my little spec tape and my resume, and I sent it up to Cleveland.  And it came back with a few red marks on it, but he said, "Keep doing what you're doing, man.  You're going to be alright."  Now, this is a man who--he and I co-anchor.  He anchors at noon at Channel 5, and I anchor at noon at Channel 19 and Channel 43.  We're now competing against each other.  But he had it in his heart not to see me as a threat, but he reached out and pulled me up, and gave me hand to do what I now do.  So, I owe him a great debt of gratitude as well.  Just a, just a selfless individual, just genuine.  Wonderful poet, wonderful public speaker... among the best in the business.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Who else?
Speaker 2: There is of course, Wayne Dawson, who works across town, who has been here longer than I have.  He used to do weekends when I first came here.  He and Eleanor Hayes did weekends at Channel 8.  They are the perennial power houses in town.  Well, he is now; Eleanor is doing other things.  But she left the business to run her father's McDonalds companies, and ended up getting tired of that, or whatever it is she did.  And she's now doing PR for one of the major hospitals in town.  But, so, there was Wayne, Romona, Leon... now there is Russ Mitchell [HM], who came from the network down to Cleveland.  There are other reporters who've been around for a very long time, lots of who have come and gone.  At our station there is Blake Chenault on air, African-American male.  We just hired a young lady as a, as an MMJ... shoot, edit, produce, write, the whole nine yards.  Shanice Wilson, she's there.  I think Romona, Blake, Shanice, and I... and Tiffany Tucker, who co-anchors the 10 o'clock news and reports... is also at our station.  And there are others at other stations as well.  I don't want to give them too much plug, you know.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 97785
Speaker 1: All right.  So, so now, is there a strong chapter of the National Association of Black Journalists [NABJ] here, do you know?
Speaker 2: Actually not.  It fell by the wayside, as it often does in so many cities.  No excuse... should be.  Rush and I, and a gentleman from the Plain Dealer, are talking about reinstituting that, getting that back together.  There is a need for it; I think there is a desire in some of us to make it happen again.  So, we are working on it slowly, put it that way.  We need to accelerate that process.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: You know how it is in many organizations:  Eighty percent of the work is done by twenty percent of the people, and that was the same thing; people get burned out.  There were lots of people from the Plain Dealer, actually, who did a lot of work for a lot of years in sustaining that organization and making it work.  And you know, you just get burned out.  You can't do everything, and... yeah.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 97786
Speaker 1: Now, so, I guess a couple of years ago, I guess you started...  Well, do you want to talk about some of your award winning shows for Public Radio?  Some of these...  I've got some notes about some of them, about an anti-Gingrich protest show...
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Newt Gingrich came to town when he was obviously in the Congress.  And there was a protest of his being here.  Newt and I don't see eye to eye, but that has no place in public television especially, or in radio.  But I covered that particular protest, and I think captured the sense of the moment for the report that I did with him.  People were not pleased that he was here; some pleased that he was here.  You know, Newt has always been a polarizing individual, or politician.  And so, that was what that was about, just covering his visit to Cleveland [Ohio].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And you did a three--well, you did a...  This is a series... one show, called "The Subject of Sex."
Speaker 2: That was... there were... that... the one that I recall was about an hour long, a documentary, if you will, for radio.  Salt-N-Peppa "The Subject is Sex."  "Let's talk about sex, Baby, let's talk about you and me..." that song.  Well, there was, at the time, a teacher who was designated by Disney as the number one teacher in America; he was from Cleveland.  And he and I went over to a suburban school, white school, in effect, a white school, and we talked about sex.  And he talked about the use of condoms and birth control and self-control, and all that stuff.  And that song was hot at the time, so I just sort of took that song...  And I remember, you know, that song coming on, and I said, "When, you know, you remember Married with Children, so you think you know all about sex.  Well, you don't.  Let's talk about sex, Baby, let's talk about..."  And so, you know, I kind of wove it all together, with sound from the students and from him, and you know, I just sort of wrote the stuff.  And it turned out pretty good.  It was an award winning piece, so yeah.
Speaker 1: Right, right, right.
Speaker 2: And it was kind of taboo.  I'm surprised at how well it turned out, and that it didn't get more...  It was more controversial, because, you know, we live in America, and some people don't like to talk about.  And so, there you have it.
Speaker 1: Okay.  In '98 [1998], a story of yours called "Police Chase" is awarded first place news report by the Press Club of Cleveland.  It was about the police chasing--
Speaker 2: Yeah, you know, the old high-speed chases, low-speed chases--chasing cars in urban centers where it shouldn't happen, you know.  People died because of that, sometimes unnecessarily, oftentimes unnecessarily; most times unnecessarily.  I have a very good relationship with the Cleveland police, but I say a bad cop makes a good cop look bad.  So, where there's a policy that is wrong, it should be called out and pointed out and corrected, just like if it were a broadcast policy that is wrong; it should be looked at and corrected.  So, I...  One of the things that I said when I was inducted into the Broadcasting Hall of Fame in 2007, with my news director sitting in the audience was, I see my job as this: to comfort the afflicted and to afflict the comfortable.  If I do that, I think I'm doing the right thing.  And so, this police chase story was about what is happening--the implications, the repercussions, you know, the ripple effect that takes place in a community, the distrust that it sows, the--you know, how it tears apart the policing community thing, and how... if I've got to run from you, how am I going to run to you when I need you... kind of thing?
Story_ID: 97787
Speaker 1: Well, what's your-- do you have a favorite news story or favorite report that you've done over the years?
Speaker 2: I've done so many.  But I think, one of the things that I was very proud of, and I didn't have a say in the end result, necessarily.  I covered it, was just within the last year, three young women who had been missing for a decade, almost a decade, were found.  I covered two of those stories.  One of the stories, Michelle Knight, fell off the map.  Nobody even had heard of her, and didn't know she was missing, except maybe for family.  But with Gina DeJesus and Amanda Berry, we covered those stories day in and day out, forever.  And I was out here in the backyard one day here at the house, working, hadn't turned the TV on.  And my neighbor came and said "They found those girls."  Like, "What girls?"  "Amanda and Gina."  I said, "What, dead?"  She said, "No."  I said, "You've got to be kidding me."  She said, "No, they're alive."  I ran in the house, turned on the TV, and "Oh my God."  So, I was like everybody else, glued to the TV.  The next day, I was down at the house with everybody else, you know, [Ariel] Castro's house and we kind of covered it, you know.  But it was amazing.  I met her... I met Gina's mom, I met Amanda's mom; I met the family.  Just, you know, covered the story for a decade, and never even thought that it was possible that these women would be found alive and well.  That was tremendous.
Speaker 1: Yeah, did the story break in 2012 or 2013?  Because I know they had, the trial is already--
Speaker 2: Well, because he, he kind of pled.  So, it had to be early '13 [2013], I'm thinking... or very late '12 [2012].  I, things get mixed up in my head.
Speaker 1: I'm trying to figure it out, too.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: But it's, it's--
Speaker 2: It may have been--
Speaker 1: -current, yeah.
Speaker 2: It may have been late '12 [2012] or very early '13 [2013], but it wasn't that long ago.  It was probably '13 [2013], because you know, a lot has happened, but it happened very quickly.  They, he pled guilty to some things.  He didn't want to be called a predator or whatever else...he loved them.  Yeah, right.  And so, he wasn't mean, just held them captive as sex slaves for a decade.  Beat one multiple times when she was pregnant, so she would miscarry... but he's not a predator, he's not a murderer. Okay, right.  And then he couldn't take what he had dished out.  He took the coward's way out, killed himself.
Speaker 1: Right.  Did, have you, I mean, have you heard any other stories about how that happened, or how that was allowed to happen?
Speaker 2: He supposedly hung himself in his cell.  Now, that may or may not have happened.  I don't know, but he's gone.  We don't have to spend five hundred thousand dollars to keep him alive for twenty years, he's gone.  I wish there were a way that he could have...  Mom wouldn't like me to say this...  I wish he would have suffered more.
Speaker 1: Now, there's an aspect to this story that reminds me a lot of the story of... and I can't think of his last name...  Frank [Willis], the security guard at Watergate.  He kind of disappeared--
Speaker 2: Uh-huh.
Speaker 1: --after a while.  I mean he was the hero of the hour for a minute.  And some say if he had been white, we'd still know about him, and he would be doing well.
Speaker 2: He will go down into the annals of history as--
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: --having been a hero, yeah.
Speaker 1: Right.  Yeah, but he died in obscurity.  Now, there's a gentleman who, a neighborhood fellow--
Speaker 2: Yeah, who happened to be walking by, and heard them and responded.  He and one other guy went over and they pulled the door.  She, it's amazing...  The one time in ten years that Castro let his guard down... that we know of... left the house, left them not chained up probably... that she could get to the door and pull it open enough to say, "Help me, help me."  You know, that kind of thing... the one time in a decade that that happened, she was able to get the attention of this gentleman and then get some help.  An amazing story.
Speaker 1: So, this black man who appeared... you know, his hair isn't combed... he's on television.  I think he's missing a couple of teeth... but he's telling the story.  I mean, he should be considered a hero.  Is he, well, what happened to him?
Speaker 2: Well, he (Laughter) got fast food sandwiches for life... I won't call the company.  And he had his moment, his 15 minutes of fame.  And now as I understand it, he's writing a book, or a book had been written in collaboration about it.
Speaker 1: So, he's still in the news over here--
Speaker 2: Yeah, he's still--
Speaker 1: --because he kind of dropped off the national stories about it.
Speaker 2: Yeah, yeah.  You know how it is, man.  I mean, you're hot one day, the next day you're not.  And the 24-hour news cycle is a hungry beast, it's got to find something else to feed on.  You know, one of the great things about Ted Turner is that he gave us 24 hour news.  And the other thing, that's bad about Ted Turner, is he gave us 24 hour news.
Speaker 1: (Laughter), that's a (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Both are true.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 97788
Speaker 1: Yeah.  Okay, now, you're civically involved.  There's a piece about you, a couple of pieces about you on YouTube, where you're being... they talk about Real Men Cook and some of the other civic...  Well, what are some of your civic activities, or your favorite activities?
Speaker 2: Well, I like to get involved in as many civic activities as possible.  I like to be a part of the community.  I could have moved anywhere in Greater Cleveland [Ohio] I wanted to.  I say to friends, I could have moved to a west side suburban community, an east side suburban community.  Out west, I would have been looked at with suspicion, by my neighbors and the police.  Out east, probably the same.  I chose Huff, the infamous Huff, notorious Huff, because here I can make a difference.  I said about 15 years ago, I've made a living at doing what I do, for a long.  Now it's time to make a difference.  So, I moved back around people that look like me.  Because I said this community, or no community, can be strong if its strength leaves it.  If its money leaves, if its political will leaves, if its educated leaves--they just cannot be strong.  If there's a dearth of African-American role models, who are boys going to look up to?  The guys on the corner?  Really?  So, I moved here with intent to make a difference, to be that shining example--not to be anybody's sacrificial lamb, or any golden light or whatever else--just to try and make a difference.  When I, when I first moved here, folks would litter the street.  And oftentimes before I pulled off my suit, I would grab my orange bucket from Home Depot, my little picker up thing, little... and go down the street in my suit and tie, and pick up paper.  A guy hollered, "Hey, MF, this is the hood."  I keep picking...  "Hey, Brother, how you doing?"  I keep picking up.  Ten years... picking up.  There's not much paper out there now... they don't throw it out there as much as they used to.  There's still some, because I live between a hospital and a grade school, but some.  They come and help; they don't let their boys throw their oil filters in the street or on the side of the road, or you know.  It's just... I remember one incident.  I was out in the backyard, and my neighbor was over here doing her thing.  And this field next to us--that now has a fence around it, where kids play from the family center--had grass taller than you and I.  A couple of guys pulled up one day, got out, walked in the weeds, relieved themselves, got back in the car and drove away.  I said, "That will never happen again."  I got in my car, went down to Home Depot, bought me a big old weed whacker, and I cut the whole freaking field, by hand.  "Never again, Dude, never, not in my neighborhood, not again."  And so, that set me on a path to try and change the actions and the mentality that I saw of a people who--because they had been so beaten down and so left behind--they couldn't see beyond what was.  I decided, as [Mahatma] Gandhi said, "to be the change that I wanted to see."
Story_ID: 97922
Speaker 1: Well, we always ask this question.  What are some of your hopes and concerns for the Cleveland [Ohio] community today?
Speaker 2: My biggest hope is that we realize that our children really are our future--that we don't just mouth those words, that we live those words, we act as if we believe that.  I believe in Cleveland oftentimes, and in America, we say stuff because it sounds good.  But if you really believe that our kids are our future, then we would go to the PTA [Parent Teacher Association] meetings as often as we go to the football and basketball games.  We would sit down at the kitchen table, the dining room table, and say "Show me your math, show me your homework.  How can I help?"  And if you don't know how to do it, learn.  Because your child is going to be saddled with the lack of knowledge, and will end up going from the cradle, maybe the grave, or to the jail.  So, my thing is if I can help find a way to educate Cleveland's children, keep them alive long enough until they see the benefit of being alive--because many of our children don't even think they deserve to be alive, by their actions.  They will pull a gun and pull a trigger in a heartbeat.  This isn't, not here in Cleveland, but it happens.  If I can find a way to impact upon the young people in this community and in this city and in this nation, the importance of self-determination. Too many people fought and died for you to have the right to do whatever it is you do, whether it's stupid or whether it's brilliant.  People died for you to be able to just sit someplace and ride someplace and go someplace and do some things.  And you're going to throw that away by pulling a gun and shooting somebody that looks like you, because you got mad at them, they looked at you wrong?  I remember when kids used to, when I was in [Washington] D.C., used to shoot each other over tennis shoes and boom boxes and starter jackets.  My daughter wanted a started jacket, and I said to her mother, "Not going to happen, it's a target."  Now, she was innocent, she just wanted what everybody wanted.  And I don't know if she even remembers.  But I remember, "No, I'm sorry."  If I can help my community appreciate who they are, and what they bring to the table, then I think I will have done a good deed.  I'm not trying to be the savior, I'm just trying to be a helpmate.  If I can reach out and pull somebody up, that's really what I was put on the planet to do.  That's why I moved here--to tap into my good neighbors who want to see a better community, who work with me to make this a better community, who clean their yards and cut their grass, pick up the paper, and help each other out.  There are pockets of really good people in this community.  And there are also people who just don't care.  So, my thing is to try to impact upon them in whatever way I can, without looking down.  Because I'm a short guy, I can't look but so far down.  You know, I'm not looking down on anybody.  I say, we can be better than this.  And I'm willing to get out here and work in the vineyard as hard as anybody.  You've seen me with my little lawnmower cut that big field for years.  It fell apart, me cutting that field out there, the one I told you about.  Okay, for me walking up and down the street, cutting tree lawns and that; for me paying some of the guys in the neighborhood to do that.  Because when I turn that corner at East 70th Street, I don't want to see trash.  You know, I don't want to see unkempt lawns and tree lawns with grass knee high.  If I've got to go in my pocket, or go in my garage and get my lawnmower and do it, it's going to get done, you know.  And I know that now that they see better, they all do better.  I used to hit the floor when I first moved here.  Thankfully, I haven't hit the floor in seven, eight years.  They've learned that there is a better way, and it's not up to Harry Boomer to make them do. If I can show them a little bit, that's okay.  And they show me, they teach me.  As a community, that's how I see it.  So, that is my, that is my mission now, to make a difference in however way I can.  I don't have all the answers.  I just know that George and Lucy Boomer instilled certain things in me, and that if I can, in whatever way I can, pass that on, that's really what I've been put on the planet to do.  I'm not my daddy's--I'm my daddy's son, I'm a preacher's son, but I'm not a preacher.  But I spread the message, nonetheless.  I'm that loving son of Lucy Jane, who was a praying, dedicated mother.  You know, that comes out in me.  And sometimes the fire of being a black man born and raised in America comes out, too--hopefully proportionately, whenever necessary, but only when necessary.
Story_ID: 97923
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what's next for Harry Boomer?  I mean, are you considering...How long are you going to remain as an anchor, and do you have another project or something that you want to do, you know?
Speaker 2: I thought about that a little bit.  I've been in the business now going... this is my 43rd year.  I thought about getting out at 45 years, but I don't if I'm going to have the money to live the lifestyle I want; I'm still a relatively young man.  So, I thought, 45 or 50.  Fifty is, 45 is a good time, 50 is even better.  If God blesses me to hang in there for 50 years in the business, I think I should probably hang up the microphone on television probably then.  Or, you know... this three, four, five job thing coming back...  I would like to actually do a talk show on MSNBC or Sirius Radio, or something like that.  I mean I've been doing this stuff since day one almost, for 40 years, in one sense or another.  I'd like to take it to a larger audience, and get the feedback from a larger part of the American population... contribute whatever I can, learn whatever I can, and plant some more seed, you know.  Being an old farmer, you know, I like planting seeds.  I like seeing what sprouts, and what fruit is born from that.
Story_ID: 97924
Speaker 1: Now, are you involved with social media, like Facebook or blogging, or any of that?
Speaker 2: I don't blog, because I can't really say what I want to say.  So, I'd rather not get in trouble.  If I were not in television, I'd be a prolific blogger.  But because I have to measure what I say, because of what I do, I don't.  But I am very much into Facebook, on Twitter, Instagram... you know, all the social media stuff.  You know, we have to do it as a part of the TV station anyway.  I sit on the news desk in the morning when I'm anchoring, and when I have a break, a commercial break or whatever else, I may tweet or Facebook or whatever else, you know, to get the word out.  I promote the show, I promote the news coming up... I promote what my anchor's going to be saying, what the news or traffic is going to be doing.  On special occasions, you know, on anniversaries or commemorations, I may tweet or Facebook about some of those things, just to let people know that I'm still in the mix, and that I have a voice.  But yeah, I would like to be able to do more of that.  And maybe if I get a chance to do some of that on a national level, I might do it; you know, wouldn't mind it.
Story_ID: 97925
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.  Now, when you look back at everything you've done to this point, is there anything major that you would do differently, if you could go back and change something?
Speaker 2: You know, that is hard to say.  Because everything that I have done has added to me in ways that I did not even fathom back in the day.  There were some hard times, but I overcame those hard times.  I think sometimes, man, wish I hadn't left [Washington] D.C.  I left my daughter there, and I still feel badly about that, because she was there with her mom.  But I came out here.  The plan was when I came here, was to put this radio station in Canton on the air.  We were going to invite other stations around the country, and I would go from city to city, putting those on the air.  But the home base would then be in Maryland, Metro D.C., with my daughter and family.  That didn't work out that way.  I ended up coming out to Ohio and staying in Ohio.  So, I missed a lot of my daughter's growing up, even though I would go home often... graduation, special programs, weekends, you know; I tried to be there.  I don't think I was the best father in the world.  I could have been.  But I've been a good father, I've been a loving father, and I'm a loving grandfather.  And so, I try to make amends as best I can without feeling guilty.  Life dealt me a certain hand, I chose to play that hand.  I'm not apologizing for that.  But I am trying to say if I wasn't there as much as I should have, then I'm going to try and be now... if not for you, for my grandkids.  Behind you there are three bins. One says, "Paper, plastic, and cans."  I'm working to save the planet, too.  I want my grandkids to be able to get in a car, or whatever vehicle of their choice, and go and do what they want to do, as I've done for most of my life, all of my life.  So, I feel a special connection to the earth by what I plant, and by what I throw away.  There are times when I take a little piece of plastic... you know, I'm going to throw this in the trash.  I say, "You know what, what if there are a billion pieces of plastic that small?  How much of a mess would that be?"  So, I walk another three feet, throw it in the plastic bin, rather than just in the trash.  Now, to some people, that may be... I don't know.  But to me, it's important; a billion little pieces mount up to be a lot of mess.  So, okay, I make my changes in whatever way I can.  So, I guess... I think sometimes if I had not come here, I would not be doing what I'm doing now.  I didn't see the divine plan.  I wanted to be in television; I'm in television; I'm on two TV stations; I'm on the internet. There's the possibility of being seen and heard around the world.  And what's not to like about that?  How can I be mad at that?  No matter what road I had to travel, no matter what stumbling stones I may have fallen on, I got up.  And with the blessings of God, I'm still kicking.  As the old saying goes... song goes, "I ain't no ways tired."  Have a red eye, but I ain't no ways tired.
Story_ID: 97926
Speaker 1: Well, tell us about your daughter and your granddaughter.  Are they in any way following in your footsteps, in terms of...?
Speaker 2: Early on, my daughter was on more radio stations in D.C. than I was.  She was a part of something called Pyramid Communications.  She was on WOL, and a couple of other... on WICB, a gospel station.  And they had a, a syndicated program that aired around the country, not on every station, but in different markets.  And so, she was in radio and doing her thing.  My granddaughter is only seven now.  So, you know, she's a little young.  But she got all A's on her most recent report card.  My grandson got all A's, except for two B's... just won the STEM Science Fair Project, first place, at his school.  Was recently, I just found out a couple of days ago, selected by one of his teachers as a student leader, and he's going to take part in a special program in D.C. to develop his skills.  He's nine years old... he loves golf, he loves football.  I'm on the board of First Tee, he's a member of First Tee in Cleveland.  He got a chance to go visit, you know, the Congressional Country Club in D.C.  I haven't been there, but I did go to Firestone, I played at Firestone.  So, I mean, yeah, I mean I can see the influence.  And they have wonderful parents.  Their father has a Ph.D. degree, their mother, a master's degree, and they're doing okay.  The economy has been a struggle for all of us... student loans, that kind of stuff.  But, you know, they're going to be fine.  I'm going to do what I can to make sure they're fine.
Story_ID: 97927
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you look back on everything you've done to this point, what today would you consider to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: My daughter and grandkids.  Because through them, whatever I am part... whatever I am, whatever I leave, whatever they find in this house when I go... they will hopefully appreciate what it took for me to get here, what it took for me to stay here, and what it took for me to leave it for them.  I think about what my father did, and the decisions he made.  And the father... and the decisions his father made... and the decisions his father made, all impacting on my ability to do what I do today.  Had any of them been lazy and shiftless and "Papa was a rolling stone kind of guy... wherever he laid his hat was his home"...  I wouldn't be able to do what I do today.  So, I owe it to my daughter and my grandkids and my lineage, to do the best I can do, to be the best that I can be.  So that someday they can say... you know, Grand Boom is what they call me... "Grand Boom was a good man.  He loved his family, loved his community, loved his people, loved his nation."  I fly a flag outside my house all the time, when the weather is permitting, in the proper season.  You know, Old Glory.  I also have, much to the chagrin of many of my friends, a Confederate flag on my coffee table.  And they say, "Why do you have that?"  I say, "Well, it's simple.  That flag played as big a part in my development in America as Old Glory did.  People who pledge allegiance to the Confederate flag used to own people that looked like me.  Their attitudes used to permeate everything I did, and what I couldn't do.  I don't want it out of sight, out of mind.  I want it front and center, so I never forget what it represents.  You know, because I know the struggles I've been through, and that's miniscule compared to what my dad went through.  And what he went through, had to be miniscule compared to what his father went through.  If they can come through that fire, who am I to complain?  Who am I to give up when times are tough?  Please, give me a break."
Story_ID: 97928
Speaker 1: Now, is there anything we have not talked about that we need to raise, before I ask my last question?
Speaker 2: I don't know.  I mean, I, as you can tell, I like to talk.  I just want to, I wish my father [George Boomer] and mother [Lucy Jane Boomer] could have been alive long enough to see President Barack Obama [HM] become president.  As I mentioned to you before, my father was at the 1963 March on Washington.  He supported me when I marched with the Wilmington Ten.  Even though it was dangerous, he understood.  He understood what it meant to be a black man struggling in America, what it meant... the hard work he had to do to survive and provide for his family.  So, I would love for them to have seen that while they were yet on this plain.  Now I know looking down from heaven, that they see it.  I would like to think that by the time it's all said and done, they can say to their son, "Well done, my son, in who I am well pleased."  That may not happen, but it won't be for the lack of trying.  I just want to be able to do something worth something.  And if I do that, I'm going to be okay.
Speaker 1: Now, when you were--did your parents get a chance to see you become successful in broadcasting?
Speaker 2: Yes, they heard me on radio... because they didn't like the music I played. (Laughter).
Speaker 1: That's right, that's right.
Speaker 2: But my mom did get to hear me do news.  So, she saw that transition in my life.  And so, that was a good thing.  She never saw me on television, though.  Because I was in Cleveland [Ohio], she was in [Washington] D.C.  And so, she didn't see me on TV, because I was not on the network, just local CBS affiliated.  But she knew of it, and approved of it.  I think when she left this plane, she didn't have any reason to be discouraged about her baby boy.
Story_ID: 97929
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, now, now, you mentioned Barack Obama [HM].  And he spent a lot of time in Ohio.  Did you, I suppose you had to have covered, you know--
Speaker 2: I did.
Speaker 1: --some of his campaign, both campaigns.
Speaker 2: Yeah.  And I jokingly, and half-jokingly, say that when he came to town, Chris Dodd was the first Senator to endorse him for president.  He did that at the Cleveland Clinic here in town.  And I was there with all of the networks--CNN, CBS, all of the people sitting there--Candy Crowley and all the other folks sitting around.  And I raised my hand, and I asked him a question.  And I said, "Senator, are you running against [President] George [W.] Bush, or for something?"  And he paused, as if he never heard that question before.  And he said, "Well, first of all, I'm running for something."  Then he went on to elaborate.  Then he says, "I'm also running against George Bush."  And he went on to elaborate.  Now, in my mind, that was a pivotal moment in his thinking, for at least that moment.  Now, did it set the pace for his race and for his eventual win?  No, I'm not even going to go there.  But I think it was one of those questions that he had not been asked, and he thought about it for a minute.  That was a source of pride for me.  I have met the President; I have covered every president since [President Richard] Nixon, in one way or another.  I have met him, shook his hand on a couple of occasions.  One thing I did not say... my daughter's uncle, Master Sergeant Retired, Robert Russell, died in the Pentagon on 9/11.  And every year, there's a commemoration at the Pentagon.  On several occasions, starting with [President] Bill Clinton, I have gone to those commemorations.  And there, I had a chance to meet President Clinton at the time.  And then twice, President Barack Obama.  I actually used my camera and recorded one of his speeches... just sitting as close as you and I are now.  When he's here, I've covered him.  Now that he's President, you can't get close to him.  But the bottom line is I'm there, I'm in the house.  I'm not outside looking in, I'm in the mix.  I'm part of that history, you know, reporting on what he said from a perspective that may not be hard, if I didn't say it.  Because my life experience is different than anybody else's.  My life is colored by whatever lens I look through, good or bad.
Story_ID: 97930
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, well the last question is similar to legacy, and you probably already answered it within the context of what you said to this point.  But I'll ask it anyway.  Sir, how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: As a, as I said, as a loving father... one who loves his daughter, his grandchildren, his family... all those who've helped make me the man...  And there are many--some who in a negative way impacted me, and some who in a positive way impacted me... more positive than negative.  Everybody whose hands I've ever shaken, whose face I've ever looked into, whose voice I've ever heard, who's answered any question of mine, or contributed to my life in any way, has helped make me the man that I am.  I owe it to them and to America, the country that I love, not to be a detriment to America, but to be a positive for America.  And that's a choice.  Tonight when you turn on TV, you will hear a story about a man or a woman who decided to be a detriment to his or her country.  You will also find and hear about a person who decided to be an attribute.  That's a choice.  My choice is to be a good person, to leave...  As one politician said, "What's wrong with a good daddy's name?"  I want to leave a good name.  George Boomer left me a good name.  I want to leave my daughter, Akilah, and my grandchildren, Marcus and Morgan, a good name that they can look at, and look up to, and look at the awards that I've gotten, or the accomplishments that I've made, and feel proud.  And say, "This is a man that meant something to me."  If I can do that, as well as impact on the community in which I live, and the city in which I live, and the country in which I live, whose flag I pledge allegiance to, despite all...  Like Langston Hughes says, "America never was America to me.  But this oath, I swear, America will be."  She's not there yet, but she will get there.
Speaker 1: Alright.  Thank you very much.
Speaker 2: Thank you, Sir.
Story_ID: 97931
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: That's you.
Speaker 1: That's me with my Afro.  I had hair, we used to blow our hair out.  There it is there.
Speaker 2: Now, describe this picture.  Who--
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the super disco jocks.  There were about twenty of us, in D.C.  We would play music in all the clubs.  We had ten of the top eleven black clubs in the District in the seventies, all the way through the seventies.  And we all were disc jockeys.  We'd play music all night and hang out and sleep all day.
Speaker 2: Except you, because you had another job.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  And this is me as keynote speaker at Oberlin College for the MLK [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] Day celebration.  That went very well, I really enjoyed that.  They did a really good job with that picture.
Speaker 2: Just trying to get space...
Speaker 1: Yeah, you can just move anything around as you need to.  Put plate on top of plate if you want to.
Speaker 2: I'll slide these, some of these over a little bit.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll put a little on the floor, I don't want to make a big mess.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Okay, this isn't going to stay, I'll set them down.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And this is an article in the Plain Dealer called "The Close-Up," just a story about my history in Cleveland [Ohio] at that time.  I was predominantly at WCPN Radio.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: I was still doing television, too, but essentially at WCPN.
Speaker 2: This is one of the Sylvers.
Speaker 1: Yeah, one of the Sylvers.  These are just pictures of me when I would go to shows.  I'd meet people and take pictures, and that kind of stuff.  I've got a ton of those around here someplace.  Don't worry about that, that's okay.
Speaker 2: That's Kevin Hooks and someone else.  I don't know who--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know that's Kevin Hooks and Harry Boomer there.  And I can't remember the guy with the hat, but I know the face.  And he was on television, too, and so forth.  I can't remember... sit-coms or whatever; oh, yeah, me and my Hawaiian flowered shirt here, playing music as a disco jock.  I don't know what club that was in, but one of the many one-nighters I would do; and this is a suit, sky blue, that we bought from, in Baltimore.  Wes and I used to go up to Baltimore all the time and buy these crazy looking suits... blue and all kinds--
Speaker 2: You should see some of the suits they have now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And this is me with my big Afro, spinning music on the Wheels of Steel as a disc jockey; and this is a picture from the Mark IV, the place I got my start... another one of those suits we bought from Baltimore.  (Laughter); now, this one, my mother would not be proud of. But this is a good buddy of mine at the time, Dwight Langley.  He and I were program director and music director at OK 100, in Washington, D.C.; this is me, playing more music.  I used to wear bow ties a lot.  In fact, one of the singers for the Dramatics liked my bow tie so much, that particular one... I was emceeing a show.  He asked for it and I gave it to him.  And there you go; this is me again at OK 100, having just pulled off my headphones, messed up my hair; this is me in N.E. Washington, D.C. where I used to live, with Wes and Clayton, two of the super disco jocks you saw.  We were all hanging out together; this is essentially just one of those crazy coats... and an old friend of mine, Popcorn was her name, is her name.  Her name is Sylvia Wright, back hanging out in the day; this is my brother Joe and his son, Jarrett, his oldest child.  Joe's a big James Brown fan, and Jarrett is his son; my WOOK ID back in the day; that's Miss Vanzant, and Harry Boomer, and George Frazier of Frazier Net, a very good friend.  He's the number one network in the world, knows everybody; and I was at dinner someplace emceeing an event, and just sat down to have a cup of coffee; and this is me covering the Ariel Castro story--the gentleman who held the three women captive for up to ten years--talking to the last man to actually enter the house before the ladies were discovered.  People had gone in the house time and time again, but he was so clever at hiding folk, that they never really were able to discern what was going on.  Some had suspicions, but never anything like that; this is a publicity photo from the TV station; and this is me with the... oops...
Speaker 2: I'm going to try this one.  You gotta shoot fast.
Speaker 1: This is me, I was the captain of the OK 100 basketball team.  We had an awesome team, we won a lot of basketball games.  We would play for charity, and give money to different non-profits in Washington; this is me making a move; this is me.  I was just talking to a young man who happened to come over to the OK 100 truck, you know... me and my very bad looking platform shoes and that big tie... big enough to choke a horse the knot was so big.
Speaker 2: A fashion statement, you'd say.
Speaker 1: Yeah, back in the day; this is The Boomer making another move on the basketball court, at the Capitol Center, same place I hit a half-court shot for two thousand dollars, given to charity.  Some people say it was luck.  I say I was just good, but I'll take luck.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's me taking that shot, you know; and again me, trying to reach out to the young people, always trying to be the example to young folk; my mother and father, the Rev. G.A. Boomer--George Atkins Boomer--and Lucy Jane Boomer; and this is a picture of the late Congresswoman Stephanie Tubbs Jones, and Kelly Chapman, and Harry Boomer here.  We're doing the Gospel Fest at Case Western Reserve University, the Stephanie Tubbs Jones Gospel Fest.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: Yeah, a wonderful, wonderful person, missed a lot; and this is portrait that I had painted.  I didn't have to sit for it, they made it from a photograph.
