Story_ID: 259572
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for The HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Matthew Hickey.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us please?
Speaker 2: My name is [HistoryMaker] George Beach.  That's G-E-O-R-G-E, B-E-A-C-H.
Speaker 1: And do you have a middle name?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  My middle name is Albert, A-L-B-E-R-T.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born August 14, 1936, at medical center in New York City [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay.  And what is your occupation?
Speaker 2: My occupation is an advertising and public relations executive and business owner.
Speaker 1: And what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today's date is February 11, 2005.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in the conference room of my agency [Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Story_ID: 259573
Speaker 1: Now before we go into depth, there are five lightweight People magazine-ish type questions that I am compelled to ask you that only require a short, crisp answer.  The first one is, do you have a favorite food?
Speaker 2: Yes I do.  My favorite food is--I have a lot of favorite foods as a matter of fact, but I'm gonna hone in on one that I really like, black-eyed peas and rice.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: I like all seasons of the year.  In Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], of course, we have a variety of seasons.  All seasons suit me well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: Yes, I have several favorite vacation destinations.  I like the islands, in the Caribbean, and I also like Europe, Paris [France] in particular.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Do you have a favorite color?  I almost missed that one.
Speaker 2: My favorite color is purple.
Speaker 1: All right.  And the last question in this little series is, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: I have several, but the one that I like is, I'm loving it.
Story_ID: 259574
Speaker 1: All right.  Now, I'm gonna ask you about your family history.  I'm gonna ask about your mother's side of the family and your father's [James Beach] side.  We'll start with your mother's side of the family.  Can you give us your mother's full name and spell it for us?
Speaker 2: My mother's full name is Ethel Lee McKinnon, E-T-H-E-L L-E-E M-C capital K-I-N-N-O-N.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is her date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: Her date of birth was 1911, and she was born in Kingston, New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what do you know about the ancestors on your mother's side of the family.  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can reflect back on my grandmother [Zoetter Robinson McKinnon] and grandfather [Edward McKinnon] to the day that I became conscious of who they were, and when we spent a lot of time in Kingston, New York, where they resided, which was really quite different from New York City [New York, New York] where I was born.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now where is Kingston?  Is it--are we talking about--this is a town actually outside of the city limits, or?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.  It's about a hundred miles north of New York City on the Hudson [River].
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  It's a hundred miles north of New York City.  Okay, so as far as you know, have your ancestors on your mother's side always been in New York or do--is there another origin for them or?
Speaker 2: Yes there is.  My grandfather was born in Fayetteville, North Carolina.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And is there a story--any stories about Fayetteville or how they decided to move from Fayetteville to New York?
Speaker 2: I never really got that story, but my grandmother was born in Saint Pauls, North Carolina.  They used to call that Tar Heel.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: But they got--they, they found their way to Kingston, New York, and established themselves there, and had a very fruitful existence in Kingston, New York.
Speaker 1: Now what is the deal with Tar Heels?  I mean, that's the symbol for the [University of] North Carolina [at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina] basketball team they call themselves--that's the nickname they call themselves, the Tar Heels.  What is a Tar Heel anyway?  Do you know?
Speaker 2: I don't know exactly what a Tar Heel is.  The stories that I heard were--had something to do--you walked barefoot and your feet got tar on them from the soil.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Soil was real black or something and gave you--
Speaker 2: And tarry.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Like the Pitch Lake in, you know, Trinidad or--they have those types of things (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Okay, so it really is like tar on the--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: --on the ground and--
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Okay.  So--but there are no stories from that side of the family about why they moved up to New York or--I mean we can all speculate that most people in the South with some of the racial conditions they wanted to get out, but is there a story, any specific stories about that that you know?
Speaker 2: I think it was more opportunity to go north and build.  He built his house in Kingston, New York, and that house still exists from the time he built it.  He owned the land and he raised his family there.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what kind of work was--what line of work was he in?
Speaker 2: My grandfather was a caterer.  He was one of the great cooks and preparers of food in that area.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And so he did fairly well as a caterer then, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Well, we loved his food and he was very, very connected to the church in Kingston, New York, and he was a trustee and deacon and he did a lot of cooking there, and--
Speaker 1: What church, what--and what denomination?
Speaker 2: It's an A.M.E. [African Methodist Episcopal] church.  It's called [A.M.E.] Zion [Church of Kingston, Kingston, New York].
Speaker 1: Okay, in Kingston, okay.  Tell me, so your grandmother and grandfather are both from Fayetteville--
Speaker 2: From North Carolina.
Speaker 1: --North Carolina.
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, and moved to Kingston, New York.
Story_ID: 259575
Speaker 1: Now, did your mother [Ethel McKinnon Beach] talk about growing up in Kingston [New York]--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and what it was--okay.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: What kind of stories did she tell?
Speaker 2: Well, she liked it very much because there wasn't a lot of prejudice.  They went to the--you know, they graduated from the Kingston High School [Kingston, New York].  They lived in an integrated area and they were able to expand on their, you know, social skills, and they--it was really, really good for her.  And as a matter of fact, she moved to New York [New York] to go to business school and she graduated in the '30s [1930s] from a business school in New York City.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what did she do for a living?
Speaker 2: She did a number of things.  She was a stenographer and she was a teacher.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did she teach business or--
Speaker 2: My mother taught in the public schools.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay, so she went on and got--to get an educational degree, too, some place or?
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact, she didn't have a degree in teaching.  It was because of her skillset that she was able to teach as a substitute teacher in the public school system.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So--but she didn't have like business classes and such in public school--
Speaker 2: No--
Speaker 1: --she taught?
Speaker 2: --because they were young people in the elementary level.
Story_ID: 259576
Speaker 1: Can you give us your father's full name?
Speaker 2: My father's full name is James Henry Beach and that's J-A-M-E-S H-E-N-R-Y B-E-A-C-H.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is his date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: My dad was born in 1902, and he was born in Montserrat, British West Indies.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Just for the sake of those who, like me, may not know where it is (laughter)--
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: --where exactly is Montserrat?
Speaker 2: Montserrat is a leeward island near Antigua and also Nevis and Saint Kitts.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now what do you know about the ancestors on your father's side?  How far back can you trace them?
Speaker 2: I can trace them back pretty far because the island of Montserrat is eleven square miles total, and everybody knew everybody, and my dad took me there first on a trip in 1956, and I got a chance to meet my great-uncles and great-aunts and great cousins and cousins, and it was a very, very interesting experience because I got to see the source of his beginnings in life.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now do they talk about--I mean, how far back do they discuss the family?  I mean, do, do--can they go back into the 1700s or--
Speaker 2: No, they didn't reach back that far as far as I knew, but they knew how they got there and how they flourished as various families.  They all had different names, Irish names in particular, Dyer, O'Dwyer, O'Neill, et cetera, because the island was dominated by the Irish and the rum estates and the estates there had Irish names, and there was a shamrock on the city hall in Plymouth, Montserrat--Montserrat, which is the capital of Montserrat.
Speaker 1: Okay, you said that the country had a lot to do with rum, did you--did you say?
Speaker 2: Well, no, their real big cash product was lime and the ships would pull in and they would supply the ships with lime to prevent scurvy for the crews, but they also produced rum from sugarcane.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  So do they have any--are there any African survivals of identity or memory amongst your father's people in Montserrat?
Speaker 2: I haven't heard them speak of the--of the diaspora, how they came and who it was that came, and how that all developed.  But I--it would just go back several generations, I have a clear picture of that experience.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Any stories from that side of the family, life on Montserrat?  Eleven square miles, that's (laughter)--
Speaker 2: It's not that large and there's no way to escape, you know, without anyone knowing what you were about, and that was the beauty of being in a small island.  Everyone knew everyone, and they knew everything about the families of everyone.  So, therefore, they were right on top of the current events of the families and also the current events of the day.  It's a British island so that the whole educational system and style is based on the crown.  So the education process, my dad had a very, very good education, heard the stories about how many miles he had to walk to go to school and come back and take care of his cattle before he left and take--and then would have to take care of it after he came home, going up to the hill, Monkey Springs [ph.], going up to the mountain, and all of these great stories occurred that he lived through, and heard about from some of the members of the family in the island.  So he always reminded us how far he had to go to school when we were going to school, and I guess that's part of the tradition of a family to tell the next generation that they have it easy compared to what they had to do during their time.  But with the British system, he was--they were very proper.  They had a very heavy brogue from the different--that distinguished them from other islands that were in the vicinity, and you know, it was a great source for growing a family and learning about your family and being covered by all of the people who were neighbors on the island.
Speaker 1: Now, did Montserrat become independent at one time or is it still a British colony?
Speaker 2: It's still a British colony.
Story_ID: 259577
Speaker 1: How did he [Beach's father, James Beach] decide to move to New York [New York]?  I mean, it is any--did he ever discuss why he decided to move?
Speaker 2: Well, yes.  They--he was the last of his family members to leave the island [Montserrat] to come to New York.  As the early members of the family, they either went to New York or they went to Boston [Massachusetts].  My dad, he cared for his grandmother.  He was raised primarily by his grandmother and he felt an obligation to stay with her as she had aged and was going into decline, so he chose to stay there as long as he could to take care of his grandmother, and when she passed, then he got really the last boat to the [United] States.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So when was it when was it when he, he actually moved to New York?
Speaker 2: He had moved to New York in the early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay.  You say he was a caterer in the--
Speaker 2: No, that was my other grandfather [Edward McKinnon].
Speaker 1: Oh, okay, your other--
Speaker 2: My--
Speaker 1: Okay, your father--
Speaker 2: My dad--
Speaker 1: All right.  I'm sorry.
Speaker 2: --his trade was tailoring.  He went to trade school in Montserrat and he took up tailoring.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So did he move right to New York City [New York, New York]?  Is that where he--
Speaker 2: Yes--
Speaker 1: --he went (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) our family was in Harlem in [New York] New York, and the system was that once one got over, they saved enough money to bring another family member over, and they shared common space, in an apartment, and that's how they really made it.  It was quite a struggle.  And I think most of the folks that immigrated to the United States had to do it on that basis.  One gets here--or they--one arrives, they begin to develop enough capital to help bring another and so on and so on and so on, so--
Speaker 1: Now, this is during the [Great] Depression, too, right?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Which is--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  I'm gonna push back on that early '30s [1930s].  It was in--it was--he came in prior to the Depression.  It had to be 1927, '28 [1928].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So he felt the brunt of the Depression.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So he actually got started and then actually felt the economic pinch--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --later.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, is there a story that your parents tell about how they met?
Speaker 2: Yes, there is a story.  My mom [Ethel McKinnon Beach] was going to school in New York, a business school in New York City, and one of her friends knew my father and wanted my mom to meet Henry.  And it's surprising, while his formal name is James Henry Beach, he is known as Henry or Henny [ph.].  But when they met, they fell in love.  My mom had these beautiful large eyes and he had--and he was a handsome man, and he had, you know, that accent that was stunning to someone that was born in America, and they just got together and they became two people that fell in love at first sight, and got married in Kingston, New York, and came back to New York and settled and raised their family of three children--
Speaker 1: Okay, now.
Speaker 2: --myself and my two sisters [Jacqueline Beach Faulcon and Ethelyn Beach Dawson].
Speaker 1: All right, now, are you the oldest or where do you fit in the brothers and sisters?
Speaker 2: I happily fit right in the middle.  I have an older sister and a younger sister.
Story_ID: 259578
Speaker 1: First of all, who do you think you take after the most, your mother [Ethel McKinnon Beach] or your father [James Beach]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's amazing.  I feel the energy from both of my parents.  I--because they both had different styles and different things that they had to offer.  As I told you, my dad came under the English system.  He was very precise.  He didn't risk anything.  He was very careful about what he said.  He spoke English properly.  He wrote beautifully and his punctuation and spelling and all of that were right on line, so I got a part of that from my dad.  But the part that I--that he lacked by--of taking a chance I got from my mom.  My mom was more theatrical.  She's--was willing to take chances and every idea was a great idea.  She could see it and begin to multiply it into a worldwide spectacular.  So between the two of them, I became a product that really shares both of their lifestyles.
Story_ID: 259579
Speaker 1: Now do you have an earliest childhood memory?
Speaker 2: My earliest childhood memory?  Yes.  I have a lot of memories from my earliest childhood (simultaneous).
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Well, do you have an earliest childhood memory?  The first memory, the first thing that you remember remembering.
Speaker 2: I remember being in a baby carriage on--I know it's Amsterdam Avenue [New York, New York] at a playground.  That's my earliest memory.  It's not really my earliest memory, it is an early memory.  I suppose I've had many.  When I was suckling to my mom [Ethel McKinnon Beach], I remember that.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, that's--you must've been pretty young then, I guess.
Speaker 2: Absolutely, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah, very young.
Speaker 2: That was in my first year of life.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, I know that everything is--floating through my brain, it's in its little cubby hole and it just needs some triggers to make it come about and, you know, in terms of recall, and I'm sure in our conversation, there's some things that you're going to mention to me and then it's gonna make me think of something that we've already talked about.
Story_ID: 259580
Speaker 1: Well, I want you to like kinda reflect back to your neighborhood, where you grew up, and tell us, like what were the--you know, what were some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: Well, I really loved growing up on 150th Street, West 150th Street in New York [New York] up on the hill.  I remember going to church on Sundays with my dad [James Beach].  I remember the walks that we used to take on Morningside Drive and we could look down and see the Polo Grounds [New York, New York] from Morningside Drive and we--you could actually see the New York Giants [San Francisco Giants] in their blue uniforms from up on the hill.  And we would have on Sunday, it was a very, very special day at--for most African Americans in New York, it was a dress up day and it was a promenade day.  After church, you went somewhere.  You visited a relative or several relatives.  There was always that special Sunday dress up, go to church, and then visit after church.  And that was the kind of experience I recall.  And then, of course, living on the third or fourth floor in the apartment building, and then the fire escape, and then being able to see the courtyard with the lines and laundry on the--in the courtyard was rather exciting.  I remember that.
Story_ID: 259581
Speaker 1: What did your neighborhood look like?  I mean, can you--now did you grow up the whole of your youth in Harlem [New York, New York] or did you grow up partly in Kingston [New York]?  Or did--
Speaker 2: No, my first ten years was in Harlem, but the summers, we would get on the day line and we would go up to Kingston and spend time with my [maternal] grandparents [Zoetter Robinson McKinnon and Edward McKinnon] there, or we were driven up with one of our aunts or uncles on the [U.S. Route] 9W, the Storm King Highway was--I remember that so vividly because the joy of being in the backseat of an automobile and looking out of the back window, all the kids really just loved that.
Speaker 1: The Storm King Highway, is that--
Speaker 2: Storm King Highway, that's right.
Speaker 1: That was really the name of it?
Speaker 2: Yep, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Nine-W.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: But the neighborhood was very orderly.  You know, it was--I had no idea of what a neighborhood that was out of order looked like.  All of the properties were well maintained.  The streets were clean.  The--everyone was courteous.  There wasn't any of the things that I've learned about as I got older.  It was just a very, very safe environment.  We saw people that looked like us.  We didn't feel that we were in a strange setting.  It was just a wonderful, wonderful experience, even how we were taught to go to school, to go up to 154th Street and go under the subways to cross Amsterdam Avenue to go to P.S. 40 [New York, New York], that was a training and an experience that I've never forgotten.  I have never forgotten seeing the morning glories on the fences.  I've never forgotten the playground at the corner where we went as children, of course, with our parents or someone, and we were on the swings and we went on the slide, and we went in the sandbox; that was the other lovely thing that happened, and that was in the neighborhood.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did you ever--do you remember going--did you go down to 125th [Street] and Lenox [Avenue] much or down in the heart of Harlem much for--
Speaker 2: Oh, absolutely--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --because my family lived in that area.  My grandmother [Henrietta Allen Beach] lived on 110th Street and Lenox Avenue.  My cousin had a photography shop at 135th and Lenox Avenue.  And a number of my relatives, my godmother lived on 145th Street and my aunt lived on--let me just get a feeling for it--Edgemont Avenue [sic. Edgecombe Avenue], so--and my uncle who was a doctor and he first practiced in my grandmother's home on 110th Street, he had a practice on St. Nicholas Avenue.
Story_ID: 259582
Speaker 1: Did you see any of Harlem's notables, you know, around the neighborhood?  I know--every time I ask somebody from Harlem [New York, New York] about the people, you know, they always remember someone they saw or came into personal contact with that was famous, or some of the movements and stuff that were going on in those days.
Speaker 2: Well, I think for me, it was people in the--in music that we came in contact with because part of our family, we were all musical, and that was a--that was a part of what we were about.  We had to study a musical instrument, play music, and that was a very, very valuable thing for us.  It taught us discipline in terms of timing, the notes and so on, and we would see people that were of a musical background more so because all of the family--my dad [James Beach] played two instruments.  He played the saxophone and the violin, my uncle played the piano, and another uncle played the violin.  And they had a little group, and they would go and do gigs.  They would go to the Savoy [Ballroom, New York, New York].  They talked about Chick Webb, and there's a piano player, Teddy Wilson, they were all--they were interacting with Chick Webb and Teddy Wilson.  And, you know, I heard stories of how Gene Krupa used to come down and just sit--and sit in and woodshed with the drummer, Chick Webb, and how the pianist was just admired by a lot of white musicians for their style and so on, and so those were very, very important times for our training, and it came from our family.  My mother [Ethel McKinnon Beach] played the piano and we all played instruments in our lifetime.
Speaker 1: Now, what did you play?
Speaker 2: I played the violin and I studied for ten years and was very accomplished as a violinist, and in the course of that activity, I played a lot of teas for The Silver Offering [ph.] and I was the youngest member of the Philadelphia Concert Orchestra in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] in the violin section.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now why Philadelphia?  That seems like a long way off for--
Speaker 2: Well, I was ten when I came to Philadelphia--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and I was still taking lessons.  I started lessons in New York [New York] and then I continued taking lessons in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: So the family moved to Philadelphia when you were ten years old.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And why did they move?
Speaker 2: Because there was an opportunity for my dad.  He got a job with the quartermaster as a tailor as work was very, very thin in New York.  And my grandfather happened to see an ad and mentioned to him that they were looking for tailors in Philadelphia.
Story_ID: 259583
Speaker 1: You were saying--talking off camera about visiting Trinidad with your father [James Beach] to visit some relatives in Trinidad.  Just describe that again for us.
Speaker 2: That was when I (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) How old were you and what--
Speaker 2: This was in the early '50s [1950s] and it was one of the most exciting parts of my trip to the West Indies, visiting our relatives in Port of Spain [Trinidad], and La Brea in Trinidad.  And I was amazed at the range of people in terms of their color, as white as my collar, and as dark as my suit, and all of these beautiful, wonderful individuals of all ethnic backgrounds, primarily African, the Indian, East Indian, and Chinese.  The Indians and the Chinese were the merchants in the island.  And they had one station on the radio that really knocked me out in terms of the music, and when everybody walked, I mean, you'd hear this one station, and the music, they walked with a gait.  It was just so beautiful to watch them walk and, when they talked, it was--even if it was a Patois type of talk.  It was just exciting.  I really loved it.  And we stayed with our cousins on Bella Road [ph.]; I'll never forget that experience.  And then we went and visited my great uncle who had a cedar farm.  The trees were, were used to produce cedar.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  Yeah, that's--now you did that, I guess when you were--oh, well, you--were you still a teenager when you went over there?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, okay.
Speaker 2: I was probably seventeen at the time.
Story_ID: 259584
Speaker 1: Now you started school in New York City [New York, New York], I guess, now what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Um-hm, P.S. 40 [New York, New York].
Speaker 1: P.S. 40, okay.  Well, how'd you like school?  How'd you like P.S. 40?
Speaker 2: I loved it.  I had my little cubby hole to hang my clothing.  I had my cardboard cigar box for my materials, my crayons, and I had my mat, a little mat that we would take our naps on, and I can see it as if it were yesterday.  And I remember the milk and cookies that we would get in the afternoon, the graham crackers and the little container of milk.  But it was there that I did a lot of creative things in art that--and they took note to my art.  I made a lot of things with construction paper, and I did a lot of drawings on--with my crayons on the paper, and I would bring them home and I would get the oohs and the ahs and that really, really made me feel good, and really, some of those pieces I have seen not too long ago that were kept by members of the family.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well that's gotta be something to see 'em now after all these years, you know?
Speaker 2: And I remember them because we would make these constructions of animals.  I remember a giraffe that I made and it was able to stand up because it was a circular bottom on it, and a lot of the little drawings that I made, I can feel what it felt like--I can feel the taste of the crayons because sometimes I'd put the crayon in my mouth and I--that waxy taste, I can even feel it right now as I recall those instance--incidents at the elementary school that I went to in New York.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you were there for--so art was a big part of going to school I take it then?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, that was a wonderful part of the experience as you know, worked--learning your alphabet, that was another thing you used large crayons to write with and I really enjoyed the, the art and the--arts and crafts, for that matter.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Did you have any teachers that were special to you in New York at P.S. 40?
Speaker 2: I don't--I don't remember the teachers so much.  I knew who they were.  They were white teachers; they were not African American.  But I can--I can see them, but I don't remember any particular name, but I always remembered the encouragement, the encouragement.  I got some oohs and ahs there, and then when I brought them home, then I got the other--the family oohs and ahs.
Story_ID: 259585
Speaker 1: Now when you moved to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], you were ten years old, and what school did you attend in Philadelphia?
Speaker 2: I attended the William S. Peirce School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  That's at 23rd [Street] and Christian Street in south Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  It's in south Philly [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  Now, did you continue in art there?  Did you continue to study art?
Speaker 2: Well, it wasn't an elective course, but when it came to art, I always did a good job.
Speaker 1: Okay, so this would be for special projects at the school and that sort of thing?  They would--you had a chance to make something?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, I remember one play that I participated in, and I was [President] George Washington in the play, and we had done some set design so to speak, and I remember working with the poster paint, painting some background scenes on heavy paper that we used in the play.  And as the George Washington character in this play, I was to eat some bread and what happened, I was eating the bread as if it was for real and then I couldn't get my lines out because I was still stuffed with the bread.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, any other favorite subjects?  Now, you're--are you still taking violin lessons at this time, too?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's right.  Music was always good and it was very fulfilling to me.  I took lessons from a very, very inspiring violin teacher, Frank Atella [ph.], who had his studio at 16th [Street] and Ellsworth Street here in Philadelphia, so I would walk to my violin lessons from 25th [Street] and Carpenter Street on Saturdays to take my violin lessons.  And he was a violinist at the time with the orchestra at the Mastbaum Theatre [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  In those days, most of the large theaters had an orchestra, and he was a violinist there, and I learned a great deal from Frank Atella.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, did--had you been exposed to any of the popular violin players then?  I think Stuff Smith, and there were some other, a couple other African Americans that played violin in big show bands and in combos and sorta thing.
Speaker 2: Yes, later on in life, I did become aware and had conversations with Richard Otto and his magic violin, who played with Sarah McLawler, who knew my aunt who played organ, organ as well.  And I saw Cat Anderson who was with [Count] Basie play the violin, and I know violinists today who are absolutely super.  John Blake [Jr.], for example, is an absolutely superb violinist who plays jazz violin, and he also plays classical music.  And if you listen to some of the early blues, you'll hear the violin as a featured instrument in many of the blues tunes that date back into the early 1900s.  The violin was a very interesting instrument, as a lot of nationalities and countries have used it.  In Ireland, they used the violin frequently in a lot of their offerings in the music world.  There's the people that study the violin that they don't put the violin under their chin, but the violin rests on their chests.  They play this very early European music, and that's how they play.  So the violin, those four strings, have done so much, in terms of what it meant in jazz, what it meant in blues, what it meant in classics, and what it meant in popular music, and so I really enjoyed violin.  And how I got to play with the Philadelphia Concert Orchestra that was conducted by Raymond Smith, it was an all-black orchestra, and when we gave our concerts, men from the Philadelphia Orchestra filled in some key spots in the orchestra for the concerts that we gave each spring.  It was a very big thing for me.  I was in my tuxedo or tails; I'm not quite sure what it was, but all of my relatives from New York [New York] would come down for this special day, see me with that orchestra.
Story_ID: 259586
Speaker 1: I mean, I take it you're a pretty good student, you know, all the way around.  It sounds like you were interested in school and--were you (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Yes, I was not disinterested in school.  As a matter of fact, as I went through elementary school and junior high school [Elizabeth Duane Gillespie Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and high school [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my older sister, Jacqueline [Beach Faulcon], she was first, and she was a brilliant young lady, so when I came through into the classes that she had been through, there was an expectation of me, so I was put on notice early in life because of my sister's brilliance, and I had to do well because that was the expectation of the teachers that taught my sister.  Then when my younger sister, Ethelyn [Beach Dawson] came through, she had it tough because not only was it me, it was you're the sister of Jackie and [HistoryMaker] George [Beach], so she was put under extreme pressure all the way through high school, and it wasn't until she stepped out of high school that she became her own person, and went on to get her doctorate degree in nursing and she is just fabulous.  But under the pressure of Jackie and George going in front of her, it was--it was tough for her.  She was--she was a rebel, but a great kid, a great kid.  So for me, learning was not something I disliked.  I loved learning about different things and I also learned the skill of listening, and paying attention early on.  Because I think my music helped me develop that discipline, because you just couldn't go off, I mean, and improvise like playing classical music, and you had to memorize the notes, memorize the phrasing, and you had to pay attention to all of those things.  So that was a very, very, you know, good basic program, that music program that gave me the skills to move ahead in other areas.
Story_ID: 259587
Speaker 1: Tell me about high school.  What was the name of your high school?
Speaker 2: The name of my high school was Simon Gratz High School.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And that's here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Yes, it is.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, tell us about Simon Gratz.  What was it like and how did you do?
Speaker 2: It was great.  I had to do well because my sister [Jacqueline Beach Faulcon] was two years in front of me.  And she was a great--she was great in music.  She could play the piano.  She was a--you know, she could've been a concert pianist today, but she developed her voice and became operatic and has done quite well with that.  I played my violin in the school orchestra.  And like when I was a student at junior high school next door, which was [Elizabeth Duane] Gillespie [Junior High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I played the violin in the school orchestra, and they selected musicians out of the entire school system which made up the All-Philadelphia Junior High [School] Orchestra and the All-Philadelphia Senior High [School] Orchestra, so I played in both of those orchestras.  And a number of the people that continue with their music careers, I played with.  I played with Spanky DeBrest; I played with Eddie Matthias; I played with Lee Morgan who is a member of the All City Orchestra [All City Philadelphia].  There was a fellow that--he was a drummer.  He's a pianist now, Oliver Collins.  He played the drums in the All-Philadelphia Senior High Orchestra.  So there were a lot of wonderful people that went through and some continued right on with their musical careers and--
Speaker 1: Yeah, I know we were interviewing [HistoryMaker] McCoy Tyner who was from Philadelphia.
Speaker 2: Of Philadelphia, that's right.
Speaker 1: He was talking about Art Tatum and all these different people in town that would just live right down the street from him and around the corner and just--
Speaker 2: Well, Philadelphia is really a mecca for musicians.  I mean, you think of the Coltranes, you think of Jimmy DePreist [James DePreist] who was my dear friend.  He was a drummer, and I used to see Jimmy doing his drum work, and he was a student of the [Stan] Kenton sound and Kenton arrangements.  And we used to--I used to visit with Jimmy before church services on Sundays and just go upstairs in his home, which was right across the street from the church.  He's the nephew of Marian Anderson, and he'd be beating on those drums and I'd be loving it.  And then he later on went on and worked with the New York Philharmonic Orchestra [New York Philharmonic] and went on to do some great work.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you were in high school, now did you--did you have--what were your--had you developed any career aspirations in high school?  Did you think you were gonna be an artist or a musician or what?
Speaker 2: My thoughts in high school were in both art and in music.  I remember very distinctly that my art teachers spoke with my parents [Ethel McKinnon Beach and James Beach] about me, because my parents had a different picture for my career, and that was minister, doctor, lawyer, teacher or undertaker.  Those were the five things that my parents had visualized that I'd be one of them.  And as I--in my passion for art and what I did in art became recognized, their visualization of an artist was someone struggling with a beret in a garret with cheese, wine, and bread, and not any success at all.  So my teachers in art in high school spoke with my parents and the key words were, "Leave [HistoryMaker] George [Beach] to us," and that's when they backed off, my parents did, in terms of identifying other professions that they thought I would be successful in.  So they were pleased that they left George to them because they were excited about the advancements I've made in the art field and in the advertising and public relations field.
Story_ID: 259588
Speaker 1: Anything outstanding happen in high school [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] that you wanna tell us about before we move you to college and beyond?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I did a lot of things in high school.  I was on the varsity football team.  I ran track.  I was also a member of the senate.  I was--you know, a member of the--I was the head of the court in school, chief justice, and I was the vice president in high school.  I did a lot of extracurricular work.  That was just normal for me, to do extracurricular work.  So it was not just going to school and coming home and--it was going to school and being involved in a lot of activities.
Speaker 1: Okay, so at William--well--
Speaker 2: At Gratz.
Speaker 1: --I'm sorry, Gratz--Simon Gratz, was that primarily a black high school?
Speaker 2: No, it was a integrated school.  The, the blacks were in a minority at that time when I went there and it has spawned a lot of people who are world famous.  [HistoryMaker] William [H.] Gray, III went to Simon Gratz.
Speaker 1: The congressman, yeah, yeah.
Speaker 2: Rasheed Wallace went to Gratz.  Leroy Kelly went to Gratz.  There were so many people that have gone to Gratz and who have had distinguished careers in either athletics or in politics or in art or advertising and public relations.
Story_ID: 259589
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation [from Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], had you decided to go to college or was that--
Speaker 2: Oh, college was in the plan from the beginning, but whether it be a music college or an art college, that was up in the air.  And it suddenly made itself very clear when I won a full scholarship to the [Philadelphia] Museum School of Art [The University of the Arts] here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and that's how I followed the path of art.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they offered you a full scholarship to--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.  That's good.  That's the kinda thing that--
Speaker 2: It's fabulous.
Speaker 1: Yes.  So you went to school right here in the city.
Speaker 2: As a matter of fact, four blocks from where we now sit at Broad [Street] and Pine [Street].  It was called the Museum School of Art at the time that I was there.  I graduated high school in 1954 and attended the Museum School of Art for four years and graduated in January of 1958.  And the school has gone through a number of changes.  While I was there, they became a college.  They became accredited to be a college, and I took a degree course, which earned me a bachelor of fine arts in advertising design.  Today, the school is a university and is called The University of the Arts.  I'm presently a trustee at The University of the Arts and have been involved in activities there for a lot of years.  As a matter of fact, I've always been in the shadow of The University of the Arts in my whole career because within a six-block radius is where I've always worked, so I'm--this is my neighborhood.
Story_ID: 259590
Speaker 1: Who were some of your teachers in art school [Philadelphia Museum School of Art; The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and some of your fellow students, would we know any of them?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, you may.  I like to talk about some of my teachers who were distinguished artists themselves, Benton [Murdoch] Spruance who was a great printmaker, Melville Price, a very distinguished abstract expressionist.  We had Albert Gold, great illustrator.  There was Sam Maitin [Samuel C. Maitin], who was a fabulous printmaker and wonderful professor.  The first African American professor at The University of Arts, I was in his first class, and that's Paul [F.] Keene [Jr.] the artist, as he has an international reputation.  Raymond Ballinger was the head of the advertising design unit that I was in.  There was George [R.] Bunker; he was a great artist, a Yale [University, New Haven, Connecticut] man.  There was just a great, great variety of artists that had much to offer the student body.  And as far as students that have graduated at The University of Arts that are very, very distinguished, they are too numerous to mention.  There, there are great photographers that came out of The University of the Arts.  Seymour Mednick is a fabulous photographer, Bob Jackson [Robert Jackson], a beautiful designer that came out of The University of the Arts during my time.  There were very few prior to my time that had been there.  There were--when I went there in 1954, there was less than a dozen black students in the student body, but now--it's much, much different now.  It's a great university.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Absolutely fabulous.
Speaker 1: Now what kind of work did you really specialize in in arts school in terms of fine art?
Speaker 2: Well, it was a little of a lot.  There was fine arts, I--drawing and painting, I enjoyed that; we had that as part of the agenda.  Graphic design, which I enjoyed; we had that as part of the agenda.  Then, there was design for advertising, which was another process in thinking and application; I loved that as well.  There were very few--oh, I have to mention, we had to do metal work, like the silversmiths and we had to produce things.  We had to do wood carvings and we had to do some ceramic work, so we got a broad comprehensive education in a lot of disciplines, but your major became your full discipline in your second, third, and fourth years.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And I took my academic courses as well to earn my degrees.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So--well, any teachers that stand out in art school that are--that you're--
Speaker 2: Well, as I mentioned, Paul Keene, I was in his first class, and the idea of seeing someone of color in this setting was just fantastic to me.  As a matter of fact, we became great friends through the years, even today, and when a tribute was given to me for my fortieth year in business, I developed an award, the George Beach Award, which the first award was given to Paul Keene at this event, and it was a very, very touching experience to have that experience with him.
Story_ID: 259591
Speaker 1: After art school [Philadelphia Museum School of Art; The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] I mean, what did you do next?
Speaker 2: It was very simple.  I walked four--I walked six blocks and I got involved--I took space in a design studio and started doing design on a work space arrangement deal, and it was the first week I got out of school.
Speaker 1: Okay so you didn't waste (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) But I--
Speaker 1: You didn't waste any time (laughter).
Speaker 2: No, not at all.  As a matter of fact, I can tell you this.  I was in the first class of students that had internships, the first internships that were introduced at the school.  It was myself, Jerry [J.] Siano, and [Gerald] Jerry Buckley; there were three students.  Jerry Siano went to N.W. Ayer [& Son, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], which was a large advertising agency here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he's always stayed in that discipline.  He retired several years ago as chairman of the eleventh largest advertising agency in the world.  Jerry Buckley went to N.W. Ayer, and he off and on worked inside, then he came outside, then he worked inside, but his whole career, spent it around N.W. Ayer and that advertising concept.  My experience was with Freed Studios [Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It was a design studio, and that was where my orientation was in my senior year at school.  I went there on a daily basis and I took my degree courses on Saturdays, and the reason why it worked so well for me, Maurice Freed, who owned Freed Studios, he was chairman of the alumni association at the Museum College of Art.  And I got an opportunity to get a jumpstart on my fellow classmates, because I was a professional in my senior year at school.  And I could feel a little--I could feel a little rub from that as a matter of fact.  Some of my teachers made comments to the effect that I want you to think more like a student as opposed to a professional.  And I won a design prize for the first cover for the Academy of Music's [Academy of Music, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] annual ball, which is now in its--it was its hundredth anniversary nearly forty-five years ago.  And after I won that award, it--and I'll tell you what it was, it was a hundred dollars and two tickets to the ball.  And I--my mother [Ethel McKinnon Beach] was my date for that occasion and I--it was a white tie event and the dinner took place at the Bellevue-Stratford [Hotel; The Bellevue Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  There was a red carpet from the Bellevue-Stratford to the Academy of the Music, and my mother and I marched down this red carpet and we sat in the balcony in the first seats in the balcony dead on at the orchestra, so that was a wonderful experience.  But what I felt--I felt a little, a few rubs while I was in school because I had won the prize as a, you know, African American person, and I felt that my work--as I began to show my work on the walls for critique, I was criticized a little more than I had been prior to winning that award, which got a lot of notice.  So there were things like that that you could sense being in a environment that you were truly in the minority, and, in fact, very few people were in the field itself, so it was unusual to pursue the course of study that I did.
Story_ID: 259592
Speaker 1: Did you pay particular attention to advertising as a young person growing up?  I mean, did you really--I mean, or the media.  What--you know, what attention did you give radio ads and TV ads and print ads?  I mean, did you really think about how they were being produced?  I just--just out of curiosity, before you got in the business of creating--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell you.  The way I listened to radio as a young person, I listened to it and my imagination became very active because I couldn't see anything other than what my mind's eye would tell me to see and what the emphasis of the radio spot or the radio story was.  When I looked in magazines, I saw the ads but I wasn't looking at the ads from the standpoint maybe one day I'll be doing this and, and--you know, it is copy, is it photography, is it artwork, is it humorous, is it--you know, any of those other types of things?
Speaker 1: They used everything when you were coming along.  And when I think about your age, I mean, you fell right in between--
Speaker 2: My age?
Speaker 1: Well, your--
Speaker 2: What about my age?
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: But really, I mean, you came along when there was a lot of radio in the beginning (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) That's all we had.
Speaker 1: --and your childhood was all radio.
Speaker 2: Atwater Kent.
Speaker 1: But you also were a young man when television started.
Speaker 2: Exactly, um-hm.
Speaker 1: And you could see the beginnings of television--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --and they did live commercials.
Speaker 2: Black and white.
Speaker 1: They did some filmed commercials, but a lot of them were done live and--
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: --there was a mixture of everything and they--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: In those days in the print ads, a lot of the scenes were actually--
Speaker 2: Rendered.
Speaker 1: --illustrations--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --or rendered and weren't shot at all--
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: --as photographs.  And then there were some photographs and a little bit of everything, right?
Speaker 2: And I think that's really one of the joys that I feel that I came along at the right time and I don't regret any moment.  You know, I--you know, I'm looking to push on for a lot more years because it's so much fun; the journey is great.  But, seeing all of that, you know, not only in the communications of advertising and materials, but just think in terms of the party line phone, the ones that you spoke to an operator on.  There was no dial.  Then, there was the rotary dial that you had to deal with, the party line that several people used the same telephone line, and then just to where we are today that we have now, not only do we have a phone, but we have something that takes pictures, something that can act as a computer just from the phone, wireless.  I mean, they had wires running all over the place, you know, for phones, but now, it's wireless.  You can be anywhere on Earth and connect with somebody near or far.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: It's amazing.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So did you have any--were there any particular ads from the old days and the days when you were growing up, you know--well, they weren't the old days.  They weren't that long ago (laughter), but, but any particular ads that caught your eye or you thought was good examples of advertising when you were coming along?
Speaker 2: Well, yeah, I can remember some, some lines as a youngster.  (Singing) "Call for Philip Morris."
Speaker 1: Oh--
Speaker 2: --little Johnny [Roventini], and that was--you know, cigarettes were very popular during that period and they're not taboo as they are today.  But the cigarette commercials were very, very dominant, and that was one.  The--I can think of L.S./M.F.T., Lucky Strikes mean finer tobacco [sic. Lucky Strike Means Fine Tobacco].  I think that's--
Speaker 1: That's right (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: --(simultaneous) how it works.
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Is that--
Speaker 1: You're right.
Speaker 2: Is that it?
Speaker 1: I think so.
Speaker 2: I remember the Ivory soap commercials and, of course, you know, the stories were sponsored--the daytime stories on radio were sponsored by soap companies, so that's why they got the name of soaps.  Are you looking at the soaps or listening to the soaps?
Speaker 1: Soap operas, right?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  I remember the L-A-V-A (singing), Lava, for a soap and then the 20 Mule Team Borax commercials, and then some 'Jack Armstrong [the All-American Boy],' the cereal of champions for Wheaties, you know.  There were a lot, a lot that I remember, Bazooka bubble gum commercials, Life Savers commercials.  So there's--there are those that leave an impression not only of what the commercial was or is, but you can also remember the product.
Story_ID: 259593
Speaker 1: You know, in some instances you can hear a great commercial today and not really identify with what the product might be.
Speaker 2: Now that's amazing.  It's--but that's--you're right 'cause I can think of a lot of commercials I don't know what the product was.  I still don't know what it was.  I've seen the commercial many times, in fact, looking forward to seeing the commercial but I don't know what it's for.  I don't--what--you can probably tell us at some point what this is about, why?  You know?
Speaker 1: Absolutely.
Speaker 2: Or what they're missing when they do these.
Speaker 1: Well, I think the good thing for me when I first started and the influence that all of my experience had been up until that point was the fact that I paid attention.  I had a very good memory.  I didn't have to take notes, but I would remember everything I said and everything that was said.  And one of the things that made me very successful early on was that I always read the copy of an ad or a brochure or a booklet that I was designing.  Once I read the copy, I got a sense of where the design should go and not only did I have a sense, but I had several senses because my technique was not just to do one.  I always had something in my hip pocket, and usually I--if I would take a percentage call throughout my career, I would say from my hip pocket, 70 percent of the things that were in my hip pocket were the winning design campaign or whatever it was that I was charged to do.  But I had that ability to retain a lot because if I had put my head down as I wrote, I would not be able to see the expression in the person that was doing the talking.  Because a lot of what you need to feel, you have to see, not just hear, but see.  So I pay strict attention to that, and then my recall ability was great or my capacity to remember a lot.  I didn't have to take one note, but I could do a twenty-eight page end report because I was actually responding in a design sense while the--while the instructions and that discussion was going on.  And if in my mind's eye I saw a particular problem that might occur, I asked the right questions to solve that problem that might occur at the time of the instruction, so it was never a matter of my going back to the studio and looking at the ceiling and waiting for the idea to come.  The ideas, for me, were happening at the point of the initial conversation.
Story_ID: 259594
Speaker 1: Kinda walk us through your career now, you started--you're working out of the Freed Studio [Freed Studios, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], right?
Speaker 2: Well, that was a--my internship.  I spent a year interning at Freed Studios, and then during the summer months, he [Maurice Freed] hired me on and at that time, he paid me seventy-five dollars a week.  And, now, you have to push back a little bit.  This is like 1956, '57 [1957], and that was more money than my father [James Beach] who was a tailor had made, and that just rocked my socks.  That awed me that here I wasn't even out of school [Philadelphia Museum School of Art; The University of the Arts, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I was receiving seventy-five dollars a week, and my father was making less than half of that, and I could--I just couldn't imagine, how could you manage to raise a family?  How could you manage to purchase a house?  How could you manage to do all of these things?  It gave me such an appreciation for the struggle that my family went through, and the preparation that they made for us and the direction of the emphasis on education, the emphasis on doing well and excelling.  It pays off, you know?  I'm the richest guy in the world because I believe.  I believe my parents, they were right, I believe in God, always right, so how can I be a loser?  I'm a winner.  So that's something that really gave me a different perspective in terms of how my parents came through and how they managed on so little.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Yeah, that is something when you think about--the salary you were making then was a grown man's--more than a lot of grown men (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --were making, yeah.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.  And then I was very frugal and mindful.  I didn't waste and I was able to save my little--had a little savings going, and it was very, very important.  And I'd like to say even prior to that when I was in high school [Simon Gratz High School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], I used to take orders at the food market.  I used to--when Christmas was over, I'd go around and knock off the wooden stands and take 'em to the basement and save them, and then sell them the next Christmas to people.  We would--my friends and I would go out on Christmas and sing Christmas carols, always having somewhat of an entrepreneurial spirit and earning.  And I'll never forget my dad saying to me, he said, "Give your mother [Ethel McKinnon Beach] something each week when you make--from the money that you're making."  And he said to me very clearly, "It's not that she needs it, but what I want you to experience is that you pay your way, stand on your own two feet.  Get in the habit of paying, because that will be very useful to you when you become an adult, you get married, you're in an apartment, you have to pay rent or you're buying a house, you have to pay mortgage."  So the idea of paying my way was really inculcated during my junior high and senior high school years when I was earning pocket change, so to speak, because my allowance was like a quarter a week.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And that was a--that has really stood well for me throughout the years of paying my way, paying salaries, paying rent, paying for supplies, paying for whatever it took to do business, I was able to stand on my own two feet and I was not surprised that I had to pay.
Speaker 1: Okay, so how long did you apprentice at Freed Studios?
Speaker 2: Actually a year and a half.
Story_ID: 259595
Speaker 1: Where did you go [after Freed Studios, Inc., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: In January of 1958, I walked six blocks from where we are and I got space in a studio called Cerotti Studios [ph.], and that was owned by Al Cerotti [ph.].  And the arrangement was that it would cost me fifteen dollars a month to be there.  In his space, I had my drawing board, I had my telephone, and what my responsibility was, was to give him first preference for my time and talent, that I would respond to whatever his needs were prior to any accounts that was able to muster up for myself.  In that first week or two that I was there, looking at the phone, hoping it would ring, I probably lost about eight pounds, but it was a tremendous experience, and from Cerotti, I was able to--after a year and a half, I was able to rent my own space at the Middle City Building [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], again, eight blocks from where we now sit, and that was a very, very wonderful experience to have my own studio.
Speaker 1: So this is in 1960 then, right?  When you get your own studio?
Speaker 2: Yeah, 1959, 1960, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, what was the atmosphere here for black artists in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]?  I know we've heard stories since we've been interviewing people in Philadelphia that make us think that this wasn't always Philadelphia, you know it was (laughter)--maybe it was Birmingham [Alabama] or something at one point and it became Philadelphia later, but it wasn't always great for black people in this city in terms of acceptance and so forth, but what was your experience?
Speaker 2: Well, my experience was really quite the opposite in a sense because what I was doing in music, I was playing music that everybody else played.  I wasn't playing so-called black music or African American music.  I was doing design like everybody else.  There wasn't anything that was popular as, you know, black design or black art.  That was not the big words in those days.  So I was competing with everybody else, and I was very good because I worked hard at being good, and I had the gift of the talent that helped accelerate, you know, my ability to do good work.  So when people looked at my work, it was like any--like my counterpart, and that's where I competed.  I did things that were market general.  There was nothing for the African American community or the Latino community or anything of that nature.  That came along in the '70s [1970s], but through the '60s [1960s], I was very, very fortunate that I got busy.  I mean, people kept me busy.  And there was another thing that was very interesting.  The Quakers here in Philadelphia were particularly sensitive to me, and one of the longest accounts I had during that time was from a Quaker run agency.  It was called the John F. Rich Company [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and I designed booklets for various campaigns.  They did fundraising campaigns for various causes like Keuka College in [Keuka Park] New York, the Culver Military Academy [Culver, Indiana], the Einstein Institute [Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey] at Princeton [University, Princeton, New Jersey].  These were all top notch activities, the oncologic hospital here in Philadelphia, the Einstein Hospital [Einstein Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], northern and southern divisions.  So when I was doing my design for them, it was across the board like anybody else, but it was good.  So that gave me a very good edge.  As a matter of fact, it was the John F. Rich Company that allowed me to do my first ad.  It was an ad for their company in the Trustee Magazine, which comes out of Chicago [Illinois].  I'll never forget it, to buy the media for the trustee and design the ad and send the materials to the publication for the John F. Rich Company.  And that was an ongoing monthly ad; we did an ad a month.  So that's how I really backed into the advertising business through my experience with the John F. Rich Company and others.  I did a lot of work for the major advertising agencies and major companies.
Speaker 1: That's Rich, R-I-C-H (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) R-I-C-H, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, out of Chicago, okay.
Speaker 2: No, they were out of Philadelphia (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) They were in Philadelphia, okay.
Speaker 2: --but the Trustee Magazine was out of Chicago.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 259596
Speaker 1: So you're on your own and doing fairly well in the '60s [1960s] then, right, you know?
Speaker 2: Yes.  And not only that, I was elected president of the Artists Guild of Delaware Valley, the first African American or first black to head that organization, and what happened, the people rallied around me.  They were just pleased to see that there was somebody of color that was, let's say, kicking it out, so they really gravitated towards me and I had a tremendous of support.  And it wasn't that I needed the support because I felt very confident at what I was doing, and that apparently resonated among the art community and the advertising community.  And I can tell you what the looks were when I would show up at a different company.  I could see the quick, oh, I didn't know you were black--or at that time a Negro or colored.  There was an expectation that I was not--I was white, those that hadn't seen me.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So, so when were you elected president of the Artists Guild of Delaware Valley?
Speaker 2: That was in 1963 and I served for two terms.
Speaker 1: Okay.  How long is a term of--
Speaker 2: Two years.
Speaker 1: Two years.  Okay.  So you were--
Speaker 2: Served for four years--
Speaker 1: So you were--
Speaker 2: --and then I served on the board of directors after I finished--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --my second term as president.
Speaker 1: So you served to 1967 and then were on the board.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 259597
Speaker 1: I think in the late '60s [1960s] that black advertising started really jumping off.  I know we were talking about Vince Cullers on the way in as being one of the pioneers out of Chicago [Illinois], and he had this famous cigarette commercial called "The Man in the Blue Dashiki" ["Brother in the Blue Dashiki"].  I don't know if you remember that, but it was (laughter)--there were some other things he did, but--and then Proctor and Gardner [Advertising Inc., Chicago, Illinois]--
Speaker 2: Proctor and Gardner.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  And, you know, then later Burrell [Communications, LLC, Chicago] I think in Chicago, but there were other agencies going to and--so what do you consider your first big break into media ads and that sorta thing?
Speaker 2: Well, my first big break was not so much when the outreach to African American populations around the country came, but it was with the Mount Everest Mint.  They were a mint much like the Franklin Mint, and I did a lot of work for the Franklin Mint and learned a lot about direct response advertising, and I did media buys and ad placements for the Mount Everest Mint, which was made up of people who formerly worked at the Franklin Mint.  And I was buying media in the major markets for commemorative medals.  I bought media in numismatic publications, I bought media in the main publications in major markets like Chicago, like California, like Atlanta [Georgia], like Florida, New York [New York], Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Massachusetts, and Ohio.  So--and they were--it was a test of fire.  For example, how did I do what I did?  Because I was asked.  Do you know, can you buy media and my answer was yes.  I never bought media but I had to learn how to do it, and everything that I was asked to do, I said yes.  I backed into public relations, I backed into copywriting, I backed into event planning, I backed into marketing, and all of those things I did.  So whatever it was, I had to do and I did with my hands.  I can remember these large spreadsheets with the media buy.  I was talking to the ad managers at all of these publications and I was winging and putting--you know, doing this all by hand.  There wasn't any computers in my office at that time.  I was making these buys all around the country and I was the voice and I was the hand that was doing it.  And that really set me apart from a lot of other folks and that gave me opportunities to buy even more.  So today, we buy media for--one of our accounts is about a million dollars for just that one account, just media alone.
Speaker 1: That's something.  That's interesting.  I see you were a real pioneer in terms of (laughter)--I'd say you were just--somebody asked if you could do it, you'd try to do it.
Speaker 2: Yes, absolutely.  And I think that's probably one of the signatures of who I am.  I'll start a fire to put it out.  I'm always willing to be on the edge.  I'm a risk-taker, again, going back to how I told you my dad [James Beach] was very deliberate about things.  And I'll tell you, he was thinking about opening up a tailor shop and he had ordered the presser, and I remember that in the home that we rented when we first came to Philadelphia.  And I would ride my tricycle around the hallway and around, and this machine was there.  And he didn't do it and he told me in later years, he said, "I didn't open the tailor shop because I had a wife [Ethel McKinnon Beach] and three children, and I was afraid that I wouldn't be successful at"--you know, with this operation.  So the fact that he didn't do something that he wanted to do I think drove something very, very strong into my persona and my way of life, that I take more risks than I should take to be a happy human being, which I am, and when you ask me or if you ask me, what do you see as success?  I'm still looking for it.  I'm still reaching for it.  So my whole existence is based on taking a chance, figuring it out, not giving up, having a can-do attitude.  So that's all--it all developed as a result of developing.  I didn't say today I'm gonna be a can-do person or today I'm not gonna turn anything down.  Anything that was moving, I was on it.
Story_ID: 259598
Speaker 1: So where did you go in the '70s [1970s] with your business [Creative Art and Design Studio; Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: Well, it's interesting.  Late '60s [1960s], early '70s [1970s], the whole idea of black advertising agencies, that was--that was really happening.  And a lot of people would say, "[HistoryMaker] George [Beach], well why don't you go that route?"  Because I was doing, you know, general marketing and occasionally with some of the general marketing groups that I worked with like Campbell's Soup [Campbell Soup Company, Camden, New Jersey], I would do a black history ad, but what I did on the, you know, as my assignments were for the general market.  And somehow, I didn't feel that I wanted to make my agency an agency that just targeted African Americans because I liked much more beyond just the African American culture.  So I never really pushed that way.  But, you know, in life sometimes people make you what they want you to be, and while I didn't identify that way, a lot of agencies from New York [New York] opened up offices here; I can think of them, Zebra [Associates, Inc.], Phoenix [ph.].  They're no longer here.  Beach [Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] is still here.  And the reason why Beach is here is that the diversity of the kinds of things that I do for the various types of markets has given me the longevity that I enjoy today.
Speaker 1: Okay.  So what, what kind of--so you--so did you do any of that kind of advertising targeted at the black community in those days?
Speaker 2: Well, yes, because people knocked on my door and said, "Would you do this ad for this group or this product?"  That became something that occurred.  It was the in thing to do and for companies to do, to be able to say, "Well, we have a minority owned and operated agency that's handling our ethnic markets," and they had representatives of--many of the companies had representatives that spoke on behalf of the markets that were African American, you know, with the beer companies, the automobile companies.  The national marketers always had a division within their corporate structure of people that represented the community, and they were the ones that had to be at all the luncheons, had to be at all the dinners, at all the events.  They were the face--they were the African American face of that marketing company.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, we were discussing I think before we started the interview, the--just being African American, you know some things about the African American community that somebody else would not know in terms of how to advertise to it, and they were very simple things and things that just occur to black people, especially someone who's keen as to what's going on in the community--pick up on, you know.  For instance, we were talking about heart medication and the language, you know, that was suggested to use in an ad, and you said, you know--and how you decided it wasn't really the--you suggested it wasn't the best language to use in the black community because it means--words mean different things--
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: --in the black community than they do in the white community.
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Yeah.  So did you--can you tell us some stories of how you were able to change the course of an ad campaign and make it successful by using the knowledge that you have that nobody else would have--you know, that a person--that no one else on the outside of the black community would have anyway?
Speaker 2: Well, I think I have a very distinct advantage in that.  In 1964, I created the African-American Commemorative Society, and that society was designed to produce commemorative medals on a limited edition of African Americans who had made significant contributions to America.  And in doing so, I became a historian, and not only a historian, but a numismatist.  Because there again, having a limited edition of sterling silver medals struck one a month was a very tremendous task, to do that along with my advertising business.  So having all of this history that we compiled on the various subjects that were selected by the membership; there were 1387 members nationally.
Story_ID: 259599
Speaker 1: Tell us how you put together this association and you had--I think it has something to do with Tuesday Magazine, right, and the ads you put in?
Speaker 2: Well, the--that's part of it.  But the real story was that we were doing work for the Franklin Mint; Joe Segel [Joseph Segel] founded that mint, and our work was very, very good, and they had an organization called The National Commemorative Society, which had five thousand and some odd members.  And that society was based on the members voting for the medals that were going to be selected to be struck in their behalf.  And once the limit of edition was struck, then the dies were destroyed to develop intrinsic value.  I had an opportunity to create the African-American Commemorative Society using The National Commemorative Society as a model.  And what I did was I did advertising to develop a membership, which was only for a certain time period, a limited time offer for memberships in the society.  I used a double-page ad in Tuesday Magazine which was run by [W.] Leonard Evans [Jr.], and the advertising manager was [HistoryMaker] Byron Lewis who heads the UniWorld [Group, Inc.] advertising agency in New York City [New York, New York].  I also took a double-page ad in Ebony magazine.  And then I took ads in numismatic magazines, which went to people who were collectors of medals and coins.  Well, when the closing date for the offer came about, I ended up with 1376 members in the society.  And each month, we would send them a newsletter and a ballot, and they would vote for the subject to be sculpted and struck on the next medal coming out.  It was a very, very democratic process.  And if you think about it from a marketing perspective, if you take the highest amount of votes, you're gonna please the highest amount of people that are in your society.  And, in fact, you can then see who came in second, and that second person might be offered up several months later, or that second person might be offered up for the next month.  And you could watch the pattern of how the members who were totally involved in the society actually reacted to the work that we did.  Now the surprising thing, that out of the 1376 members we had, we had just about two hundred members who were African Americans; all the other members were white.
Speaker 1: That speaks I guess to the number of collectors who were out here really.
Speaker 2: And the understanding of that now.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: We did a special mailing to the NMA, which is the National Medical Association, of black doctors, and also to the black dentists, and the majority of those that responded within that two hundred range were doctors and dentists.
Speaker 1: Not historians--not, not historians, you're saying (laughter)?
Speaker 2: Not historians.
Speaker 1: Did you appeal to the historians at all?
Speaker 2: Well--
Speaker 1: Did you know who they were?
Speaker 2: Well, the people that had joined the society, one is an outstanding historian; his name is [HistoryMaker] Charles Blockson.
Speaker 1: Yes, that's right.
Speaker 2: He--at the time he joined the society, he lived in Norristown [Pennsylvania] and, of course, I was operating here from Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And I got a chance to meet him, and he told me about his desire to collect books about African Americans.  And that's--he began collecting books, and now he has the Charles [L.] Blockson [Afro-American] Collection at Temple University [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], a very, very distinguished collection of black artifacts.  And we have (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) It's the largest collection ever assembled and he started when he was a child (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's exactly--
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: --right.
Speaker 1: Yeah.
Speaker 2: And I enjoy spending time with Charles Blockson because he was so encouraging to me with this commemorative society, and he would talk about me on many of his talks.  We featured him and his collection on one of our calendars [African-American Historical Calendar], because not only did I do the commemoration in sterling silver, but out of that whole idea came the historical calendar series, which is now in its thirty-fifth year, and that was because the price of silver was going so high that I had to think of another way to get the story out.  And I went to paper because, again, with silver I had to buy silver futures in order to have enough silver to strike the coins at the price that the membership had to pay.
Story_ID: 259600
Speaker 1: When did you start this society--I mean, the [African-American Commemorative] Society?
Speaker 2: I started the society right after King's [Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.] death, Dr. King's death.  He was our first subject and--
Speaker 1: Okay, so that's in 1968.
Speaker 2: Yes, that's correct.  And the sculptor who sculpted the Martin Luther King, Jr., medal was Gilroy Roberts, the sculptor of the John F. Kennedy [President John Fitzgerald Kennedy] piece.
Speaker 1: Now he's black, right?
Speaker 2: No, he's white.
Speaker 1: Really?  Oh, okay.
Speaker 2: All of the sculptors--there's a great story here.  All the sculptors that I used in the beginning were white because there were--in order to produce these medals, you had to use low relief, and--to create the dies for these commemorative medals.  I brought Cal Massey, a dear friend, an African American artist, I commissioned him to do the Jackie Robinson medal.  That was the first medal that he had sculpted.  And he was so good that he eventually was hired by the Franklin Mint to design medals in their behalf.  I also commissioned Paul [F.] Keene [Jr.] to design the obverse and reverse of a medal.  And he never did a medal but, again, we did it together.  Joe Bailey [Joseph C. Bailey] who is now deceased, he was a sculptor; I had him or commissioned him to design a medal.  So out of all of the medals that we created in the commemorative society, there were no more than five black sculptors that were good at low relief sculpture, and I brought them on to do it, and I feel very proud of that.
Speaker 1: How many coins did you strike all together?
Speaker 2: We struck seventy-six.  Our first series was fifty and our second series was twenty-six.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Seventy-six sounds like a Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] number (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's right.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Seventeen seventy-six [1776] is a big number.
Speaker 1: Yes.  Yeah.
Speaker 2: But we had 13--1376 members and I still get correspondence from those members asking about their collection, asking me for a value, what do I think it's worth.  And of course I instruct them to be in touch with the American Numismatic Association, which I was a member of.  And here's six thousand members from around the country and including Canada, and in that association, there were three blacks.
Speaker 1: Now, who would--would we know any of these three blacks?
Speaker 2: Yes, because when you're in a sea of whites, you can certainly find each other.  When we'd have--there were annual conventions around the country, and one person was Lawrence [K.] Chavis.  He was a professor at a university [Virginia State College for Negroes; Virginia State University, Petersburg, Virginia] in West Virginia [sic.].  And the other African American member of the commemorative society was from Texas.  He owned a barbershop, but he loved to collect medals.  There was a fourth member also.  He was from the State of New York.  I can't think of his name at the moment, but there was the four of us in a sea of whites who were numismatists.  And, you know, dealing with the auctions, dealing with understanding what the quality of a commemorative medal was and its value.  As a matter of fact, I auctioned the only platinum medal that was struck of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., by us at one of their conventions and received a thousand dollar bid on it and we accepted a thousand dollar bid, and I presented Ralph Abernathy a check for a thousand dollars from the sale of that platinum commemorative medal of Dr. Martin Luther King.
Story_ID: 259601
Speaker 1: Now if someone had the entire collection [of the African-American Commemorative Society] now, if they had all seventy-six of the coins in sterling silver, what would that--what is that worth today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, it's worth as much as someone wants to pay for it.  It's very hard to put a number on it when--I'll get calls; I may get a half a dozen calls every three months.  Someone, either the lawyer for an estate, they've come upon the collection of medals, they wanna get a value as a settlement of the estate of one of our members, or some family member comes--inherits the collection and they wanna get a value attached to it, and the only way that I know that is a fair way is to have them contact the American Numismatic Association, so they could be put in touch with a numismatist who is in the business of buying and selling commemorative medals and currency, coins.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Okay.  So you can't tell us (laughter) right now or you don't think it's a good idea to tell us right now.  But, yeah, it's interesting.  I imagine they're worth quite a bit now.
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: When you think in terms of, these are the only ones that were struck in the whole world, 1376 medals, that makes them very rare.
Speaker 1: Yeah, well, well seventy-six different ones, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, um-hm.
Speaker 1: Yeah, just seventy-six different--
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: And there are 1300 and some sets?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: Okay, in the world.
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: And the dies--once we strike the final coin or medal, the dies are destroyed.  The collection is at the Smithsonian [Institution, Washington, D.C.], and the collection is also part of the White House [Washington, D.C.].  They were members and a coin--a commemorative medal--I keep saying coins, but a commemorative medal was sent to the White House from the inception until the last one that was struck.
Story_ID: 259602
Speaker 1: So you went from the striking medals to developing a calendar [African-American Historical Calendar]?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Now, do you sell the calendar in terms of limited editions of the calendar too or what (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) No, it's an open edition calendar.  But what's so very interesting about it is that more people can be serviced by the calendar than the 1376 members of the [African-American Commemorative] Society with their medals because when people have something like a commemorative medal, they're not willing to show it off.  It's--they'll identify who they would like to share that with, so it's not something for mass consumption.  And then, to many people that have something that they feel has a value, they protect it.  They don't leave it out in the open.  They don't let everybody know, well I have a collection of these or this or that.  But in paper and with a calendar, I've got 365 days with the exception of a leap year where a story about African Americans who have contributed to our country can be seen by young and old alike, and it's illustrated in a way that you can visually see it and it's written in a way that you can understand the language.  So I--millions of those have been distributed since the onset.  We are now--as I said to you initially, today is February 11th, 2005, we are working now on our 2007 year calendar.  We have to work well in advance because of the manner in which they're sold to those that buy, because it's not a commercial entity that you can buy in a store.  They're sold to companies and it's based on the idea that the order is already made before production--before the calendar is produced.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, who consults with you on the calendar, on the history calendar?  Do you have any--
Speaker 2: We have a very interesting group of people that sit together and talk about which subjects we're going to include on the calendar.  We get a lot of inform--a lot of suggestions from people who have seen the calendar and who have had a relative that they felt was very important that should be commemorated on the calendar.  And once a year, we sit down and we sift through those subjects that we think are appropriate and we come up with the twelve that we're going to produce for the following year.
Speaker 1: Okay, but you didn't tell me who (laughter).
Speaker 2: Oh, they're (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) I mean--okay.
Speaker 2: No, as a matter of fact, they're educators, they're artists, and they're just regular lay people because it's important to get that kind of mix.
Story_ID: 259603
Speaker 1: What else are you involved in or have you been involved in since the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: The--I've been involved in a lot of not-for-profit organizations in terms of volunteering and having a leadership role with those organizations.  As I had indicated as I did my work, people seem to enjoy working with me because I seem to be on top of what it is that we have to discuss.  I say I'm a jack-of-all-trades and master of many.  I know a lot about a lot of things and I only need a few sentences and I sound like an expert, because there are things that I've either experienced or I'm just aware--I keep myself constantly aware of local, national, and international events.  I'm--and I like to read about them more so than to see them on television, or even on radio.  I like to read because I can get through the clutter and I can pick up those salient points that I need to store in my brain, and so once I'm in discussion, I just need the trigger to recall, and put it together.  So it's very easy for me to talk about things that may be totally foreign from art, commemorative medals, being a numismatist--I didn't even know what that was before until I became involved, but I can tell you all about what a numismatist is.  And that's how it's been for me and that's why I feel the journey that I've been traveling thus far has been so interesting.  I love it and as my favorite words or quote was, I'm loving it, still am.
Story_ID: 259604
Speaker 1: I know the first time I ever heard of a numismatist was in reading the works of J. A. Rogers.  I don't know, did you ever get a chance to meet him at all?  Joel Augustus Rogers, he was an author and historian from Jamaica who lived in New York [New York] and--
Speaker 2: No, I never got a chance to meet Mr. Rogers.  Is that something I would have an opportunity to do today?
Speaker 1: Yeah, well--no, he died in '66 [1966], but he was--he started writing in 1911 and wrote several books--'From "Superman" to Man,' 'Africa's Gift to America,' 'World's Great Men of Color,' 'Nature Knows No Color Line[: Research into the Negro Ancestry in the White Race'], a lot of some--lot of books.
Speaker 2: I would be interested because he's a visionary, I mean, just by the titles.  They're the kinds of things that would capture my interest.
Speaker 1: Maybe some that [HistoryMaker] Professor [Charles] Blockson knew when he was a teenager, you know, and they would meet--I mean, I guess hang out in Harlem [New York, New York] and stuff together?  So--no, I just wondered 'cause that's the first time I ever heard about a numismatist was reading the works of Rogers, but--yeah, and there's some of the people that--I mean, we've had a group of intellectuals I guess in New York and in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] and in Chicago [Illinois] and other cities who have stayed on top of history and culture in a way that I think a lot of people wouldn't understand that who don't--who wouldn't imagine that we were doing unless they really knew, you know?  So it's--yeah.
Speaker 2: You're absolutely correct on that, and I have my family to thank for priming me in the appropriate way to pursue education and to understand the Booker T. Washingtons, the [Mary McLeod] Bethunes, the [W.E.B.] Du Boises, or the Countee Cullens, all of the people that came before us that had to pave the way so it could be better for us.  On my mother's [Ethel McKinnon Beach] side, most of her family, they were in the teaching profession; they taught at schools.  And they always, always had a strong, strong mandate that you learn something about black history.  And I know one aunt that I had, she had every Ebony magazine that was ever printed that she stored in her home, but black history was always pushed.  Her sister, my other aunt, she was also a teacher, so there was always that pushing to let you know that there's somebody that happened before you did, and that's why you have a better opportunity today, because there were--they paved the way for us.  But if you don't know anything about where you've been, then you really don't have a good sense of what your future might be, the possibilities of what your future might be, what you can dream about and what you can really make happen.  So that had a lot to do with my ability to touch the historical aspect of African Americans and to make that information available to schools, to individuals.  We had here in Philadelphia when I first did the [African-American Historical] Calendar [with the African-American Commemorative Society], the idea I sold to a bank.  And the bank then was charged with making distributions to the public schools here in the City of Philadelphia.  And, in fact, the distribution was made on an even basis.  It wasn't heavy in the black community.  It was across the board.  Now, they did run out in the black community and then they reached into the other communities to get some of their inventory, which was really good.  But they did this for twenty-two years, and they may not have wanted to do it for twenty-two years because in the tenth year, there was a belly band put around the calendar as a market research device.  Do you use this calendar?  Do you find it helpful?  Is there things that you would like to see different about this calendar?  And everything came in positive, so they couldn't really back out.  I mean, that was the idea.  If the information came and said, well, no, it's just kind of a nuisance, you know, I don't really use it, this information is not really of any value, then they would have a legitimate case to discontinue supporting that calendar.  The only reason it was discontinued was that the bank was bought by another bank and that was the opportunity for them to discontinue some of the things that became an institution within the institution.
Story_ID: 259605
Speaker 1: I was looking at the [African-American Historical] Calendar [of the African-American Commemorative Society].  Some of the illustrations remind me of a series called Golden Legacy.  Do you remember that series?
Speaker 2: I remember that series of the--of books on the various subjects that were illustrated in a similar fashion.  We like the way we do it.  As a matter of fact, we are really trapped in the way we do it because those that have collected it, they don't really wanna see contemporary change in the format, and that's--and that's really a beautiful thing, and I've learned how to deal with that.  It's just like when we develop a campaign for a client, the client and their employees say, "Well, I'm tired of hearing that line; I'm tired."  Well, wait a minute, we're not really doing it for you, we're doing it for a public that is only hearing it a few times, so they're really not tired.  So with the calendar, once that format was established in 1968, it has remained the same, the panels, the story, and the portrait, and that's what the collector, that's what the recipients of the calendar are looking for, and they will have nothing other than that.  We have in a sense contemporized some of the drawing compared to the way we did it initially, and we brought it into nine panels of story as opposed to some of the early stories were, you know, thirteen, fourteen panels, and it was, you know, a lot of--it was a lot of work.  And everything was hand drawn.  This was the day when you had to get the type set and have it pasted up--
Speaker 1: That's right.
Speaker 2: --and it was--it was--it was quite a labor of love and--
Speaker 1: Is every calendar different?  Different--
Speaker 2: Every calendar--
Speaker 1: --figures?
Speaker 2: --is different.  We--in some cases, we have repeated some subjects, but basically it's a new audience that sees it.  You know, there's only so many things that happened in the 1700s.  So when we started, there was very, very little literature.  There was very few books, so I'm pleased when I walk into a bookstore and see all of this African American history and all of these stories about great people and all of these adventures and novels by African Americans.  I'm just thrilled to death.  There was only four or five publications when I first started that were available that had any kind of historical significance, 'Before the Mayflower: [A History of Black America]' which was done by [HistoryMaker] Lerone Bennett who's with Ebony magazine, that was one.  There was Aptheker who (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: (Simultaneous) Yeah, Herbert Aptheker's--
Speaker 2: Yes, exactly.
Speaker 1: --'American Negro Slave Revolts' and--
Speaker 2: Right, exactly.
Speaker 1: Right, yeah.
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Those were the things that we were able to touch, just try to feel something.  And then the spoken word, when people would tell us about [William] Monroe Trotter and some of the people in different parts of the country.  When we heard the word, we were able to illustrate it and develop the story.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now are there any interesting stories associated with the coins or the calendar that centered around some of the figures on the coins and the calendars?  Any of their relatives talk to you or surface that had interesting things to say about their personality that you focused on?
Speaker 2: Yes, as a matter of fact, we had a beautiful reception for the wives or spouses or individuals who were connected with the subject.  For example, Mrs. Jackie Robinson [Rachel Robinson] attended the event; Lucille [Wilson] Armstrong attended the event; Charles Handy, W.C. Handy's brother attended the event; and we had another--there were four or five in this total presentation.  How amazing.  How amazing to--for me to see the wives or the husbands or the brothers of these people who had done such great, marvelous things, and to be able to have ongoing relationships.  Lucille Armstrong, our family became attached to her, and she would correspond with us regularly.  And when I was in New York [New York], I would go out with Lucille Armstrong and Al Copetti [ph.] who escorted her to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and he was the person that, that grew up with Louis Armstrong and Louis Armstrong gave him his first trumpet, one of Louis Armstrong's trumpet.  Well, when we went to places in New York, the red carpet would roll out.  I never saw such adulation for a person like Lucille Armstrong because of Louis and because of her talent as well.  Charles Handy, he gave us a book, a music book, 'Unsung Heroes Sung' [sic. 'Unsung Americans Sung,' W.C. Handy] and here's this marvelous piece that his brother put together that we have.  I've gotten slave documents from a lot of people that we've come in contact with.  We've--as I say, they--we get all kinds of things that are--they find us.  They look for [HistoryMaker] George Beach and they find us, and they keep us in touch with what they're doing.  Mrs. Armstrong--Mrs. Robinson that was a marvelous meeting with her.  Now I have a relationship with her daughter [Sharon Robinson].  I met her daughter at events, and this is really very important, to carry the legacy forward.  We should never let the deeds of those who came before us and those who are with us now ever fade into the sunset; it's just too rich and valuable.
Story_ID: 259606
Speaker 1: Tell me about the big corporate giants that you work for, you know Campbell's Soup [Campbell Soup Company, Camden, New Jersey] and Hershey Foods [Corporation; The Hershey Company, Hershey, Pennsylvania], Scott Paper [Company, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]?
Speaker 2: I had a very valuable experience working with these corporations.  They came about as a result of the pressures from the Civil Rights Movement and the idea of seeking out minority companies that can offer services--goods and services to the large corporations.  And someone did a story about me and it was in the paper, and I used that story as a solicitation piece to the major corporations and got an immediate response.  And what I enjoyed was that the work was for the mass markets and it was inspiring to see an ethnic food--soup can label that was designed by me, or a packaging improvement that was designed by my firm [Creative Art and Design Studio; Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], or an ad for a freestanding insert that was designed by my firm in the mass media.  The thing that I did find, however, was that as I tried to expand myself within those corporations and offer more than just design work and execution of advertising, but to offer more media and marketing services and more full service type of advertising, I found that each one had a ceiling for my services, and to the extent that I remember sitting with one director of marketing, and he took me to lunch and said, "Well, [HistoryMaker] George [Beach], I know you wanna do more than what you're doing now, but you see here at our corporation, we have our vendors each in a box, and that's how we look at our vendors that you're in this box and when we need those services we go to that box.  Now, if you choose to step out of that box and try to be more, then you're at risk because you're no longer in the box that we would be looking for you.  And if you succeed, you succeed.  If you fail, you fail.  But we can't guarantee anything."  So I chose to step out of the box, and each time I stepped out of the box, that was the end of my relationship with those corporations.  And that's to say that your destiny sometimes doesn't have to be what some others might design for you.  So once I stepped out of the box, I could no longer get back in the box with that corporation and I didn't really choose to because I was moving on, and being able to move on was part of my commitment to my beliefs and my confidence in our ability.  So that's one of the things I found with a lot of the corporate accounts, that they--it was more of an altruistic experience for them.  It wasn't for me to stay with a corporation for twenty-five, thirty years, doing business and growing within the business.  It was to serve a function when there was pressure, and I was a very good candidate to serve that function for those corporations.
Speaker 1: Okay, so they kinda put a cap on you.  Even though the opportunity was given, they screw a lid down on your--
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --your ability to grow.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: I know people--artists have a story, a similar story, they're doing fine art in terms of the National Endowment for the Arts [NEA], creating a special position for black artists and then never letting 'em out of that special grant group.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: They all got smaller grants, and you couldn't get a bigger grant if you stayed in it, but you might not get anything if you got out of it.  But it's not because of the quality of your work, it's because you were initially put in it (laughter).
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.
Speaker 1: Yeah, so--
Speaker 2: So that was really a challenge, and I early on chose to not have a separation between what I loved to do and my life.  I've gotta give so much credit to my wife [Mary Stewart Beach] of forty-one years and my two sons [Timothy Beach and Matthew Beach] and other members of my family who have been very, very supportive, because without their support, it might've been a different story for me.  My wife is very accomplished.  She was an opera star who I met here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], but she stepped aside to allow me to go forward, and that's really--I guess forty-one years ago, that might've been the right thing to do, but in today's market, there's careers by both husband and wife, you know.  So today, everyone can have their career.  There's no stepping aside.  I mean, that's the way life is.  But, you know, my wife was very, very supportive along with my other members of the family, and that's what really gave me strength to circumvent any cap that was placed on me.  And as a matter of fact, when the cap is there, then as a Leo, I'm thinking faster and quicker.
Story_ID: 259607
Speaker 1: I perk up when, you know, the words can't be done, never done, those kind of words and, no, this is it for you, that only represents another opportunity to face a challenge, whether it be with the same people or other people, at least I've had an experience.  I know how to maneuver in the business world.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Now let's talk about another kind of challenge.  Now you've had a, really a heavy physical challenge to deal with, that being arthritis.  Can you tell us about that?
Speaker 1: I sure can.  As they say, arthritis will be my friend for life, but I have rheumatoid arthritis and I was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis nearly thirty-five years ago.
Speaker 2: Okay.  And--well, what are the symptoms and how does it affect what you do?
Speaker 1: Well, the symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis is a irritation and inflammation of the joints.  They become inflamed and become very painful, and they become--in a sense, the cushions that lay in between each of the joints become dissolved by the arthritis disease.  And when I first was diagnosed with arthritis, I thought it was, you went to the rheumatologist--I never knew about a rheumatologist; I knew about a general practitioner or an, an internist or a surgeon.  But a rheumatologist, that was not even in my vocabulary.  But a rheumatologist was the--or is the specialist in over one hundred different forms of arthritis, and I had rheumatoid, which is a type that causes great degeneration of the joints, and causes deformity, et cetera and et cetera.  I thought I was just going for treatments for a couple of weeks and I'd be outta there.  Well, it's been thirty-five years and I'm still there, but I'm much better than what I was, because at the time, the only solutions for remedy were not a solution of cure, but a solution of reducing the pain and inflammation, and I was taking up to twenty to thirty aspirin a day, and then I would have to take Tagamet so that my stomach would not implode from the aspirin intake.  Then I got gold salt injections.  I had direct injections into the joint with cortisone.  They would be into my ankles, into the base of my head, the bottom of my feet.  It could be in my wrists, wherever the inflammation and pain occurred the most, that's where the rheumatologist would do the injection of cortisone.  And I went through over the period of years all of the various types of drugs that were introduced to try and contain the arthritis pain and joint destruction.  I was at a point with the drug regime that I was on that the whites of my eyes were yellow, I was very almost comatose in a sense, very numb because of the pain and the use of pain killers, and I could hardly move.  I couldn't walk.  I had to be helped up and down.  If I sat for more than ten or fifteen minutes, I would almost be frozen in that seated position.  If I sat on something too, too low, I couldn't get back up.  I'd have to pay attention to where I would be, where I would--where I would sit, how I would be able to hold onto something to keep from falling.  I had to develop a very deep sense of awareness.  I had to pre-think every move I made, and I had to be cognizant of where--if I were to fall, how would I catch myself.  So I used, again, from my artistic ability, the ability to visualize and the ability to lock onto everything that surrounded me.  I could--from this room and this very spot, I could close my eyes and walk to the door, I could walk up the steps, I'd have a sense of where I am and an extraordinary sense of what my surroundings are so that I could, could function appropriately.  For example, for me to walk, you know, let's say the length of this conference room, it would take me probably about thirty-five minutes to make that move and each painful step was something that I would never forget.  Everything--again, I had to visualize where I was, have preconceived idea of how to slide my feet, where to lean, what to hold on to.
Story_ID: 259608
Speaker 1: Then, there's a series of operations that took place, joint replacements I had--replacements that I had to take.  My knee has been replaced, my hand had a replacement in it.  I had cervical laminectomy.  I had foot fusion.  I had elbow surgery.  And as a consequence of foot fusion, a screw that was inserted to hold the foot because that was to lock the foot from having any motion, I always thought of hockey sticks had come out while I was in a cast and created a staph infection, which nearly killed me, and it was after a hundred thousand dollars' worth of MRIs and X-rays and a infectious doctor who put me on a regime of medicines and I had to have intravenous antibiotics into my body based on a hip implant over a period of years, I beat it because I was determined to beat it.  The picture that I saw for myself was still going on.  The picture that [rheumatoid] arthritis gave me was one of complete un-participation in life's program because I was designed for an electric wheelchair.  I wasn't to walk.  I wasn't supposed to even be able to use my limbs.  My wife [Mary Stewart Beach] used to drive me to my office and I would get on the elevator, I was on the twenty-third floor in the Lewis Tower Building [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], and she would drive me down, I'd get on the elevator, I'd go up, I sit in the chair, and I would be out like a light, she'd come back, pick me up, and I had no interaction with the staff, no interaction with the clients, until one day, my accountant said, "[HistoryMaker] George [Beach], they need to see you," and that was an activity.  I would then have to get to a client's office and just get in the doorway, and manage to look as normal as I possibly could look with severe pain from rheumatoid arthritis.  But those are some of the things that I encouraged--incurred.  And because I wanted to know as much as I could about arthritis, I got involved with the Arthritis Foundation, first as a person that was assisting them in public relations, then I was elected to the board, then I was elected chairperson and I served two terms as chairperson of the Arthritis Foundation of Eastern Pennsylvania.  And then I served as the media pass chair and I interfaced with all of the rheumatologists.  I was aware of all of the modern drug types that were out for servicing someone with rheumatoid arthritis.  So I got as close to the subject as I possibly could because it was important that I continue to do what I was trained to do from a youngster and I still do it today, having control of my life, having a deep commitment and understanding and liaison with our maker, with God.  I believe in him so strongly.  I believe that he has protected me.  I believe that he has allowed me to have challenges and the challenges are things that I have to overcome.  He's given me the ability to do that.  He's gifted me with art.  He's gifted me with a quality of life that I've earned and I'm very, very blessed.  I'm blessed, again, because of my wife, my family, and people who have been very, very encouraging to me, and who look at me and say, "It's impossible.  You are absolutely amazing."  And, of course, I like to hear that because I am and I strive to be, and when people see it and feel it, then I know I am amazing, I am accomplished, and I will be able to do more than I've ever done in my life, so I'm still looking forward to the second half of my journey in this wonderful thing called life.
Story_ID: 259609
Speaker 1: You were initially diagnosed [with rheumatoid arthritis] as someone who shouldn't be able to walk right now, right?
Speaker 2: That's exactly right.  That's exactly right.  They had me looking at wheelchairs.  I was in a--after all of these operations, they put me in a rehabilitation center, and I had no energy to do these little exercises that they had.  I would--they would wheel me to the place and I would just lay on the mat.  I had no--a sheet felt like two thousand pounds.  Every--I couldn't lift anything and they didn't allow me to use the wheelchair because I had no strength in my arms to do it.  I was pushed about.  I was bathed.  I was transported from the wheelchair to the bed.  I mean, that was the routine.  And then when they went for the physical therapy, I just didn't participate.  I looked at that and I couldn't do it.  I mean, there was no way I could do those physical therapies.  Then they would ice me down and then send me back to my room, you know, via the attendant.  And then--I'm still thinking, I'm getting outta here.  This is not the picture.  They said, "Well, you know, we wanna take some of the patients to look at these wheelchairs," and it was these electric wheelchairs and I thought that's what they meant, just to look at them.  Actually, they were sizing me up for an electric wheelchair.  They talked about reconfiguring my home with ramps so that I could be able to scoot up into my home with these--on this electric wheelchair with these various ramps.  They talked about--I would have to have a van to drive as opposed to a passenger car.  And when they began doing the paperwork on that, I said, "No, this is not gonna be."  And what I did, I got myself out of that rehabilitation center and I had called around to all of the people that had been--I had been in their service, the physicians, the rheumatologists, and everyone, and no one wanted me--wanted to take me in their service because I was so fragile.  And it was only the hand surgeon that was able to take me in his service so that I could get out of that rehabilitation center and be admitted into Thomas Jefferson University Hospital [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and go through a regime that got me back on my feet.  And I'll tell ya, when my wife [Mary Stewart Beach] came to get me out of the rehabilitation center, the director said, "Well, where are you taking him?"  And she said, "I'm taking him to the hospital."  She just stepped forward, she said, "Well, no you can't come out of here."  And it was almost like one of those movies where you're trapped in this, you know, castle and they're gonna keep you in prison forever.  But that was the defining moment for my return to full productivity.  Yes, I know how much I can lift.  I know how much I can stand and I'm very conscious of what I can and cannot do, and I live by those tenets, and I'm getting along absolutely fine.
Story_ID: 259610
Speaker 1: Let me ask you about your artwork.  Now you're also an accomplished fine artist, and tell us about your work and what your technique is and what your subject matter is.
Speaker 2: Well, I'd love to tell you about my artwork because that was one of the gifts that I had from the creator.  He made me a createe, not only in the art but in the music and other things as well.  But in art, I really enjoy doing art, but with the arthritis and the onset of that, I wasn't able to do any paintings for over twenty-five years.  The last commission I did was a ten foot by sixteen foot mural for a new library [Lucien E. Blackwell/West Philadelphia Regional Library, Free Library of Philadelphia] that was being constructed here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania].  And when I signed my name to the bottom of that mural ['Knowledge'], I knew that was it, that I could not go any further.  I could never paint again.  I would never lift up a brush and so I put the brushes away.  I didn't do another piece of art because it was too painful to do.  As I went through all of these various types of treatments for my [rheumatoid] arthritis, a biologic was introduced and I began taking self-injections twice a week of a biologic called Enbrel.  And what that biologic does, it's created to attack the TNF [tumor necrosis factor] cells, so it sets itself against the cells that are the ones that are causal for the inflammation and the joint damage; therefore, it knocks it right out.  And when the events of 9/11 [September 11, 2001] occurred and New York [New York] being my home and my first office that I opened in New York was at 15 Maiden Lane, and I had been in and out of the towers [World Trade Center, New York, New York] at the top of the--Windows on the World [New York, New York], various offices and various meetings that I had in the towers, that touched me, and it touched me so much that it gave me the courage to lift those brushes that lay still for over twenty-five years, and the first piece of work I created was called 'Indivisible.'  It was a skeleton of the Twin Towers engulfing an American flag under a full moon.  That painting appeared in Wyeth Pharmaceuticals [Wyeth, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and a report, it was on their website, it's on the Enbrel website, it's been contributed to arthritis chapters around the country, and it's just--started me back to painting again.  It--the way I paint is a little different.  I can't hold my hands and arms up like I used to before the onset of rheumatoid arthritis, but I have a way.  I found a way to get it done.  I found a way to get these long brushes that are almost as long as a broom handle, and I found a way to do it.  There was a challenge, and I produced four pieces of work that were shown at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art [San Francisco, California] in 2001 at a event that Wyeth had--that Immunex [Corporation] had sponsored.  The painting of 'Indivisible' was just recently shown at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in a exhibition called "Our Flags" [sic. "Our Flag"].  And there is just a myriad of things that are very, very exciting for me in terms of my first love, drawing and painting that are occurring that--my prints are collected by a lot of major corporations and in private collections, so I'm very thrilled about it and I think of all the possibilities of what's been stored up in my brain and in my heart that hadn't been expressed through art that I now have an opportunity to do.
Story_ID: 259611
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the African American community today?
Speaker 2: My hopes and concerns for the African American community are as broad as the country itself or even really the world.  We as a people have to continue to press forward.  We cannot become complacent.  We do not have it made in my view.  When you have it made, you've reached your end.  We have to constantly exercise our minds, develop our ability and perceptions in a positive manner.  Yes, there's a lot of negative things that have happened.  You could take up a cause against certain things that you will never be able to accomplish or reset, but find out what they are.  It--find out whether the battle for everything is more important than the battle for several things that you can really accomplish.  Yes, it's good for us as a people to reach beyond what we believe we can do because we can.  We've done it in the past if you understand our history.  We've done a lot and we can still continue to do a lot.  We do not have to become complacent.  So what I say to the African American community today is be absolutely involved in the political life of the community in which you live in.  You have the ability to elect elected officials by your vote.  The power of your vote is very, very important.  And you have to support those candidates that have your interests at heart.  And you have to support them in a number of ways.  You can support them financially as they move forward with their campaigns, you can support them in volunteering to assist them in the works that they're doing, and you can support them just by supporting them.  It's so important if you support and elect the elected officials who have your interests at heart, then you're doing a job for your community as well as for you and your family.  The educational piece is absolutely important.  I'm amazed that--how young people are so adept at using computers and the computer games and they are whizzes at it.  They need to continue to do it.  They need to do--they need to create their own songs.  They need to create their own games.  They need to market their own specialties that they develop, because we're all an original, and whatever it is, we don't have to see it done by somebody else.  If we're doing it and it feels right and people respond to it, then we have to continue to do it and not worry about whether it's gonna make a million bucks or not.  It's going to be an expression of the inner part of you as a human being and it's going to be a contribution to those that look, feel, or enjoy that which you have accomplished.
Story_ID: 259612
Speaker 1: Tell me, when you look back on everything you've done so far, is there any major thing that you would do differently?
Speaker 2: I sometimes think about that.  I think about it in a lot of ways because I think hindsight sometimes can correct things for you as you go forward.  I'll tell you, the kind of person I am is an experience person.  I've got to experience what it is.  My dad [James Beach] was--and my mom [Ethel McKinnon Beach] as well, but more so my dad, because I was the only son, he was very, very protective about things in terms of who I was with, where I--you know, what I did and so forth and so on.  I wasn't even allowed to own a bicycle, but I learned how to rent 'em (laughter).  And--but he was very, very protective, and I remember the discussions that I had with him and my comeback to him was, "Dad, how will I know how hot fire is unless I touch it?"  You know, your telling me how hot it is doesn't give me the experience of feeling how hot it is.  So, sometimes I've got to try it my own way.  And I think that was a defining moment in terms of how I approach things today and how I look at things that occurred in the past.  What would I do differently?  Nothing.  What would I do better going forward?  A lot, because I've learned a lot from what I did in the past.  And whatever it was that I did, I never used it as a putdown.  You know, I never used my fingers to point to anyone and blame anyone for my rheumatoid arthritis, for being black if that was an issue, or being poor if that was an issue.  My finger points to me.  I am responsible for my actions.  Yes, there are things that can agitate you to a degree that you are out of control, but control is a very strong weapon to have for life.
Story_ID: 259613
Speaker 1: What would you consider at this point to be your legacy?
Speaker 2: Why are you giving me such tough questions?  I think of a lot of the things that I've done in the past not to dwell on them, but just--I--you know, I think of them as part of the process of going forward.  I think my legacy is yet to come.  Yes, I've done a lot in these sixty-eight years and I'm looking forward to doing a lot in the next half of my life.  But I would think the things that were most important that if I were not here tomorrow that people would remember, my pioneering efforts in the field of advertising as a African American business owner who has always worked for himself, not having any guarantees of an income or pension with the exception of what I was able to accomplish and how I've been able to arrange my life.  I would think that what I've done from a black historical perspective will have meaning from here until perpetuity because history is--it happens every moment, and to have had an opportunity to speak about African American men and women who have contributed to the world, quite frankly, that's something that I think will have meaning long after I've been gone.  I think the one thing that I did at The University of the Arts [Philadelphia Museum School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], my alma mater, I created a endowment to provide financial aid to minority students, especially African American students, for their supplies because I knew what it was like, even with a full scholarship, going to that university, there were costs involved.  I had to paint on bed linen and cardboard, and my brushes were from M.A. Bruder [& Sons, Inc.], horsehair brushes.  I didn't know what a sable felt like.  I didn't know what a piece of linen canvas felt like and--but I made do with little.  And so instead of making the financial wars for artistic scholarship, they're there when they matriculate to The University of the Arts.  They are good to begin with in their artistic scholarship, but what many of the students, minority students especially need, is assistance in buying the supplies so that they can keep up with their peers with the appropriate equipment.  So that's--I'll be remembered for that for sure because the endowment will be causal for that to happen.  And I--the other legacy is my family.  My sons [Timothy Beach and Matthew Beach] who, one son is with me here in the--in the business [Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania]; he's been with me three and a half years, and he is very important to continue this business.  And he looks like me, acts like me somewhat, but he is his own person.  And we see each other every day for however long it might be.  I don't get in his way.  I allow him to grow independently of who I am because it's very hard sometimes to step into the shoes of your predecessor because of the expectation of your public.  So he can develop what he needs to develop because he'll always be Beach.  That's his name, that's his heritage, that's his culture.  And you know, that's a very, very good legacy to have, to be able to extend your business beyond your own life and particularly with a family member involved.  So, what would be my legacy?  All those things and some that I probably haven't even thought of.
Story_ID: 259614
Speaker 1: You can be surprised how people perceive you.  When I was starting as a designer, and I developed a calendar or better yet I developed the commemorative medals [of the African-American Commemorative Society] when people would see me, oh, this is the guy that did--that does the medals.  Well, no, no, I'm really a designer, but this is the guy that does the medals.  They were defining who I was or am.  Then when I developed a calendar, this is a guy that does the black history calendar.  No, no, I have an advertising agency [Creative Art and Design Studio; Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  This is the guy that developed the black history calendar.  So your public really defines who you are and now they're defining me as the artist or the--they used to say the man who is for such a long period of time, his door open, his phone never stopped, and he's still here forty-six years later.  So they will say that and I know that's true because I'm a living example.  They will say, he's a legend in his own time.  Well, that's fine, but I still have more to do.  The whole idea of my participation with organizations like the Arthritis Foundation, just newly elected to the Alliance for Aging Research based out of Washington [D.C.] where I can contribute my knowledge, and also my energy to helping others, as the baby boomers now become the biggest population that we have to deal with in this country, and we certainly have things that they have to be concerned with, social security, medical, Medicare, Medicaid, all of these things.  So being in all of these kinds of activities is very, very important, and to being an active member of my church.  I believe in tithing.  I believe in going to church on a regular basis and participating in communing with God.  Those are some of the things that are very, very important to me and may be important to others as they seek to define who I might be.  But I'm looking forward to also finding out who I might be because there's so much more that I feel I can do.
Story_ID: 259615
Speaker 1: Now your father [James Beach] who was cautious and concerned that you were stepping out there into a world of beret wearing, starving artists, you know, in an attic some place, how did he feel about your success as an artist, you know, almost immediate success by comparison to, you know--
Speaker 2: Well, I'll tell ya.  That was a very, very meaningful experience for me because my parents were very pleased to see the kind of accomplishments that I could achieve, and I could see it in their face.  And you see, that's what drives me.  What I do, I can get immediate gratification, whether it's a painting, whether it's an ad, whether it's a speech, whether it's--whatever it is, I like to see the reaction.  As I told you, I don't like to lean down taking notes.  I'm watching and I can get the nods and I can keep moving and I can see the heads.  When I tell my story, I can see, you know, the looks and so the words just begin to flow and the feeling and the context of my message just goes where it has to go.  I have no prepared notes.  The first speech I gave for a group like that, I had notes.  But it was my life, why did I have notes on my life?  Now, I walk into the room, the energy of the room, the sense of the room dictates what I say about my life.  I should know it.  I've lived it and I'm still living it.  So I have a great deal of fun with it and I know my parents who are deceased now are smiling in heaven because I've achieved some things that have made them proud and they have made me proud by being great parents to me and the only thing I can do is be reciprocal in making them proud, making my family proud, my children [Timothy Beach and Matthew Beach] proud, and all those that feel I'm worthy, making them feel proud.
Story_ID: 259616
Speaker 1: Have we passed something or skipped something that we should've asked you?  I know we can't ask everything in a limited amount of time, but is there anything real significant that we haven't mentioned that you wanna mention before we ask our last question?
Speaker 2: Sure.  I--when I first started in business [at Creative Art and Design Studio; Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] in 1958, in 1959, the Alliance Francaise [de Philadelphie] in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania] offered me a scholarship for a year to study in Paris [France] at Academie (unclear), and I just started on my own and I was very reluctant to step away for a year and go to school in Paris, and I declined the scholarship.  The next year, they came back at me and they said, "Would you consider going for the summer?"  Well, I had some employees at that time and I said, "Well, I would consider going for the summer," and I did.  I wasn't able to go to Academie (unclear) but I was able to go to the Academie de la Grande Chaumiere [Paris, France] for drawing and painting, and I studied with Andre Treves.  And in the afternoons, I went to the Alliance Francaise to work on the language portion of it.  But that was a tremendous experience.  I've been back a number of times.  I lived with a family when I was there and the third day that I was there, they gave me a key to their house.  Why?  Because of the way I was trained at my parents' [Ethel McKinnon Beach and James Beach] house.  They felt so confident with me that they allowed me to have a key to their home.  And when their son got married in 1970, they invited my wife [Mary Stewart Beach] and I to come to the wedding that was held in the south of France and it was a very unique, unique wedding and a unique party of a dozen people that were in the wedding party, and my wife and I were part of that dozen, and that was very, very good.  So I've made other trips back to Europe, particularly Paris.  In 1998, I was there.  I couldn't draw or paint, but I saw a lot 'cause I loved the French impressionists.  I liked to be in the spaces that they were in, breathe the kind of air that they breathe, enjoy the kind of ambience and environment that they did their work in, so that was very important to me.  So my European experience has boded very, very well in my development.
Story_ID: 259617
Speaker 1: This is our last question, and it's similar to legacy but a little bit different.  How would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: Just that way.  I would like to be remembered.
Story_ID: 259618
Speaker 1: Go ahead and tell us about this.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph that was taken at the--a tribute that was held in my honor for forty years of being in business.  On the left is Floyd [W.] Alston, a former president of the Philadelphia School Board [Philadelphia Board of Education], the lady is [HistoryMaker] Emma Chappell who was the founder of United Bank [of Philadelphia] here in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], and of course, here I am enjoying that evening.
Speaker 1: During that evening, we had a photograph taken of some of the key players that were honored at my tribute, Shirley Dennis on the left, formerly with the PECO Energy [Company] along with my pastor, G. Daniel Jones, the pastor of Grace Baptist Church of Germantown [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], myself, Ray Ellis who's very, very much involved with Reverend Herb Lusk [II] at his church [Greater Exodus Baptist Church, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and he was a deacon there and he was a former football star with the Philadelphia Eagles.  Paul [F.] Keene [Jr.] is next to him, and Paul Keene received the George Beach Foundation medal and Paul Keene was the first African American teacher I had at The University of the Arts [Philadelphia Museum School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  He's an outstanding internationally known painter.  Next to him is [HistoryMaker] Renee [J.] Amoore, one of my dear friends who's one of the top women in the GOP [Republican Party].  She lunches and dines with presidents.  She is well respected in the political world and she's the head of the Pennsylvania GOP delegation.  Next to her is David Brown.  David Brown was president of Beach [Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] at the time.  He's a very talented young man who now has his own firm called Brown Partners [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: Here is a photograph of myself doing what I love to do, paint.  I'm painting the oil painting of Ida May, and this is truly one of the things that I live for, lifting the brushes that lay still for so long and painting again.
Speaker 1: Here I am with my son and Governor [Ed] Rendell at the governor's offices in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, after presenting a Giclee print of 'Indivisible' of the painting of--from the oil painting that I created as a tribute to the 9/11 [September 11, 2001] tragedy.
Speaker 2: Here we are, the three musketeers, friends for life and for a long term.  On the left is Bob Jefferson [Robert L. Jefferson].  He's a graduate of The University of the Arts and also the illustrator of the African-American Historical Calendar series.  On my left is my dear friend, Cal Massey [Calvin Massey], who is the portraitist of the portraits in the calendar series and a dear friend for life.
Speaker 1: Here I am with three students that received the award from the George Beach Foundation that I present to students annually at The University of the Arts.  They are minority students, especially African Americans, and the--it's a cash award for their supplies.  I'm there with the head of the department along with the director of the graphic design operation.
Speaker 2: I'm shown here along with the president of The University of the Arts, Miguel Angel Corzo.  He's the first president of color to be the president of The University of the Arts and he comes to us from the Getty Foundation in Los Angeles, California.
Speaker 1: I'm shown here with quarterback--
Speaker 2: Donovan--
Speaker 1: Donovan McNabb from the Philadelphia Eagles.  I'm accepting from him an autographed football.
Speaker 2: I'm shown here with the original oil of Ida May, which is one of my favorite paintings.  Ida May is now deceased.  She was an artist, and when I first met her several years ago, I just connected with her as she connected with me, and I was determined to paint her and share the experience that I felt with her for all those who view the painting.
Speaker 1: I'm shown here at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art [San Francisco, California] with a painting of the man which is on your left and a painting of John Lee, who is John Lee Hooker on your, your right.  The interesting thing about the painting of 'The Man,' I did that in 1956 when Ghana became independent [sic. 1957] and there was a model on the model stand that never really looked like what really came out of my hand and my brush, and that painting has been a part of me and an inspiration for courage and pressing forward since 1956.
Speaker 2: Here's a photograph of me in one of my first studios for Beach Creative Art and Design [Studio; Beach Creative Communications, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  As you can see, I have my drawing table.  I'm happy and smiling, and I got my magic markers and all my other tools available to get the job done.
Story_ID: 259619
Speaker 1: Here is a picture of my father.  It's his passport picture.  As you may know, he was born in the British West Indies, and this is the photo from his passport when he came here to the United States.
Speaker 2: Okay.  What's his name?
Speaker 1: His name is James Henry Beach.
Speaker 2: This is a project from my photography course while I was, was a student at The University of the Arts [Philadelphia Museum School of Art, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].  It was a reflection of my mother in our toaster.  That's how I designed the shot and you really can't see me in the shot taking the photograph, so I think I did the right kinda job there.
Speaker 1: That's a nice print too.
Speaker 2: About what year would this be?
Speaker 1: This would have to be in 1956 or '57 [1957].
Speaker 2: This is an early photograph of me in one of my first studios.  As you can see, I'm surrounded by a lot of inspirational things on my wall and I'm doing business on the phone that still has the same telephone number that I had forty-six years ago.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of--
Speaker 2: Can you move your right hand?  You're shadowing.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of the head of health and welfare Los Angeles [California] as part of a marketing program that we did for CDC [Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia] with C. Everett Koop's mailer responding to AIDS [acquired immunodeficiency syndrome], and we did the outlook for the African American community in eleven major cities, Los Angeles being one.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of a presentation of 'Indivisible' to Mayor [Michael] Bloomberg of New York [New York] and Senator Arlen Specter of Pennsylvania.  Along with Mayor Bloomberg and Senator Spector is Lyn Boocock-Taylor, the president of the eastern Pennsylvania chapter of the Arthritis Foundation [Arthritis Foundation of Eastern Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my experience at a summer camp, Camp [James] Emlen in Telford [Pennsylvania], Souderton section of Pennsylvania.  The camp was the first away from home experience that I had, and I was working in the arts and craft area with the young students.  I was just beginning high school at that time.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph that was taken of me when I became president of the Artists Guild of Delaware Valley and it was used on all of the marketing materials and membership materials for that organization.
Speaker 1: It's back in 1963?
Speaker 2: Yes, that's 1963, that photograph was taken.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph that was taken in 1994 with the illustrator, Bob Jefferson [Robert L. Jefferson], and myself discussing some of the portraits that were being used in the African-American Historical Calendar.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of myself and Cal Massey [Calvin Massey], and this photograph was taken in 1970.  That was a few years into the calendar experience.  We started the calendar series in 1968 and our pictures have always appeared on the back of the calendar and we have watched ourselves age over the years, but our spirit is still the same as if the first day we began producing the calendar.
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of my--that was taken when I graduated Simon Gratz High School [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 2: That's 19--
Speaker 1: Nineteen fifty-four [1954].
Speaker 2: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 1: Wait one minute.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  This is a photograph of myself and [HistoryMaker] Dorothy Height.  We're in African garb at an event during African history month or--after that, yeah.
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is the beginning of a beautiful marriage of forty-one years with my wonderful wife, Mary Helen Stewart Beach.  We were married in Texarkana, Texas.
Speaker 2: Why Texarkana?
Speaker 1: She was from New Boston, Texas, and that's to accommodate the wedding party.
Speaker 2: Okay.  Here's a second picture.
Speaker 1: Aside from having a wonderful marriage and a beautiful wedding, I was now obliged to hold my wife's hand as she cut the cake.
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: Here we are as bride and groom along with the parents of my bride, Benny Stewart and Iris Stewart, on the left, my mother Ethel [McKinnon] Beach, my father James Beach, and my godmother, Mary Dyer [ph.].
Speaker 2: Okay.
Speaker 1: This is a piece or better yet, this is the cover of sheet music that is titled 'We've Got the Devil on the Run.'  My mother used to play this song and I remember it so well that it's even a part of how I live today, keeping the devil on the run.
Speaker 2: How does the song go?
Speaker 1: This was 250 years ago (laughter).
Speaker 2: (Laughter).
Speaker 1: What's interesting, this particular work was produced by the great Elder Michaux.
Speaker 2: Lightfoot [Solomon] Michaux, right.
Speaker 1: Um-hm.
Speaker 2: I think he was related to Lewis [H.] Michaux.
Speaker 1: (Unclear).  Ready?
Speaker 2: Um-hm.
Speaker 1: Now this is a photograph at my sixtieth birthday with the mayor of Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], Edward G. Rendell, my wife, and myself having a wonderful celebratory time.
Speaker 2: All right.  Now I would get as close as you can and--
Speaker 1: Can you see who that is?
Speaker 2: I was just trying to read that writing--it's cute, I think that's what it says.  Ethel is cute.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: Oh, yeah (unclear).
Speaker 2: Yeah.  Okay.  Tell me when you're ready.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my mother at her home in Kingston, New York, and I love the inscription under it.  It said, Ethel, so cute.
Speaker 1: (Laughter).  Okay (unclear).  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of my father who at the same time was visiting my mother's parents [Zoetter Robinson McKinnon and Edward McKinnon] in Kingston so that's why their picture appears together on the same page.
Speaker 1: And it's in the '30s [1930s], right?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Early '30s [1930s], I guess?
Speaker 2: Yes, the early '30s [1930s].
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: This is an early photograph of me that was taken at a studio in the Bronx [New York, New York].  This was typical of children and people of our day to have a studio photograph taken.
Speaker 1: All right.  Ready.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of myself and my two sons, Timothy [Beach] and Matthew [Beach].  Timothy is on the end, Matthew's next to me, and we are just getting ready to take a cruise on one of the boats in Philadelphia.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.
Speaker 2: This is a photograph of me as the ring bearer in the wedding of my aunt and uncle.  My uncle is Dr. Phillip Beach [ph.] and he married Edna Hodges [ph.] who was from Philadelphia.  Phillip Beach was born in Montserrat, British West Indies.
