Story_ID: 3400
Speaker 1: My name is Julieanna Richardson and I'm the interviewer.  And Scott Stearns is the videographer, and Glenda Collins is the observer--Glenda Collins, right, is the observer, and I'd like to start out Dr. Black by you stating your name first, middle and last name and spelling it for us.  And give us date of birth?
Speaker 2: Keith Lanier Black, K-E-I-T-H, L-A-N-I-E-R, B-L-A-C-K.  Date of birth is 9-13-57 [September 13th, 1957].
Speaker 1: Okay, and I'd like to have today's date?
Speaker 2: April 21st, 2004.
Speaker 1: And I'd like to have our location and your occupation?
Speaker 2: Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles, California; occupation, director of neurosurgery at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center.
Story_ID: 3401
Speaker 1: I'd like to know what your favorite food is?
Speaker 2: My favorite food is probably lobster.
Speaker 1: Favorite time of year?
Speaker 2: Favorite time of year is summertime.
Speaker 1: Favorite color?
Speaker 2: Favorite color is black.
Speaker 1: Favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: The Caribbean.
Speaker 1: And do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: Favorite phrase or saying?  Now, that's an interesting one, probably not.
Speaker 1: No problem.  I'd like to start out by asking you about your father--he's your namesake--.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) There, there is a--.
Speaker 1: Oh, you do.
Speaker 2: I thought of one.
Speaker 1: Okay, good, okay.
Speaker 2: And that is "hay."
Speaker 1: Hay.
Speaker 2: H-A-Y, just hay.  That's a universal word.
Story_ID: 3402
Speaker 1: I'd like to start out by asking you about your father, and if you could give his name and I'd like you to talk about, you know, what you know about his growing up and his background?
Speaker 2: My father's name was--or is, actually.  He's still alive, he's turning eighty this year, is Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr. His occupation for most of his life was an elementary school principal.  For a short time, he was also a professor at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] and also a short time, assistant superintendent of schools in Rockford, Illinois and also in Cleveland, Ohio.  He was born in Beatrice, Alabama.  His father was a bricklayer.  He fought in World War II in the [U.S.] Navy and spent most of his career as an elementary school principal in Auburn, Alabama during the time of George Wallace when the schools were segregated.  He had received graduate education at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], went back to Auburn to try to enhance the education of the students there.  And since the school system, since the student body could not be integrated during that time under segregation, he was able to integrate his staff--integrate his teachers.  He was able to create an integrated student body--integrated staff, and started teaching French to elementary school students, African American students in the fourth grade--had the best library in the school system at the time.  He taught his students civil disobedience.  A number of his students went on to protest in front of civil--in front of the city hall; integrated the all-white pool, you know, at the time.  So he was, he was very pro-education, very pro-civil disobedience, very pro-integration.  Ultimately, he went on to become an integration specialist at Kent State University, which was a special program in the department of education at Kent State University, that advised all of the school systems in Ohio on mechanisms to integrate both their student body and, and their staff.
Speaker 1: Did he ever talk about his growing up?  Do you--did he ever tell stories about growing up in Alabama?
Speaker 2: He--he did.  I mean he was--he was very proud of his father, you know, very, very proud of the fact that his father, who was a bricklayer, donated his labor and services and time to build the first school--you know, all-black school, in their small town.  You know, they built the church, very, very proud, and--you know of the contributions that his family, particularly his father was able to give back, you know, to, to their small community.  He was particularly very proud of--of how wise his grandfather and great grandfather were at the time.  His great grandfather came to this country from Jamaica and landed in Charleston, North Carolina as a free man and was hired as a foreman over the slaves in Alabama and got paid at the time.  And when the slaves were freed he took the small amount that he had saved up, bought some land; eventually, accumulated about a thousand acres of land in Beatrice, Alabama and was, in fact, the richest man in that county, black or white, at the time--had cotton mills, grist mills--I mean cotton gins, corn mills and so forth and was very affluent.  And, in fact, in the titles and deeds to the land, put in a stipulation that none of his offspring could sell the land without first offering the land to someone else in the family.  And they could never sell sort of the oil and, and mineral rights.  So most of that land still stays within the family.  I mean I actually inherited I think twelve or fifteen acres, you know, after all these generations of--of some of the land.  And my grandmother, actually, at some--at one point, were receiving royalties from Standard Oil Company for oil that they--oil rights that they wanted to--to drill on the land.  So he was, he was proud of the fact that his great grandfather was, you know, quite wise in terms of accumulating assets, accumulating resources at--at the time as well.
Speaker 1: Now, just explain to me, where is Tuskegee [Alabama] as opposed to Beatrice as opposed to Auburn, are they all close to each other or are they're not?
Speaker 2: They all are very close.  It's sort of in that southeastern part of, of the state. Beatrice is not too far from Tuskegee.
Story_ID: 3403
Speaker 1: Your mother, can you give her name and what you know about her background?
Speaker 2: Right, my mother is Lillian Black.
Speaker 1: Her maiden name?
Speaker 2: Her maiden name is Jones.  She was born in Alabama as well, the daughter of a sharecropper who had a number of sons and, and daughters.  She was one of the, the only one of her sisters, actually, to attend college and get a college degree; went on to become a first-grade school teacher, which she was, and--you know--for most of her life.  She's currently retired, and--you know, my parents are still together after all these years--living in Warrensville Heights, Ohio, which is a suburb of Cleveland, currently.
Speaker 1: Did she talk at all--is she a talker?  Did she talk at all about her growing up and the family?
Speaker 2: She did. Quite a bit--very different lifestyle, you know, obviously, from my father, you know, being the daughter of a, of a sharecropper.  You know, they had a much more difficult financial struggle at the time.  And, you know, I think she was one of the, the lucky ones in that her uncle actually helped support her to go to school, and, and to college where she met my father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.].
Speaker 1: And where did she go to college?  They both, they met at college?
Speaker 2: Yeah, they, they met when they were freshmen in college at Alabama State University [Montgomery, Alabama], which is--at that time was the black, you know, college in Alabama.  My father had just returned from the service, and--the [U.S.] Navy.  My mother was a, was a freshman.
Story_ID: 3404
Speaker 1: And your siblings?  Can you give their names--?
Speaker 2: I have one brother.  He, his Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.  He's seven and a half years older than I am.  He's currently an attorney, living in Columbus, Ohio.  When we were living in Auburn, Alabama at, at the time, since the school systems were segregated, it was very unusual for African American students who went to a all-black high school to actually get into college.  Or if they did get into college, the college that they got into was, you know, either Tuskegee Institute [Tuskegee, Alabama, now Tuskegee University] or Alabama State [University, Montgomery, Alabama].  My father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.], being the ultimate educator, made the sacrifice for my brother to move him out of Alabama, since he wanted to stay in Alabama and work in the school system.  So from the time that my brother was essentially twelve years old, he, he was going away to school.  For the first year, went to live with my aunt, Ann Jones, who is my mother's sister in Seattle, Washington; went to school for a year in Seattle when he was twelve.  So I think that would have been in about the seventh grade.  Eighth grade year, my father was doing his graduate work at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] so he did his eighth grade year at, in Philadelphia with my father.  And in the ninth grade, they sent him away to private school, Brewster Academy in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire, where he did his high school training, and then went on to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] for his undergrad and Ohio State [University, Columbus, Ohio] for law school.
Story_ID: 3405
Speaker 1: What is your earliest memory of growing up?
Speaker 2: My earliest memory is actually walking out on the porch naked, you know, where I must have been about two or three years old. And I was, I mean I was just kind of, kind of realized that, oh, I have memory, you know, at this point.
Speaker 1: And this is in Auburn [Alabama]?
Speaker 2: In Auburn.
Speaker 1: Now, you were born--and the records say you were at Tuskegee [Alabama]--.
Speaker 2: I was born, I was born in Tuskegee because none of hospitals in Auburn admitted black patients.  So, you know, my father had to Tuskegee to the black hospital where I was born and then drive back to Auburn.
Speaker 1: And Auburn, how large a town is it?  Can you just sort of describe it?
Speaker 2: It's essentially a college town, you know.  The main thing at Auburn is Auburn University, which was a segregated white university at the time.  The population cannot be any more--I mean, at least when I was going there, no more than about fifteen, twenty thousand.
Speaker 1: Can you describe the block that you grew up on?
Speaker 2: The block that I grew up in was more of a middle-class, all-black neighborhood in, in Auburn.  And so it was, it was the block in Auburn where most of the black teachers, principals, lived at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember your neighbors, any of your neighbors?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Can you describe them or who they were?
Speaker 2: Well, the neighbor next door was the Bennetts.  Debra Bennett who was principal of the, of the high school; across the, across the street was, was the coach and teacher, you know, at the high school.  You know, so those were, you know, that neighborhood essentially sort of consisted of--.
Speaker 1: And the street, do you remember the name of the street and the address?
Speaker 2: Lincoln, Lincoln Street, 551 Lincoln Street.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you share with us any--well, you know, you were there how long, were you before you moved to Cleveland [Ohio]?  How long were you in Auburn?
Speaker 2: We--.
Speaker 1: You were there till--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, we--I lived there until I was essentially ten.
Speaker 1: Ten, okay.  I would like you to take yourself back to that time.  And I'd like you to describe what sights, smells and sounds remind you of growing up, you know, in that, you know, in that town?
Speaker 2: Well, the interesting thing about growing up in Auburn at the time is that you essentially lived a, a segregated lifestyle.  So you lived in a self-contained African American community.  Your doctors were black, your teachers were all black, your dentist, you know, was black.  All of the people that you saw and interacted with were black.  You went to a black recreational facility, you know, a black pool and so forth.  And, you know, that's all that you knew, and so, I mean, you know, at the time, it seemed great or it was fine.  It was, it was a wonderful experience for me at the time because we lived right next to a forest so we spent a lot of time in the forest.  We built three-story towers, you know, out of trees we cut down, you know, spent a lot of time playing army, you know, in the woods, fighting, you know, doing that sort of thing.  It was a, it was a great time to sort of grow up.  The last year that I was there, you know, we--you know, they integrated the school system voluntarily.  You could elect to go to the white school.  So for, for a year in the fifth grade, you know, I was a part of the first class that integrated, you know, the school system in Auburn, you know, that year.
Speaker 1: Now, can you give me an idea of any smells, though, that remind you of, of Auburn or growing up?
Speaker 2: In terms of, of smell, you know, really just, you know, being outdoors, and probably my dogs.  You know, I had a lot of dogs, you know, at the time.
Speaker 1: Okay, any, any sounds?
Speaker 2: Sounds, just, you know, kids playing.
Story_ID: 3406
Speaker 1: What were you like as a young boy?
Speaker 2: I--for as long as I can remember, I always had a fascination with science.  You know, sort of my earliest memories, I mean was fascinated I think originally with tadpoles and frogs and, and aquariums.  I ended up, I think, in second or third grade having this fish tank with guppies and went on the local TV programs, and they started having babies, which guppies do quite frequently.  And I won the award for having the most prolific pet at the time.  Because we were out in the woods, you know, we spent a lot of time.  You know, the big thing at that time were, you know, was BB guns and everybody had a BB gun and was trying to shoot birds.  But, you know, the birds that I would shoot, I would try to rush back to the house and try to operate on them to get the BB out to see if I could save the life.  You know, I would get my brother's [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.]  biology book, you know, who was a number of years ahead of me.  And I would see the anatomy of a frog, you know, with the intestines, the heart, you know, the lungs and so forth.  So I figured out that I could anesthetize the frogs with alcohol, and I could basically dissect these frogs with their heart still beating.  So I would try to do, you know, heart transplants, you know, on the frogs.  And, you know, I would play with the chicken hearts, you know, in the sink, you know, that my mother would, would cook and try to understand the anatomy, you know, of the different chambers in the heart.  And my father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.], you know, who I always describe as being the ultimate educator, would see this.  And then, you know, he would cultivate, you know, that interest.  And, you know, he went to the slaughter house and got a cow heart, you know, and allowed me dissect, you know, the valves and the different chambers there and, and, you know, and would help me build weather stations and, you know, cal, calculate the speed of the wind by driving the car.  So when it was at twenty miles an hour, I could sort of mark that down and use, you know, for barometric pressure and various things, and, and just essentially being a great dad, and identifying an interest, you know, that his son had early on and being able to cultivate that interest.
Speaker 1: So your interest in tadpoles goes back to what age?
Speaker 2: As long as I can remember.
Speaker 1: As long as you can--(simultaneous).
Speaker 2: And, you know, my--I mean, you know, the second memory I have, you know, outside of walking out with no clothes on, is looking, you know, around and being fascinated with the fact that the tails on tadpoles would, would disintegrate as they became frogs and realizing that they used that as their food source, you know, while they were, you know, still tadpoles.  I mean, you know, my memories are basically, you know, being fascinated with science when I was growing up, you know, trying to build an airplane out of a lawn mower engine and, and plywood, you know, seeing if I could get the curvature of the wings, you know, just right so that the plane would fly.  And--
Speaker 1: Did your father have an interest in science himself?  I know you said he was an educator, but he--.
Speaker 2: No, no interest in science.
Speaker 1: No interest in science, okay.
Speaker 2: Right, but he was fascinated with education, and the--more of the process of education.
Story_ID: 3407
Speaker 1: Can you describe your family life or around holidays or just, you know, memories you have of growing up?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think, you know, the best thing about the holidays is that my brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.] would come.  So, you know, he would come home from, you know, wherever he was at the time.  And, you know, I got a chance to hang out with him.
Speaker 1: So you were raised almost like an only child in some respects that he was--,
Speaker 2: [Simultaneous] Essentially, right.
Speaker 1: --you know, he was away like that.
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: So was your hero or idol or?
Speaker 2: Yeah, he was my big brother.  He was the idol who I looked up to when I was growing up.
Speaker 1: And so what were holidays, you know, what were they like?
Speaker 2: They were great.  I mean, you know, who doesn't like Christmas?  Yeah, who doesn't, you know, enjoy Thanksgiving with all the food and family and so forth around.
Speaker 1: And would there be a lot of food, a lot of people coming?
Speaker 2: A lot of food, you know, you know, so it was always a very happy time, you know, a lot of family around.  You know, sometimes aunts, uncles, cousins, you know, would, would come in.
Story_ID: 3408
Speaker 1: And the black community, how large was this?  You said, you know, my block was middle-class, you know.  So how large was it, did you have a sense of how large that middle-class community was?
Speaker 2: About two blocks.  It was about two blocks, and then--yeah, I mean cause you could imagine, I mean, you know, how many teachers and so forth that you would have that, you know, would all want to live in the same area.  And around that obviously, were African Americans with less financial resources.  So, I mean, and you'd just have to go a few blocks away and see, you know, your friends who, you know, were not quite as well as, as you were.  And not that we were well off because, you know, I mean you're talking about salaries of schoolteachers, being middle class.  My father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.], I think made six thousand [dollars] a year, and my mother [Lillian Black] made five thousand [dollars] a year.  And I think they paid about five thousand dollars for the house that we were in.
Speaker 1: And so in this community--now, did you have a best friend.  I'm just trying to get a sense of you as a young person?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: You know, besides, you know, the early fascination with science, I'm trying to understand, you know, what was sort of going on in that head, and, you know, what were you like?  Were you, you know, a quiet child?
Speaker 2: Two best friends.  One was Russell Bird, again, who lived, you know, sort of just outside of that area, a family not quite as well off.  And the other was Kenneth Hill, again, you know, not quite as well off on the other side.  So we were all in the same class and, you know, they were the ones I considered my sort of best friends during that time.
Speaker 1: And so they're the ones who you were doing BB guns with, you know, and playing around in the woods--,
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: --you know.
Speaker 2: Right, you know, (unclear) obviously, you know, the community was very small, so you had a sort of core group of friends.  But, you know, to play army, you had the whole neighborhood essentially.
Story_ID: 3409
Speaker 1: The elementary school you went to, what was the name of it?
Speaker 2: Boykin Street.  My father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.] was principal and my mother [Lillian Black] was a first-grade teacher.
Speaker 1: So how was that?
Speaker 2: It was okay.  I mean, you know, it wasn't great to me.  You know, at the time, you know, they had corporal punishment.  You know, the kids would actually get paddled, you know, for misbehaving.  So, you know, it's not quite, you know, the best thing after, you know, a sixth grader who just got paddled, you know, by your father when you're a second grader to be walking out in the, in the play yard.  But, you know, you know, you still had your father as principle.  So, you know, you had a little bit of protection.
Speaker 1: So, you were--I'm sorry.  We all had corporal punishment back then (laughs).  We all experienced that back then.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) you said it's not great. We all experienced that Dr. Black.  But you're saying, that it was almost like being in a fishbowl is what you're saying or not?
Speaker 2: Yeah, it, it was, definitely.  I mean, you know, I left there in fourth grade, but I mean you can imagine having my mother being a first-grade teacher there for, you know, during that time, the four years that I was there.  My father was, was the principal.  So--.
Speaker 1: So you had to be the good kid in many ways?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I mean, you know, you would get double punishment, I mean, you know.  So, you know, he, he didn't give, my father didn't give a lot of slack.
Story_ID: 3410
Speaker 1: Are there any other, you know, did you have any favorite teachers or anything during that time or other people outside the family who influenced you?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  I mean I think, you know, the, the big influence is, you know, is probably my brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.], you know, and parents [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr. and Lillian Black] , you know, during that time period.
Speaker 1: Now, do you remember any messaging that your parents, you know, made at that time?  You know, we're all messaged to.  So do you remember anything, lessons that they told you about whether how you conduct or how life worked or anything that sort of stayed with you till this day?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, did you--okay, let me as, though, but between the two of them, what do you have of both of your parents?  You know, who are--like what do you get from your father and what do you get from your mother?
Speaker 2: You know, I think my mother, you know, is the one that has more of a love for life, enjoy living, you know, experiencing, you know, life.  So, I think I, I definitely get my adventure side from her.  I probably get my more serious, you know, side from my father.
Story_ID: 3411
Speaker 1: Tell me what happened in terms of how your father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.] ended up getting this opportunity?  He had gone away already that one year, right, to be in Philadel--was he, had he gone to be in Philadelphia [Pennsylvania]--?
Speaker 2: University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: At University of Pennsylvania.
Speaker 2: Which return, to be principal of, of the school?
Speaker 1: Well, he wanted--you were saying your brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.] was in Philadelphia, you know, that one year.  But you were still living in Auburn [Alabama], right?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And then, but when you were in fifth grade you left to go to Cleveland [Ohio], right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But that--do you remember the year that he left to be away from your, you know, from the family?
Speaker 2: Yeah, absolutely.
Speaker 1: Okay, do you remember anything about that year, you know, being with your mother [Lillian Black] and, you know, and, and the experience of, you know, of your father being away?
Speaker 2: The thing that I remember is how great it was to go visit him, yeah, in Philadelphia, and walk around the University of Pennsylvania campus and see Philadelphia, ride the subway.  Yeah, that was a lot of fun.
Speaker 1: Well, it's city versus--it's city versus country.  It's North versus South.
Speaker 2: Right, correct.
Speaker 1: So, it was like a whole new world had opened up?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And what about that world attracted you?
Speaker 2: I, I think, you know, again, it was just sort of different experiences.  My family was very good about taking trips.  I mean, you know, they would get in a car and drive across country.  So, you know, we got a chance to see a lot of, a lot of the country, but I think it was nice to visit my father away in a different location.  He was living in a little small basement apartment, you know, at the University of Pennsylvania at the time.
Story_ID: 3412
Speaker 1: Did you have a favorite teacher?  Did you say you had--?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: You didn't.  Okay, so was your best, your best subject in school always science?
Speaker 2: Science.
Speaker 1: Math?
Speaker 2: Science and math.
Speaker 1: No English.
Speaker 2: English was fine.  I mean, yeah, when it came, you know, to interpreting writing and poems and things like that, you know, more abstract parts of English, I did very well in.
Story_ID: 3413
Speaker 1: Do you remember when your father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.] told you about moving, you know, with the family?  Or who was it, your mother [Lillian Black] or father who said that we're gonna be moving?
Speaker 2: It was essentially, you know, both.  You know, my, my father had essentially become too progressive, you know, for the town, you know, teaching, you know, students civil disobedience.  And I remember, you know, he dropped me and a group of friends off and, you know, we integrated the white pool, you know, at, at the time, you know, doing things like that.  So, you know, he was getting a lot of pressure from the school superintendent, who was getting a lot of pressure from, you know, the white community to sort of, you know, curtail, you know, his activities, which he didn't wish to do.  So we moved.
Speaker 1: And this is in the--you know, at this point, we're in the early, mid-'60s [1960s]--?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: Around mid-'60s [1960s].  Do you remember any, you know, things that were sort of happening in your town [Auburn, Alabama] or sort of around you, you know, that you, you know--things happening?  You remember [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.]'s  death, I would take it?
Speaker 2: Absolutely.
Speaker 1: Do you remember where you were when that happened?
Speaker 2: In the bedroom, watching on an old black and white TV set.
Speaker 1: And do you remember the discussions that, you know, happened around that in your family or in the community?
Speaker 2: I don't remember a lot of the discussions, no.
Speaker 1: And your father, you said, he was sort of--but let's talk about the integration of the pool.  Do you remember--he just dropped you off?  I mean or did you want to go to the pool and that's what motivated him?  Or--?
Speaker 2: No, we knew it was a better pool.  I mean, so why not.
Speaker 1: And when you went over there, did you actually get in the pool?
Speaker 2: I got in the pool.
Speaker 1: And can you just describe that whole thing?
Speaker 2: You know, we jumped in the pool, and, and that was it.  I mean, you know, it was, it was a small town.  I mean so, you know, everyone knew my father.  I mean, and, and, you know, no one did anything.
Speaker 1: And how many of you were there?
Speaker 2: It was about five.
Speaker 1: Five, and you--did you guys talk about how much fun it was to jump in the pool and what people said or--?
Speaker 2: We didn't really care.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: And, so Auburn was really--it's, you said it's a community--it's a college town.
Speaker 2: It's a college town.
Speaker 1: But it's a community of how many, though?
Speaker 2: I think it's probably about fifteen, twenty thousand, I would imagine.
Speaker 1: Do you think your father was influenced by, you know, being up North and--I mean I remember in even the discussion of your brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.], cause, you know, Seattle [Washington] is much different and then he was in a boarding school at, you said, was it Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: New Hampshire.
Speaker 1: New Hampshire.  So your brother is coming back with reports--,
Speaker 2: Mh-hmm.
Speaker 1: --you know, about what it's like, and what was he telling you, you know, up North is like?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, the, the school [Brewster Academy] in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire was real isolated.  I mean he was the only black student there, very different than Alabama.  You know, a lot of snow, very cold.  Most of the kids that he was in school with were very affluent Caucasians.  So it was, it was a different experience.  But again, I think, during his experience in Wolfeboro, New Hampshire, you know, he was somewhat isolated until he got to the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan].
Story_ID: 3414
Speaker 1: You said you admired your brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.] you know, like he was like your idol.  What about him in that way?  What--I mean he was seven years older, so he was, you know, was in children's terms, significantly older.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: But what about him was--you admired so much and wanted to be like?
Speaker 2: I think just that he was my big brother.
Speaker 1: And do you remember any stories he told you about things that happened that sort of impressed you or experiences he had.
Speaker 2: I think, you know, I was, I was probably more impressed, you know, to hear his stories when he was a freshman, and you know, sophomore in college [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] more so than, than high school.  You know, it was a much more interesting time.  I mean that was the time period I think that, you know, he moved out of this all-white high school, being the only black student to the University of Michigan, during a very interesting time, you know, around '68 [1968] now, which was sort of, you know, the, the Civil Rights Movement was coming to a head.  He took a, a very active role in a lot of the student demonstrations, you know, had a leadership, you know, position in a lot of the African American student societies at the time.  At the University of Michigan, one of the big events was the BAM [Black Action Movement] strike [1970], you know, where the African American students took over the, the President's [Robben Fleming] house at Michigan.  And he was very involved in that.  So I thought that those experiences, you know, this sort of entire transition now where he was actively involved in, in the Movement was very interesting.  And I got to go visit him and see that whole lifestyle, you know, and the college campus, you know, which was fascinating, going to some of the groups where, you know, the students were discussing civil right issues and, and, you know, debating these issues and talking about the plans of, you know, what they were gonna do and so forth.  So that, you know, I think was a, you know, was an exciting time period.  He claims that because of his leadership position there, that he was blackballed from the University of Michigan Law School.  He didn't get, get in, you know, because of, you know, all of that activity.
Speaker 1: Well that's probably true--.
Speaker 2: It may very well be--,
Speaker 1: At that time.
Speaker 2: --be true.
Story_ID: 3415
Speaker 1: So your father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.] was sort of under pressure, as you said, you know, things were becoming uncomfortable because he was like a lot of people, you know, people in the South who were participating.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so how did the opportunity come up at, in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: It, it--several sort of stops along the way.  I think when he first left, his first stop was in White Plains, New York, where he was assistant superintendent for a very short time.  I think maybe six months, and then he went to Rockford, Illinois, where he was assistant superintendent again, for a short time, maybe like six months or a year.  And then he went to Cleveland, where he became principal of a elementary school in Cleveland for a few years before getting the job at Kent State University [Kent, Ohio] as a desegregation specialist in the department of education.
Speaker 1: Now you moved around with your father at these places, did you, in the six months, you were--?
Speaker 2: No, no, we would, we would visit, but my mother [Lillian Black] went straight to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: She went straight--okay.
Speaker 2: And so, she went straight to Cleveland, and I went with her directly to Cleveland.
Speaker 1: Now, Cleveland, so you went to Cleveland even when your father went to--what was the first place before Rockford?
Speaker 2: White Plains, New York.
Speaker 1: White Plains.  So you went to Cleveland at that point?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so where--who were your parents--who was your mother staying with at that time?
Speaker 2: At the time, she stayed with a, with a cousin who is also a teacher in the Cleveland Public Schools just for a few months, and then, you know, she got her own place.
Speaker 1: And so she continued teaching?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and so now at this point, you're in fifth grade, sixth grade?
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 3416
Speaker 1: So how is the school system now that you--you're attending what school at that point in Cleveland [Ohio]?
Speaker 2: Well, for only about six months I attended the Cleveland Public Schools and then my mother [Lillian Black] moved to Shaker Heights, Ohio, which was one of, you know, the very good school systems in the nation at the time, primarily, for the school system, for me.  So, you know, rather than send me away to private schools, she and my father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.] decided that they would rent a place in Shaker Heights where the school system was actually, you know, good.
Speaker 1: Can you describe Shaker Heights at that point, you know, cause there was--it was a mixed community, right?
Speaker 2: Right, it was, it was, it was mixed.  I would say it was about 80, 85 percent white and maybe about 10 or 15 percent black at the time.  But it was primarily a very affluent community, great school system, you know, a great suburban community.
Speaker 1: And the school you went to, what was the name of it, in Shaker Heights?
Speaker 2: The, the elementary school that I went to was Moreland [Elementary School, Shaker Heights, Ohio], just for like one year, and then I went to the junior high school, which was Byron [Junior High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio], and then Shaker Heights High [School, Shaker Heights, Ohio].
Speaker 1: And Byron--okay but your mother is not teaching at any of those places?
Speaker 2: No, she's teaching in the Cleveland Public School System.
Speaker 1: And, now, Byron--and you're still continuing to like science classes, right?
Speaker 2: Even, even more so.  I mean, I mean it's, at--I mean it was very clear, you know, sort of, during that time that I, I just had a love for science.
Speaker 1: And what were some--what--was there any aspect of science, I mean at this point.  You know, I don't know what grade you take biology in and then there's chemistry--.
Speaker 2: I loved it, I loved it all.
Speaker 1: You loved it all?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, of how things worked and operated?
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: Okay.  And--.
Speaker 2: But more of an affinity for biological science.
Speaker 1: Which is treated, sort of your beginners and where you ended up anyway.  And so, with this, was there any teacher that influenced you at Moreland when you were there?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: Okay, no, no.  This is interesting.  You have no--I mean up to this point, you have no favorite teacher?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: And so, do--but you like school?
Speaker 2: Mm-hm.
Speaker 1: Okay, you're good--what are your grades?  Are they, you're a good student, I take it?
Speaker 2: A student.
Speaker 1: A student, okay.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 3417
Speaker 1: Anything else that's really influencing you as you sort of mature, and you're a teenager at this point, you know, that is impacting you one way or the other or?
Speaker 2: Probably not.  You know, I--well rounded, you know, liked sports, liked girls, you know, had friends, and, you know, doing fine.
Speaker 1: Did you--what about just the, was your family a religious family?  I didn't ask that.
Speaker 2: Not overly religious.  Yeah, we went to church, you know, Presbyterians, which is sort of plain vanilla, you know, religion without a lot of rituals.  But not overly religious, no.
Speaker 1: And now were you Presbyterian--you weren't Presbyterian in Auburn [Alabama], were you?
Speaker 2: Well, in Auburn, I don't quite think that there was a Presbyterian.  In Auburn you were Baptist.
Story_ID: 3418
Speaker 1: In Shaker Heights High School [Shaker Heights, Ohio] cause we're at, let's see, in high school, you would have been--let's see, are we in 1968, nine [1969], well, no, later than that, right, in high school?
Speaker 2: Yeah, getting into the '70s [1970s].
Speaker 1: Seventies, right, okay, cause you're--and, but let's talk about this.  At what point, because you know in all your press material, it talks about the fact that you start hanging out at Case Western [Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio], you know, in the labs. But I want to know where does, how--where does that come from?  How are you starting to hang out at Case Western?
Speaker 2: Well, a couple of things.  My father [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.] went back to the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania] and, and, you know, spent more time back at the University of Pennsylvania when I was in about the eighth grade.  And during that time, when he was there, I was staying with him.  I spent the summer with him, there one summer.  And when he was in class, I would essentially go to the medical center and to the medical school.  And I would walk around the medical school and walk around their research labs.  And, you know, there would be labs that would be opened, you know, like, for example, their pulmonary function lab, that would have all of these machines, you know, people would go into boxes and you breath in it, and you evaluate, you know, the pulmonary function.  And, you know, every once in a while, you know, the researchers would take, you know, take me in.  They would take an interest.  You know, who's this young kid that's walking around the halls.  And they would show me what they were doing.  They would talk about what they were doing, explain it to me.  I got to watch, you know, the experiments.  And, you know, some of the labs, I would actually sort of come back, you know, day after day and sort of just hang out and sort of watch to see what, what they were doing.  And I actually started reading about it.  I would, I, I figured out, you know, how to use 'Index Medicus', which is the, the index of sort of medical articles at the time.  So I could go look at 'Index Medicus' and, and read about the experiments that I, that I was seeing.  And I said, you know, I can do this, you know, this--you know, I could figure out basically how to do these, you know, some of these experiments.  So when I went back to Cleveland, I would ride my bike or, or take, you know, the, the rapid system, you know, the train system to Case West Reserve University, and I would go to the medical school library there.  And I would look in the 'Index Medicus', and I would, you know, pick a different topic, pick different articles that I would want to read about.  And I actually picked a topic in leukemia.  I started reading about leukemia.  And I, I started designing a research project to essentially cure leukemia, you know, try to find a treatment for leukemia.  You know, and so I read my, you know, objectives, background, methods, research plan and so forth and sort of a, a research project outline.  And I started taking it to the different professors at Case West Reserve University that were working in the area, and I would say, look, you know, I have this project in leukemia.  I'd like to come into your lab and do this project.  And it was an interesting experience because most of them would sort of read what I wrote, and they would say, "It's not bad.  I mean it's interesting, but, you know, you're not quite ready yet."  And so, you know, but what it did for me, it, it gave me an opportunity, you know, not only to go at 'Index Medicus', learn how to, you know, research articles, but to put it together and start basically trying to pitch my research projects to different investigators to different laboratories.  And my father would also sort of watch this interest.  He didn't know much about medicine or how medicine would work, but he got one of the prominent African American physicians in the, in, in Cleveland to, to meet with me.  Dr. Esque Crawford, who was an OB/GYN [obstetrics and gynecology] specialist.  And we went out to dinner, and it was actually probably the fanciest dinner I'd ever had at the time.  You know, it was like shrimp dijon, I said, whoa, that's pretty nice stuff.  And we talked.  And Esque, Esque Crawford really became the first physician to actually sort of say, okay, I will help you.  And what he did, he was working at St. Luke's Hospital [Cleveland, Ohio].  And there was a surgical research laboratory.  And he went to the director of the surgical research laboratory and said, here, I have this student.  I want him to, to work in your laboratory for this summer.  So he made the introduction, got me in.  Now, this was about the ninth grade, when I was in the ninth grade.  And this laboratory was run, run by the head of cardiac surgery at Case Western and had developed its own artificial heart valve.  So they did a lot of heart valve replacements, a lot of heart transplants, you know, in this surgical laboratory, a lot of kidney transplants.  And I basically came in--there were a couple of black guys that were the surgical technicians, doing all the surgery.  So, you know, I first started drawing blood from the dogs, and then, you know, I got a chance to sew up the incision, and pretty soon, I was in there in the ninth grade, you know, doing heart valve replacements and, you know, doing heart transplants on these dogs, and then kidney transplants.  It was absolutely fantastic.  I mean here I am in ninth grade doing surgery, you know, you know, to try to help, you know, develop surgical techniques, which for me was absolutely fantastic at the time.  But I realized that, well, I mean if I do this, I'm still just a technician.  I mean I'm sitting here; it's great doing all the surgery, but I'm just, you know, being a technician.  You can teach anybody how to sew up a, sew up an incision.  But the lab at the time had just gotten the scanning electron microscope, which was new technology at the time, where you could basically--it was an electron microscope in 3-D.  And looking at these heart valves, I came up with the concept that these heart valves may actually be doing damage to the red blood cells as the red blood cells pass through the cells.  And again, I went back to 'Index Medicus', and I learned about schistocytes, where are sheared blood cells, if they get crushed with mechanical injury.  And I said, well, let me do a project, looking at with the scanning electron microscope to see if I could pick up any of these schistocytes in the blood from the, from the dogs that had these heart valves placed in them.  And I talked the laboratory director into letting me do that.  As part of the technique to learn how to use it though, I got to go up and watch open-heart surgery on human patients that were undergoing heart-lung bypass machine.  And I got a chance to draw some blood from the heart-lung bypass machine to look at under the scanning electron microscope as sort of a baseline.  And it turned out that what I would do is I would incubate these blood samples over time, you know, for eight hours, twelve hours, twenty-four hours.  And amazingly, what would happen is that when the patient underwent heart-lung bypass, the normal discord shape of the blood--it would still look discord, but if you incubated it, it would change from the normal disc shape of a red blood cell to one that looked like porcupine, with a bunch of, you know, spicules sticking out, which is very bad because the capillaries that blood cells are going through are only about five microns in diameter.  The red blood cell is seven microns in diameters.  So in order for the blood cell to get through, it has to bend like a parachute.  A discocyte can do that.  If it takes a shape like porcupine, it cannot.  And it gets stuck in the capillaries and plugs up the blood flow.  And you essentially get little mini strokes.  And I basically described this observations in the--using the scanning electron microscope, of patients undergoing heart-lung bypass where the blood cell changed from a discocyte to an echinocyte, and I described it as the discocyte-echinocyte, echinocyte transformation of patients undergoing heart-lung bypass and wrote up a paper, you know, about it, which was actually a very important finding because it, it explains why people lose part of their mental function, cognitive function after they've gone on the heart-lung bypass, why people, you know, say, oh, I'm not quite at--I'm not quite as alert as I was because you basically get little, mini strokes in the brain from that.  I won the Westinghouse Science Award for that project.  I actually published it in a paper, had my first paper at the age of seventeen, and got my true first taste of, of research, you know, at that time.
Speaker 1: So that prize that you won from Westinghouse, at seventeen, the research for that began one or two years before that?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, I want to go back to just understand why you chose to do a paper or to do research on leukemia?  I mean why had you chosen--?
Speaker 2: It just seemed like a good thing to do at the time.
Speaker 1: You didn't know anyone who, you didn't know anyone who had had leukemia or cancer?
Speaker 2: No
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Speaker 2: No, it just seemed like it was a problem that needed a solution.
Speaker 1: You know, what I find interesting about this discocyte, sort of, the research you did at that time, with because open heart surgery, that was very new at the time, I mean wasn't it a new discipline?  I mean a lot of surgery--I mean that has sort of been very advanced over the years, right.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right.
Speaker 1: And, but at the time that you were doing your research, it was still very new?
Speaker 2: Correct.
Speaker 1: I'm just trying to get--to have you put it for me in some historical context.
Speaker 2: (Simultaneous) Right, yeah, a lot of that was, was sort of new at the new.  I mean the heart, it was sort of the heyday of heart surgery.  You know, they were developing the technology to do heart transplants, which was an exciting field at the time, developing, you know, the technology to really perfect doing heart valve replacements, you know, coronary bypass.  So it was, you know, that time period was probably the heyday of cardiac surgery.
Story_ID: 3419
Speaker 1: Why the biological sciences, I'm just trying to understand what--was it the beating of the heart, I mean was it the whole thing of blood cells?  I'm just trying to understand what--?
Speaker 2: Just understanding life, you know.  You know, the process of life itself, you know, the function of life.  It's just something that I loved to understand, you know.  You know, when I took my first biochemistry class, you know, learning about the Krebs cycle and, you know, the whole metabolism of how a cell lives.  And to me it's beautiful.  It's like, you know, it's just like, it was looking at God's art, you know, and how all of that fits together so perfectly.
Speaker 1: Okay, and you, during this high school period, you know, the story of you, you know, at the University of Pennsylvania [Philadelphia, Pennsylvania], that was real interesting, you know, sort of fascinating and then coming back and sort of spending time, and this whole thing with doing, you know, research, you know, sort of being fascinated.  Now, the terms, did they fascinate you as well?  You know, you said you were using Medicus--what was it called?
Speaker 2: 'Index Medicus'.
Speaker 1: 'Index Medicus' to do, you know, research.
Speaker 2: No, it's not really.  It's, it's, it's more of the, of the why and the how.
Speaker 1: And not the what so much, but the why and how.
Speaker 2: The why and the how.
Story_ID: 3420
Speaker 1: How do you end up going to University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], you know, and finding out about the program there?
Speaker 2: Well, it was actually interesting.  One would think that my high school counselor would have told me about it.  But he didn't, I mean seeing that my interest was in medicine.  I had accelerated through all of the high school science courses.  I had taken advanced science class, no more science for me to take in the twelfth grade.  So I actually took an elective where they gave me credit for doing research for that year.  I had taken all of the math so I was taking calculus, you know, at the local, you know, college.  I was taking German at the local college.  So one would think that, oh, you know, your high school counselor at this top suburban school would have told one about this six-year medical program.  But they didn't.  But I, but because my brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.] had gone to the University of Michigan, I happened to see a flyer from Michigan, you know, come to him as an alumni, and it described it Interflex program, this six-year medical program.  And I said, hey, you know, that sounds pretty good.  You get admitted to a medical school out of high school.  You go to school for six years instead of eight.  And then I learned that there was another program at Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts] at the time, another program at Northwestern University [Evanston, Illinois] And again, I went to, you know, the wonderful high school counselors at Shaker Heights [High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio], and said, well, you think I should apply to more than one?  And again, got bad advice.  They said, "Well, if you get into one, you get into all of them.  So just apply to the one that you want to go to," which was not good advice at the time.  It happened, you know, to work out.  But, but that's how I found out about it, just because this flyer happened to come to the house.
Story_ID: 3421
Speaker 1: You basically, you know, find out about this program, and you apply.  Do you just apply to the program at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I only applied to the six-year [Interflex] program at Michigan on bad advice of my counselor, and I apply to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] and Stanford [University, Stanford, California].
Speaker 1: Was there a difference between the program at Northwestern [University, Evanston, Illinois] and University of Michigan, and--was it Boston?  It was--?
Speaker 2: Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts], yeah.
Speaker 1: University, it, I mean when you look back in terms of the--?
Speaker 2: Michigan would have been my top choice.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you did okay?
Speaker 2: I lucked out, despite the counselor.
Speaker 1: You know, counselors are often--there are horrific stories about counselors.
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Speaker 1: So, so you arrive there, and you're very directed in many ways cause you know this is what you want to be, and this is what you want to do.  Can you talk about--and you had spent time on the University of Michigan campus.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So can you talk about, you know, your first year there and what that experience was like?
Speaker 2: Sure, yeah.  Well, you know, I decided to, you know, to go to the six-year program.  I was accepted to Harvard and Stanford and, and turned Harvard and Stanford down and decided to, you know, to be that--cause again, you know, you're already guaranteed a slot in medical school.  But they only took, they took fifty students in the program, and only ten from out of state, from around the country.  So it was extremely competitive to get into.  I never considered myself to be a genius or, or really smart. So I'm thinking, this is gonna really hard.  You know, I'm gonna have to work really hard or, you know, all of these kids are gonna just really blow me away, you know, in this, in this accelerated program.  And I remember--you know, they had special classes for us, you know, cause we were sort of this little, you know, special, experimental group.  And the first class was sort of an accelerated inorganic, organic chemistry class that was taught by this, a professor who was like twenty-six years old; by the age of twenty-three, had received both a Ph.D. in biology as well as chemistry.  So I'm saying, this is probably not good.  So after, you know, after being in class for like two weeks, we had our first quiz.  And, you know, all of the students in this program were all sort of staying in the same dorm.  And I remember, you know, going in to see some of my classmates, and I would ask them about, you know, how the, you know, studying was going, and ask them about a problem.  They said, "Oh, yeah, the answer to that is on page eighty-four."  I mean they had essentially memorized, you know, this whole chemistry book.  And I'm saying, you know, this is just, this just isn't gonna work, right.  So, you know, we walk into the first quiz that we had, and which was supposed to be inorganic chemistry.  I don't know if you remember inorganic chemistry, but it's basically converting, you know, moles to, you know, grams and stuff.  And it's, and that's kind of what we were studying.  And we got the first quiz, and the first question was, if you have two organisms, organism A and organism B, and you put them both in a capsule with two liters of oxygen, and, you know, X number of grams or substrate, and you shoot them off to the moon, which one is gonna run out of oxygen first if one is using, you know, glucose as an energy source, and the other one is using, you know, protein?  And I'm thinking what does this have to do with--, this is the wrong quiz.  I mean this is not, this is not even what we're studying.  And then it clicked.  And then like after about a minute, I sort of got it.  It was a conceptual problem where you had to apply the knowledge that, you know, you learned.  And it took me about three minutes to figure out the answer, you know, write it down, and, you know, I was done.  I walked out.  And everyone else, all the other students that essentially sort of memorized the book, you know, and had memorized all the problems, were having a very hard time converting, you know, sort of what they had memorized to, to solve this conceptual problem.  And I got an A on the test and had finished it in like ten minutes, and they had struggled for, you know, an hour, and they were, you know, having a hard time with it.  And, you know, suddenly I was like the genius of the class.  And I'm thinking, gee, I didn't really study that hard, but I can fig--I can figure out a conceptual problem, you know.  My gift is that, you know, with, you know, basic knowledge, I can solve, you know, most things that are conceptual.  And that's what they wanted.  I mean, you know, I was able to sail through the, the courses.  You know, physiology, which is how the body works, is conceptual.  Once you know the basic principles, you know, you can solve, you know, all of the problems.  You know, those things come very easy to me, and that was, that's my knack, that's my gift.  So actually, I didn't find the program to be very hard at all.  I mean it was actually very enjoyable.  And after a while, it became actually, a little boring because it wasn't challenging enough.  So, you know, I started doing research and, you know, got involved in, in more research, and, you know, had a great social life.  You know, I got to go to parties and hang out and I learned how to fly and learned how to scuba dive, and had a great time.
Speaker 1: Well, let me ask this. The program that you went to, how many blacks were in that class of fifty, that, you know, came in with you?
Speaker 2: Two.
Speaker 1: There were two of you or two more besides you?
Speaker 2: One more in addition to me.  There was an African American female that was from in state, who dropped out in her first year, very smart, but just didn't sort of make it in the program.
Speaker 1: And those programs, why were they designed in the first place?  Was it a new type of program that had sort of existed, those six-year programs?
Speaker 2: Well, the reason that they were designed to make a more compassionate physician because the educators felt that the competition for pre-meds were, was becoming such a grind.  You know, you had people sort of sabotaging other people's chemistry experiments and it sort of created this competitiveness among pre-meds that they felt carried over to medical school, and it carried over to being, you know, not necessarily the most compassionate physicians.  So they felt that if they could take a group of really smart kids who could make it, eliminate that sort of competition to begin with, that they could focus on learning for the sake of learning, focus on being more compassionate physicians, without that sort of competitive pre-med edge, because essentially, as long as you maintained a C average, you were guaranteed of being a physician.
Speaker 1: And why a lesser time period?  I mean why as medical--I mean, you know, being on that track you take off two years basically, right?
Speaker 2: Yeah, because they were able to--you essential do all your same liberal arts.  So you complete all the liberal arts requirement, you know, in terms of English, history, political science, art history, whatever you want to take in terms of your elective courses.  And for your science courses, you essentially become--you take those early.  So in the, in the second year of the program, we were taking biochemistry with the medical students.  So, you know, you don't have to take, you know, all of the undergrad science courses, you know, and then repeat those in medical school.  You could essentially sort of accelerate your science program if you have a very gifted class.  And, you know, you can move gross anatomy, you know, up to the second year.  You can move microbiology.  So you can take those courses and not to be redundant with all of the undergrad courses.  So you can cut out a lot of time.
Speaker 1: So you're saying in that first exam that you took, that you aced the exam?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I aced the quiz, and at that point, I could relax.
Speaker 1: This is how many months into the school year?
Speaker 2: Two weeks.
Speaker 1: Two weeks into the school year?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And so these--there were people who had been, you know, saying on page eighty-six, whatever, or eighty whatever.  I mean what I want to just get, and I--so you, after whatever, three minutes, ten minutes, whatever, you get up and walk out.  You're the first one out.  And they're there for, you know, whatever, an hour--whatever, later.
Speaker 2: Yeah, everyone has a, has, has a different gift.  So, and, and intelligence is measured in different ways.  Some people have a gift in that you give them a huge body of information and they can memorize that body of information regurgitate it to you.  Other people like me, I have a gift in solving conceptual problems.  So, you know, if, if I have conceptual problem to solve, I have--I can see things differently.  You know, I can, I can get the concept.  I can come up, you know, with the solution.  So, you know, those kind of things are easier for me to do.
Story_ID: 3422
Speaker 1: Can you tell me what some of your favorite courses were [at University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan] and, you know, in those, in the beginning years?  You said you--.
Speaker 2: Favorite course was probably physiology.  Physiology and biochemistry.  Biochemistry because, you know, the chemistry of every living cell on earth is all the same.  I mean, you know, that's just incredible.  It's amazing.  I mean, you know, how can a amoeba basically use the same chemical cycles, you know, the same, you know, energy source, glucose, proteins, that our cells are using.  You know, that connection, you know, that common sort of paradigm; how all of those chemicals come together to allow a cell to live, to reproduce, you know, to survive, to fight off infection and invasion.  I mean it's fascinating.  I mean if you look at it, it is fascinating.  So, you know, the, the chemistry of life, the physiology of life, you know, how, how all of that comes in to, you know, allow the body to function.  And, you know, for the kidneys to integrate with the heart and the lungs and how all of that works, totally fascinating.  And, of course, neuroanatomy, you know, the structure of the human brain.  You know, the neurochemistry, neurophysiology, you know, the function of the human brain, absolutely fascinating.
Speaker 1: So those courses though were--was it biochemistry first, physiology second and then neuroanatomy third?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, right.  Now, in the process of your, you know, of your study, now, you're saying that by your second year, you're taking classes--,
Speaker 2: Medical school.
Speaker 1: --with the medical school.
Speaker 2: The way that the program was designed, in your first year, you go off and you do sort of a little pre-internship, you know, they send you off to work with a physician for the year.  So, you know, you're, you know, you're working with an internist right after your first year of the program.  I went off to Battle Creek, Michigan and worked an internist for a year, lived with him in his house and so forth.  And you come back after that first year, and you're, you're taking courses in medical school.
Speaker 1: And was there--there was nothing about the process that you found--it was exactly what you wanted, I guess is what I'm saying?
Speaker 2: Yeah.
Story_ID: 3423
Speaker 1: How large was the University of Michigan Medical School [Ann Arbor, Michigan]?  I mean, I mean you're--.
Speaker 2: It's, it's a big medical school.  I think the entire medical school class was about 220, 250.  And so, you know, this program took up fifty of those slots.
Speaker 1: And what is it--but you guys are much younger than anyone else too.  Was that--.
Speaker 2: Two years younger.
Speaker 1: Just two years younger.
Speaker 2: Cause you cut two years off the process.
Speaker 1: Okay, not three?
Speaker 2: Well, when the time--well, you're three years younger when you start taking the courses, but by the time you're, you're in, you've shaved off two years.
Story_ID: 3424
Speaker 1: In that process, was there anything about the teaching, the technique?  Does [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] have a certain technique when it comes to, you know, training its doctors as opposed to, you know, Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts] or Stanford [University, Stanford, California] or, you know, the other medical schools around?
Speaker 2: Well, the, the other ones that I've had a chance to, to really know well, I mean, you know, Michigan versus UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California], you know, a school like that, the one thing that I will say about Michigan is that they expect the medical students at Michigan to be physicians.  I mean, you know, we were not spoon-fed.  I mean, you know, we had to learn how to learn, whereas, you know, you come to a UCLA, and everyone expects the knowledge to be given to him and, and spoon-fed so they can get off, you know, to surfing, you know, before the, before the surf goes down.  You know, when we started our clinical rotations, you know, the students took pride in the rotation.  I mean, you know, we took pride in the fact that we could, we would get to the patient at, at 6:00 in the morning before the intern would get to the patient at 6:30, and have all the lab values, would have the information, would be able to present the information to the, to the resident or the chief resident or the attending on rounds, would have all that information correct so that the intern or the resident didn't have to correct us with any of that information.  So, you know, we took all of that very seriously and took pride, you know, when we got to do a technique.  I mean if we got to put in a central line or, you know, or do a, a puncture in, in the chest and drain fluid off, I mean we took pride in doing, you know, those procedures, whereas, when I was a professor at UCLA, it wasn't that same intensity among the medical students.
Speaker 1: And in this, in this process, you said that, you know, the program was designed to make a more humane or compassionate, you know, physician.  Well, that was the thought behind these programs.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What in this, in the, in your training actually at University of Michigan, was geared towards that?
Speaker 2: Well, in, in the six-year [Interflex] program, and it essentially was, was a laboratory.  We were tested, you know, once, if not twice a year, in terms of, of our attitudes, I mean how we felt about life, how we felt about patients and medicine and our colleagues, had a lot of psychological profiles, you know, sort of done during that time.  A lot of emphasis placed on, on learning for the sake of learning rather than learning for the sake of, gee, I have to get this grade to get into medical school.  So there was a lot of that, that took place.
Story_ID: 3425
Speaker 1: Are you a proponent of programs like the one you went through [University of Michigan's Interflex six-year medical school program, Ann Arbor, Michigan], Dr. Black?
Speaker 2: I found the programs to really be mixed.  I think that, I think there are great programs, and that, yes, you know, the pre-med grind is probably not, you know, the best way to develop one's attitude towards life in college.  The real difficulty in those programs is that you take somebody from high school, and you ask them to make a decision about what they want to be for the rest of their life, and essentially college, those four years in college is a time when you have an opportunity to explore a lot of different things. I mean, you know, you may come in thinking that, gee, I want to be a marine biologist and you come out and you're a poet.  You know, that's what college is all about.  It's sort of giving one the opportunity to explore a lot of things in life.  So if you take a high school senior and you put him into this, you know, very selective, every elite, you know, competitive program, and say, now, you're gonna be a physician in six years, and if you drop out, then you're, you're somehow a failure, you haven't been able to sort of make the cut, that's not necessarily a good thing.  And so the, the students that I think it did the most harm to were those students that thought they might have wanted to go into medicine, but then they, gee, I want to be a writer, which is what happened to my roommate, who like me was also accepted to Harvard [University, Cambridge, Massachusetts], very smart, came in and said gee, you know, I don't know if I really want to be a doctor, and he left after the first year.  And he went back to Harvard and, and majored in English and became a writer.  So the--you know, that's the trade off.  What has happened over the years is that those programs have basically sort of gone out of favor and have been dismantled.  And I know the program at Michigan, you know, went from six years to seven years, eight years, and then they ultimately, just did away with the program.
Speaker 1: That's interesting cause I was just at Brown University [Providence, Rhode Island] speaking and a woman was in a program, but I think it was eight years, but it's--I think, was it an eight.  I don't think it was a six-year program--.
Speaker 2: Right, they're, they're very--I don't think there're any more six-year programs left.
Speaker 1: And she, you know, I was saying, you're making a commitment.  What if you end up wanting--but she was, she enjoyed it, you know, so far.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think if, if--you're lucky if you enjoy it.  I mean, you know, for me, I was lucky because I had worked in a research laboratory.  I'd gotten to do surgery.  I had spent a lot of time around hospitals.  And I knew that's what I wanted to do.  So for me, it was fantastic.  You know, if, if, you know, you happen to come from a situation where, gee, both your parents are doctors and you kind of say, gee, you know, the thing to do is to be a physician, and you find out, no, this is not what I want to do.  I want to be an investment banker, it's not a good thing.
Story_ID: 3426
Speaker 1: In that process, other things, you know, during those six years, it may be later that you say you experienced this, but during those six years [at University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan], did you learn things in terms of even, either patient care or about the, you know, the process of being a doctor or operating in an academic environment, that have sort of stood the test; you know, early lessons that have stayed with you at all?  Was any of that--did you get, you know, exposure to?
Speaker 2: A lot of it.  You know, I was very lucky in that I've, I've had great mentors along the way.  And, you know, one of the things that I think is key to anyone's success is finding a good mentor or mentors.  One of my great mentors was an African American cardiologist by the name of Otelio Randall who was one of the few African American professors at the University of Michigan at the time.  And he essentially took me under his wing, and I started working with him in the research lab when I was Michigan.  But more important for me, than his direction that he gave me in how to do a particular research project, was the time that he spent with me, telling me about his experiences in being a professor and, and the challenges of being in an academic medical center, you know, the, the internal politics.  You know, how he dealt with the chairman of his department when, you know, he wasn't getting the resources that he needed or someone was trying to take, take away his research space or not give him support to do his research project or not giving him support to, you know, do, do a particular clinical piece of work.  And he, and he would talk to me about that.  And I would listen, and I was able to learn his approach to it, the things that worked, the things that didn't work.  And amazingly, five years, six years, seven years later, when I was going through that same process, encountering some of those same challenges, I was able to, you know, fall back on the things that O.T. [Otelio Randall] had talked about and how he approached the problem, and take some of his strategies and to apply those in all the situations that I encountered in, in, you know, the politics of academic medicine.
Speaker 1: So what were his--can you talk about some of his strategies?  He basically was a survival strategy and how to, to survive in those environments, right, and excel?
Speaker 2: He basically, he basically was a survival strategy.  I mean, for example, if, you know, if his chairman of his department wasn't supporting, you know, his research, I mean how he would go out and try to, you know, get, you know, get alternate research funds, you know, to try to do it or get alternate research equipment or try to procure different things to do this studies.  He wasn't necessarily the most supported professor, you know, being in the department at the time and being African American and being very outspoken.  So, you know, he had a lot of challenges.  He didn't do great at it because he didn't survive at Michigan.  He left Michigan and went on to become a professor at Howard University in Washington, D.C.  So, you don't necessarily have to have a mentor that tells you all the right answers.  Sometimes, you know, looking at and seeing what things don't work, you know, also allows one to avoid, you know, those strategies as well.
Speaker 1: And in his--and so he was, was he the most significant, you figure, a mentor during your, the six years there?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Story_ID: 3427
Speaker 1: Your interest first was in the heart, wasn't it at that point?
Speaker 2: Yeah, my interest in the heart was just because--,
Speaker 1: That's where you had begun?
Speaker 2: --that's where I had an opportunity.  I mean, you know, it's not like you know, when I was in the ninth grade, you know, they said, here you can go and do this, this, this or this.  They said, you can go work in the surgical laboratory, and what they did was hearts.  And that was great.  That's what I did at the time.  But when I was in my first year at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], I had picked up a neuroanatomy book.  And I fell in love with the human brain.  And so I knew what I wanted to work on was the human brain.  Actually, what I really wanted to do was to understand consciousness.  Ultimately, I wanted to try to figure out what the conscious process was.  But I also knew that I loved research, and I knew that part of the strategy was building on what you had already done and finding somebody that would be willing to allow you to do that.  Now, O.T. [Otelio] Randall was a cardiologist, so I said, look, you know, I want to go and do some research, but I really want to try to get into brain research.  So we sat down, and we actually designed a project, you know, that worked out for us cause we designed a project to look at the influence of the brain on the heart.  And--because we knew that patients who had strokes, also developed abnormal heartbeats.  You know, they had, they developed heart damage.  So the first project that we started working on was a project to look and see how brain injury stressed the heart.  So, he could mentor me in that project, and then I could also begin, you know, pursuing my interest working through the back door to get into research in neuroscience.
Speaker 1: So what year is this?
Speaker 2: My first year.
Speaker 1: This is the first year that this happened.
Speaker 2: Right, as soon as I, really, I mean as soon as I realized I wasn't gonna flunk out, you know, of the six-year program, I said, well, now I can--let me go and find some research.  So I started talking to some of the neuroscientists.  I talked to the head of the Mental Health Research Institute and the neuroscientists at Michigan.  And I, I got hooked up with O.T. who started, you know, we started thinking of a project that would sort of meet both criteria and sort of tie in the heart to the brain so I could get into the brain.
Speaker 1: Now, when you start projects like that, how long do those projects usually go?  That's what--so you started your first year, you were saying?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then how long did that project last?
Speaker 2: I essentially, I mean just one project led to the next.  So what O.T. did, he said, look, he said, look, I'm a cardiologist.  I don't know much about the brain.  So work with this other guy who was working at a different research center and was doing research on strokes.  So I--to find out, you know, to basically develop my initial sort of methods to look and see what impact stroke would have on the heart.  So when I started working with this other doctor on strokes, we started looking at ways to protect the brain from brain injury from strokes.  So I started working on that.  We looked at putting, ways of putting the brain to sleep, and we were able to reduce the amount of brain injury from the stroke, you know, by 70, 80 percent.  And, you know, that research, you know, expanded over time.  And it actually got to the point that, you know, I would go to school during the day, and then do research at night.  And I was so good at it, actually, they started paying me to do it.  So, you know, I would go in, and after I, you know, maybe like nine, ten and eleven o'clock at night and work in the Research Lab till about three or four in the morning, and get paid and, and do research.  So I actually had a fair amount of, of cash reserve, you know, during that time period as well.  I started taking flying lessons and doing a bunch of other things as well.
Story_ID: 3428
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Bill Cosby and me having dinner at Bill Cosby's home, here in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: [Keith Black (right) and Bill Cosby (left) at a dinner at Bill Cosby's home, Los Angeles, California, not dated, from the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3429
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Sidney Poitier, me and Quincy Jones at Quincy Jones's birthday party last year at Spago's.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black (center) with Sidney Poitier (left) and Quincy Jones (right) at Quincy Jones's birthday celebration, California, 2003. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3430
Speaker 1: That's a picture of my daughter, Teal Black, and I flying a Marchetti, doing a little dog fight. We were just getting ready to go up for a dog fight, between the two of us flying.
Speaker 2: What year was this?
Speaker 1: This was, I think, about a year ago, a year, year and a half ago.
Speaker 2: And location?
Speaker 1: This was in--right here in East L.A. [Los Angeles].
Speaker 2: Okay, great.
Speaker 1: Flying out of Los Angeles.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black (right) flies with his daughter, Teal Black (left), Los Angeles, California, ca. 2003. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3431
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Oprah Winfrey and me.
Speaker 2: Year?
Speaker 1: That would have been about two years ago.
Speaker 2: Occasion?
Speaker 1: That was actually at dinner at Pauletta and Denzel Washington's home.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black (left) and Oprah Winfrey (right) at Pauletta and Denzel Washington's home, California, 2002. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3432
Speaker 1: That's a picture of Sidney Poitier and me at a black tie event, I think about four years ago.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black (left) and Sidney Poitier (right) at a black tie event, ca. 2000. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3433
Speaker 1: This has also been written about, and you've talked about this whole thing of consciousness.  And, I mean was, what is curious to me, was--is that what you really were trying to do and you termed it consciousness, the interest in consciousness?  And unconscious--I mean where did that come from, is what I'm wondering?  You say I was interested in consciousness.  Where did that come from?
Speaker 2: Well, it came from the fact that the ultimate organ in the body is the brain, right, because everything else, all the other organs are really just there to support the brain.  I mean the heart is just the pump, you know, to pump blood to support the brain and so forth.  And the brain, its ultimate role is to allow us to be conscious, is to provide a conscious experience.  So if you really want to understand the brain, what you really want to understand is the conscious experience, you know, what is this conscious experience?  What is it that you're actually experiencing right now, when you're looking at me and you're interviewing me, and you're hearing my words and you're seeing, you're seeing me here and you're looking at all these different colors.  What is actually taking place in your brain to allow you to experience that?  Is it just a bunch of nerve cells and axons that are firing action potentials and electrical impulses?  Or is there something beyond that, that is allowing you, you know, to, to have that, to have that experience.  What is that interface, you know, between all of the different things that come together between your visual system, your auditory system, your sensory system, you know, to allow you to integrate this experience, even with the emotion, depending on, you know, what you smell and what you taste.  As, as an artist and as an interviewer, you were very interested in what smells I remembered when I was young, what sounds I remembered.  It's all consciousness.  So, you know, the ultimate experience in life itself is consciousness, and that experience, at least as far as we know, is provided to us by the human brain because if there's damage to particular areas within the brain, we know that we lose that conscious experience.
Speaker 1: So tell me, what was sort of the trajectory of your research?  Where did it start and what are the, sort of the key steps along the way that you, you know, you took in this whole sort of looking at consciousness in the brain?
Speaker 2: You know, the steps were really very, very straightforward and very simple.  And the first concept is, you know, let's learn as much information as is known about the way that the brain functions.  You know, what's the anatomy of the human brain?  What's the biochemistry of the human brain?  What's the physiology of, of the human brain?  You know, what is, you know, how, how does all of those functions come together, you know, to make it work.  So I can tell you, for example, you know, photon of light is reflected off of my face and is going through the lens of your eye to your retina and to the seven layers in your retina and it's converted by rhodopsin in your cone cells to the electrical impulse, and it goes back, you know, to your optic nerve and opticals and optic track and to your lateral geniculate body, which is the layer in the posterior thalamus.  It has seven layers.  And it goes from there into your occipital lobe, in your visual cortex and into area seventeen.  And it goes from there to area nineteen, in your parietal lobe.  And we can describe with mathematical calculation sheets in advance, so the mathematics, like Laplace transforms, how those action potentials travel down the columns of the cortex in area nineteen.  So the first process is just let me understand what physically happens in the brain, you know, when you see or when you hear or when you touch something.  And then see if that provides any clues to what the conscious experience may be.
Speaker 1: Now, that process you described, how long does that all take?  I mean the, you know, the process you said.
Speaker 2: That I've just described?
Speaker 1: Right, seconds?
Speaker 2: Yeah, less than a second.
Speaker 1: So when you look at the brain, you're looking not only at the sight, you're looking at feeling and you're looking at all the sensory--?
Speaker 2: Yes, so if you want to, you know, scientists tend to sort of segment things.  So, you know, trying to understand everything all at once is obviously too much.  So let's just take one aspect of it.  Let's just take the visual system, and see how the visual system works, and see if we can figure out anything from the visual system to allow us--if we understand one aspect of consciousness, if you understand, you know, what happens when we have a visual perception, then you can understand what happens with an auditory perception or a sensation or anything else.  So, you know, I said, well, let me just focus on the visual system.
Speaker 1: Okay, and then from the visual, you went from there to what?
Speaker 2: I just stayed right at visual.
Speaker 1: You stayed at visual.
Speaker 2: Yeah, just trying to figure out how, you know, what is the visual experience?
Speaker 1: Okay, now, what is this, you know, where you then start working at the, you know, at the, there are things that were more spirit--the spiritual side of consciousness.  Where did that come on in that process?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, if you, if you look at sort of, you know, what I just described, you know, I could, I could tell you, for example now, on a physical level, you know, a lot of information, a lot of data for exactly what takes place in your brain when you see.  But if I told you all of that, it still doesn't explain what your conscious visual experience is.  So it still doesn't explain, you know, what is it that you're experiencing.  Yeah, I can describe it in mathematical equations or, you know, anatomical pathways, but it still doesn't explain, gee, how you're gonna look out and see this three-dimensional, sort of thing that you're seeing right now, and navigate, you know, through the space.  It doesn't explain how all of these action potentials come together in a way.  So, then you have to say, either, you know, science undergoes scientific revolution.  So obviously, [Albert] Einstein could never understand the theory of relativity until Isaac Newton explained the laws of gravity.  So it may be that there is other laws of science that we just haven't explained yet, and we're not far enough evolved yet to actually begin to sort of put together a concept of consciousness that, you know, we're too, we're too naive scientifically yet.  So, one body of thought says we just need to learn more science and that we will undergo these revolutionary breakthroughs in science to begin to get a different way of looking at the world and life so that we can ultimately explain consciousness.  But then as you begin to study philosophy, though, it's another concept that a brain could never understand a brain because you need to be more evolved, more complex than the organism is that you're trying to understand.  So you may be able to completely understand an ameba, but an ameba can never understand itself.  You know, an early Apple computer may be able to be understood by a super, you know, computer today.  But an Apple, you know, first-generation computer could never understand itself cause it doesn't have enough computing power.  So one concept says, well, a brain can never understand a brain because you need to be more complex than the organism is that you're trying to understand.  Now, you know you begin to get into different philosophical discussions.  Can we really, truly, with our brain, understand consciousness?  And then you begin to ask, well, maybe consciousness is not a scientific experience.  Maybe it's a spiritual experience.  Maybe it's a religious phenomenon or some sort of enlightening phenomenon.  So, and at that point, I started studying different religions and looking for common truths among those different religions to see if one could get a clue as to what happened.
Speaker 1: And what were the religions that you studied?
Speaker 2: You know, Eastern religions, you know, the, you know, the Buddhist, the Hindus, the Christianities, the Muslims, you know, and, and you began to see sort of common threads, you know, within all of these different religions, which was fascinating in and of itself.  I mean, for example, you know, have you ever wondered how, in the 'Book of Genesis', whoever wrote the 'Book of Genesis', five thousand years ago, got the sequence of evolution exactly correct.  I mean if you were gonna sit down, and you were gonna write it as a religious writer, religious scholar, you know, the creation of man and the universe and earth, you might put the sequences different.  I mean why did whoever wrote it, put the sequence exactly the way that we believe in science that it occurred.  God said, let there be light, and that was the Big Bang Theory.  You know, it said, you know, let me separate the heavens from the earth.  So, you know, the, the mass started forming and formed planets that rotating around suns, you know, so you had day and night.  Let me separate the land from the water.  That's exactly what we believe in science.  You know, let me put the fish in the sea, and again, we believe that life started in the oceans.  You know, and then the animals on the land, which is the way that we believe--and then man.  Now, you know, if you were writing, why not write it self centered, you know, God created man, and then created, you know, all of this food for me to eat and so forth and then all of these things.  But the sequence is exactly the way that we know it to be, at least now, scientifically.  So why is that?  You know, why do all religions have these common truths.  And why is morality throughout all of the human experience all in the same.  You know, do unto others as you would have others do unto you.  You know, if you look at the religions and you distill any religion you choose, down to any sort common denominator, they're all the same common denominators.  Don't focus on the material life, focus on the spiritual life.  Treat other people and other things as you want to be treated.  You know, honor the, you know, thy father and thy mother.  It's all the same.
Speaker 1: And these were courses that you were taking?
Speaker 2: No, these were things that I--.
Speaker 1: The discussions--.
Speaker 2: These are things that I just have come up with, you know, myself, in sort of studying these things, you know, to begin to sort of put, you know, this together.
Speaker 1: Well, it's interesting because I've heard, you know, scientists talk is totally separate from religion, you know, and that being a conflict constantly.
Speaker 2: Not at all.
Speaker 1: Right, now--.
Speaker 2: I mean, you know, I mean, you know, the ultimate goal of science and religion is exactly the same.  There's no difference between science and religion except, except in the methodology it used to get at the ultimate truth.  So, the ultimate goal of science is to explain how we got here, is to explain who we are, which is the same thing religion does, explain how we got here, explain who we are, and it gives us some basic laws to live by.  It's all the same.
Story_ID: 3434
Speaker 1: I want to understand in this process of you doing, you know--now, you start operating as a research assistant in your first year of medical school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor], your second, your, what?
Speaker 2: Once I was at the medical school?
Speaker 1: Um-hum.
Speaker 2: Probably in earnest, probably--I, I had sort of identified the project in the first year, and by the second year, I was, I was working in the lab in earnest.
Speaker 1: So you were in the--okay.  And in that--.
Speaker 2: Probably I think by that first summer.
Speaker 1: That first summer after your--?
Speaker 2: First year, or actually, no, not the first summer cause we were in, doing the--.
Speaker 1: You said you went away.
Speaker 2: Then the, right about that second year, first part of the second year is when I started doing the research.
Speaker 1: Okay, and would that research continue throughout your medical school, experience in school?
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: Okay, were there--so can you describe some of the things that you worked on or the things that you found most interesting?
Speaker 2: Well, again, we started off doing research on strokes because I wanted to understand how strokes affected the heart.  And from there, I just started working on strokes, you know, looking at ways to reduce stroke size, after a, a person had a stroke.  So we looked at putting people in barbiturate coma that could reduce stroke size.  And then we started looking at biochemical ways to reduce stroke.  We came up with the fact that aspirin, for example, reduced the bad prostaglandins in the blood that could reduce platelet from clotting and reduce infarct size in the heart.  I started, interestingly enough, you know, it's just sort of coming back to light now, doing research, you know, during this time period back in the mid-'70s [1970s] on fish oil.  We found out that Greenland Eskimos didn't get strokes or heart attacks.  And the reason they didn't get strokes or heart attacks cause they ate a lot of whale blubber, which is a good fish oil, versus red meat which is a bad, sort of fatty acid, and that omega-3 fatty acid could reduce stroke size.  So, you know, we did a lot of work on that, publishing papers on that back in the '70s [1970s], which is now sort of the en vogue thing today.  And then because I was involved with working on the whole prostaglandin pathway, Bengt Samuelsson published an article in 'Science' on leukotrienes which is a new compound, just discovered, that is the cause of inflammation in the body and swelling.  And he won the Nobel Prize [1982] for that.  And I realized that that compound could be causing brain swelling.  And then I started working on brain swelling, brain swelling around brain tumors, and then it ultimately, led me to a technique to increase drug delivery selectively into brain tumors by opening up the blood brain barrier.
Speaker 1: Now, Samuelsson, where was he located?  Was he--?
Speaker 2: Samuelson was in Europe [Sweden].
Speaker 1: He was in Europe.  Okay.
Speaker 2: Yeah, Bengt Samuelsson.
Speaker 1: And he--this research that he did on inflammation was during, it was during this period in the '70s [1970s]?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and can you talk about that research?
Speaker 2: Yeah, basically, it was a chemical pathway on leukotrienes, that he found that white blood cells would release when they had inflammatory spots, and because I was doing a lot of work on brain lipids at the time, I realized that the brain lipids would be converted into these leukotrienes and I hypostulated that that could be a cause of swelling around brain tumors, which we actually showed that it was.  And then we could manipulate this chemical to deliver more drugs in the brain tumors.
Speaker 1: Now, at this point in time, Dr. Black, where is the research in the country at that point in terms of brain tumors because I, I know that you--okay, I'm not gonna say, but I just want you to sort of put this in, you know, in terms of cancer tumors or, you know?
Speaker 2: It was, it was almost--it was very little, I mean at the time, looking at the cause of swelling in the brain around brain tumors and finding ways to open up the blood brain barrier to get more drugs to brain tumors.  So this was, I mean we were really pioneers in that area at the time.
Speaker 1: And the research, a lot of the research in terms of tumors and cancer, were occurring in what, because you didn't hear a lot about sort of brain tumors.  I know, I mean--I'm trying to--because research, cancer, but we lung, and I mean and other things in (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: Right, brain tumors were sort of an orphan area.  You know, we were still trying to figure out whether we could use chemotherapy or radiation, you know, to treat brain cancer.
Speaker 1: And, and so, in this pro--what is intriguing you about this whole thing about the brain, and, you know, and the research and where things were at that point.  And, and, what about monies?  Monies are not really readily available for brain research at that point, are they?
Speaker 2: No, I mean it certainly doesn't--didn't have the money of breast cancer or lung or prostate or, you know, later AIDS, at the time.  It still was sort of an orphan area.  But what, what intrigued me was really the need, you know, that patients were dying from brain tumors.  And we didn't have good treatments.
Speaker 1: And so the, let me understand, is this research strictly in sort of in a laboratory, but is it tied to a clinic or anything that is--I'm just trying to understand the nature of the research cause a lot of--you know, sometimes research are just things that occur within a laboratory with, you know, animals.  That's what, the basis.
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, you know, when I was a medical student, I mean I was restricted primarily to that, but clearly, you know, I wanted to translate my research into, into new therapies for patients.  So we always had a bent on trying to get these new therapies out to patients.
Story_ID: 3435
Speaker 1: During this time, you know, you had mentioned, you got your pilot's license or you start, you know--I think you said also sky diving or--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I did a lot of things.
Speaker 1: Okay, so is this because you have like a lot of time on your hands where, you know, school is not that--you said, I was, sort of got bored or, you know, I had, I dated, I did--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, but also I, you know, I had a zest for life.  You know, there are some things you cannot experience by reading a book.  You know, I always, you know, for as long as I could remember, I always wanted to sky dive.  So I did it, you know, and see what that experience was like.  You know, I, you know, I wanted to learn how to fly airplanes.  So I did that.  I loved the water, you know, so, you know, you know, I scuba dived and learned how to sail boats and, you know, climb mountains, you know, all those things.  I just wanted to do.  It's a part of the whole balance in life.
Speaker 1: And how had the balance, how had you sort, as a person, how had you learned that that was important because you're, one, in a very specialized program, you know, where people are very focused.  And is it because you had sort of, you saw that this was easy and you could sort of do it, and, and manage it.  Or is it because--cause I'm sure there were classmates of yours that, you know, were not particularly balanced.
Speaker 2: Right.  But, you know, all things in moderation, you know, all things, you know, in balance.  So, you know, both of those experiences--and all of those experiences are equally important.  You know, I, I don't think that I would want to have to trade, you know, one for the other.
Speaker 1: But you were working in the lab a lot of times till 3:00 in the morning?
Speaker 2: That wasn't work.  That was a hobby.  That was more fun.  I mean I was lucky cause I got paid for it, you know, that was great.  But it wasn't like I have to go to this job.  You know, doing the research is like doing art.  It's like being an artist.  So, you know, a truly good researcher is basically creating new knowledge.  It's taking something from nothing and creating something totally new, something totally different, you know, that, that doesn't exist before.  You know, what research is about is, is like Miles Davis or John Coltrane composing a new piece of music.  It doesn't exist.  Now, you cannot go to a music file and say okay, let me find this piece of music and play it.  You know, when you do research, you cannot go to a textbook and say, let me find the answer or solution to this problem.  You're creating the solution.  You're creating the answer.  So, that's not work.  I mean if it's work, it's a whole of things that pay a whole lot better and a lot easier than, than doing that, you know.  That's a passion.  So, you know, if, if we set out to say, oh, I can teach your immune system how to fight cancer, and I can develop a cancer vaccine, it's not work.  It's art.  It's creating, you know, new knowledge.  You know, it's a passion.
Story_ID: 3436
Speaker 1: In this process of, you know, the research, the things that you were sort of learning, and you said, you know, [Bengt] Samuelsson or that Samuelsson then stemmed--his research stemmed you to look, you know, closer at the brain and sort of take, you know, what he had learned and see how you could--what other projects did you work on, you know, before you ended medical school that you think were critical in the area of, you know, sort of neuroscience, neuroanatomy, you know, cancer research?
Speaker 2: You know, trying to identify, you know, the reason for brain swelling, trying to find ways to reduce brain injury from stroke, you know, those were the main, main things that I worked on, you know, during that time.
Speaker 1: And so, and the whole thing of--because, I mean just for the person who is, you know, not a doctor, the key thing with strokes and the long-lasting effect of strokes have a lot to do with how quickly you can reduce swelling, right?  Is the--.
Speaker 2: Well, what we found, a stroke is basically due to a blockage in a blood vessel supplying blood to the brain.  So if, if one of the blood vessels become clogged by arthrosclerosis or cholesterol or whatever that gets in there, and plug up that artery, and that area of the brain doesn't get any blood flow, and you end a major area brain damage.  You can end up being paralyzed or you lose your ability to speak or you lose your ability to see.  What we found is that if we could intervene within the first ninety minutes, of the occlusion, we could reduce the amount of damage that your brain would have by up to seventy percent.  So you would only end up with about 30 percent of the damage.  So essentially, you know, we were developing a strategy.  So, if, if you had a stroke and the paramedic could get to you early, you could get into the emergency room and get this treatment, you know, we could reduce the amount of damage or brain loss that you would have ultimately by a huge amount.
Speaker 1: But the whole effect, let's say of aspirin on swelling, right, that had--that was on swelling, aspirin, right?
Speaker 2: Well, aspirin was a way of preventing those vessels from clotting.  You know, we were working on the mechanisms as to why that actually occurred.
Speaker 1: Were you doing any research during that time on like pre-stroke, you know, subjects or people who had a higher, you know--,
Speaker 2: (Shaking head no.)
Speaker 1: --no, there wasn't.
Speaker 2: No, only with, only in sort of, with respect to like the Eskimos versus, you know, populations that eat red meat, you know, why the Eskimos have a much lower incidence of stroke because they eat a lot of ocean fish.
Speaker 1: Okay, was there any work at that time between African American and non-African American populations?  Were you involved--?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no.)
Speaker 1: That was still early in the--.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, but there has since that time, you know, been that type of--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Story_ID: 3437
Speaker 1: When you were getting ready to, you know, finish medical school [University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan], you--where were you thinking you want to do your internship and, you know, and, and your--well, first your internship?
Speaker 2: I thought, actually, I wanted to go to University of California, San Francisco [California].
Speaker 1: And why was that?
Speaker 2: That was the top neurosurgery program in the country at the time or Johns Hopkins [University, Baltimore, Maryland].  Those were sort of my first two choices.
Speaker 1: And then, but, what happened?
Speaker 2: Actually, I got into both of those programs, but the, the star person at the University of California, San Francisco, happened to be leaving that program and taking over as chairman of neurosurgery at [University of] Michigan.  And his interest was also along the same research interests as mine at the time.  That was Julian T. Hoff, or 'Buzz' Hoff.  And when he found out, you know, that I was looking at all the programs, and he was coming to Michigan, he called me and said, you know, you could come to San Francisco, but it would be a mistake.  You ought to stay at Michigan.
Story_ID: 3438
Speaker 1: The work that you did--so Buzz [Chairman of Neurosurgery at University of Michigan Medical Center Julian Hoff] came, what work were you doing with him during that time, during your residency, intern--[University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann Arbor, Michigan]?
Speaker 2: He was also working on strategies to reduce stroke size, which was the work that--I mean he actually thought I was some kind of professor somewhere.  He didn't realize I was still a medical student cause he was reading my papers, you know, wondering who this guy Keith Black was.  And then he realized, you know, that I was a medical student, you know, (chuckle) applying, you know, for an internship and residency in neurosurgery.
Speaker 1: So you're, you're publishing--I thought you were doing--you were doing research, but you were publishing papers at the same time?
Speaker 2: Yeah, right.
Speaker 1: Okay, and were you participating in, you know, conferences presenting those papers?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't understand that.  Okay, so you, I mean you were doing--but usually when people--you weren't a research assistant?
Speaker 2: No, I was, I was independent at that time.
Speaker 1: But not going necessarily for your own grants?
Speaker 2: I would go for, for the ones I could go for.  I mean I couldn't go for an NIH [National Institutes of Health] grant, but I could go for small grants.
Speaker 1: And so he get there.  Now, do you do your internship and residency with--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay.
Story_ID: 3439
Speaker 1: When I finished at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], what happened was, is that I was looking for jobs.  I had been Ann Arbor for twelve years and then I wanted probably to get out of the Midwest.  And I was recruited to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California] to basically develop their brain tumor program at the time.  So they had just gotten a chief of neurosurgery at UCLA, at that time, Don Becker.  He was bringing in new faculty, new staff.  There wasn't a big program in brain tumors at UCLA at the time.  They were only doing about fifty brain tumors a year.  And I had an opportunity to, basically to come in, and build that program.  So I spent, you know, the next few years building, you know, the Brain Tumor Program at UCLA.  We took from doing about fifty brain tumors to when I left, in '97 [1997] to doing about five hundred brain tumors a year.
Speaker 2: Now, is this unusual that a young graduate would be, you know, brought in to build a program from scratch like that?
Speaker 1: Yeah, it was, yeah, yeah, cause, you know, normally, you know, you started off as sort of the, you know, the--in more of a junior position, more of an assistant position.  So it was a great opportunity, you know, to take something, you know, where you had the lead in, and build it from the ground up.
Speaker 2: Now, did Michigan ever fight to keep you?  I mean they had sort of given birth to you in some respect, or they might say they had given birth to you?
Speaker 1: Yeah, I'm, I'm, you know, Michigan and I had this sort of affinity for each other.  So, you know, if they clearly wanted me to stay, you know, I had a, I had a job there if I wanted to go there.  But, you know, having done all of my training there, it was, I mean they realized that it was very important, you know, to go some place different, to see a different perspective.
Story_ID: 3440
Speaker 1: Were you married at the time, had you and your wife married at that point in time or not?
Speaker 2: We were, were cohabitating.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: So, you know, we were, we were, you know, living together for like six years, you know, prior to that time.  And then when I moved, we decided that if Carol, cause my wife, Carol [Bennett], you know, was, you know, did have a faculty position in urology at [University of] Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] at the time.  So when I finished my residency [at University of Michigan Medical Center], if she was gonna give up that position and move out to California, then we felt that, you know, at that point, we should go ahead and get married, you know, to do that.
Speaker 1: So both of you came here to be with, at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California]?
Speaker 2: No, I came to UCLA, and she went to USC [University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California].
Speaker 1: Oh, but she's at UCLA now, right?
Speaker 2: Right, when I left UCLA, she left, and then she went to UCLA.
Speaker 1: Okay, I didn't understand that, okay.
Speaker 2: There was maybe about a year of overlap.
Story_ID: 3441
Speaker 1: We were talking off-camera earlier just about [business leader] Reginald Lewis.  Now, he--this, didn't he pass--he passed around that time, didn't he?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Okay, cause you said you thought he was, you were even maybe an intern at the time that he might have--.
Speaker 2: Or either a resident--,
Speaker 1: A resident at the time.
Speaker 2: --early, early junior faculty.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and so, in that, in that period of time, what was the state of brain, you know, tumor research at the time that he, you know, sort of succumbed?  What was the state of the industry?
Speaker 2: Pretty dismal.  You know, with brain--with the most aggressive type of brain tumor, the type that he had, which what we call a grade IV glioma or a glioblastoma multiforme. The median survival from time of diagnosis to death was probably somewhere around nine to twelve months, given best standard of therapy.  And that therapy included surgery, radiation and possibly chemotherapy.  And what we knew was that, you know, surgery was not curative.  Radiation was the only thing that we showed to benefit these patients really in the thirty or forty years.  If we radiated the brain, then we could increase survival from about four to six months to about nine or ten months or so.  So we got some benefit with radiation therapy.  And with chemotherapy, you know, despite the fact that a lot of different medical centers have tried a bunch of different therapies before, that chemotherapy only gave about a two-week increase in survival for patients with brain tumors.  So the therapy was pretty dismal, and that's the most common type of malignant brain tumor.
Speaker 1: So, in that process, so basically, if you got a brain tumor, it was a death sentence?
Speaker 2: Well, no, the--well, you have to realize, there are a bunch of different types of brain tumors--.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you, can you talk--.
Speaker 2: About half of the brain tumors are benign.  If you're lucky enough to get a benign brain tumor, then there's a very good chance that if you get a good neurosurgeon, you know, that tumor could potentially be cured.  The other half of brain tumors are malignant.  And the most common malignant brain tumor, which makes up about sixty percent of these malignant brain tumors is this glioblastoma, where, you know, the prognosis is really just very, very poor.  So take out the benign tumors where, you know, we've developed the good surgical therapies, and if you focus on just the malignant brain tumors, we haven't made much progress.
Speaker 1: Even today as we sit?  No, that's not true today?
Speaker 2: Well, you know, what our entire effort is focused on, you know, here at Cedars-Sinai [Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] is to changing the whole paradigm.  So when I moved to Cedars-Sinai in 1997 and we put the resources of the institute together, you know, we set about to essentially try to, to try to change that.  So if you look at the way that all of cancer is currently treated, it's what I call the slash-burn-poison approach.  You try to slash the patient or try to cut the tumor out with surgery.  You try to burn the tumor with radiation therapy which also burns normal tissue in the process cause there's a very narrow window between when you're killing the tumor, you're killing normal cells.  Or you try to poison the tumor with chemotherapy, which tries to kill cells that are dividing.  And as you know, there are a lot of cells in the body that divides, you know, from your hair to your GI [gastro-intestinal] system to other things, and, and a lot of times the tumors become resistant to the chemotherapy.  They develop ways to get around it.  So again, you go back to this whole conceptual thing.  Let's try to take the clean look.  Let's try to find a different conceptual solution.  And one of the things that we knew about these tumors that we learned from the research lab, is that in order for a cancer cell to develop in the body, it has to make itself invisible to the immune system, so that your immune cells, your killer T cells cannot recognize it.  And then the tumor will release certain chemicals around the area where it is, and then divide it to try to kill off these immune cells if they come in to attack it.  Now, we look at cancer as being a very efficient machine.  It's like a shark.  It just eats and sleeps.  It doesn't waste any resources or any energy.  So if you step back from a conceptual point of view, one has to ask themselves, why is this cancer cell devoting so much of its energy to hide from the immune system and to try to make the immune system defective?  And the answer, I believe, is that if the immune system could actually see the tumor and could recognize it and attack it effectively, it could wipe out the cancer.  So based on that paradigm, we developed a way in the mid-1990s in the laboratory to develop a, a cancer vaccine or brain cancer vaccine.  We could take the proteins from the tumors, put it on a very specialized immune cell.  Put that back under the skin as a shot so that now theses killer immune cells could recognize the cancer protein.  Once they recognize the cancer protein, they could then go in, right into the tumor and attack the cancer cells that had this protein on their surface.  And when we did this in rats, we could eradicate the cancer in eighty percent of the rats.  So five years ago, we started treating patients with this.  The first patient we treated with the vaccine, five and a half years ago, with a malignant brain tumor, is still alive and doing well today.  And what we found is that even if you take this most aggressive form of cancer, this glioblastoma multiforme, where less than five percent of patients will live two years, when we give the vaccine with our other therapies, forty-two percent of the patients were living at two years.  So the survival with the vaccine has gone from five percent to 42 percent.  So that's the first step.  So we're looking at different ways, a whole new paradigm of treating the cancer.  We're developing ways to eliminate the need to even do surgery, destroying the tumor non-invasively, using focused microwave energy to vibrate the water molecules in the tumor cell, heat it up to 220 degrees Fahrenheit with the denature all the proteins in the cell, so that the tumor cells die, the normal cells stay alive, and we can activate the immune system they go in and wipe out any of the remaining cells that may escape.  So we're saying, let's take a whole new paradigm to treat brain cancer, as well as other cancers.  And that's one of the things that we're developing here at the institute.
Speaker 1: So this vaccine, is administered after someone has determined, has been determined to have--?
Speaker 2: Yes, so normally, I mean a vaccine doesn't mean that it's always used to prevent one from getting a disease.  It just means it's a way of activating the immune system against it.  So normally, we think, oh, we have a vaccine against measles because, you know, we don't have measles, but it prevents us from getting it.  This vaccine is that we have patients that already cancer, but now we're activating their immune system to fight, you know, the microscopic cancer cells that they may have.
Story_ID: 3442
Speaker 1: Now, in your research and your, you know, the things that, your treatments here, have you found that there's a certain profile where it works, where there is this survival rate, you know, of two years or four years or longer, and can you talk about that?
Speaker 2: Well, we're still very early, you know, in the process, but we know, for example, that patients that have a lot of native, a lot of nave T cells that we can recruit up to fight against the tumor, tend to do better with the vaccine, which makes sense because, again, the more, sort of, you know, recruits you have, you know, to bring into the fight, the better, you know, your, your battalions are gonna be essentially.  So, you know, we're fighting sort of these, these subgroups that we think may actually do better.  But we're still very early in the process of trying to find ways of enhancing the vaccine and making it better, making it more potent.
Speaker 1: Now, what are the symptoms that patients experience that sort of are classic signs, you know, for a brain tumor or are there classic signs?
Speaker 2: The most common presenting symptom is an unusual and very different headache than one normally experiences.  So most patients come in, the symptom is a headache.  Now, that's very scary for anybody hearing that because the most common medical complaint is headache.  You know, we get headaches all the time.  And obviously, only a very small, small fraction of headaches are headaches that are caused by brain tumors.  Most headaches are tension headaches or migraine headaches or cluster headaches or, or something.  But also, the most common presenting symptom of a brain tumor is headache.  You know, usually a headache that's worse in the morning than at night.  Sometimes the patient says, ah, I've never had a headache like this.  I get headaches, but this is very different than my normal headaches.  You kind of get this intuition that this is not quite right.  Or they say, gee, I have this headache right here. You know, and there's a pain.  So those are all things that, you know, your physician will look for and say, well, if this headache isn't quite right, maybe I should go ahead and order an MRI scan.
Speaker 1: Have you--have there been situation where--well, let me ask, what is the average time, you know, for a tumor to grow in one's brain?  Do you think things grow like exponentially or they do--you know, if you found or can you determine the age of the tumor?
Speaker 2: It's very variable.  I mean, again, there are a hundred and twenty different types of brain tumors according to the World Health Organization classification.  And about half are benign.  The benign ones can grow slowly over years, and then for the malignant ones, the aggressive ones, they can grow in a period of months or weeks.  And they can grow very fast, so I mean it's not uncommon to have a patient that had an MRI scan or a brain scan for some other reason, a few months before, and you come back, and you repeat it a few--you know, three or four months latter, and there you see, you know, they have this, you know, malignant brain tumor there that's growing, and it's quite significant in size.
Story_ID: 3443
Speaker 1: And you came at this research because of what?  Was it because, you know, the traditional methodologies were not proving to be very effective?  I'm just trying to understand how you came conceptually--?
Speaker 2: To the vaccine?
Speaker 1: Yes, to the vaccine.
Speaker 2: Because one of the, one of the things that I had is that, you know, I've operated on more than four thousand brain tumors.  And I've done a lot of research, you know, I have twenty years of researching on the human brain and, and, you know, years of researching on brain tumors.  So I know the field.  And what I did is, is to just say, okay, let's stop, you know.  Let's survey where we are right now.  And if one were to just take a clean slate, and say, now, if--let's look at what has the highest possibility of giving us an impact of increasing survival against brain cancer, what would that be today?  And if you look at that based on all the information that we know, the conclusion that I came to is that the thing that has the highest impact is increasing the immune system, okay, and, and for the reasons that we just explained.  Again, you have to respect your enemy.  If the enemy is brain cancer, you have to understand the enemy.  What is it doing?  What, I mean what, what is it devoting this energy and its resources to try to avoid?  And if you look at it, gee, it's, it's putting a lot of its energy, a lot of its resources into avoiding the immune system.  It's made itself invisible to the immune system.  It's releasing, it's making, it's taking time out of its day of trying to kill, you know, this person to make proteins to send out into the body to make the immune system defective.  Now, if, if the immune system then was not important to the cancer, over the million years of human evolution and people developing cancer, and cancer trying to learn how to survive in our body, if during this evolution, the immune system wasn't important, why is cancer devoting so much time and effort into trying to override enemy and attack.  So by understanding one's enemy, you have to come back and say, wow, you know.  We may not cure cancer by activating the immune system, but it gives us our best shot right now because this, this entity is devoting a lot of energy to the immune system.  And if we can eliminate that advantage, you know, that it has in, in making itself invisible and trying to make the immune system defective and get the immune system to come in and to attack it, it gives us an opportunity to see, well, what kind of impact will we see on the cancer if we do that.  And based on the preliminary things that we're seeing, it's very promising, you know.  We're not gonna make the radiation any better.  We're not gonna make the surgery any better, you know.  Our ability to try to find a, a magic drug that's gonna kill all of these tumor cells is years and years away.  And we don't even know what the right target is right now.  We don't have a target that says if we block off this target, we're gonna kill every cancer cell.  Gene therapy still has a lot of problems.  You know, the immune system, finding a way to make a vaccine to enhance the immune system is here now.
Speaker 1: So you, but you had some Doubting Thomases when you came up with this theory, right?  Did you--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, which was absolutely great because again, that's when you know you're on the right track.  You know, one of the things about being a good scientist is being able to go against, you know, the current, being able to swim upstream.  You know, usually, whichever way the crowd is going is not the way you want to go.  You know, so, you know, you tend to sort of, you know, want to diverge out and take a different perspective on things to really give you a true advantage.  So, you know, sure, I mean, you know, we had people that were so-called experts in brain tumors, when we came up with, you know, writing grants and asking the National Institutes of Health for money to fund these studies, would give us twenty-five reasons why a vaccine against cancer would never work.  You know, now, they're writing grants to try to ask for money to try to find a vaccine to work for cancer.  That's just the way science works.
Story_ID: 3444
Speaker 1: I want to just go back to UCLA [University of California Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, California] for a minute because you spent ten years there, right?
Speaker 2: mh-hm.
Speaker 1: Right, from 1987 to 1997.
Speaker 2: Right, mh-hm.
Speaker 1: And in that process, I mean I just want to understand, you said they were doing fifty operations a year, and then you increased that to five hundred.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: And then the articles talk about how, you know, an average doctor may be doing fifty, and you were doing two [hundred] fifty, you know, yourself, personally.  And I'm just wondering what was the, the ground that allowed for this to happen.  I mean first of all we have, you know, you are--I mean you could be as brilliant as you want to be.  But it's different when you are trying to institute--within an institution, build a department, you know, from scratch.  So I want to understand how--and even though you had O.T.  [Otelio Randall] , you know, who you said was, you know, taught you maybe some of the right things and wrong things, that doesn't mean that, you know, at a new institution with a new program, that you can sort of build it.  And I'm just wondering, what were some of the things that you feel that you did right in the process?
Speaker 2: The things that I did right is that I focused basically on the fundamentals, you know, not get too wrapped up in the politics, you know, but just focus, you know, let's do good science.  Let's take really good care of our patients, and let's try to make a difference for our patients.  And what happens is that over time, people recognize that.  So if you're focusing on your art, you're saying, I'm gonna have the best outcomes that anyone could have on my surgeries, then, you know, people begin to recognize that because after a while, you know, people say, wow, you know, I had this patient that everybody gave up on and said, it was inoperable.  And, you know, I sent him, you know, there, and they took the tumor out and the patient did really well.  I mean and, and after you get, you know, some of those over time, I mean people recognize that, you know.  As you begin to sort of focus and say, wait a minute.  Let's advance the field, you know, let's see if we can develop some new strategies, some different strategies of treating these tumors that will advance that the way that these tumors are treated.  You know, and people began to recognize that.  And when you begin to sort of build, you know, infrastructure, a team to take better care, you know, in people with that particular diagnosis, it begins to get recognized.  And over time, you know, we were able to, to build a program.
Speaker 1: Now, did the university itself, did it create a supportive environment?  Did it have--I mean were you given a program, you were given sort of, no holds barred with the program?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: No, and ultimately, I think that was the, you know, that is the problem, I think with, you know, a lot of the university programs now.  That was why I moved from UCLA ultimately, you know, to Cedars-Sinai [Medical Center, Los Angeles, California].  You know, we, we built the program basically, you know, from the bootstraps.  And it got to a point that we were rather limited, and we needed institutional support.  You know, we needed, you know, the university to come in and say, okay, we will make an investment back into this program to make it better, you know, even more, you know, cutting-edge, you know, than, than what it was.  And at the time, I was being recruited to a number of chairmanship jobs.  You know, they were looking at me to be chairman of neurosurgery at Stanford [University, Stanford, California], at UCSF [University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California], you know, a number of different places.  And so, you know, the dean and the, and the provost, the head of the medical center, you know, came to me and said, Keith, you know, we would love for you--you know, we, we like you.  We don't want you to leave.  We know that you're getting looked at for a number of these chairmanship jobs.  You know, what can we do here at the university, you know, to, to have you stay here.  And I said, you know, allow me to build a cutting-edge program.  And I basically put--I took about ten thousand, fifteen thousand dollars of my own money and, and had the former CFO of the university hospital write up a business plan where we basically showed how if the university invested seven hundred thousand dollars a year back into the program, we could build a comprehensive brain tumor center and bring in more and more patients that would essentially make the university two or three million dollars a year.  And it would be a win-win situation cause we would get the money, you know, to build the program, help our patients, do the research, and the hospital and the university would get a profit because we would, you know, be doing more surgeries and generating more patients.  And, you know, the dean came back and said, this is wonderful, this is great.  But come back with a program for about seventy-five thousand dollars and we'll talk.  And at that point, I realized that there was no, there was no future at UCLA.  And the next morning, I picked up the phone, and I called the CEO of Cedars-Sinai, Tom Priselac, and I said, you know, I'm interested in talking to you about developing a comprehensive brain tumor program at Cedars-Sinai.  And, you know, we sat down to dinner, and, and we met; met with Tom Zenty who was his number two guy, the COO.  And then he looked at me, and they said, you know, Keith, you know, this is really nice, but what we really want is a comprehensive neurosurgical center.  How much money would that take?  And, you know, my eyes got very big and very bright, and I said, let me get back to you.  And it was essentially here at Cedars-Sinai, sort of no holds barred.  We'll give you whatever resources you need.  And based on that, we moved the program over here, and not only were we able to create, I think, the world's best brain tumor program, but we've created one of the world's best neurosurgical programs.  And we're continuing to grow and to expand because, you know, this hospital had a vision that, you know, if you want to be the best, you know, you got to have a partnership, you know, with your researchers, with your physicians, to build the best programs.  And we're gonna put the resources back into the institute, you know, to build the best.  And, you know, we've accelerated our research far beyond, you know, what I could have ever hoped.  We expanded our research facilities, expanded the number of clinical trials, you know, that we're able to offer.  And we're doing over a thousand, you know, major intracranial cases here a year.  So, you know, it's an even bigger, better program than we could have ever created at the university.
Speaker 1: And now, does Cedars-Sinai have an academic affiliation or is it own--?
Speaker 2: Yeah, the academic affiliation is with, is with UCLA, but interestingly, you know, the politics, you know, which I try not to get involved with, is such that, it's almost kind of comical in a sense, even though I was the youngest professor in the history of the Department of Surgery at UCLA, even though I had an endowed chair at UCLA with NIH [National Institutes of Health] grants and lab support and so forth, when I moved over to Cedars, you know, they, they have refused to give me or anyone in the institute an academic appointment at UCLA, even though that's the global agreement between Cedars and UCLA because I think that they, they still, they still hold a grudge, you know, that, you know, that we've left and we've created something even greater here at Cedars-Sinai.
Story_ID: 3445
Speaker 1: Can you just repeat about  bradykinin, the research that, you know, what led to even--?
Speaker 2: One of the problems with the brain is the blood brain barriers.  So the brain capillaries have a wall that do not allow most drugs to get out of the blood into the brain.  In fact, about 98 percent of all the potential drugs, therapeutic drugs to treat brain disorders cannot be used because they don't get out of the, the blood vessels in the brain into the brain tissue in therapeutic concentrations.  And, you know, that's also a problem in treating brain tumors because these brain tumors have a blood brain tumor barrier that do not allow enough of the chemotherapeutic drugs to get out of the blood into the tumor.  So by understanding the biology of these blood vessels, we were able to come up with a way of opening up the blood vessels within these brain tumors to increase delivery of drugs by more than three, 400 percent selectively, to the tumor.
Speaker 1: Because before this, there was, it was some very little percentage, like would not--oh, a little percentage of the drug that got through, like not--?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean like maybe two or three percent, and 98 percent or something like that percent didn't go--,
Speaker 2: Right, right.
Speaker 1: --didn't go through.  So what did you, why did you think that that was going to work?  That's what, I guess that's what I'm trying to understand.  You explained very well the whole thing with, you know, why--how you had come up with the idea of a vaccine.  I thought you did, you know, you did a very good job of that.  So what would this whole thing, what made you think that you could increase delivery of the, you know, of the medicine into the, you know, the brain itself through this--?
Speaker 2: So what happened with how we came about bradykinin is that when I was trying to reduce the stroke size from my early research, even back at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan], we started working on prostaglandins and leukotrienes which are derived from the arachidonic acid which is one of the main lipids in the brain.  And what we realized is that leukotrienes could cause the swelling around brain tumors by making these brain tumor blood vessels open more, more leaky.  And what we found is that if we, and we dis--we sort of discovered this pathway.  So we knew that if we gave leukotrienes into the veins or into the arteries, we would increase the leakiness of, of these vessels.  Now, the other thing that sort of became very clear that if it worked for leukotrienes, then there had to be other compounds that acted in a similar way to leukotrienes that would give a very similar effect on, on these brain blood vessels, these brain tumor blood vessels.  So then we just started making a list of compounds that could act in a similar way to the leukotrienes.  And we started tested them.  And the one that we tested that had the greatest effect was bradykinin.  And so we ultimately used that to develop the strategy of increasing drugs selectively into the tumors by using bradykinin-like drugs.
Speaker 1: Now, one question comes to mind.  In this, being able to increase, then was there a question about how much you could increase effectively if so little was getting through, you know, for treatment.
Speaker 2: Right, and, and whether we could get enough in to make a difference in the survivals and what we found was that, yes, when we gave just the chemotherapy alone to, to (unclear) with brain tumors, they, they all died in about thirty days.  When we gave the chemotherapy along with bradykinin-like drugs to increase delivery of these drugs to the brain tumors, you know, we saw a forty, fifty percent survival.
Speaker 1: Now, when you took those from the rats to humans, you know, from mice to humans, what was--were, did the results, were they the same because that's probably why we've not, read an article that said, okay, well, it can work, but this not going to work, you know?
Speaker 2: It actually worked in humans to, to some extent if you gave it in the artery.  But we had licensed the technology to a start-up, a biotech company up in Cambridge [Massachusetts], that actually saw much a bigger market for the drug if they could get it to work just as an intravenous drug.  So they did the clinical trials, giving it intravenously, rather than directly into the artery.  And all of our work showed that it didn't work if you gave it intravenous.  So although their clinical trials showed some effect, it never reached the, you know, the potential that it could have had if they had injected it into the artery.
Speaker 1: And what would be the difference between intravenously and the artery, that's what--I mean they're both vessels, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: I mean--.
Speaker 2: Well, if you inject into the artery, you're gonna get a much higher concentration of the drug right to the tumor.
Speaker 1: Okay, okay, and was there a time period over this work, or would it work immediately?
Speaker 2: It worked right away.
Speaker 1: Okay, but even with this increasing, did you find the survival rates of the patients increased?
Speaker 2: If you, if you gave intra-arterially.
Speaker 1: For--increased from whatever, from--?
Speaker 2: We did, we, we didn't do a large number of patients.  We only did like twelve patients intra-arterially.  They did a bunch of patients intravenously.  They saw an increase in survival intravenously, but it wasn't significant.  But we were seeing a really great effect if they gave intra, intra-arterially.  But once, you know, they had sort of lost the opportunity on that trial, we then went back to the lab, went back to the drawing board to make that technology even more effective, and develop ways to make it, you know, more potent.  And so we worked on, sort of ways of activating potassium channels, you know, that were sort of farther downstream from the bradykinin to get it to work intravenously, which we now have, that we're planning to go back into clinical trials and test.
Speaker 1: Now, the, the vaccine, where are you in that whole sort of, you know, project?  I mean, you know, things have certain life cycles, you know, where, you know, you'll be able to maximize what they can, you know, the research that can be done there?
Speaker 2: It's very early in the life cycle.  We're just in what we call phase two trials now.  We're planning to go into phase three, and we have a lot of thoughts on how we can make the vaccine even more potent.
Speaker 1: Are there other people--you pioneered, though, this vaccine, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Are there other--oh, you did say a lot of people now are applying, but is there, is there someone else around, you know, who's in your collaborative group that is doing important research or parallel research in this area?
Speaker 2: For any brain tumors, probably the other group that's doing a lot of work on this is people at the University of Pittsburgh [Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania].
Speaker 1: You didn't mention them before, though, when you were mentioning good--.
Speaker 2: They have, they have good immunology, not necessarily the strongest overall brain tumor program.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is the nature of their research that they're doing?
Speaker 2: Also, you know, trying to develop vaccine strategies as well.  They're not quite as far along as we are, but, you know, they, they're working on a similar strategy.
Story_ID: 3446
Speaker 1: So, Dr. Black, you're very, you're like a rock, I mean a rock star, you know, doctor, sorry, I don't mean it in that way (laughs), but you are sort of, you know, because it's an area that is not, you know, I mean, you know, is not very known.  And yet you've, you know, gained a great deal of prominence in it.  And I'm just wondering where you are, and you're still young.  Our average age for interviews are in the mid-70s, you know.  And so you're, you know, one of our younger candidates, and I'm just wondering, you know, where you are in your sort of life cycle, because you've been on a path that was charted very early.  And I'm just wondering, you know, what does, you know, Dr. Black, what does he want to do, you know, in his life, and, you know, what things do you still want to accomplish?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think, that's, that's an easy one.  Yeah, it's pretty simple, is find a cure to cancer, go back to work on consciousness, and try to figure out what is consciousness, and to make sure that my kids and grandkids are really great people.  You know, so those three things, I'm set.
Story_ID: 3447
Speaker 1: There have been these articles where you talk about the, the brain and how beautiful the brain is, and I would like you--I mean as an organism, that when you saw it, you sort of fell in love with the brain, you know, when originally it had been a frog or a heart.  And I'm just wondering, why, you know, what you've said about the brain and it's sort of beauty?
Speaker 2: Well, let me give you an example.  What do you think is the most fascinating and most beautiful thing you've ever seen in your lifetime?
Speaker 1: The most fascinating and beautiful.  I really like the ocean.  I don't know if you call that, you know, the ocean, nature, but that's where I function best.
Speaker 2: You, you look at this ocean, you know, the waves, the sunsets, and you, you get this sort of spiritual experience.  You say, wow, you know, there really does have to be higher life form when you look at it.  Now, you know, imagine, looking into the microscope inside the human brain and taking that beauty of the ocean and multiplying that by a hundred times, you know, looking at the spinal fluid bathing the cranial nerves and the blood vessels and the cortexes in they hypothalamus, you know, inside the human brain.  And you will have that same experience.  It's like there has to be a higher order to create this, and it's not just the ocean and the sunset.  But you're looking at something that was created that actually allows us to have this conscious experience, allows us to create, allows us to write, allows us to speak, allows us to think, you know.  What could possibly be in anything that we've ever seen more beautiful than that, more incredible than that?
Speaker 1: And in that, so you, that's where you come in to talk about, you know, your, your profession really is an art form in many ways or surgery as an art form?
Speaker 2: Well, surgery is an art form.  Surgery is an art form, but what I say is that ultimately, we all have a need to understand where we came from.  If a child is adopted, they want to find their biological mother.  There's a need to sort of understand who we are and where we're from.  The whole human experience with religion is this need to understand who we are, where we're from.  The whole drive of science is to understand how, why, you know, where did it come from.  So, you know, if you, if you want to understand an artist, you know, if you want to understand [Gustave] Moreau, you know, why did he paint, you know, you study his art.  And, you know, there are scholars that spend their lifetime, lifetime studying a particular artist to try to figure out, why did he paint that way?  Why did he choose that particular shape or color?  If you want to understand human nature, if you want to understand, you know, nature itself, you know, you study science because science, you know, is the study of God's art.  And, you know, what you see then is that, you know, it all begins to sort of come together and, you know, it brings you closer, even if you can never understand it, to appreciating it, you know, to appreciate how wonderful this artist is to have created such an incredibly beautiful, complex structure.  And that's what science is all about, and that's what being human is all about.  That's what our experience is really all about.
Speaker 1: So you believe in many ways, God lives within you and, and your skill, your gift, he gave, is that what you're saying essentially?
Speaker 2: Oh, I think, you know, he lives in all of us, you know, I mean, you know, we're all given that little piece of DNA genetic code that allows every life form to share, you know, this same experience.  You know, that is whatever you want to call it, that most of us call God.  You know, you wonder how salmon can migrate thousands of miles and find the right river to get back to where they need to be, and how birds can migrate thousands of miles, how turtles can go back and find the same place to lay their eggs, you know, that--you know, for year after year.  And whales can migrate, you know, birds can never have heard a song, and they can sing the appropriate mating song.  You know, how is that possible?  And so you also have to ask, you know, how is it possible that a person can write the 'Book of Genesis' because we already know.  If we meditate, if we allow our minds to focus deep within, we all have the message.  That's why all religions are all the same because no matter whether you're Muslim or Buddhist or a Hindu or Christian, if you meditate and you find that one conscious experience, we're all preprogrammed.
Story_ID: 3448
Speaker 1: Now, in your, you know, in your sports or your extracurricular activities or the things you like doing, you know, whether--do you still sky dive?
Speaker 2: (Shaking head, no.)
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: I've used up all my jumps.
Speaker 1: (Laughing) Okay, that's good, I don't blame you, that's good.  I only, I wanted to do that once upon a time.  I got chicken.  But what--I know that you like to vacation in the Caribbean, and I know that you have, you know, hiked up to Kilimanjaro, right?
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: What are your sort of favorite things, and what other things that you have done have been given you this same feeling as that of, you know, operating on someone's brain?
Speaker 2: Nothing really comes close to operating on the brain.  But, you know, things that--I like being close to water, you know.  It's that rebirth and purification about water, you know, that's always very nice.  I love scuba diving.  I love sailing, you know, just being close to water.
Story_ID: 3449
Speaker 1: Your brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.], what does he say about your, you know, the path that you took, the one who was your, you know, the one who you looked up to?
Speaker 2: He's very, he's very proud.
Speaker 1: And your parents [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr. and Lillian Black]?  Are they, were they were surprised at all?
Speaker 2: They, I'm sure they, they were probably very happy and must be surprised.  They say they were not surprised.  And they're very proud as well.
Story_ID: 3450
Speaker 1: You talked about the things that you would like to do still, and, and I'm wondering what you--and this is, it's sort of a hard question cause you're still young, but what do you want your legacy to be?
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think the reality, you know--a couple of things are just always, regardless of how you look at it, very critical.  And that is, how well you do as a parent.  I think, you know, when I look at my parents  [Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr. and Lillian Black], they feel like they've had a successful life because, you know, they can turn to my brother [Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr.] and I and say they have two successful kids, and they were great parents.  So, you know, I hope that I can raise two kids to be great people and that they can raise good kids so I can see great grandkids.  So, you know, that's one thing.  I don't think I would feel particularly fulfilled in life, you know, if I'm the world's greatest scientist and my kids are not really doing well.  So I think in reality, I would probably put that first.  And I think I've been blessed because, you know, even though I spend, you know, a lot of time away from home, I probably have one of the world's greatest mothers for a wife [Carol Bennett], you know, who does a very good job in really developing, you know, our kids into really great people.  So I, I've been lucky, you know, there.  The other thing in terms of science is, you know, to just leave the world a little better for my creativity and knowledge and what I found it, you know, just, you know, to add a little something positive to it.  You know, the goal isn't, you know the goal of medicine and science isn't really to cure all the disease.  I mean you don't want to, you don't want a world where everybody's living forever.  I mean we only are meant to sort of be here for a certain amount of time, die and make room for other people.  And so, you know, if we cure the process of aging or if we cure, you know, all these diseases, then right, we don't, we don't have any room on earth for the future generations to come.  And we're not even doing a good job right now in sort of balancing the resources, you know, that we expend for the current population.  So that's not really the goal, but I think the goal is to, is to--the life that we have, you know, the time period that, you know, we have to make that time period as healthy, as high of a quality, you know, as one can.  So, you know, there's no need for five-year old kids any more to die of polio.  You know, so we have better treatments for that.  And I hope, you know, one day that, you know, you know, young kids that are dying from brain tumors, which is probably increasing, the incidence of brain tumors is increasing.  The leading cause of cancer death in people less than nineteen is now brain cancer.  I hope that we can have that same sort of benefit, you know, that says, you know, you don't have a death sentence, you know, any more if you're diagnosed with this.  We can treat it.  We can give you a good quality of life, up to some point and just make the world a little better.
Speaker 1: Just one thing caught my attention.  Why is the leading cause of, you know, death--why, of nineteen, why before nineteen?  What is causing this?  Do we know?
Speaker 2: Our speculation is probably toxins in the environment, although we don't know.  You know, it could be anything from diesel exhaust with ultra-fine particles released from diesel engines that go right through the lung into the blood and go into the brain.  And when animals are exposed to these ultra-fine particles, they develop brain tumors.  Tanaptalene (ph. COULDN'T VERIFY), which is another industrial exhaust, plastic, people that work in plastic factories around vinyl chloride have a high incidence of brain tumors.  And everything that we get now, our food, our water is in plastic.  You know, we take our food that we're gonna heat up in the microwave oven, we put a little plastic wrap over it, put it in the microwave, and then it comes out with the little holes that the microwave has burned in it.  So we're eating this plastic that we know is carcinogenetic.  So, it could be cell phones.  I mean, you know, we have a lot of toxins in the environment that are probably not the best thing to do, not right now, which is one of the things that I was saying, you know, about our ability to live and balance currently on earth and not pollute, you know, this little fishbowl that we live in.
Speaker 1: And your children's names, can you give them?
Speaker 2: My daughter's name is Teal, T-E-A-L, Atwal (ph.), and my son's name is Keith Quentin Black.
Speaker 1: And what would you want them to, to know about you or say to them?
Speaker 2: That their dad loves them very much and is very proud of them, and I hope they have a wonderful life.
Story_ID: 3451
Speaker 1: That is a photograph of me taken probably with in the last couple of years.
Speaker 2: Okay, so you're here at Cedar--?
Speaker 1: At Cedar, here at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles [California].
Speaker 2: [Keith Black Cedars-Sinai photograph, ca. 2002. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3452
Speaker 1: This is a photograph of me.  I think I must be about twelve years old at the time.
Speaker 2: And do you know where--this is a school picture?
Speaker 1: Yeah, this looks like a school picture.  So it must have been--.
Speaker 2: Were you in Cleveland [Ohio] at the time?
Speaker 1: Yeah, in, in Cleveland, probably seventh grade.
Speaker 2: Okay, Moreland Elementary [School, Shaker Heights, Ohio]--?
Speaker 1: It was probably at Byron [Junior High School, Shaker Heights, Ohio].
Speaker 2: [Keith Black junior high school photograph, 1969. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3453
Speaker 1: My brother, mother and me in 1983 when I was a second-year resident at the University of Michigan [Ann Arbor, Michigan] at a former, former, former, function.
Speaker 2: Now, you have to give your brother's, you say from left to right, your brother's name.
Speaker 1: From left to right is my brother, Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr., my mother Lillian Black and me, Keith Black.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black (right) with his brother Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr. and mother Lillian Black, 1983. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3454
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me when I was at UCLA [University of California Los Angeles].  I was a junior faculty member.
Speaker 2: Do you remember approximately when that was?
Speaker 1: That must have been a picture taken probably about ten years ago.
Speaker 2: So nineteen--?
Speaker 1: About nineteen, yeah, about ninety-two [1992], '94 [1994].
Speaker 2: [Keith Black, Los Angeles, California, ca. 1992-1994. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3455
Speaker 1: A picture of me Boykin Street Elementary School [Auburn, Alabama].  That would have been in '66 [1966], so I would have been ten years old or probably in about the fourth grade.
Speaker 2: [ Keith Black Boykin Street Elementary School elementary school photo, Auburn, Alabama, 1966. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3456
Speaker 1: A picture of the family with me on the left and my brother, Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr., my father, Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr., my mother, Lillian Black.  I must have been around second or third grade at the time.
Speaker 2: And this is in?
Speaker 1: This is in Auburn, Alabama.
Speaker 2: [Off-camera discussion]
Speaker 1: [Keith Black (left) with his brother Robert Nathaniel Black, Jr., father Robert Nathaniel Black, Sr.  and mother Lillian black, Auburn, Alabama, ca. 1967. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3457
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me and my daughter, Teal Atwal Black and my wife Carol Bennett, when I received the 'Essence' Award, which I believe would have been in 2001.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black with his daughter Teal Black and wife Carol Bennett at Essence Awards ceremony, New York, New York, 2001. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3458
Speaker 1: This is a picture of my son, Keith Black and my daughter, Tal Black, taken two years ago in our backyard.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black's son Keith Q. Black and daughter Teal Black, 2002. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3459
Speaker 1: That is a picture of my son, Keith Black and my daughter Teal Black.  I believe Keith looks like he was maybe about five years old at the time.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black's son Keith Q. Black and daughter Teal Black, ca. 1990s. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3460
Speaker 1: That is a picture of me and one of my porters when I was climbing Kilimanjaro.
Speaker 2: It's you and what.
Speaker 1: One of my porters.  That would have been now almost fourteen years ago, so around 1990.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black and unidentified man, Mount Kilimanjaro, Tanzania, ca. 1990. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3461
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me on a safari in Kenya, standing next to a Masai.
Speaker 2: Okay, year?
Speaker 1: This would have been around the same time, during 1990.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black with unidentified man, Kenya, 1990. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3462
Speaker 1: That's me with Nelson Mandela in the home of Pauletta and Denzel Washington about three years ago.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black and Nelson Mandela, ca. 2001. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3463
Speaker 1: That is a picture of a neurosphere and neuro cells derived from cells of the bone marrow from a--that we're using as a technique to regenerate nerve tissue within the brain.
Speaker 2: Okay, year?
Speaker 1: That was taken about a year ago.
Speaker 2: [Neurosphere and neurocells from Keith Black's research, 2003. From the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3464
Speaker 1: This is a picture of the, of a red blood cell that's a discocyte and a red blood cell that's an echinocytes that looks more like a little porcupine, which is the red blood cell transformation that I discovered when I was a high school student.
Speaker 2: [Red blood cell transformation from Keith Black's research, not dated, from the collection of Keith Black]
Story_ID: 3465
Speaker 1: This is a picture of me on the cover of 'Turning Point' magazine.
Speaker 2: [Keith Black on the cover of 'Turning Point' magazine, 1999. From the collection of Keith Black]
