Story_ID: 3860
Speaker 1: My name is Larry Crowe.  I'm interviewer today for the HistoryMakers.  Our videographer is Scott Sterns.  Observing is Ann Ashmore Hudson.  Sir, could you please state your name and spell it for us, please?
Speaker 2: My name is Edward W. Brooke.  I live in Warrington, Virginia and I'm a former United States senator.
Speaker 1: And what is your date of birth and place of birth?
Speaker 2: I was born October the 26th, 1919 in Washington, D.C.
Speaker 1: Okay, and what is today's date?
Speaker 2: Today is September the 22nd--or 23rd?
Speaker 1: It's the 23rd right.
Speaker 2: Today is September the 23rd, 2003.
Speaker 1: And where are we at the present time?
Speaker 2: We're in Washington, D.C. in my apartment in Watergate.
Story_ID: 3861
Speaker 1: What is your favorite food?
Speaker 2: Lamb.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite color? Do you have a favorite color?
Speaker 2: Blue. Blue.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite time of the year?
Speaker 2: Spring.
Speaker 1: Do you have a favorite vacation destination?
Speaker 2: St. Martens in the French West Indies.
Speaker 1: And finally, do you have a favorite phrase or saying?
Speaker 2: "You do what you have to do."
Story_ID: 3862
Speaker 1: Can you give me your parents' full names and spell them for us?
Speaker 2: My mother is Helen Seldon, S-E-L-D-O-N Brooke.  She was born in Petersburg, Virginia on April the 19th of l892.  I know little of her mother and father, but she was born on a farm outside of Petersburg in Prince George County.
Speaker 1: Okay, so there aren't any stories that passed down about her, her parents or ancestors or anything that you--
Speaker 2: My mother's mother died when she was 3, and she was taken by an elderly sister to live in Washington, D.C.  And her memory of her mother was very sparse.  And she did not remember her father at all.  So no one really gave me that information and I've never done a lot to find out about it.
Story_ID: 3863
Speaker 1: What about your father?  What's your father's full name?
Speaker 2: My father's name is Edward William Brooke.  He would be Edward William Brooke the second because I did know my father's father, my grandfather, Edward William Brooke, the first.  Edward William Brooke the first was a slave on a plantation outside of Fredericksburg, Virginia, about 2 miles.  And the family name of the slave owners and the head of that plantation was Brooke, B-R double O-K-E.  And slaves at that time took the names of their, of their slave holders.  And he ended up with the name Edward William Brooke, which is sort of British and I believe that my foreparents at that time were British.  My grandfather looked a lot like Indian and I have heard that he was part Cherokee Indian, part British and that--and part African American.  And he was emancipated and moved from the Brooke Plantation to Fredericksburg where he married my grandmother, Dorothy Jefferson, Dolly Jefferson as she was known to all.  And they lived there for a while, and then they moved to Washington, D.C. where he got a job on the Pennsylvania railroad as a trainman working on the rails; and where he had his--they had their children, one of which was my father, the oldest.  And he was Edward William Brooke, the, the second.
Speaker 1: And now, was your grandfather freed prior to the Civil War or after the Civil War?
Speaker 2: I think, from the best I understand it, that it was after the Civil War.
Speaker 1: So he was part of the great emancipation of people after the war?
Speaker 2: Yes, and his movement from the plantation where he was freed into, 2 miles that it was only from there, into, to Fredericksburg.  And that plantation, that area is now called Brooke, Virginia.  And I think it just took the name of the, of that plantation.
Speaker 1: Are there any stories that your grandfather told about, about slavery that he passed down?
Speaker 2: He, he didn't like to talk much about it.  He was a very free spirited person.  We vaguely talked about slavery and what his, what he did.  But I can't really recall that he told me anything remarkable about his time on that plantation.  He probably was there mostly as a, as a child, probably was born there, and lived until he was a young, probably in his teens, when he moved to Fredericksburg and got married when he was freed.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, well tell us about your father.  What did he do?  What kind of life did he have?
Speaker 2: My father was ambitious.  He was self-educated.  He worked and put himself through Howard University Law School [Washington, D.C.].  He got a job in the government as a government lawyer, worked in the Veterans Administration, but was always frustrated by the fact that white peers always advancing and he never could advance.  He felt discrimination and segregation very deeply and we lived in a segregated society in Washington, D.C.  He had ambitions for his children and he provided an education, both for my sister, Helene, who went and graduated from Howard University as well and who taught English in the District of Columbia public schools.  He sent me to Howard University as well, and I got my bachelor of science degree from Howard.  And all of it was due to my father's desire to have his children educated because he felt that education was critical if we were to live in the United States of America.
Story_ID: 3864
Speaker 1: You grew up near Howard [University, Washington D.C.], right?  The neighborhood you grew up in was near Howard University, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I was really born in Ledroit Park which is right down the street from Howard University so I grew up in that environment.  But we moved quite a bit.  We rented all the time.  My father never owned property until, oh, I guess I was a young man when he bought his first home in Brookline, Massachusetts, but we lived on First Street, near [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School.  We lived up on Gerard Street and several other places in Washington as renters.
Speaker 1: Okay, can you reflect back on your early childhood and give us a sense of some of the sights and sounds and smells of growing up?
Speaker 2: I was fortunate to a great degree to be born through the parents.  I had, as I said, my father and my mother really wanted education, a good education for their children.  We were always protected.  We lived in a cocoon, a segregated cocoon to be sure.  We were not allowed to go to theaters downtown Washington, to department stores, where our girls and our mothers and friends could not try on hats or try on shoes.  We could not sit down and eat a hot dog or have a soft drink at a counter in the 10 cents store or in a, in a drugstore.  Strangely, the public transportation, the buses, trolley cars were not segregated.  So we never really had to sit in the back of the bus or in the back of the trolley.  But that was about the only thing we were (unclear).  Even the government buildings had white toilets and colored toilets.  And the name colored was used at that time.  You were white or you were colored, and then later you were white or you were Negro.  But we never went outside of our cocoon.  We had theaters, which were good theaters.  I remember growing up with the likes of Duke Ellington and Count Basie and Jimmy Lunceford, later Ella Fitzgerald and Ethel Waters, all those greats who came to a theater called Howard Theater in our cocoon.  And then there was the Lincoln Theater and the Republic Theater where we went.  We had our own dance halls.  Everything that we thought we needed was given to us by our parents, living in that cocoon.  We knew each other.  There was not much immigration into Washington in those days.  We could leave your doors unlocked and your cars unlocked.  But yet there was the stigma of segregation.  And we read about and we heard about the horrible lynchings in the South.  I don't recall much being done about it.  We knew it was shameful.  Our parents though tried to protect us from that and in some respects, that was good.  In some respects, it was not good because it didn't give an opportunity to express our feelings and our opinions about it.  I remember my grandmother--and I've heard this story from many others as well, would always say, remember your place, stay in your place.  Now, they didn't do it because they agreed that our place was inferior to those of whites.  They did it because they wanted to protect us because there was always that fear that we might be physically harmed as well as, of course, psychologically harmed as well.  I never appreciated that and I've always said since then, your place is anywhere you want it to be.  And I believe that and I believe that very strongly.  But we came up sort of outside of the, of the real bitterness and hatred and racism that predominantly was in the South, much more visible in the South, but yet existing in the North and in the East as well. And we went around our merry way.  We had a good education.  We had three high schools for coloreds or for Negroes at the time.  One was Armstrong High School, which was a very fine vocational high school, Cadoza, also a very fine business high school and [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School, which was a classical high school.  I was fortunate to go to Dunbar High School.  And Dunbar High School had teachers who were graduates of some of the great white colleges in the country, from, from Harvard [University] and Smith [College] and, and Yale [University] and Princeton [University] and other universities around the country.
Speaker 1: Dunbar is one of the--
Speaker 2: Dunbar was the second--
Speaker 1: --famous high schools (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: It was.  And it was--the reason why Dunbar was so great, one, was because of its teachers.  And these teachers had PhD's and masters degrees, teaching at a high school because they couldn't teach in the big, in the nation's big universities.
Story_ID: 3865
Speaker 1: What were the activities that you really liked the most when you were coming up?
Speaker 2: Well, I liked sports.  I was never really fast.  I never was that good.  You had to have speed to be a, a great athlete and I wasn't physically fit to be a great athlete, but I played sandlot football, baseball, basketball.  I did swim and played tennis.  A teacher by the name of Perkins, one of the first blacks I knew who ever was playing tennis in those days, taught me tennis.  And I became captain of the [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School tennis league.  And I spent a lot of my time in sports and community activities.  I was a great churchgoer.  My church St. Lukes Episcopal Church, but my mother and father originally were Baptist from Virginia.  They later joined the Episcopal church.  I was acolyte at that church and carried the cross, crucifix and a lay reader.  So I spent a good time of, a good bit of my time really in, in church work.  But I loved the social activities that Washington [D.C.] had to offer.  Washington was always a big social town.  And sometimes I spent more time in social activities than I did in, in my studies.  But Washington didn't offer to us, us being colored people or Negroes at that time, all the wonderful things that Washington had because we were denied because of race.  But it was made up for by virtue of living in this protected cocoon with some very wonderful heroes, inspirational heroes that, that we heard about and knew about and, and came in contact with.
Speaker 1: Who were some of those heroes?
Speaker 2: Well, Dr. Charles Wesley, who was a historian, a very noted historian and a very, very fine man whom I began to know very intimately, and later became very associated with him in the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity when I went to Howard University [Washington, D.C.]. Charles Drew who was a noted, really a scientist because of blood plasma and what not, that, that he discovered.  But people came in the community.  George Washington Carver came and we'd hear him.  A. Phillip Randolph would come and, and speak at, at our high schools.  And so we got to know some of the very famous Negro men and women who--Manny Barras, people like that who, who came to Washington.  So we were, as I said, we were fortunate to, we were very, very fortunate, very lucky that we at least had that.  But it didn't always prepare us for the world we had to live in and the world ultimately that we did live in.
Speaker 1: Now, you said that your grandmother cautioned you about staying in your place and that sort of thing.  Was there another voice that encouraged you to stretch out a little bit?  Were there some other voices that you heard?
Speaker 2: (Unclear) my mother believed that Washington had deprived us of opportunities that she had hoped we'd have.  She lived opera.  She took me to New York when I was a young boy, to the San Carlos Opera Company.  I remember my first opera was 'Carmen'.  It was a very, all this peasantry and pageantry and what not and the beautiful music.  And so I, I studied opera.  I learned opera and ultimately, I was president and chairman of the board of directors of Boston Opera Company later on in life.  So it followed me because of that.  She loved music, dancing.  I went to the ballet when I could get up to, to New York because we couldn't go in Washington.  We, we--the theater, for example, we couldn't go downtown to the National Theater to, to see a play.  I mean those kinds of things we did not have.  To the extent that we could have things, we had them within the cocoon and usually by people who were members of our own race, namely, colored and Negro entertainers who did frequent Washington and from whom we learned a lot and enjoyed a lot.
Story_ID: 3866
Speaker 1: My mother was very outgoing.  She was an extravert of the highest order.  My father, contrary was, was a introvert.  I think he liked people, but he was never confident and never sure.  And he suffered so much inwardly from, from segregation and discrimination.  And I think at times he was even bitter about it because he was always passed over in his employment.  He always thought he had a lot to contribute and wanted to contribute to this country and to this world, and he felt that he was not given the opportunity to do it because of his race.  And, and that hurt him, hurt him deeply.  And consequently, we felt that.  On the other hand, my extraverted mother was always happy and joyful, loved social affairs.  I think she belonged to six or seven bridge clubs, and they would meet around in the homes and occasionally meet at our house.  And I'd have to sit in until someone who was late arrived.  And the way they played bridge, if you made a wrong move or played the wrong card, you'd know about it.  It sort of soured me from bridge and I never played bridge any time after that.  But she was part of that social world, and he indulged her.  I think he enjoyed seeing her do it, but he didn't really want to do it himself.  He had very few friends.  He was interested in politics, but mainly because he was bitter about what Southern Democrats were doing and what, particularly Virginia Democrats were doing.  And he voted against them all the time.  And he always said to us, when the Democrats are in power in the White House, Washington is really hell to live, which he didn't use profanity much, and that was a pretty strong word for him.  But that's what he called it.
Speaker 2: It was pretty much true, too, yeah.  I think that was pretty much true too in those days--
Speaker 1: Oh, in those days.
Speaker 2: It was Woodrow Wilson, shortly before you were born that put up the colored signs and all that--
Speaker 1: Well, during my, during my time, I, I saw the signs.  I, I knew they were, were everywhere around.  You just couldn't do it.  I remember joining a, the only real protest movement that I joined as a young child, as I remember was the movement against the--I think it was the People's Drugstore, at the time.  I think it was--I know it was a drug chain.  And this lady sort of organized a protest movement and placards and what not.  And Terrell was her name.  And we marched in the parade showing our protest, the fact that here this was really, practically in our cocoon or certainly at the border, and we couldn't go in that, in that drugstore and sit down and have a, have a sandwich or a drink.
Speaker 2: You said that was Terrell, Mary Church Terrell?
Speaker 1: Yes, that's her name.  Mary, Mary Church Terrell.  I can picture her today.
Story_ID: 3867
Speaker 1: What was [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington D.C.] for somebody that was on the inside of that high school that's so famous in history?
Speaker 2: Dunbar was in many ways a wonderful institution, academic, very demanding.  As I said, strong teacher, demanding teachers, inspirational teachers, teachers who'd been there and wanted you to go there and who wanted to prepare you well to go there, who opened up vistas that we had never seen before or never dreamed of because they had traveled.  And they had read books, and they had written books.  And we were exposed to all of that.  We had a lot of social life there, but primarily it was an academic institution.  And scholarship was foremost and they taught us about equal justice, equal opportunities, things that they thought, that we, growing up, would be the leaders of the future, that therefore, we should be well trained to take on that roll.  And so that was a school to, I owe a great debt, as was Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay, now, at Dunbar were you--did you run for class office at Dunbar?
Speaker 2: Never was political.  Had a lot of friends.  I think in the class book they said something about my friendship.  I, I associated and was friendly with all the different classes of people in our high school.  I got along well with both boys and girls, liked the girls primarily, but I got along with the boys as well.  No, I, I never thought about running for off--class officer.  I hadn't, that hadn't struck me yet.  I had gone to school believing and wanting to be a doctor, a surgeon.  When I was a young kid, I used to cut up little animals in the attic, by dead, dead animals we'd find in the street or by--and so I was headed toward medical school.  That's what I really wanted to do, even as early as my junior high school days which was Shore Junior High School.  And one of my teachers, I think he was from Yale, a Yale graduate, Shippen was his name, and he said to me--and he taught a course in civics.  It was an elective course which I took because I had heard it was not a difficult course.  And so I took civics for that reason, the wrong reason.  And he said to me, you know, young man, you ought to think about going to law school, maybe go to Harvard School.  He said, I think you're wasting your time in, in pre-med courses--
Speaker 1: Now, this is at Howard, right?
Speaker 2: No, this is in high school, in high school.  This is in high school, that early in my life.  But he saw something in me that he thought, he thought the direction in which I was going was not--I was not suited for as well as I would be suited for a legal training, as a matter of fact.  And then, you know, one of the reasons for my wanting to go to medicine was because the doctors were the wealthy ones in our society.  And they married the girl, the pretty girls always wanted to marry doctors.  Certainly, their mothers wanted them to marry doctors (laughter).  So the doctors were sort of the cream of the crop.  And that was another reason why I'm sure I saw myself as being a doctor, the prestige of it, the, the creature comforts of it, the attraction to the opposite sex, all those things entered into it.  So was really going into medicine for the wrong reasons.  And when Mr. Shippen said this to me, I paid a little bit of attention to it, but not a great deal of attention to it.  It didn't change me enough so that when I went to Howard I continued to pursue pre-medical courses and pre-medical training.
Story_ID: 3868
Speaker 1: How were you grades in high school?  Were you a good student?
Speaker 2: Fair.  Average.  Never a great student.  I, I had a diverse interest when I was in high school.  I enjoyed my high school education.  I enjoyed it.  I learned a lot, but I was never, you know, a scholar, never--I read the books I had to read and some I didn't have to read.  But I wasn't into books all the time.  I was into a lot of different things.  As I said, I was into sports.  I was into social life.  I was into a club which we had started and George Scurlock and Percy Pitts and Duke Ellington's son, Mercer, all of these kids, we, we formed a club called the KTM's in those days.  And you had to form those clubs for your social life because you couldn't else, outside of it.  So I, I was interested in that type of thing as well.  I was sort of all-around, what is it, into everything, but master of none.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you, well, would you describe yourself as a real competitive kind of a person or--
Speaker 2: Not, more reg, just a regular guy.  I think a likeable guy.  I liked people.  I didn't have to pretend about people.  As I said, my mother was extraverted and so was I.  I enjoyed people.  I enjoyed their company and their association and I liked to communicate with people.
Story_ID: 3869
Speaker 1: When you were in high school [Paul Laurence Dunbar High school, Washington D.C.], are there certain teachers that stand out as mentors or, or
Speaker 2: Yes, one of my teachers that stands out in my mind was Ms. Bertha McNeal, who was an English teacher, who taught me how to write a composition, the introduction, the body and, and the conclusions and started to organize my thoughts and to put them down on paper, and to speak.  And she was excellent, inspirational, knew her English.  She certainly helped me in grammar and I think it's, it's helped me throughout my life.  And I was fortunate to follow her up with another English teacher at Howard University [Washington D.C.] by the name of Dr. Coleman who was also excellent.  And so I had those two ladies in my life so far as English was concerned.  But I was still pursuing science, course in science through Dunbar and, and through Howard University as well.
Story_ID: 3870
Speaker 1: So when you were on the verge of graduation, you had planned to pursue medicine at Howard [University, Washington D.C.]?  You were going to Howard to pursue a medical career?  That's what you liked--
Speaker 2: I would have liked to gone away to school.  I had a cousin who was like a sister to me and was a classmate.  We sort of grew up together.  She was scholarly.
Speaker 1: That's Adelaide?
Speaker 2: Adelaide.  Her name was Adelaide Cromwell. Her father taught at [Paul Laurence] Dunbar High School [Washington D.C.], as did one of her aunts and Adelaide was into books, but she was a regular girl as well.  I, I loved Adelaide, still do as a matter of fact.  And--
Speaker 1: Is she--just a question?  Is she related to John Wesley Cromwell, the lawyer and book (unclear)?
Speaker 2: No, no, I don't think--
Speaker 1: Okay, all right, I just thought I'd ask.
Speaker 2: And Adelaide went, went away where her aunt had previously gone, one of the few Negroes who went to Smith College [Northampton, Massachusetts], one of the early ones, if not the earliest one.  And so Adelaide went to Smith College and we had several others of our class that went to Northeastern colleges, some of the great universities in the country.  My father, first of all, couldn't have afforded to, to send me to one of those colleges.  It was just too costly.  Secondly, I didn't have the academic record.  I never tried so I don't know whether I would have been admitted or not, but as I said, I was an average student and I'm not sure that I would have been admitted.  But Howard University was close, didn't have to pay for the dormitory.  He'd pay my tuition and I could walk from home to Howard University, and most of our, my friends and most of our classmates went to Howard University, those who were admitted went to Howard University.
Speaker 1: Okay, well, what was Howard like when you got to Howard?  How, how did you like Howard?
Speaker 2: I think I would have liked Howard even better had I lived in the dormitory and had a feeling for campus life.  I was a, what you call a city student.  I went home every night.  I did my work at home.  Sometimes I'd stop and go to the library, but I wasn't right there at the library.  I didn't communicate with all the kids there because they, they were on campus and I was living at home.  And it was, quite a few did it, of course, but I love what Howard University had to offer.  That's where I really came into contact with Dr. Wesley, the other members of the fraternity.  They, they had people that came, A. Phillip Randolph, for example, was an inspiration.  Haile Salasie came to campus.  I can't begin to mention the, the number of people that came to campus for various reasons, concerts, lectures.  We were exposed to all that, but mostly, again, we had wonderful teachers, excellent teachers in all of the various colleges of the university.  Mordacai Johnson who was a, was a great president of, of Howard University and went on a building program.  We had great football teams and basketball teams in those days because again, unfortunately, Negroes were not allowed to, weren't playing on, on big universities around the country.  So they, they went to Howard University and Morgan [State College] and Hampton [Institute], Virginia State--
Story_ID: 3871
Speaker 1: Who were some of the sports stars at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] when you were in school?
Speaker 2: Oh, Willie Wynn from New York was a basketball player who could have played on the Celtics or any of the great, the Bullets, any other great teams in the country.  He was a great, great players.  A fellow by the name of Singh, S-I-N-G-H, a football player, not, not the golfer.  He was a great football player.
Speaker 1: S-I-N-G-H.  That's a, that's an Indian name.
Speaker 2: Yeah, cause he was, he was a--played on Howard's football team.  But I can't remember them all, but we had a good team.  Howard University, Howard-Lincoln game.  Lincoln [University, Lincoln, Pennsylvania] was another black university in Pennsylvania, and the Howard-Lincoln game was the big game every year.  It'd come here or we'd go to Philadelphia [Pennsylvania], up there and play them.  That, that was always a great thing.  Howard University was the capstone of black college education in those days.  It still is as a matter of fact.  So my experiences at Howard were, were great.  I didn't do well in chemistry.  As a matter of fact, I didn't turn in my papers, and I, I was rudely awakened (laughter) when I got a failure, an F in a chemistry course up there.  But, but the professor was right.  I hadn't, hadn't turned in my papers, hadn't done my work.  I had become very active in fraternity work at that time.  I became the--was elected, one of my first elective offices was as the president of my chapter, Beta chapter of the Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity.  And I spent a lot of time, a lot of my effort in that organization.  And again, the girls, social life, the whole nine yards.  And I struggled through the science courses again, did well in the history and English and political science courses.
Story_ID: 3872
Speaker 1: Did you have any courses from William Leo Hansberry in History?
Speaker 2: I did have Mr. Hansberry at one time and I had, I'm trying to think of the two that really stood out in my mind.  One became the United Nations--
Speaker 1: Bunche?
Speaker 2: Bunche, Ralph Bunche.  I, I studied under Ralph Bunche, and then there was another young man who taught there.  I was very, very much impressed with, but it was my first introduction into political science and into politics.  But I still never dreamed of being personally involved in elective politics.
Speaker 1: Did you have any courses with or did you run into Charles [Hamilton] Houston at the Law School?
Speaker 2: I knew, I knew Charles Houston.  As a matter of fact, I think he was either in my father's class or one year or so ahead of--so I knew, I knew Mr. Houston.  He was a wonderful lawyer and a great teacher.  And I think he ultimately was the dean of the Howard University Law School.  But at that time, I wasn't focused on law.  My father never pushed me into law, never said, you've got to go to law school.  He never really encouraged me.  He said, you do what you have to do, do what you want to do and follow your own instincts.  So he knew I was headed for Medicine, so he never objected to that.
Speaker 1: What about Howard Thurman?  Did you ever come in across--
Speaker 2: Howard?
Speaker 1: Howard Thurman, the--
Speaker 2: Oh, Howard Thurman was a good friend, a great guy.  He was the dean of the, of the chapel and, of course, he was in the divinity school and he taught divinity.  I can't say too much about him.  He was such a wonderful person.  And he was a good mentor.  He was a good listener.  He gave good advice and whenever I wanted someplace to go and talk to someone outside of my family, I did it with him.
Speaker 1: That's good.  That sounds interesting.  I know I've heard--well, quite a few of the people we've interviewed that attended Howard during that time period, remember going to Howard Thurman's home for these weekly meetings with students.  He would have, they would--he would have discussions in his home with students--
Speaker 2: I never attended in his weekly meetings with students.  They were mostly for students who were living in dormitories, who were away from their homes and he provided a home for them.  Well, that's one of the downsides of, of living at home, your personal home and going to the university.  I missed out on, on some of that.  But I didn't miss out on Howard Thurman.  He was there.  He was there for all of us.  We, he got to know us by first name.  We got to know him, and there was nothing we couldn't tell him.  He always kept your confidences.  Howard was a great man.  Then I saw him again because he came to Boston University [Bonston, Massachusetts] years later.  And, because I was at Boston University Law School, and so I knew him, I knew when he came to Boston as well.
Speaker 1: Okay.  All right.  I'm just trying to think of who else was there and I mentioned Hansberry because he was the only--
Speaker 2: Yes, Hansberry was (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: --person teaching African history.
Speaker 2: History, Hansberry was teaching African history.
Speaker 1: In the country then, huh?
Speaker 2: Probably, yeah, probably right.  We didn't have all this, you know, black studies programs and all those things then.  Hansberry probably was, was it.
Speaker 1: And Alain Locke, did you know--
Speaker 2: Alain Locke, I knew Alain Locke.  I knew Rayford, Rayford Logan, all of those were wonderful, wonderful teachers.  They all had the advantages of great educational institutions.  And--
Speaker 1: Was Sterling Brown--
Speaker 2: Sterling Brown was--I remember Sterling from poetry (unclear).  He was (unclear) a poet, and we knew him.  Yes, I knew Sterling.  I knew him, family who knew him as well.  Yeah, the, the names of the, of the faculty members were a who's who in, in American education, not just black education, across the board.  I mean they, they had it.  They knew it and they gave it up, I mean they taught it.  And they were always an inspiration to their, their students as well, not just a teacher, but I meant, a model, a truly, real role model.
Story_ID: 3873
Speaker 1: In terms of organizational life, you were mainly involved in the A Phi A [Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity], I guess at that point and you become President of A Phi A, which shows a high level of social commitment (laughter).
Speaker 2: Well, I went into Alpha Phi Alpha because of its-- of what it stood for.  It was the oldest Negro fraternity in the country, founded in Ithaca, New York in 1906.  And it started off early as a social literary club before it became a fraternity.  It was a great debate in the fraternity as to whether it should be a fraternity or stay a literary club-type thing.  And in, as it, finally, in 1906, the latter part of 1906 when it became a fraternity and the first fraternity, and it began to expand and attract scholars and athletes and, and new people in, in the university, by the time I came along, you had such role models as a Charles Wesley or a Rayford Logan or Charlie Drew.  I'm just don't want to name names, but I could go on with the number of Negro educators and athlete--athletes and entertainers and scientists who were members of the fraternity.  So they were truly inspirational.  And I wanted to be associated with, with these people.  I wanted to know what they knew.  I wanted to, to be able to hear them, to listen to them, to be guided by them.  And that's why I chose the fraternity.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now--
Speaker 2: So it wasn't, not just a social club at that time by any means.  We--and they made us more aware of what was happening outside of our cocoon in Washington, D.C., what was happening across the country and across the world.
Speaker 1: Okay, so you took advantage of a national brotherhood of--
Speaker 2: Oh, no question about it.  I, I've often said that when I got interested in politics to a bit, cause I was elected the president of my chapter and I was later elected vice, eastern vice president of the whole eastern region.  I was also elected lay member of the executive council when I was a student.  So I got exposed to Alpha politics and Alpha politics is like church politics, I said in Massachusetts, if I can survive the politics of Alpha Phi Alpha, I can certainly survive the politics (laughs) of Boston, Massachusetts.  So be it.
Speaker 1: All right.  What kinds of activities at A Phi-- was A Phi involved in at, when you were in school, you know, beyond the social, you know?
Speaker 2: Well, go to, go to college was one of their first early programs because we did not have--blacks were not going to, even to getting a high school education in those days.  A selected few again, because masses of our people were, were not taking advantage of public education and, and getting high school diplomas.  And then if they went to high school, a lesser, much lesser number went on to get a high education and go to college.  So they worked on scholarship programs, inspirational programs to get blacks to go into getting their diplomas and getting their degrees.  And that in itself was a big, big undertaking.  One of the things that I thought about when I was in the fraternity and listening to men like Wesley and Belford Lawson who also inspired me into coming into, into Alpha Phi Alpha and its politics, I found that so often, even though the opportunity is there, we don't take advantage of it.  How do you get that child to go forward and to realize what the value of a good education is?  What it means to him or her and to their family and ultimately, to the world.  And the belief that you can contribute, contribute to your family, to your face, to your country, again, to the world.  And it all begins, as they told us then, in being prepared, getting that education.  And so the fraternity did a lot in doing that and I enjoyed that opportunity to work with them in, in doing that.  So that was really sort of my baptism, you might say, in, into politics.  But I never saw myself going into active elective politics; still headed toward M.D. degree.
Story_ID: 3874
Speaker 1: I always felt that here were these men and women, mostly men in those days, who had the advantages of superior education and had no outlet for their political instincts or to give of their political knowledge.  And they had to find some place for it, and they found it in the fraternity.  Some of the speeches I heard at the conventions should have been heard at the United Nations, certainly should have been heard in the Senate or the House of Representatives of the United States.  These men never had that opportunity.  They were restricted to their fraternities because of segregation and discrimination.  Think of what, how, how beneficial and how better the world and the country may have been had it been opened to men of that generation, to Negroes of that generation.  As, same thing in sports.  Some of the great sports, athletes of the day had been Negroes who never had the opportunity in those days to compete or to be recognized in the country or around the world.  Think of the loss because of that.
Speaker 2: And I ga--I suppose you're saying too that because of the, of segregation, these organizations that might have been clubs otherwise, found themselves really attempts, places where people were acting out dramas that they, that should have been on a larger stage some place, right?
Speaker 1: Fraternities, women had with sororities, then developed the social clubs, the Guardsmen, the Links, the What Good Are We's, all of these social clubs, a lot of it because we were confined again, larger than the Washington cocoon, to a national cocoon of Negroes, who couldn't go beyond that, who could not go out there into the world and compete with everybody of every race and every color and every religion; couldn't have been done.  The loss is, of course, to the Negro, but the greater loss is to this country and to the world because they did not have the advantages and what they had to offer.  They, being the Negroes, had to offer at that time.  And I sat back, and I said, I'm listening to these people, and they vying politically in backroom meetings, all the whole thing of politics.  And they were playing it out, and I said, in a fraternity, why?  The answer is, is because they couldn't do it elsewhere.  They were denied that opportunity.  And that's a great tragedy for this country.
Speaker 2: So you could see that at that point.  Did you, did you ever dream at that point that you'd be able to break loose?
Speaker 1: No.
Speaker 2: Break out of that?
Speaker 1: I never, I never saw myself in that role.  I was part of it.  I was elected myself, president of my chapter, and eastern vice president.  So I indulged in it, but at the same time, I felt the fact that I'm doing this because I can't do it any place else.  The perimeters were drawn.  The barriers were there.  The question was, how do you overcome them and when would you overcome them?  But I can't truthfully say that at any time, even though I lived in Washington, did I ever go to the United States Senate gallery and sit up there and say, I'm gonna come back here and desegregate this, august (unclear) body.  I never said that, never thought that.  I was ashamed of the fact that there were no Negroes in the United States or elsewhere.  I remember from Chicago, you had a Republican representative.
Speaker 2: Oscar DePriest?
Speaker 1: Oscar DePriest, when I was a young boy.  And Oscar DePriest was my father--Oscar DePriest.  But there were not many Oscar DePriest's around.  There were none in the Senate.
Story_ID: 3875
Speaker 1: You're at Howard [University, Washington D.C.] and you graduated in '41 [1941], right?
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: All right.  Did you have to make any adjustments at Howard in terms of this Science curriculum?  Did you finish with a pre-med--
Speaker 2: Yes, I, I finally, I finished at Howard University with a bachelor of science degree, though I had taken in my last years there more other courses in German and French and, and political science, history and moved a little away from the sciences, but enough to qualify for a Bachelor of Science degree.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Now, when you graduate World War II is in swing.  The United States was just entering World War II and it had been raging in Europe for a while, but the U.S. entered in '41 [1941], right, in December of '41 [1941]?
Speaker 2: When I was at Howard University, I joined and was a member of the Reserve Officer Training Corp, ROTC.  And Howard and Wilberforce University in Ohio, we had camps together in the summertime.  So I got to know some of those officers who--potential officers from Wilberforce University.  And when I finished at Howard University, I was too young to get my commission in the United States Army.  And I didn't weigh enough to qualify.  I had to weigh 135 pounds.
Speaker 1: You didn't weigh 135?
Speaker 2: And I was 6'1", weighing 132 pounds.  And in order to get my commission, I had to eat bananas and drink water and put on those extra pounds.  And finally, I--they gave me my commission as a second lieutenant.  So I as then ready and prepared to go to war because the country really was practically in war in 1941.  We were supplying European allies with the tanks and the guns and the equipment.  And [Adolf] Hitler had been already making his move in Czechoslovakia and Poland, etc.  And on December the 7th of 1942, I was at my home in Brookline, sitting on the porch.  My mother was very ill so we had no radio and the telephone couldn't ring because of her sickness at the time.  And a telegram boy came up and gave me a telegram and it was from the U.S. Army with orders to report to Fort Devens, Massachusetts for assignment to the 366 Infantry, Combat Regiment stationed there in Fort Devens, Massachusetts.
Story_ID: 3876
Speaker 1: Tell us about the Army?
Speaker 2: Well, because of my mother's illness, I got a deferment until January of 1942, and then I left and boarded a train from Washington [D.C.] that ultimately took me to Boston [Massachusetts] and changed to Back Bay [Boston neighborhood].  And from Back Bay, it went out to Fort Devens [Massachusetts].  In those days, young men wanted to go to war because of Hitler, what he had done in Europe and the feeling it would happen in the United States and then the atrocities.  So we were literally fighting war for freedom.  It wasn't like Vietnam or other wars we've had since that time.
Speaker 1: He was a real threat who was--he was a real aggressive threat in Europe who--
Speaker 2: Yes.
Speaker 1: --had threatened to come across the (unclear) (simultaneous).
Speaker 2: Yes, yes.  Oh, there was a clear threat.  It was no question about it.  And so when I went, went to the Army, you know, everybody was gearing up, getting in uniform.  We had--people were being drafted that had conscription at that time.  And I arrived at Ayer, Massachusetts which was just an outpost of, of the Fort Devens Camp.  And it snowing and cold.  I'd never experienced such cold in all my life.  In fact, one of my first purchases in Massachusetts was long underwear that I bought at the, at the PX.  And I went to, up to the barracks and ran into the Officer of the day, who assigned me to my, my post in, in that organization.  And I stayed there in Fort Devens training.  The camp was segregated.  We could not use any of the facilities of Fort Devens other than those which were in our, again, in our little area to which we were assigned.  The morale of our men was low because they couldn't do anything after their arduous training for combat.  And little by little, we got some entertainment, some facilities for them, again, segregated.  And it was, it was really one of the first times that I really felt the pains and the horrors of segregation.  And when I remember the hearing of equals, you know, separate but equal doctrine, I then knew that nothing is separate and that separate is equal.  And that certainly wasn't there.  And again, I got back into trying to keep our morale of our troops up.  I organized a basketball team, took them to Boston to play basketball, outings in Boston because we couldn't do anything in the post.  We rode through the, the tennis courts, past the tennis courts, past the fields, all the wonderful things, passed the huge swimming pools.  But we could not use them.
Speaker 1: Now, this is in Massachusetts.  This is not--
Speaker 2: This is Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: --Georgia.
Speaker 2: Fort Devens, Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Not in Alabama.
Speaker 2: Not Alabama or Mississippi.  This is 1942 in Ayer, Massachusetts, outside of Boston, the cradle of liberty.
Speaker 1: Yes.
Speaker 2: Right.
Story_ID: 3877
Speaker 1: The rhetoric rose during the war about what a, what a wonderful country this was and why we should be fighting--
Speaker 2: Fighting for freedom--
Speaker 1: We're fighting for democracyand freedom (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: Fighting for democracy, all those things.  We're gung ho.  We're going to save the world.  We're going to save our country.  We're going to stop the execution of Jews.  We're going to bring peace and plenty to the world.  And bam! Right straight at us.  And our proud outfit.  We had a colonel by the name of Colonel Howard D. Queen who was a very proud, old, long-time infantryman that worked his way--self up, and was a colonel commanding, eventually the 366th Infantry.  And these, he instilled in pride in his men, but he was always fighting the, the Army and always fighting the segregation and the discrimination that we had to live with in this country before we'd even gone overseas.  And then word came that we were gonna be used for guard duty, that we would be guarding the trestles of the bridges and I took on a job as a convoy commander.  And I'd take a convoy, say I went to Ottawa, Maine, which is a little town with no streets, no roads, where the train goes through on its way up to Canada and comes once a day, and then comes back in the evening.  And the people there had never seen Negroes in their lives.  In fact, some of the kids were running, try to rub and see if the black would come off the soldier.  Can you believe that?  Actually did that.  They didn't know.  They'd never seen that before.  Some of them had never left the town, was born there and never left it.  Ottawa, Maine, it still exists as a matter of fact.  And I commanded a little group and sent our men out for guard duty, mostly at night, but also in the day as well, to protect us from espionage or any kind of terrorists act.  We didn't call them terrorists in those days, but that's what we were doing when we thought we would have been sent overseas to combat duty.  And we went through that for many months, and it was hard to keep the morale of troops up under those circumstances.  But we did, and eventually we were sent to Patrick Henry, from Patrick Henry in Virginia, then boarded a ship and sent as we thought for combat in the Italian theater.  We landed at a place called Casablanca.
Speaker 1: In Northern Africa, right?
Speaker 2: In North Africa, and we had zig zagged in the Billy Mitchell, which was the name of the ship we were on because of the submarines, fear of submarine attacks.  So we had go zig zag and we couldn't dispose of our garbage because of the same reason.  We didn't want to give away our location.  And when we landed at Casablanca, there were scores of North Africans standing on the shoreline with pails, and they came out to our ship.  And they took our waste, the garbage, discarded food, old food, filled their pails.  And I stood there looking in the faces of some of them, and though they were hungry and they needed the food, in spite of its decay, the hatred in their faces was something I shall never forget.  We landed and we tried to dig in and put up tents for the men.  The ground was so hard and I remember the stakes being broken because they couldn't penetrate the earth.  We stayed there for several days.  We had an outdoor screen.  They showed us pictures of syphilis, people with Syphilis and other venereal diseases, blotches on their and what not, at its worse stage.  And that was to discourage us from having sexual intercourse with any of the local people or any of the French people who were there.  After a very trying experience, we boarded trains to take us to Oran.  These were boxes where they carried something like 8 mules or "x" number of men.  And it traveled so slowly over those rickety tracks that you could get off, defecate and get--catch up with the train rather than do it in the box cars.
Story_ID: 3878
Speaker 1: We were there on an Easter Sunday I remember vividly.  I had kept with me all that time a can of Del Monte Fruits, salad, cut up fruit.  And I opened the can and with our c-rations and what not, passed it around to some of the men in the car in which I living, to all of them I was traveling rather.  That was the highlight of Easter for us that year.  We landed in Oran, waiting to go into combat.  And Oran has a little town there, and the men were first allowed to go in, but there were altercations right away.  The white soldiers and the Negro soldiers.  They didn't want them to come into the bars.  If they were seen with one of the French girls, they were attacked.  So our troops had to travels in threes or fours or fives or larger numbers for their own safety.  The hatred, the racism, the bigotry was so blatant.  Our colonel protested it and the commander of troops there put out an order that our, that our men could not go into the bars and could not fraternize with any of the local people.  It was a very trying, very difficult, depressing--I remember so well the problems that the colonel was going through because he was under constant pressure to restrict us into a small area so that we would not interface with white soldiers or with white local people.  And so we waited in a somewhat state of despair until we boarded another ship to take us over through the Straight of Gibraltar to land in Naples, which is at the (unclear) bottom of Italy, again, thinking that we would then be sent into combat because that's what we were trained.  And the usual procedure is, when you come on the terrain, you get some last minute prep training before you actually enter into combat.  It's for a short period of time, but you need that because we'd been doing guard duty and nothing else.  You know, it's like an athlete has to prime his muscles and what not.  We were immediately dispersed to do guard duty at Air Force installations under control of the 15th Air Force.  And there we were again, told that we were not fit to do combat duty, that we were being relegated to guard duty, work duty.  And that's what happened to this proud unit of the 366th Infantry regimen, which was composed of men, a lot from New England and Boston, but from all over the country.  It's officers were college professors.  Dr. Hyman Chase, who taught me zoology at Howard University was a major in that regimen.  And there were many others, doctors, lawyers who were on reserve or had ROTC training, who comprised the, the black officer group.
Story_ID: 3879
Speaker 1: Our morale was very, very low.  Colonel Queen called me and asked me if I would take a chorus, assemble chorus and go around to visit our troops at various installations in Southern Italy.  And we did.  I had no training in that.  I couldn't sing one note, but he believed that I could be helpful, and I did it.  You do what you have to do.  I took the morale and tried to raise some kind of entertainment for them.  Joe Louis came over, but he was the only celebrity.  We never saw Bob Hope or any of the wonderful entertainers that you read about and hear about, not for colored troops.  I think, to my recollection, that Joe Louis was the only one who came.  That was a great, great occasion, when he came and spent some time with us.  But that was all.  I don't remember that any of our entertainers were sent over there and the bands or any, anybody that I can remember, any celebrity of any name or stature that was sent to entertain our troops over there.  By that time, the 92nd Division out of (unclear) I think it was Kansas I think they were out of.  They came over and there was a whole division.  And its commander was a man by the name of--it'll come back to me, gave us a pep talk.  Finally, us being the 366 Infantry, we were called and assembled and he said something like your press, the black press or whatever has been screaming and hollering for you to go into combat and frontline.  Well, you'll, we're gonna give you your chance and you'll suffer your injuries.  It, it was a horrible speech.  I can't remember it.  I tried to block it out of my mind, but it was the worse speech I think I'd ever heard, which further demoralized the troops.  And then they began to break up the 366 infantry and send battalion to a unit over to the 92nd division and another battalion to another unit of the 96th division or regimen.  So we were broken up.  And Colonel Queen took sick and he was returned to the States.  And another Negro by the name of Ferguson, Colonel Ferguson took over the command of the 366--or the remnants thereof.
Story_ID: 3880
Speaker 1: It was during that time that--I think it was before [Colonel] Queen left, but I'm not quite sure, I was asked to head up a band of Italian partisans to reconnaissance and intelligence work.  We were to go behind the German lines, try to find out where troop concentration and mine fields, artillery units were located; try to find out what their patro--petrol situation was, how much gasoline and oil they had to move their tanks and etc; find out how much food they had, what their morale was and to send that information back and (unclear) entry to Division Headquarters.  It was gruesome, scary assignment, important assignment.  And I gained a great respect for the Italian partisans who were made up mainly of, of men who opposed [Benito] Mussolini, who was the head of the Italian, who was the head of Italy really, and who worked in conjunction with Adolf Hitler during World War II.  And they were men whose villages had been ransacked by the Germans, their women raped, their mothers abused, their children taken away for work, and nothing left in the town but old men because all the horses and cows and any livestock were taken by the Germans.  So when we came to a town that was completely ravaged, and these men were men who were fighting and who were bitter and had, full of hatred for the Germans.  They were cutting and they were shrewd.  They knew the terrain because it was their country, and they lived there.  And they were very courageous and brave.  Working with them was quite an experience.  I had one unfortunate experience, however, because they never wanted to take prisoners.  They felt so strongly and hated them so much.  And we came across--they came across one young German and they captured him.  And they frisked him and they found a picture, as I'm told, of his girlfriend, and they did obscene with it and what not.  And I was further told that he tried to run away.  I seriously doubt that.  No way for him to run away.  They had stripped him of everything.  And anyway, they killed him.  They put a bayonet in him.  His blood was on the ground when I was told.  I came back, and that's what I found because no one would admit that they were the ones who did it.  They all said that he was trying to escape.  I tried to interrogate them to find out as much as I could of actually what happened, what the facts were.  They were mum.  Here I was, in charge of this unit, in charge of a, a, of men and a situation which had ended into what I believed was murder because he was captured, and he was alive.  And I had to report it, and I did.  Nothing, but nothing was done about it.  And I suffered from it for, for years, thinking about it.  I could see the picture.  I could see the face of this young man.  Somebody's son.  I don't think he was anybody's husband.  He looked like a young boy, a kid.  But that's war.  That's what the answer is, it's war.  I came back to my unit eventually and I was so distressed over what I considered to be a flawed military strategy.  We would have shells, the Germans, we would have shells coming from our rear to the Germans' fortress on the hills up in front of us.  It was one of the highest hills in Apennines (unclear) and our troops wanted to take that hill.  That was our objective.  And we could see, literally see from one hill to another with a deeper ravine (unclear) the Germans on the other side, entrenched as they were, cause they'd been there many times.  They, they commanded all the high sprawled placed.
Story_ID: 3881
Speaker 1: I had never studied Italian.  I had taken French, quite a bit of French, and I had talked to a civilian when I was stationed over there.  And I began to pick it up.  I had a little book.  I began to use it--and little by little and I talked to Italians whenever I could, I got enough Italian so that I could converse with them.  They could understand me and I could understand them.  I would say I was never fluent in Italian, but I had, and I didn't have a reading knowledge of it, but I certainly was able to make myself understood.
Speaker 2: Okay, and you worked with people in the Italian Resistance who actually, that knew how to--
Speaker 1: Yes, well, they didn't speak English practically at all.  And so working with the partisans, I picked up even more Italian so I became more and more fluent in the language.
Speaker 2: Okay, all right.  Well, now, your story, one can't help but think or be reminded of the story of the 54th Massachusetts, the Civil War and probably the stories on a lot of black units serving in the United States Army up to this point.  So we're talking about maybe 200 years of this kind of treatment in the military whenever there's a war, from the Revolutionary War and now it's World War II and we still have this segregated situation and this humiliation and--in the, and black men are still called upon, you know, defend the liberty and honor of the country and the freedom and all that, you know, and find this segregated situation.  Did it, I mean--so the men's morale, the morale of the men was, was low and for the most part, you're saying.
Speaker 1: Well, certainly for every war, perhaps in the Revolutionary War, fighting for freedom of the country and the beginning of a democracy maybe, you know, black men were inspired.  I've read many stories about it, but I presume, you know, a lot of them were used as, for labor, for doing the hard tasks that have to be carried out during a war, that people never think about.  If for every one soldier you put on the frontline firing a, a rifle, there are hundreds of people, soldiers back there doing all the myriad of things, transportation and communications and digging those trenches and, and so forth and so on.  And so I'm sure they've been used historically for those, for those purposes.  The tragedy of World War II, and I don't know as much about the Civil War except, again, they were fighting under horrible circumstances because they were fighting for people in the South who wanted to keep them in, in slavery, you know.  So that, that's ironic when you stop to think about it, but that's what happened though in many cases.  But when you get to World War II, everybody was imbued with the spirit of freedom and democracy and getting rid of this tyrant, this horrible man who had risen to, to power and the white supremacy and all those things, everything that went along with [Adolf] Hitler and [Benito] Mussolini and what not in those days.  Everybody wanted to get rid of that.  They wanted to come back to a free society.  But our society wasn't free.  We weren't free when we went in that war.  We lived in segregation, and we were discriminated against when we went to that war, but that did not--and I'm proud to say that, that did not hinder our patriotism.  I mean we were Americans.  We were there to fight for freedom, for our freedom and for the freedom of others across the world.  We believed in that.  And then to be subjected to the discriminary policies in combat as we were in, in our domestic life was a hard pill to swallow.  And that's why morale was so low.  You had to constantly build your men up and, and rev up the patriotism and what we're fighting for and our people, your wives and your children and your family back home were depending upon you.  We had to constantly--it's like a football coach cons--constantly trying to rev up his troops, rev up his team, get them in the spirit of, of what their, their mission is.  So we knew what our mission was.  And, unfortunately, our government, our country did not want to give us the respect that we deserved and which we were due.
Story_ID: 3882
Speaker 1: How did the tour of Italy end?  How did your tour of duty there end?
Speaker 2: Ignonomously.  They broke up the 366 into, they called Engineering battalions.  I was assigned to an engineering regiment.  I knew nothing about engineering.  It was a labor group.  They sent us into quartermasters, all kinds of different, a variety of things they had in our--but broken up, still segregated and prepared us in Italy to go to the South Pacific.  We were headed for the war in the South Pacific.  Until the [atomic] bomb and Hiroshima, we had our orders and we were at a staging area in Ligor--Livorno in the staging, ready to go, to board ship to go to the South Pacific and fight that war.  But we were broken up then into all sorts of, and fragmented into, into all these--so this glorious unit which had gone into combat and lost trained men, had the Congressional Medal of Honor, Fox, for one comes to mind.  But there were others.  And I knew them, him very well because he was one of our, again, I think he was from Wilberforce [University] (unclear).  He wasn't Howard.  He was a Wilberforce graduate.  We knew them.  And consequently, there we were ready to go and to fight another battle, but we would not have been used for combat over there either probably.  But in the war we did fight, I thought we were being used for com--for cannon fodder.  Artillery shells were being logged in.  Every time, in the morning around 6:00 o'clock, and then we'd go down from our hill into the valley and up the next hill, trying to take them.  By that time, the enemy was waiting for us with their machine guns and mow us down like ducks on a pond.  And so I went to the Colonel Ferguson, and I said to him, "This, this is wrong.  We're, we're killing, we're murdering our, our own troops."  I said, "You've got to change that strategy."  I said, "Let me take a platoon and go down in the daytime, you know, when they're sleeping cause they're up all night probably protecting themselves.  Just go down the ravine.  We can cover them from our hill.  Go down the ravine, up the (unclear) while they're sleep and catch them by surprise."  The element of surprise has always been a strategic vehicle.  And he looked at it, and he said "well, let's, let's think about it."  And he said, "I'll, I'll take it back into Division,"--Almond is the general's name, Almond, A-L-M-O-N-D, Almond and see if we can get it approved.  And he had an assistant by the name of, of Woods who would come around where we were and say, pick up the paper and use the N word and all the rest of it.  I mean, I mean he was just so bad.  It think Almond was from Alabama, if I'm not mistaken.  General Almond.  I'll never forget his face.  Well, anyway, he--they disapproved the plan that I had submitted and said, "You never send a boy to do a man's job. " Now, I didn't know whether he was talking about me, but most likely he was talking about sending a small platoon up against, against the enemy.  So I remember sitting on a rock, big huge rock.  Colonel Ferguson and I were sitting talking about it.  And I said, "Well, Colonel, suppose I take a patrol myself and go ahead and, and try this out just to see what would happen.  You're gonna be protecting us.  You're going to be shooting.  You can see us since it's gonna be daylight.  Do it at high noon.  I'm sure they're sleeping then because they've been way up.  They had--the artillery thing's over and they're going back to sleep.  They've got to sleep some time."  And he says, "I can't, I can't go against orders," he said.  He said," I can't do it, but I understand what you're saying." And he said it in a way which just left a little bit of a door open.  And then he came back and said, "Who would take the platoon?"  I said, "I would take the platoon."  "No, no, you can't do that."  "You find, you would have to find somebody to find, to do it."  I said, "Well, if we could do it, I would. " That was the end of the conversation.  I then went to Lieutenant Jung, a fellow by the name of Jung, big strapping, strong, muscle-bound man.  I can't remember his first name.  His name was Jung, sort of reddish hair, short cropped.  And I asked him to, to lead the patrol.  He was a second lieutenant at that time.  I was a first lieutenant.  I had been promoted to first lieutenant.  And we went through with it in a patrol.  He took the troops over, very bravely, very courageously and went down the hill, just as we'd planned it.  And we had our machine guns and everything on this, on this hill.  And his mission was to go over to this hill and catch them  by patrol, which they did.  They were sleeping, caught them by surprise, and they started firing.  And they pulled back, but they pulled back on a wide front cause they thought it was a major attack, which, of course, it wasn't.  By that time, he had, had called back to us and we then sent our troops in and secured the land.  That was called Mal Faeto.  Colonel Ferguson recommended me for the Silver Star, and I think Jung for either the Silver Star or Bronze Star or something, never got it.  Never, never got it.  That's, that's not the important part of the story.  The important part of the story is that it saved a lot of lives because they had been doing this, not only where we were, but in other sectors in which they were involved, that they'd send their troops wave after wave after wave to almost certain death.  Well, that's a horrible thing to say, but that's what happened, almost certain death.  And it sent their calling card in advance, so it was an old strategy which, if it ever worked, never worked well for us.  That's Mal Faeto, still there.
Speaker 1: And how do you spell that?
Speaker 2: F-A-E-T-O.  I got a letter from a soldier of the 92nd who knew Chung.  And Jung had told him about, that he had received an order to do this.  He didn't tell him who the person was, but that was it.  I just got that the other day.  I've got it in here now.  So I've got his name, his full name, now.  But I remember.  But he was a member of the 366.  He at some time--I didn't realize he had been attached to the 92nd as well, but at this time, he was with the 36--it was so disorganized, is a kind way of saying it.  But, you know, they just didn't pay attention to separate regiments or anything like that.  They did what they wanted to do.  And we had no, no recourse.
Story_ID: 3883
Speaker 1: People did get in combat in the 366th?  You did go (unclear) (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: Oh, yes, we lost a lot of our--we lost a lot of our troops, at Gen--Guadalcanal and other attacks around.  We lost a lot of our troops, a lot of our officers and a lot of our men.  No question about that.  And there were some--but you see, no one was recording the history of, at that time, of what it's all about.  And in fact, there was a lot of criticism that black troops did not stand up under fire, and could not be used.  And I think he made some statement that he would never use black troops for, for combat duty.
Speaker 1: Yeah, that's--
Speaker 2: This was Almond.
Speaker 1: Okay, Almond.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I think that's written that he said he wouldn't, would never use them for combat duty.
Speaker 1: And he was from Alabama?
Speaker 2: He didn't want to use them at first anyway.
Speaker 1: He was from Alabama, you said?
Speaker 2: I think he was, yeah.  I'm writing my memoirs and I've got some of that down already about, about him, and a little more about his speech.
Speaker 1: But that was pretty usual in the Army that commanders and cfficers were Southern--
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah.  Well, they came out of VMI [Virginia Military Institute] and Valley Forge and military institutes, have already gone for the, for the military part of the--not, not so much in the North or the West, but mostly Southern.  They took great pride in their military institutions.  A lot of them, and though I appointed, when I was in the Senate, I had appointments to West Point and Naval Academy as all Senators do and the Congressman as well.  So it's, it's amazing that you don't have more diversification and geographically, but most of the generals came from the South.
Speaker 1: It's probably still that way today.
Speaker 2: I, I wouldn't be surprised if it was about the same cause they go to the--
Story_ID: 3884
Speaker 1: How did the war conclude for you?
Speaker 2: Well, after the units were broken up, we were sent back to, to the--we went sent to Leghorn to, in the staging area, ready to go over to, into the, further South in the Pacific.  And we just stayed around there trying to keep morale as best we could.  It was a, again, a hard nut to crack because here are these proud infantrymen, some of them had been battleworn themselves, were sitting around in a engineering outfit.  They tried to give some training in, in engineering work, which mean they were digging ditches, running pipes and stuff like that, not knowing what their fate was gonna be, having been part of the winning of one war and now going, entry to another war.  So you can image how their spirits were.  And finally, after the [atomic] bomb was dropped, orders were changed and we were ordered to come back, which we did, on a ship, Liberty ship.  And we landed in New York, came up past the Statute of Liberty and Colonel Queen came out to meet us on a tug boat.  And the chaplain prayed for us all on the deck.  And we went to our camp in New Jersey, Camp Kilmer [Edison, New Jersey], I believe it was, so that they could do all the paperwork and all the things they have to do to get you out of the Army.  Some of them went North, other places, but most of us went to Camp Kilmer.  And it was there that you were able for the first time to telephone your mothers and your fathers and your wives and your sweethearts and all the rest.  So the lines were very, very long, as you can imagine.  I shall never forget calling my mother.  I remember how she reacted and what not when I told her I was coming home because she thought that day, but it was several days before they finished debriefing us for what it was worth.  And finally, we--I went from Kilmer to Fort Meade [Maryland].  They transferred me to Maryland which was near my home.  And I went from Camp Kilmer, went up to (unclear) Porsen, Massachusetts and Connecticut, New Hampshire.  I went to Fort Meade and it wasn't Kilmer.  I think it was Fort Meade when I called her.  I don't think we could get, use the phone before we got there, but we did.  I came home to, you can imagine, a son you haven't seen for years, was (unclear) away, days or weeks, didn't what it was, all you knew was, whether he was alive or she didn't know whether I was injured or maimed or what.  It was a strange feeling, strange times.
Story_ID: 3885
Speaker 1: The unit, 366th was commanded by black officers.  And that was unusual for those days, and that it was a combat unit was unusual too and not a (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: When I first went to, when I joined the unit in January of 1942, the commanding officer was white as was the assistant commanding officer, who was white.  And the, the battalion commanders were white.  But everything below that were Negro officers.  No, there were no white enlisted men.  No white non-commissioned officers.  And eventually, that changed and battalion commanders were Negroes and the command was given to Colonel Howard Donovan, I think, Queen, who became our regimental commander.  And he was, of course, a black man.
Speaker 1: And he was succeeded by a man by the name of--
Speaker 2: He was--Alonzo Ferguson was his name.  Colonel Alonzo Ferguson, also from Washington [D.C.], also I think a faculty member at Howard University [Washington D.C.].
Speaker 1: And you also mentioned one of the other faculty members at Howard--Fowler, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he was the head of the zoology department.  And that's Hyman Y. Chase--
Speaker 1: Oh, Chase.
Speaker 2: Hyman Y. Chase.  You could never forget him if you knew him.
Speaker 1: And Colonel Fowler too, right.
Speaker 2: James Fowler was a West Point graduate who joined the 366 Infantry Regiment.  I don't remember Fowler overseas.  I remember him at Fort Devens [Massachusetts] in the training of our, for combat.  He could have been overseas, but I don't recall.  My memory doesn't serve me that well, that he was part of our regiment when we went overseas.
Story_ID: 3886
Speaker 1: You met a young lady in Italy too, right?
Speaker 2: I met--while I was in the staging area, waiting to go to the South Pacific, a friend of mine, Samuel Jackson, another Officer, another Howard, Howard [University] ROTC graduate and I rode in our Jeep to a place called Via Reggio, which is on the Italian Riviera and it was there that I met and communicated with and visited with in Genevar, Italy, while we were still in the staging area.  And then we wrote back and forth and she wanted to come to, to America as did everybody else over there at the time as a matter of fact.  But we, she came to America and we were married in Boston at my cousin Adelaide Hale, she was, Adelaide Cromwell, who had married Dr. Henry Hale, an eminent scientist, chemist really.  And we were married there in her home in Massachusetts.
Speaker 1: Okay, now did you, did you catch flack from relatives or friends about marrying a, someone who was really considered white?
Speaker 2: I think at the time, you know, she looked--my first wife, her name was Rumegia, was a couple of years, maybe two years older than I, came from a very good family.  Her father was an industrialist at the book conglomerate over there and I think a library was named after him, etc.  And she--I, I just never thought about her as being white or black to tell you the truth.  She was olive complected, and I just never thought about it.  It never occurred to me.  I didn't think there would be any problem.  I wasn't sure I wanted to get married.  That was my biggest problem.  And when we finally got married, which was a little bit after, the time after I left because I had then left Washington [D.C.], and gone to Boston [Massachusetts] and was in law school at the time.  And I told her, you know, I was busy studying law.  I knew where I wanted to go and blah, blah, blah at law school and what not.  And a lot of people over there, overseas, I think still do, think that, you know, gold runs down the street  and what you're gonna find.  I was there living in a $25 a month apartment with hot water heat and janitor service, etc., down in the West end of, of Boston, which really, incidentally, was an Italian section.  I spoke my Italian and what not, but I didn't have any problems on interracial marriage problems, let's put it that way; certainly, not in Washington [D.C.].  She came to Washington eventually, and met my friends, my mother and aunt.  She met all my friends and they got along fine.  When we went to Boston, we lived at first in that little apartment, then with a friend of mine from the Army and his wife and family.  And again, we were living in a, I won't call it segregated by, by law, but still segregated, Roxbury in, in Boston, Massachusetts, outside of Boston really.  And we lived there.  And I never experienced any real problems with the race.  It was not until I stood for election as state representative that the interracial marriage was ever mentioned.
Speaker 1: Now, that's in 1950, right?
Speaker 2: That was 1950.
Speaker 1: We'll get to that though, but I just wanted to find out--
Speaker 2: But up until that time, I think she came over in '47 [1947] maybe.  And, yeah, I think Ramie was born in '48, yeah, that's probably the time.  And I ran the first time for state representative in 1950, you're right.  Prior to that time, we had no problems, but Italian war brides over there and her, her sister had married an Afro American also afterwards, after I had left, of course.  Her younger sister married an African American Army sergeant who stayed in the Army and worked his way up to be a colonel, as a matter of fact.
Speaker 1: Did she, did her sister eventually move back to the States too?
Speaker 2: Her sister came, as did her mother, as did her brother.  They all came, yes.
Story_ID: 3887
Speaker 1: Why did you decide to go into law at this point?  And why didn't you continue to pursue medicine.
Speaker 2: When I was in the army and particularly, Fort Devens [Massachusetts], officers are asked to sit on--assigned really to sit on, in court martial cases, either as prosecutors or as defense council.  And I chose to serve my time as defense council.  And I did and I read the court martial manual, became affiliated, familiar with it and defended a lot of soldiers up there, even in a case of murder, as a matter of fact.  And I got somewhat of a reputation as being the soldier's defense lawyer.  And I enjoyed my work.  I found it challenging, interesting and important.  So when I came out of the army, I'd spent--I was about 4, over 4 years in the (unclear), 5 years in the army.  That was a big chunk out of my young life at that time.  And a big chunk out of my, my career, whatever my career was going to be.  And so when I came back, I thought, look, I ought to go to law school.  So I called my cousin, Adelaide, and I had an interview at Harvard [University] law school.  At that time, soldiers were getting out in large numbers.  The schools were filling up because of the GI Bill of Rights, which was one of the most important and wonderful pieces of legislation ever passed because it enabled a lot of soldiers to get started in life and to have homes and what not and pay it back in rich dividends because they did so well.  And so I went to talk to the Dean and he said, "Well, we can't take you,"--I got out in March.  I think I wanted to start in, right away.  And he said, "Well, we're so full up now, we'll consider you in another class, not, not now.  We can't do it now."  And then I went over to Boston University [Boston, Massachusetts].  I'd talked to my father and told him, and he said, there, are there other law schools.  And I said, yes.  I said, "Boston University has an excellent reputation."  And he said, "Well, why don't you talk to them." So I went over and talked to them.  And they were getting all this money then so they were getting all these good professors in law and what not.  And they had the good reputation.  And they started a program, really the reason I didn't wait around and go to Harvard if I could have gone to Harvard, and mainly because of Shipner (unclear) (laughter).  Anyway, but what happened then was, they started this two-year course, where you go through the summer and you just keep going.  You don't--there's no summer break at all.  And you finish in two years and because of the time I had lost because I was in there with students who were much younger, who had gone through college and were not in the army or in the war.  And I took that two-year course and at Boston University, stayed on, was an editor of the Law Review there, and began to find myself, enjoyed reading the cases and doing the research, and stayed on and got a master's degree in law, as a matter of fact at Boston University.  So it was a good, a good experience for me, good academic experience.
Speaker 1: Who were professors of yours that stand out?  Do you remember any of them?
Speaker 2: Yeah, Professor Bisole, who taught constitutional law, was a great mind.  Professor Pierce who taught procedures and just about everything else, and a former army colonel, had a stick and he would, used point it and what not.  And he was very, very, a very, very good professor.  A Professor Lowell, who had written a book that all law schools use in sales.  He was an excellent--we were lucky to have him.  And there were others that, that were, were very good.  I was fortunate again to have a strong faculty and inspirational people.
Story_ID: 3888
Speaker 1: Did you find Boston [Massachusetts] very much different from Virginia--I mean from D.C.?
Speaker 2: I knew a little about Boston because I came into Boston when I was at Fort Devens [Massachusetts].  I brought troops in and got to know people.  Some of my soldiers in my, in my platoon and in my company later were from Boston.  In fact, two of those, Sergeant Clarence Elam became a lifelong friend and very highly respected family in Roxbury [Boston, Massachusetts neighborhood].  And Al Brothers who was a dear, dear friend, who was assisting me in the Army, they'd also wanted me to come to Boston.  That's another reason why I wanted to go there.  And they had a--he had a wonderful family there, and we lived with him.  My wife and I lived with him and his wife and children in their mother's home in a small duplex--
Speaker 1: This is Al Brothers?
Speaker 2: Al Brothers.  We lived together, and he went into real estate and when I opened my office, he had his real estate office right next to mine.  And so I did a lot of the conveyance and passing of the papers and title searching for him and what not.  So it was a good carryover from my Army days.  So I lived out there.  Roxbury was a district which was predominantly Jewish, but Negroes were moving in as Jews were moving out.  And if you look at the social, cultural thing, that's generally what happens.  The Jews had moved in when, when the, the English or the Brahmins or whatever were moving out.  The Yankees were moving out.  So it's been one of those kinds--some Irish, but not many Irish.  Irish mostly lived in south Boston and Italians usually lived in the north end and the East end.  But these other groups, the demographics and the what not--
Speaker 1: And Roxbury was becoming sort of a (simultaneous) (unclear)--
Speaker 2: Roxbury , Roxbury was beginning to get more and more black (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 1: That was the Roxbury (unclear) Malcolm X when you were there--
Speaker 2: Yes, it, it took on that as more and more moved in.  More immigration from the South, soldiers who left the army and stayed, stayed in Massachusetts, lived in Roxbury, a lot of them lived in Roxbury.  A lot of professionals, black professionals came there and located, relocated into Roxbury.  And that's what, when some of my friends felt that Roxbury was not getting your proper treatment or recognition from city government and state government, then they wanted someone to run for public office.  And I think they asked me because I was a veteran for one thing and--which was important in elective office, and another because I was a young lawyer.
Story_ID: 3889
Speaker 1: When you graduated from [Boston University] law school [Boston, Massachusetts], you opened up a--
Speaker 2: Practice.
Speaker 1: --an independent practice.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: You didn't join any other firm or anything--
Speaker 2: I tried to join some firms.  When I finished law school and had a good record in law school.  As I said, was on the Law Review, I got recommendations from professors to law firms.  But none of them were interested.  It was only one law firm that was going to take me and it was a Jewish law firm.  And they were going to pay me $35.00 a week.  And I was going to do research primarily.  I wasn't going to be meeting with clients and I was going to do sole research job, I think tantamount to what we now know as paralegals, though that hadn't evolved at that stage.  But that's what the job sounded, the job description sounded like.  The Army, under the GI Bill of Rights, in addition to paying your tuition and your books and all, paid you $52 a week when you got out--$50 a week for 52 weeks.  No, I'm sorry.  $20 a week for 52 weeks.  The 52-20 Club, that's what it was called.  They gave you $20.00 a week for 52 weeks, okay.  I was offered $35 a week for, for this law firm.  And I said if I can't make $15 a week or more, then I'm in the wrong profession.  So I opened up my shingle in Roxbury.  I went to an old--it was a Necco Candy company, make those little wafers, owned, owned the building in Roxbury where they had a factory, and they also had a theater that they had leased out.  But the theater was closed and they had some offices on the second floor.  I went to see the president of the Necco Company in Cambridge [Massachusetts] and asked him if he would rent it to me.  I was just starting out in my practice.  He said, oh, "I'd love to help you and you're courageous to come in here and ask me this, he said, but that's a big building, you know, I'll have to heat the building."  I said, well, l"et's find some way where you don't heat that portion of the building.  And I'll pay for the heat where I'm, the portion that I'm occupying and maybe we can rent the stores out underneath of it."  He said, "That's a good plan."  So that's what we did.  And Al Brothers took one part.  I took the other part right on the corner, put a big sign on the window where the buses and cars came through, and started my practice of the law there in Roxbury.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I subsequently then moved my practice further downtown on Columbus Avenue, Tremont Street which is where the NA--NAACP [NAtional Association for the Advancement of Colored People] had had its office, and I took over that office.  And then later because I wanted an interracial practice, I moved it downtown near the courthouse at 10 Pembelton Square, right next to the courthouse.  So I was moving sort of, I would say, a little bit up the ladder insofar as getting clients in because blacks did not come to black lawyers.  They had begun to go to black doctors, but not lawyers.  If they had any case worthy of, of taking, retaining, they went elsewhere to the law firms, Jewish law firms perhaps because they thought they had the contacts with the judges and the juries and the courts and what not, which black lawyers did not have.  So that was a big, big barrier.  And when my father got out of law school, there were only 100 lawyers in the country--black lawyers out of law school.  But, of course, that number had increased, but they were not doing well.  Most of, a lot of them, I won't say-- well, maybe most of the blacks who were in my law school class and, and came out of the law school, graduated, passed the bar were working in the post office or as Pullman porters.  And they did some work in law, but they couldn't, barely--but they couldn't make a living practicing law.  It was not easy.  I was happy when my wife would call me on the phone because the phone wasn't ringing.  If it had not been for the GI Bill of Rights, which gave money for down payments on homes and GI's were buying homes, and Al Brothers' real estate, I would have found it very, very difficult to make it.  But I did make it and my practice grew, and I took in other lawyers with me.  I didn't build a big firm, but I had a fellow by the name of Louis Johnson from down in California who came in and worked with me and, and a couple others, Harry Elam, (unclear) Taylor's brother.  And so I stayed there and practiced law for a few years after I came out of law school before I ran for public office.
Story_ID: 3890
Speaker 1: Tell us about the run for public office.  Now, you were drafted by the community you said.
Speaker 2: Well, I wouldn't say I was drafted (laughter).  Every politician says he's drafted, but a group of my friends did say to me, look, this situation is getting so bad out here now that something's got to be done.  We need some representation.  Why don't you run?  And I said, oh, come on, I've had no experience in politics.  After all, I'm from Washington [D.C.].  I've never even voted in my life.  And they said, that doesn't--you, you can do the job.  You, you know, you have the officer status and banded men, talking--they gave me all sorts of good reasons why I should do it.  And, and I didn't have any money.  I had to raise money, door-to-door, a dollar or whatever we could get.  And finally, I agreed to run for state representative.  But I wasn't a Democrat or a Republican.  And at that time, you could run on both tickets.  And I ran on both tickets against two incumbents who were Jewish in a, overwhelmingly at that time, Jewish neighbor--ward.  And I lost the Democratic nomination by several hundred votes, but I won the Republican nomination.  And by that time, I had taken time to look at the two parties.  And I thought I should run the, as a Republican.  And I ran as a Republican in the general election and I lost.  Again, I lost by, I think something like 300 votes against the two incumbents.  And that was it.
Speaker 1: Okay, now in those days, I guess in 1950, probably most black people were, at least in a national election, Democrats, most.  But it still, there still were, quite a few were still Republicans.  And in Massachusetts, how would you describe the political landscape there in terms of Democrats and Republicans and what they were seen as representing?
Speaker 2: Well, in my ward, in which I was running cause I had not focused on state politics or national politics at that time, in my ward, it was predominantly a Jewish ward.  Negroes were moving in, most all were Democrats.  And we had had some, some Negroes who had been elected to the state legislature, but not many.  Herbert Jackson in another part of Massachusetts was a Republican who was elected to, as state representative and also as a, as a city council of Malden.  They had Larry Banks, again, a Republican, who had been elected in ward 9 which is lower Roxbury, who was in office.  But that was about it at that time.  That was before the, Roy L. Boulding, him and his family became politically active.  So after I lost that election, it was encouraging enough for me to run again.  And particularly, in 1952 was the year when [Dwight] Eisenhower was running as a Republican candidate for president.  By that time, I knew some of the--because of my run, I knew some of the Republican leaders, Christian Herter was gonna be governor of Massachusetts, Henry Cabot Lodge, who was a United States Senator.  And when I ran in 1952, when Eisenhower came to Massachusetts, he came through Roxbury.  And in an open car and a, a politician who had been with him before, got out of the car, and I got in the car, to stand by Eisenhower as he went through my ward.  Then I got out of the car, and someone else got (laughter) in the car.  And later at the rally that night, I was standing with Eisenhower.  So, but by then I was satisfied, not only because of the personalities, but because of the record of the Republican party, which I thought was progressive in Massachusetts as compared with the Democratic party which I thought was regressive.  And therefore, I was comfortable with state politics, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts politics, heavily Republican party.
Story_ID: 3891
Speaker 1: The Republicans in Massachusetts come from a tradition of, you know, Republicans that, prior to the Civil War, were there and the Abolitionists (unclear) there--
Speaker 2: Exactly.  Abolitionist movement.
Speaker 1: Fighters for human rights basically are the Republicans.
Speaker 2: They were the Republicans.
Speaker 1: Republicans are Governor Andrew of Massachusetts and during the Civil War and others on down the line.
Speaker 2: That's correct.
Speaker 1: The Irish basically, working class, were represented by the Democrats, right?  Irish immigrants coming in to south Boston and other places?
Speaker 2: Well, the big battle was as the Irish population grew, both in strength and popularity and in power, James Michael Curley, I'm sure you've heard that name, the mayor of Boston [Massachusetts], whom I got to know, as a matter of fact and who sent me a book, after I lost my state representative, said, you have a great future in politics, and went on.  But he was quite a politician.  He knew, he knew all how to treat people (laughter) and to encourage people.
Speaker 1: This is Curley.
Speaker 2: That was Curley.  But, you know, the Saltonstalls, the Cabots, the Lodges, the Herters, I mean, the old Yankee--
Speaker 1: This is the old Boston Brahmins--
Speaker 2: Bost--Boston Brahmins, but they were basically, they were good people, sound people, conservative to an extent, but they were--they were progressive and for social change.  And I, I found comfort in, in that knowledge and in being with them.  So when I ran for, for state representative the second time around, I, I still lost the election but very narrowly.  As a Republican, I became one of the, got into at least knowing the Republican figures in, in Massachusetts politics.  Not national, Massachusetts politics.  And I stopped running after that.  They said, well, you should run again.  I said, "No, no, no.  I'm gonna go back and practice law.  I need to make some money, take care of my family."  By that time, I had a daughter and a second daughter, and I stayed out of politics, got more active.  I was the vice president, first vice presiden of the NAACP [National Association for the Advancement of Colored People] and the board of the Urban League, the Hospital for Women.  I became very, very active in Veteran politics.  That was the new veterans organization headed by Harold Russell of the, what is it, not the 'Best Years of Our Lives', something else, whatever.  It was an organization which unlike the VFW [Veterans of Foreign Wars] and the American Legion which was segregated.  This was integrated, and I thought I found my home there.  And I was elected commander of my local post.  Then I was elected State Commander, which was the first time in the history of the country at that time.  A state commander of AMVETS [American Veterans of World War II], and then I went on to be elected National Judge Advocate of AMVETS, American Veterans of World War II.  So I was very, very active in Veteran affairs and Veteran politics.  And it was in 1960 that a friend and an advisor to Governor [Christian] Herter, came to see me and asked me to run for secretary of state, which, of course, would be a statewide office.  And I said, "I couldn't even be elected state representative, how, why do you think I can be elected secretary of state?"
Speaker 1: Now, an, a position though, you were appointed.  You had an appointed position that allowed you to investigate--
Speaker 2: That was subsequently.
Speaker 1: That was subsequent to the--
Speaker 2: First it was secretary of state.  And he said, "No, this is important.  You've got to get out there.  This is another race entirely.  You'll be talking to a vast audience.  Now, you're going to be talking--you were talking to thousands of people.  Now, you'll be talking to millions of people.  And you'll be talking to what are the Massachusetts population."  It was about 5 million at the time, maybe going on 6.  And he said, "This is a, another ballgame.  Think, think bigger than where you were."  And, unfortunately, again, the Negro population at that time was probably less than 2 percent, voting population.  And again, most of them were Democrats.  I had already been subjected in my race for House of Representatives, that I was criticized by the opposition and others as saying that I had married a white woman.  It sort of shocked me because I'd never thought of it as such.  And in Italy, the people, the Italian people themselves were so good to our soldiers, they never had trouble with the people over there.  They, they took them to heart, took them to their homes.  I mean they opened up their doors to them.  So, it wasn't that kind of thinking in, in this foreign country where we were at war.  Here.
Story_ID: 3892
Speaker 1: People who immigrated from Southern Europe weren't necessarily considered white when they first got here?
Speaker 2: No.
Speaker 1: They were kind of in limbo.
Speaker 2: Well you know they said when Hannibal walks through--I don't want to start (laughs), but I just never thought about it.  But that became a part, a factor in, in the race.  Somewhat in the Roxbury, state of representative--state representative races, but more so when I went statewide.  And so we had meetings and how to do  it.  I insisted they (unclear) she [Mrs. Rumegia Brooke] just come out and campaign with me.  Let them see her and let them talk to her.  And I--spoke Italian, there's a large Italian population in Massachusetts and I spoke Italian to them.  That was part of the coalition.  And anyway, I ran for the nomination at the convention and then in the primary because I was challenged both times.
Story_ID: 3893
Speaker 1: Tell us about this campaign for Secretary of State.
Speaker 2: Well, I had to raise money for the campaign for the convention and the primary in which I was challenged, and then for the general election.
Speaker 1: This is 1960.
Speaker 2: This is in 1960.  And we raised $17,000 for all three.  So we never got on television with that kind of money.  And a lot of people said to me, when they did see me on television which was when I was giving my concession speech, we didn't even know you were running.  We would have voted for you, but we didn't know you were running.  And a lot of people had said, white voters are not going to vote for you.  They don't vote, they're not accustomed to voting for black candidates.  And I said, that isn't right.  Why should they not?  If they believed in me and they believed I could do the job.  Why wouldn't they vote for me?  We've been voting for white candidates all these years.  Well, enough didn't vote for me.  But a million did so a million votes in a losing campaign against a seasoned candidate.  And there was some confusion because his cards came out saying, his name was Kevin White.  He was later the mayor of Boston.  And on the cards, they came out and they said, 'Vote White'.  Now, his name was White.  He had every right to say 'Vote White', but there was a lot of confusion about it.  He, of course, denied that it had anything to do with that, you know, he said, you want to Brooke.  I'm saying 'Vote White'.  But with all of that, I still got a million votes.  So I said, if they're only 2 percent of my people (laughter) the voting population, and I'm getting over a million votes, it must be somebody out there voting for me, some white people who are out there voting for me.  And there were,okay.  So even though I lost, I won because my name began to be known around the state.  And even though I didn't have any television at all, no ads, nothing like that, no billboards, nothing, door-to-door campaign, best you can.  But, you know, that's a needle in the haystack thing when you're talking about 5, 6 million people.  But I went in every parade I could go in, every clam bake I could go to, every barbeque I could go, every church, synagogue or temple or mosque I could go to, I went to.  But I lost, but it was enough for them to sit up, for them, being the Republican power people, to sit up and say, look, he's got some appeal to the Massachusetts electorate.  So after that I was offered a judgeship.  I was offered other jobs.  And I said, I did not want them.  I wanted to--if I stayed in politics, I wanted an elective office.  I didn't want someone telling me what to do.  I wanted to make my own mistakes and make my own progress or whatever.  And I wanted an elective office.  And I thought I was too young to sit and (unclear) lock on the bench, though I had great respect and even awe for the judiciary, I did not want a judicial appointment.  But after that election of, in 19--after the Secretary of State election was lost, the governor called me and asked me what I wanted.  And I said, well, I really hadn't thought that much about it.  And he said, you don't want the district court.  And I said, no.  I said, I had been told that there is a position of Chairman of the Boston finance commission.  And he said, what is that?  And I said, well, it's a watchdog agency that was set up years and years ago by the Old Republican, Bromen, group to oversea the city of Boston politics and government to weed out corruption.  And it has subpoena power, which is very, very important in such investigations.  And I would find that challenging.  I would find that important.  And he said, what does it pay?  And I said it pays $5,000 a year.  And he looked at me as if to say, you know what you're doing?  Getting off pretty easy, okay.  So he finally said, well, if you want it, okay, it's yours.  So I was appointed chairman of the Boston finance commission.  It consisted of three Democrats and two Republicans and I went in as the chair.  But the Democrats were really in control.  And we started looking into corruption in the fire department and the police department and the city of Boston's government generally.  And one after one after one, more and more attention was drawn to this agency.  And I was the beneficiary of that, of that publicity.
Story_ID: 3894
Speaker 1: What were the challenges of trying to investigate corruption in city government and other--the government's largely Democratic, right, and, at this point?
Speaker 2: That's why it was formed.
Speaker 1: Right, right.  And--
Speaker 2: Early on, the Curley and pre-Curley days.
Speaker 1: This was a, you know, it's a model of--well what do you, I mean what were some of the challenges in trying to, and what things did you discover as a--(simultaneous) (unclear)
Speaker 2: Well, land, land taking cases, for example, where the city would take land and pay exorbitant prices for the land, bribery cases where bribery, if you wanted to do business in the city of Boston, you had to pay a bribe off to the council or someone in order to do that business.  Even in the school committee we found incidences where there were kickbacks on toilet paper and soap, the contracts that were being, being let out.  Non-bidding on public contracts was, was a big, big, big issue.  Even in the fire alarm system, I mean contracts given to people who didn't install the fire alarms.  I mean it might sound petty, but it was big in terms of how widespread the corruption was in the government.
Speaker 1: The aggregate was what really makes a big--
Speaker 2: When you put them together, exactly.  The aggregate of it is all.  And we had hearings and they took me to court and said, I'd overstepped my boundary of Agency head and that we didn't have the power to, to subpoena their records and their bank records and what not.  The court upheld our authority to do that.  And so it was, it was a very active year or so that I stayed on as Chairman of the Boston Finance Commission.
Speaker 1: Now, did you feel a financial pinch yourself from taking this job?
Speaker 2: Yeah, well, I had, I still had my practice at that time, and I, I could practice law and I was, I was doing fairly well.  I'd taken in a couple of young lawyers to work in the, in the office.  And I was able to struggle along, but that was about it.
Story_ID: 3895
Speaker 1: This position, you held this for how long?  How long were you the Chairman of the Finance Commission?
Speaker 2: '61 [1961], in, in '62 [1962], in November of '62 [1962], I ran for attorney general [of Massachusetts].  And for that election, they had called me in because I had done this job of ferreting out corruption in the City of Boston.  And they offered me the nomination.  They were putting together a ticket, John Volpe was heading the ticket for the Governor.  And they wanted me to run for lieutenant governor and Elliot Richardson, who was U.S. Attorney and Editor of the Harvard [University] Law Review, and been in [President Dwight] Eisenhower's administration and had all wonderful credentials and himself a millionaire, called me in.  And they, he said that they would like for me to run for lieutenant governor.  And I said, "But I don't want to be lieutenant governor."  Said, well, "What do you mean, you don't want to be lieutenant governor?"  I said, "I don't want to be a candidate for lieutenant governor because I want to be a candidate for attorney general."  And he said, well, you, you know, "You've got things going for you.  You got over a million votes.  You lost but you got over a million votes.  You've been around the state so you have some name recognition.  And, you know, you've done some other things."  And he said, and the finance commission, he said, but I can raise the money.  I have the money, and I've got the background.  I had experience as a U.S. Attorney, all of which is true.  And he said, and I have family.  Well, that struck me.  And I said, I had family too.  I said, if you want to be attorney general, then you're going to have to beat me because I'm going to be a candidate.  And I got up--we were meeting at the Parker House, and left a--and I went out and declared my candidacy for Attorney General.  And that was probably my most difficult battle.  In the Convention, on the first ballot, though I'd gone all over the State, and thought that I had the delegates, I didn't have the powers to be.  I didn't have the governor.  I didn't have member of the Congress so I didn't have others.  And the chairman of the party and none of those people were, were with me in, in this race.  They were--they knew Elliott.  He had even been an assistant to [Leverett] Saltenstall (unclear), been his AA in the Senate.  But Senator Saltenstall was a very fair-minded person and very--a man full of integrity.  And he was the chairman of the convention.  And on the first ballot, Elliott lacked one vote of being nominated.  And at first, they thought that he had won the, the nomination, but there was some other who hadn't voted, and he lacked one vote.  In fact, had gotten up, raised his hand and the press had all gone to him and shook his hand, the governor and I'm sitting there, watching my votes go down the drain.  I just couldn't believe all this work had, that the pledges I had from delegates around the state.  And that's a lot of work.  It's a big state.  I mean you have to travel around and meet at all these city, ward, town committees, Republican committees.  And Senator Saltenstall ruled that there had to be a second ballot.  And I'll give you the background of how the technical reasoning for it, but we went to a second ballot.  By that time a lot of people had left the convention cause it was the last nomination for that, that (unclear).  That was the one where [George C.] Lodge, young Lodge was gonna be facing [Edward] Teddy Kennedy for [John F.] Jack Kennedy's seat.  And so it was a lot going on at the time.  And the delegates were weary in that hot, hot convention hall in Wooster, Massachusetts.  And on the second ballot, I got on the radio and said to my delegates, come back, it's not over yet, come back, come back.  We can still win this.  And he says that, he says, a lot of his people didn't come back.  I don't know.  Anyway I won on the second ballot, the nomination.  And then he challenged me in the primary, he didn't take so we had to go in a primary fight, which (unclear) was a very fight.  And being up against him and--now, you're not talking about delegates.  Now, you're talking about all the Republican voters in Massachusetts, people who wanted to vote.  And he was one of them.  And there were about a handful of, of our people--of Negroes in that at the time.  And that was a hard, hard fought campaign, not on racial lines.  He wanted the job.  The leading newspapers in the State wanted him for the job.  They thought that he would do a good job, which I'm sure he would have, gone on to be governor and then President of the United States.  They were looking down the road.  And here comes this guy, not even Massachusetts born or bred or anything, sort of upsetting this applecart.  This doesn't make sense.  So I got none of that press, hardly at all.  And the Negro press was very small in Massachusetts, smaller than in most places.  But we had some great people up there in Monroe Trotter and others.  So I had sent out letters to Negro lawyers across the country, trying to get, raise funds, trying to show them how important--not me, but how important it was to have for the first time, an elected attorney general in this country.  Well, I'm ashamed to tell you what I raised.  But it was precious little few dollars that came in to support it.  But we went ahead, and I prevailed.  We won that election by something like 48,000 votes in a Republican primary.  And then I had to face a former lieutenant governor a former attorney general of Massachusetts, an Irishman who wasn't the greatest by any means, but, but popular.  And I won that election and was elected attorney general.  And then it really, my career really began.  I got the best lawyers I could find with the great integrity, wonderful, wonderful people.  And we went about our job.  Again Massachusetts was plagued with corruption.  They called it "Taxachusetts".  They said to do business anywhere in Massachusetts, you have to pay.  It was embarrassing.  They had on CBS, national television, police and a bookie, letting people walk in freely when the police are there directing the traffic for them.  It was, it was pretty bad. Surrounded by a very able, dedicated group of lawyers, investigators and what not, and working with the Crime Commission which was appointed by the legislature because things were so bad at the time, we were able to bring about convictions of several people who went to jail, exposed under common garage case was one.
Speaker 1: What happened in that case?
Speaker 2: Money paid out in the hundreds of thousands of dollars for, under-the-table to get the contract for it, to run it.  It was, it was a bad, bad case.  And it's so much detail here that I, I don't want to take the time to go into it.  But--
Speaker 1: That is one of the important cases.
Speaker 2: That was one of the important cases.
Story_ID: 3896
Speaker 1: And the Boston Strangler came along.
Speaker 2: Now, that's a case that--was that really ever solved?  I mean there's been speculation about whether they really solved it?
Speaker 1: Well, let me put it this way.  Women were dying regularly.  First, the older women, most of them were white.  Then young women, then a, a black woman was strangled, killed.  All in the same things, gruesome.  I don't want to get in those details.  And I felt that enough was not being done to allay the fears of women.  Mothers were shielding their children--their daughters, locking their doors, buying guard dogs, locks were sold out.  (Unclear) safe.  It was a frenzy period.  The Boston Strangler became a big, big issues, as you can imagine.  And I found that the district attorney of this county and the district of the other county were not communicating.  The police departments of the various cities and towns were not working together in conjunction in order to solve this case.  And under the Constitution, the attorney general is the chief law enforcement officer of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  And the powers of attorneys general vary from state to state, but in this state, it's a very powerful office.  And I was the only Republican in office.  All the rest of the candidates were Democrats.  All the officeholders were Democrats, okay.  So it was very difficult to get cooperation.  It was amazing that Governor Volpe was able to get the Crime Commission passed in the first instance.  The Crime Commission was headed by an old Yankee lawyer, who was a wonderful guy, full of integrity.  They did investigation.  Then they'd turn over their information and evidence to me as attorney general.  And I had to make the decision as to whether to prosecute, to bring an indictment and to prosecute and eventually, send people to jail.  And we did that.  On the Strangler case, I brought in all the attorneys, all of the district attorneys and the chiefs of police and all the other agencies that MDC worked into my office and said, I want to set up a bureau within my office to coordinate, not to take over your powers, but to coordinate your activities to get at the bottom of this and try to find out just who is the strangler or stranglers and bring them to justice and allay, this fear that is gripping our state.  Well, that wasn't looked upon favorably by the District Attorneys.  I think one, maybe one out of the 5 was a Republican.  The rest were Democratic.  Some saw it as a power grab, accused me of, some saw it and accused me of running for higher office perhaps as much as the Governor or the United States Senate on this case.  Far from the truth.  I had not focused on that at that time.  I went to bed at night and I thought the Boston Strangler and I saw the pictures and I saw the places, something--I even brought in Peter Hurkos whose a psychic from California to help us.  I made the statement that I'd bring in the Devil himself if he could help because they're burning in effigy.  They put a turban around my head and had all kinds of cartoons (laughter) about this crazy man whose, whose, whose bringing in psychics to try to solve criminal cases in the state and using the state's money.  I had a friend who wanted me to bring in Peter Hurkos.  I didn't know that much about Peter Hurkos.  I just vaguely heard about him.  And he said, I'll pick up the tab if you'll bring him in.  So I didn't use the state's money for that.  But it was a real struggle, a real battle and it went on for a long, long time.  Eventually, F. Lee Bailey, who was a criminal lawyer, representing his client who was a Bridgewater State Prison where they send people for (unclear) mental examinations, was sitting beside another inmate by the name of Albert DiSalvo.  And Albert DiSalvo told Bailey's client that he did the strangulations and explained them and described them and all the rest, even insertions into women.  It was gruesome.
Speaker 2: Now, some of these gruesome details were not available to the general public.
Speaker 1: That's correct, were not available to the general public.  It was sufficient enough for F. Lee Bailey to try to get representation of Albert DeSalvo.  In fact, when I heard about it, F. Lee Bailey had a camera crew down at Bridgewater, trying to get pictures of him.  He wanted to take over the case, book rights to movies, everything.  And I sent for F. Lee Bailey and had him come into my office, threatened to put him jail and disbarred, disbar and take you for disbarment before the court.  In fact, I went to the court, Supreme Judicial Court and asked them to restrict him.  He didn't even represent--DeSalvo was represented by another lawyer.  I called that lawyer in.  By that time, he--at first when he came in, he told me that he had not given, had not let Bailey, had not given Bailey any rights.  The second time he came in, he talked to, to DeSalvo's wife who had met Bailey and they agreed to retain Bailey to take over the case.  And he did.  Bailey was convinced from all he read and from the evidence that his client's given, that DeSalvo and has talked to DeSalvo, that Albert DeSalvo was the Boston Strangler.  So he asked for a meeting with me.  He came in, and we sat face-to-face about as close as we are.  And he said, I'll make a deal with you.  He said, I will have him plead guilty to one of the strangulations if you will accept a plea of insanity.  Without any hesitation, I said, no.  I didn't have to think about--I said, I will never agree to have him declared insane by a psychologist or psychiatrist today and a year or two or shorter or whatever, have him declared sane and walking the streets again.  So we could not reach a deal.  DeSalvo was later tried for other crimes he had committed in a Cambridge Superior Court.  And he was sentenced to life imprisonment at Walpole State Prison.  It was there that he was killed by an inmate.  When I get the question, and I do often, they keep--every time it comes back, the movie runs all the time, I would--they offered me something like $125,000 to play myself in the role and I wouldn't do it.  I didn't want to, I didn't want to commercialize it.
Speaker 2: Who does play that?  Somebody does play you in the DeSalvo--Tony Curtis plays Albert DeSalvo and somebody who plays--
Speaker 1: My assistant attorney general who I appointed as Head of the Bureau, John Bottom (unclear).  He's dead now, cooperated with them.  I would not be even interviewed by them.  They had me on camera--I forget the guy who played my part [William Marshall], and me, having drinks at the, in the evening.  I'd never drink in the office.
Story_ID: 3897
Speaker 1: DiSalvo went to jail for another crime, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, he [DiSalvo] went to jail for another crime.  The judge--he tried to plead him some insanity plea again over there in Cambridge [Massachusetts].  By that time, I was in Washington [D.C.].  I had gone.  Elliott Richardson succeeded me, incidentally, when I went to Washington [D.C.] in the [US] Senate.  That election, he won as Attorney General, which is the job he wanted originally.  He didn't stay there long.  [John A.] Volpe, Volpe came down as Transportation, and Elliot came down, he was Attorney General of the country.  He was chair--Secretary of Commerce, Secretary of Defense, Secretary of, what city--
Speaker 1: State, wasn't he at one time?
Speaker 2: Secretary of--no,--
Speaker 1: Was he ever Secretary of State?
Speaker 2: No, he never got the state, but he was Ambassador to St. James, the Court of St. James.  And something else, anyway, but he held all kinds of posts.
Speaker 1: Familiar figure and--
Speaker 2: Oh, he was, he was their fair-haired boy and Elliott was a very bright guy.  He and I had our differences, but he called me.  I took him around to call the commit--committees as is customary in the Senate whenever he would--to be confirmed, took him to every committee.  So I had got to the point where I said, I don't know how good he is or how bad he is, but anyway here he is again (laughter), you know, cause he, he'd come from one to another.  He held so many posts down here.  He just died recently as a matter of fact, about a year or so ago now.  But that, that was the big fight.  That was, in Massachusetts politics, that's one of the--it goes down as one of the biggest fights in that city's politics.  And then I didn't endorse Barry Goldwater, see in '64 [1964], when I was running for re-election.  And got the largest vote of any Republican in the country that year.
Story_ID: 3898
Speaker 1: Let's talk about the election, the senatorial election came (unclear) (simultaneous)--
Speaker 2: That was, that was the '64 [1964] secretary of state election for reelection.
Speaker 1: Right.
Speaker 2: That was my reelection bid in '64 [1964] secretary of state.  And I, I couldn't go with Barry Goldwater because of his stand on civil rights and--
Speaker 1: That's the election for Attorney General in Massachusetts?
Speaker 2: That was when I was Attorney General.  And that's when the Voting Rights Act came up, when I was Attorney General.  And they challenged the constitutionality of the Voting Rights Act.  So I got eighteen Attorneys General around the country to join me in a brief amicas to file with the Supreme Court.  And I got Archibald Cor--Cox.  I appointed Archibald Cox as one of, assistant, one of my Assistant Attorneys General to present the case to the Supreme Court.  And we won that case.  That was the [Nicholas deB.] Katzenbach who was, who was [US] Attorney General of the country at the time.
Speaker 1: Nicholas Katzenbach.
Speaker 2: Nicholas, right, got good memory.  Nicholas Katzenbach.
Speaker 1: Okay, now what was the substance of that now.  The Voting Rights Act, you said this was in regard to that--
Speaker 2: The constitutionality of the Voting Rights Act itself was challenged--
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: --and the case was brought against Katzenbach as the Attorney General of the United States.  And that was before the Supreme Court [South Carolina vs. Katzenbach, 1966].
Story_ID: 3899
Speaker 1: I've always thought that was the most important legislation in civil rights [Voting Rights Act of 1964] there is because that gave you the basis for voting and for power, political power, and that's been my message out there all the time.  Political power, political power.  Economic power is important, you get that.  But political power is also very important.  I had this debate with [Dr.] Martin Luther King [Jr.], as a matter of fact, on, on political power and economic power, you know, social power.  And black power, which was coming along at the time.
Speaker 2: And King, the position that the political power wasn't as important as--
Speaker 1: No, no, no, no, no, no.  He didn't take that.  We were over in Europe and he asked to meet with me and we met and we talked about, at that time, the main issue was Vietnam, and I asked him, I said, "Martin, do you think that your position and advocate against the war, as taking the leadership in that regard against the war will in any way hinder your effectiveness as the civil rights leader of this country."  And he said, "Ed, I was a preacher of the word of God before I was a civil rights leader."  Brief answer and that was it.  Then we talked further about the next step would be the economic issue.  We've got them, as he said, from the back of the bus to the front of the bus, but how do you pay the fare, type of thing.  I said, how do you pay the fare?  And we both agreed that that was going to be the most difficult of the battles, the economic, economic equality, economic, you know, parity.
Speaker 2: And it was in that battle that he lost his life.
Speaker 1: Still there.
Speaker 2: Yeah, the war of poverty.
Speaker 1: Yeah, no question about it.  So that's where we got into, into that.  But it was a, it was a very good open discussion because see, I was in the Senate.  I was in a position of power and he was a civil rights leader.  So we, we discussed things, this, about where we go, where we go from here?  How do we achieve this and (unclear).  And I said, we can never overlook political power.  That controls our faults, our words, our deeds, our lives.  If you're going to live in a democracy, the name of the game is political power.  If you live in a free enterprise system, the name of, of the game is money, green power.  So.
Speaker 2: Did you know Martin Luther King, Jr. when he was a student at Boston University?
Speaker 1: Yes.  He made into the fraternity up there, Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity, yeah, when he came--
Speaker 2: Okay, did you have any--
Speaker 1: I didn't, you know, I didn't have any association with, with him in the movement other than maybe contribute money or something because as Attorney General, I didn't think my position then was to, to be a protesters in the street.  I had always--I won't say it burdened on my shoulders, but I had always to be aware that what I did would determine what others coming behind me could do.
Story_ID: 3900
Speaker 1: I made statements where some blacks have disagreed where I've said, look, I was elected Attorney General, United States Senator, first for the people of Massachusetts, then for the people of the United States, of the United States to represent all of the people.  Now, nobody expects me not to stand up for civil rights.  I would believe if I were a white man, I would stand up for civil rights because it's right.  But I can't be a civil rights leader and a United States Senator at the same time.  I do my job as a United States Senator.  We've got civil rights leaders.  [Dr.] Martin [Luther King Jr.], one, Jesse [Jackson Sr.], you name them, whomever you want.  They're civil rights leaders.  Take Alvin, in his field, he's doing so much good for civil rights just by doing what he is trained to do and what he elected as his career.
Speaker 2: Dr. Alvin Poussaint?
Speaker 1: Yes.  And I can name many.  In their fields, they do--everybody is not a civil right--and nor should they be.  Every black lawyer, young man or woman who comes out of law school, doesn't have to be a civil rights.  I'm happy about [Richard D.] Parsons as the head of AOL or [Stanley] O'Neal, head of Merrill Lynch.  That's improvement to me.  That's, that's progress in a democracy, in a free enterprise system.  Or Sylvia Rhone, a woman, young woman, I, whom I know well, father went to school with me.  That's what we've got to understand.  And now there's no one who really sticks out as, as a civil rights leader as such like Martin because of the civil rights movement itself.  But we've got to--progress has got to be made in the economic field.  Still a, when I was running, there was just a hand--not a handful, but there were very few black elected officials in this country, a few in the congress, a few in city councils, fewer statewide, but not many.  I got letters from New York, said, they wanted to run for Attorney General, one, Connecticut whose running for state treasurer or something.  The Stokes brothers [Louis & Carl] out in Ohio and I think they thought, how did you do it?  You know, if you can do it, we can do it, which is fine (unclear).  But they--I think it gave them some encouragement that it could be done.  That was the important thing, that it could be done, and they did it because historically, we were electing only people to the Congress who were not from predominantly black constituencies.
Story_ID: 3901
Speaker 1: In '64 [1964], you, as you've said a moment ago, you didn't endorse Barry Goldwater who was the Republican candidate--
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --who proved to be kind of a disastrous candidate for the Republicans and--
Speaker 2: Oh, he hurt the party, set the party back, lost every state except--I forget the--it was a disaster for the party.
Speaker 1: He was sort of a war hawk, and
Speaker 2: That's right.  He wanted to give the generals authority and power over disperse--of the use of nuclear weapons.  To me, that was unconscionable.  Those decisions are not to be made by generals.  And he was against, opposed the civil rights law.  How could I in good conscience of--and I said to them, I said to my people, I said, if I were a white man, I wouldn't vote for him.  I can't--funny thing.  He came to Massachusetts at Fenway Park, and they had a big rally.  And I was the only one on the ticket that didn't show up at that.  And he said, "Oh, my good friend, Ed Brooke, couldn't come.  He was otherwise engaged tonight," making a joke.  And he sent a hundred dollars to my campaign for election to the state senate.  And he was all hearts and flowers when I was in the Senate cause he changed a little bit in later life.  He even came out for women's rights to choose which was one of my big issues, the language (unclear) for this life of the mother and, you know, rape, incest and the life of the mother was language I worked out with your Congressman Hyde, Henry Hyde, Henry Hyde, yeah.  Battles I had with Jesse Helms on the, on that issue.
Story_ID: 3902
Speaker 1: [Blanche K.] Bruce and, and [Hiram R.] Revels were elected  [US House of Representatives] and had great difficulty in being seated, as you, as you may remember.  And from that time on, I don't know that there was a black to run for the United States Senate.  I might be wrong.  I don't recall who it could have been.  We did elect blacks to the House of Representatives.  And, as I'd said earlier, Oscar DePriest being one I knew about and then, then came [William] Dawson and [Augustus] Hawkins and some of the greats, Adam Clayton Powell, for example, and his successor, [Charles] Rangel and others have been elected, Cardiss [Collins] and Shirley Chisolm was elected to the House of Representatives.  But I don't remember any running for the United States Senate.  And, of course, you can't, can't be elected if you don't run.  And I guess that's because you need a statewide constituency to elect you.  And you need the recognition and you need to raise the money because it's very costly to run for a statewide office.  And I think that why we didn't have more African Americans running for the Senate is because one, they hadn't run for anything else on the statewide basis so they could get name recognition; two, the difficulty in raising the money that's necessary to run the successful campaign statewide, and, and three, because they just didn't believe that they could go beyond the black voting population and garner the white votes that, that they needed.  But all that's been disproven since this time.  I mean we've got elected, mayors elected with white and black constituencies and we've got legislatures and school committee people.  And we've had governors, in my own state of Virginia, elected a governor, an African American to that high office.  We've had lieutenant governors elected across the country.  So it's, it's really improved, but it's far, far behind where it should, should be, the number of black elected officials in the country.
Story_ID: 3903
Speaker 1: When you decided to run in '66 [1966], you had already laid the statewide groundwork for yourself, basically, by becoming Attorney General?
Speaker 2: I would never have been elected Attorney General, had I not run for Secretary of State where I got over a million votes in a losing cause.  That got me out there.  That got me acclimated to statewide office elections.  I began to form a statewide organization.  I began to find out where I could find funds for my campaign.  So the losing effort for Secretary of State in 1960 was very, very helpful to me in my later elections.  So when I ran for Attorney General, which as I've said, was my hardest race, primarily to get the Republican nomination against such formidable opposition as, as Elliott Richardson, by that time, I had began to develop a very, very strong political organization in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.  And had I not be elected Attorney General, and had not my staff been able to do the wonderful job that they did, I would never have been able to run for the United States Senate when Senator Saltonstall decided that he would retire.
Story_ID: 3904
Speaker 1: How would you typify or can you typify your constituency?  I mean what, what kinds of people, I mean what, what groups of people supported you, you know, typically?
Speaker 2: I think I had the development of, created a sort of a coalition of people.  I used for my slogan in one election, I think for Attorney General, "you can believe in Brooke" and I was truthful with them.  I was upfront with them.  I talked to them.  I listened to them.  I campaigned hard and when I was elected to office, I worked hard.  So I had developed a following.  And people, once they vote for you, don't like to vote against you unless they have good reason, at least in their minds of voting against you.  So I built on that million votes in my losing campaign for Secretary of State all the way through.  I never, even when I was defeated in 1978, I never lost a Republican primary.  Even that year, I had strong opposition from, from the right, from a strong, conservative opponent, but I still was able to win the Republican nomination for re-election in that year, which would have been a third term in the United States Senate.  I served 12 years, two terms.  But I think, and I've said to a lot of young men and women who aspire to high political office, that you've got to get out there.  You've got to run.  You've got to run form statewide office first, or you may start off running for school committee or selectman of a town or supervisor in, in some towns and it varies.  But you've got to get your name out there.  And once you get your name out there, and people recognize you and believe in you, then I think organization will grow and develop and you'll get the kind of support that you need to be elected to statewide office and national elections.
Story_ID: 3905
Speaker 1: Who ran against you in 1966?  What was your opposition?
Speaker 2: In 1966, I was contested at the convention, but it was nominal opposition.  I had sort of preempted the field.  When Senator Saltonstall decided that he was going to retire, he did so with a public announcement, I think in December of 1965.  And said that he was gonna retire and spend the rest of his life with his wife and his personal matters.  Practically every Republican congressman, and there were several, maybe 5 of them or so.  Elliott Richardson was still lieutenant governor, John [A.] Volpe was the governor.  He, he had given thought to running for the United States Senate.  So there were a lot of potential office seekers who wanted to serve in the United States Senate, and rightfully so.  Some of them had earned, thought they had earned the right to do so.  But I also thought that, that I had earned the right to run for the United States Senate.  So I went to Governor Volpe and I said to Governor Volpe, "John, if, if you want to run for the United States Senate, I will run for governor.  But if you decide you want to stay where you are and run for reelection as the governor of Massachusetts, then I'm going to run for the United States Senate."  And he said, "Well, wait a minute.  Why you have to rush into this thing?  Let's think about it."  I said, "I've thought about it."  I said, "I don't have time."  And he said, "What do you mean by time?"  I said, "If you tell me you're going to run for governor, for reelection for governor, then I'm going to announce that I'm a candidate for the United States Senate tomorrow."  He said, "Tomorrow?  My God, aren't you rushing to judgment."  I said, "No, I'm basing it on the fact that if I don't get out there first, I'm going to have a more difficult fight in getting the Republican nomination."  And he said, "Well, I'll think about it and I'll call you back."  I said, "No call me this evening.  Call me within an hour or so because I've got to arrange for a press conference tomorrow at the Copley Plaza Hotel where I will make my announcement because I've already organized it and we're bringing people in, hundreds of people from around the state to, to make this announcement."  Well, then I never got the call back from him, but I called Elliott Richardson and told him.  Elliott said the same thing.  He said, "Well, I was thinking about running myself.  Don't you think you're moving too quickly?"  I said, "No, I don't think I'm running too quickly at all."  I said, "I need the time.  I need to raise the money.  I've got a lot of things to do."  I said, "I can't wait.  I can't wait for a lot of people to jump into this race."  And he said, "Well, I'll have to think about it."  I said, "Well, the time for thinking about it is over."  Then I did the same thing with every Republican congressman in Massachusetts.  And I said to them all, about the same things and all of them said they were thinking about running themselves and, which to me strengthened my position that I didn't have any time to waste to run.  Now, you might say, well, isn't that political opportunism.  Of course, it's political opportunity.  But that's what politics is all about.  I learned that.  You strike when the iron is hot.  You take advantage of the opportunities you get.  They may not come again.  And had I not declared my candidacy immediately, I feel that I may not have received the Republican nomination for the United States Senate.
Story_ID: 3906
Speaker 1: You didn't seem like someone who wanted the approval necessarily of these politicians that you approached.  You already had it set in your mind that you want to--.
Speaker 2: Well, I didn't think I needed to get approval from the governor, from the lieutenant governor, from the members of Congress, the Republican members of Congress, who may or may not have sought the Republican nomination for the United States Senate.  It was a coveted post.  I knew that.  I knew that in the way things go, that normally, they would want to move up.  And that's the highest place they could go within the commonwealth.  So I, I didn't come, come to them begging (laughter), or asking for approval or sanctions or anything of that nature at all.  I told them that I was gonna be a candidate.  If they wanted to get the nomination, they would have to beat me in order to get the nomination.  Simple as that.  I even bargained with the governor because I thought out of due respect, that being the senior member of the, of the Republican statewide office holders, that he was entitled to it.  If he had wanted to be United States Senator, that was his opportunity.  But he couldn't be both.  And I said to him, "John [A. Volpe], you can't be governor and United States Senator.  You've got to make a choice, one or the other.  If you want one, I'll take the other.  But if you don't make that choice now, I'm off and running," and I was.
Story_ID: 3907
Speaker 1: Once you received the Republican nomination to run--I mean was it--who was your Democratic opposition?
Speaker 2: I ran against former Governor Elliott--Endicott Peabody, who was a Democrat, but there were several who sought the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate.  One was John Kenneth Galbraith who a Harvard economist and well known, had been ambassador and had excellent credentials for the job in foreign relations, etc.  Then there--the mayor of Boston, a very popular man by the name of John Collins, who sought the Democratic nomination.  There were others who got into the field because they felt that, that maybe I could not be elected, that the Democratic nomination was valuable.  But in that race for the Democratic nomination, former governor Endicott Peabody prevailed.  So he was ultimately my opponent for the United States Senate.
Speaker 1: So well, what were the issues in the campaign?
Speaker 2: Well, Vietnam was a very important issue during the campaign.
Story_ID: 3908
Speaker 1: Vietnam was a very, very important issue in the campaign.  The country was all up in arms about Vietnam and how we got there, and how would, would we get out of there.  And it was on every politician's mind and on everybody's mind as a matter of fact.  I had no real foreign policy experience.  I had read a lot.  I had traveled a lot.  And so I brought in people from the various universities, and there are many in Massachusetts that you can call upon, to sort of form a think tank and advise me on certain political issues, particularly, in foreign policy.  And one of them was Henry Kissinger, who was not known in those days at all.  He was teaching at Harvard [University] at the time.  And he came in, and he was very helpful to me on some of my foreign policy issues.  And later on in life, Henry and I differed on many political foreign policy issues, but at that time he was my advisor.  In fact, I had talked to Nelson Rockefeller about him, and he, after he left my campaign, he worked with Nelson Rockefeller, and then ultimately ended up, when Rockefeller's campaign for the Presidency was unsuccessful, he went over with Richard Nixon and ended as not only his foreign policy advisor, but as his Secretary of State.  But at that time, I was dealing with Vietnam.  Peabody was pretty much adhering to President Lyndon Baines Johnson Vietnam policy.  And I said, look, I can't tell you how I'm gonna vote on issues that--on Vietnam.  One thing I will tell you, I'm not gonna be a rubberstamp for the administration, for Lyndon Baines Johnson and anyone else.  I'm gonna do my research, and I reminded them of the same, that I make often that my father had said, "A man's judgment is no better than the information upon which he bases that judgment".  So I'm gonna gather and garner all the information I can, and I'm going to formulate my own policy, but one thing I can assure you I'm gonna do everything I can to bring an end to the war in Viet Nam.  So that was my position on Vietnam.  I had some experience with domestic policies for, as attorney general, I dealt with a lot of 'em.  I had various divisions within the Attorney General's office on housing and health care and things of that nature.  And so I, I was better versed, but still I brought in professors from Wellesley [College], Brandeis, Boston University, Boston College--people who came together and sort of I used as an advisory group in the think tank or I'd call on them individually if I had a question.  So that's how I began to build my, my positions and write my position papers and make my public announcements and speeches, based upon information that I had garnered in time.
Speaker 2: Okay, so the Vietnam war was an issue, of course, you've just talked about--
Speaker 1: Major issue was Vietnam.
Speaker 2: --at that time in the country
Story_ID: 3909
Speaker 1: I suppose then the urban unrest was an issue too, I suppose?
Speaker 2: Urban unrest, yes, in fact, there was a, a cartoon which shows me running when all this was happening in times, during--(unclear) well, back in those days, both when I was [Massachusetts] attorney general (laughter) and running for the United States Senate, I was running with, with [Georgia governor] Lester Maddox, with all the, all the unrest that had been going on in the country, leading up to the civil disorders that, that came about just as I was going into the Senate.  So in that time in 1966, the country was in turmoil.  We had econ--we didn't have a depression, but they had an economic downturn.  Vietnam was a very costly war, both in terms of lives and, and in money.  Jobs were a big problem.  The civil rights struggle was still going on.  Housing, fair housing legislation, etc., which I took on when I went into the Senate.
Speaker 1: And black power declarations--.
Speaker 2: Black tower--power, I, I interfaced with, with [H.] Rap Brown, as a matter, he invited me to come to New York and meet with him and some of his lieutenants.  And I was advised not to do so, but I did.  And I went there in, in sort of a sub-basement from just around the, from a 125th Street, up on 7th Avenue, I guess it was, and not too far from the old, the hotel up there in, in Harlem--.
Speaker 1: Theresa, the Theresa Hotel.
Speaker 2: The Theresa Hotel.  And I met with him, and when I went in, you know, it was sort of a hostile environment and very cold.  And I, they were cordial, and I sat down in the chair, hard-back chair and they began to pepper questions at me.  And they said, you know, "You're not one of us, said, you're not black.  You're part of the administration.  You're part of the problem."  And I said, "I'm a part of the problem because I'm a member of the United States Senate."  I said, "I thought that's what we have been fighting for, that we could be, blacks could be elected to higher office."  I said, "I'm in the seat of power where I can do most good for the improvement of our people and you tell me I'm one--part of the problem?"  I said, "I think I'm a part of the solution."  And I said, "If you, you talk about black power," I said, "you're in a, you're in a democracy, in a free-enterprise society." I said, "You don't have the guns and missiles and the tanks and all.  You don't start a revolution.  I don't want you to be subservient, but on the other hand, I want you to recognize that political power is important for the improvement of our lives and race relations in this country.  And I would think that you could see that."  Well, we went back and forth, and I won't go over the whole speech that we had, the back and forth together, and there were no applause, of course and I left.  And they escorted me to the car, and, and I drove back and came back to Washington.  But I did have a good exchange with them, and most of their, their complaint was, you know, the, the power structure that the government anti-this, anti-that, and that if you were a member of that government, then you were the enemy.  You were not a friend.  And I said, "I'm sorry you see it that way.  I think I'm a friend, and a good friend."  I said, "I want you to look at what I've tried to do since I've been in the Senate already, about housing and employment and, and small business and all the rest of it."  And I went on with a, a litany of things that had been accomplished and were in the works.  But they were very militant, but never was I in fear that they were gonna harm me physically or maybe psychologically, they wanted to harm me , but they never threatened me in, in any sort of fashion.
Story_ID: 3910
Speaker 1: There was a riot in Los Angeles in 1966 in Watts.  That's when Watts, that summer of '66 [1966].
Speaker 2: Oh, yeah, it was across the country.  It was the beginning of the outbreak because one of the first jobs I was given when I went to the Senate in January of '67 [1967], that's the beginning in 1967.  I forget the actual date, but President [Lyndon] Johnson called me and asked me to serve on the, on the [Otto] Kerner Commission, which had hearings all across the country looking into civil unrest, as you may recall.  I served with Roy Wilkins, who was a member of that commission and Kerner, who was the governor of, of Illinois, was the chairman of the commission.  John [V.] Lindsay from, from New York was the mayor of New York, had been in the Congress, and we had from--representatives from labor and what not.  It was a very good commission, and we did a lot of hard work, and we held hearings, and, and we interviewed people, and we talked to people.  And we visited Watts and all the others, Detroit had, had burn-outs, Washington, all these things were going on at that time.  And we were appointed by Johnson, but Johnson, who was a good civil rights president, I'll give--have to give him credit for that, but he did not support our finding and our recommendations.  And he never invited us to the White House as a commission after we had given our report, which was given earlier than it was expected and scheduled.  And had Johnson set the tone by embracing the report of the Kerner Commission and putting into effect the recommendations thereon, I think race relations would have moved ahead much more rapidly than it did and it has.  He had his reasons.  He was a consummate politician, but on that issue, Johnson just was not there.  And there--much has been said about it, and much has been written about it, but it was a good commission.  And a lot of those recommendations, unfortunately, were never implemented.  And consequently, I think it, it slowed down, considerably, the progress of African Americans in the United States.
Story_ID: 3911
Speaker 1: Just prior to your run for the Senate, and I guess the voter registration in the South had increased significantly.  The--.
Speaker 2: The Voting Rights Act was passed before--the Voting Rights Act was when I was an attorney general.  That's when I took a leadership in upholding the constitutionality of it.  When I went to the Senate, the Voting Rights Act was in effect and registration was increasing, and many organizations and many persons stood out and began to get that registration going.  That was the biggest in my mind--in my opinion to happen, most significant thing to happen in civil rights in this country.
Speaker 1: And what did--do you recall how you felt about it or some of the, I guess, your thoughts on the summer of 1964 when the, the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party, you know, went to Atlantic City with that, with a delegation, with an alternate Mississippi delegation and how they were treated in the Democratic party when they had the credentials, and actually met the criteria better than the regular--the Dixiecrat regulars.  Did you--as a Republican (unclear) (simultaneously)--?
Speaker 2: I, I was displeased, but I was not surprised.  In those days, the, the Democrats, Southern Democrats, mostly were anti-civil rights, anti-black, you know, and they were in control of, of those delegations.  And they did not want and did everything they could to prevent Negroes from being seated at their convention.  They didn't want that.  I'm not saying Republicans, Republicans didn't have the problem because there weren't that many Republicans to be seated.  We're here, there, and, but not everywhere.  And consequently, as I said, I looked at it on the screen and heard it on the radio, but I wasn't surprised at what they did.  And it was an unfortunate setback for, for the Democrats, but on the other hand, blacks stayed with the Democratic party through all of that and I have always thought that we ought not put all of our eggs in one basket, and that at many times, they were being taken for granted in the Democratic Party.  There have been some good Democrats to be sure and good administration, but in the main, if you're sure that you have the vote, then you don't necessarily spend a lot of attention to that particular group.  You're over there looking for a vote you don't have that you're trying, trying to get.  And I think to a degree, we have suffered by not having a more viable, two-party system in this country among, among African Americans.  I think we should have that.  I think they should be in the Republican party, and if they're dissatisfied with the Republican party, as I have been on many, many occasions, particularly on national Republican politics and issues, their stands on issues, stay in there and fight; try to get it changed.  But you can't do it from the outside.  Come in, you know, be on the town and ward committees, on the state committees and be delegates to the convention and fight for what you believe in.  But just don't stand outside and say, oh, this party is that.  Make it what you want, want it to be.  The Democratic Party is not what, is all favorable to African Americans, let's face it.  More and more enlightened African Americans now are coming to realize that that just isn't true, and that there are many things, like the free enterprise system and how it works and, and small business and big business.  They have, they have a, a better relationship really, would have within the Republican Party than in the Democratic Party .  The Republican Party  has failed to bring them into the party because the perception is that they're exclusive and that they don't want them into the party.  And they haven't done much about it.  No Republican president in recent history that I can think of has actually tried hard to bring more blacks into the Republican Party  and given them a reason to come into the party and making them feel comfortable in the Republican Party .
Story_ID: 3912
Speaker 1: When you were elected Massachusetts, it was sort of a anomalous situation, and I remember seeing your picture in "JET Magazine" and on the cover of the newspapers, and people were saying, well, he's a black Republican from Massachusetts, the home of the Kennedy brothers?  How did this happen, you know, and did you--and this, you just described this conversation with [H.] Rap Brown, did you feel--you had to have felt largely misunderstood everywhere you went at that point that, you know, or most place anyway.  People didn't understand who you were--.
Speaker 2: I've had to live with that--.
Speaker 1: --and what you were doing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I've had to live with that, still live with that.  In 1952, John [F.] Kennedy, the former president and I were two of the, named outstanding, young men in greater Boston.  And at the banquet of the dinner in which we were given this award, he said to me, and he was a young Congressman at the time, and he said, "Ed, you ought to be a Democrat."  And I said, "Jack, you ought to be a Republican," and we laughed.  And he said, you know, "There're only two positions who are really worthy of having in this--in politics."  And I said--in the government, and I said, "What are they?"  He said, "the United States Senate and President."  Of course, he was elected to both 'cause at that time he was, I think maybe a freshman congressman if I can remember.  People used to jokingly say to me, what happened to you?  And I said, well, I didn't have a uncle--Joe as a father to (laughter), and his money and all the rest of the--there are a lot of things and reasons for it to be.  When he moved in, into, into the Presidency--you see, [Robert] Bobby Kennedy was never in Massachusetts.  He'd come to Hyannisport  where they have their compound, but he was never involved.  [Edward] Teddy was, I think, after he got out of law school, served as an assistant district attorney to Garrett Burns who was the Suffolk County District Attorney for a little spell.  And, of course, when Jack went to the Presidency, Teddy eventually got that job.  Jack appointed someone else by the name of Smith, I can't remember his first name, sort of the interim to hold that seat until Teddy could run.  And then Teddy ran against [Henry] Cabot Lodge's son, George Lodge, for the Senate seat.  All that time, the Kennedy's were all around me.  They were running for office.  They had important political offices, and I didn't know Teddy as well as I knew his brother.  And I didn't, I mean we weren't intimate friends by any means, but, but I knew him, and he knew me.  And we were active--we were campaigning up there and different places together.  When Teddy came to Washington, and he was, he defeated Lodge for that position, that was the same year that I was elected Attorney General.  And Kennedy, Jack, the President was saying--was reported to have said, "this might be the most important that has happened in this country", even though his brother was, was running for office at that time, meaning my election as Attorney General of Massachusetts because he wasn't living when I was elected to the United States Senate.  But, I've known the Kennedy's.  I knew Mrs. [Rose] Kennedy.  I didn't know the father well, but I knew the mother much better.  She was a very strong and very wonderful lady.  I knew the sisters, peripherally, but not, not well.  And I got along with the Kennedy's and our paths didn't cross that much.  When we were in the Senate, Teddy went his way, and I went my way.  We were together on a lot of social issues, but politically, I--he had to support my opponents, and I had to support his, though he really didn't have any opponents by that time.
Story_ID: 3913
Speaker 1: So when you were elected to Senate--I mean I can think of only--well, there're probably, there are other example, I guess of people, of black politicians who won major offices who didn't have a majority black constituency and I can think of [US Congressman] Ron Dellums as one, [US Congressman] Harold Washington in Chicago is another, though he had a sizable black, you know, base--.
Speaker 2: Yeah, but they--yeah, but most of them had almost a exclusive black population.  Some of 'em didn't like you--the ones you're mentioning now had--.
Speaker 1: But Dellums had to run against mostly--I mean he was running in a situation when blacks were the clear minority--.
Speaker 2: Um-hum.
Speaker 1: --in the district that he won in.  So he had to get a coalition of other people.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: Harold Washington had to do the same.  Blacks were closer to being a majority in Chicago, although he had to convince many of them to vote, who never really voted before.  They didn't think it was worth it.
Speaker 2: Right.
Speaker 1: So he had to get--he had register people--.
Speaker 2: Exactly.
Speaker 1: --to get them on the rolls.
Speaker 2: The numbers don't matter.  It's the voting.
Speaker 1: They were still outnumbered numerically by the white population when he ran, but he was able to win.  And you ran with the smallest black base of all.  And did you--I, did you feel that you had--did you feel like that you had a base in the black community, or did you feel like you represented the black community--I mean in your heart yourself, did you feel that you--(unclear) (simultaneously)?
Speaker 2: I certainly felt I represented--first of all, they needed representation, perhaps more than the others did.  So I, I represented them, and I felt I was, that I had to represent them and wanted to represent them.  I, they were my people.  But I, I knew that I could not win on, on racial votes.  I, I couldn't have gotten off the ground.  And I did not get all the black votes, even at that time because I was a Republican.  And they (unclear) some maybe because I had an interracial marriage, I may have lost some, some black votes and white votes to be sure.  But I, I didn't let that really bother me or worry me.  I knew when I went, when I got into politics, ultimately, I got into politics, late getting in politics, trying to understand the dynamics and the demographics and all the rest of it, I knew that it was a state which was dominated by the older Republican Yankees and the, and the Brahmins so called.  I hate to classify people, but they were.  The Italians who had moved in later, after the Irish, were big numbers.  The Irish pretty much dominated the Democratic party.  The Republicans were, were the Yankees and the Brahmins.  The Irish had the Democratic party and ultimately, they were success in getting the Italian immigrants who came over, who joined in great numbers, the Democratic party.  Ultimately because of the national politics, many Jews went into the Democratic party as well, and other ethnic groups that came in.  And the Portuguese, the Cape Verdians, who dominated a part of, of the state, and there were a lot of French Canadians living up there, so you had to look at the whole fabric to, political fabric to determine where you're gonna get the votes.  And I did that, and I went to all those various ethnic groups, put them together as best I could, appealed to them.  I tried to bring back a lot of the, the Jewish vote, which I was successful in doing.  And I made serious inroads into the Irish vote as well, plus with my knowledge of speaking Italian and the ra--interracial marriage with an Italian girl didn't hurt me at all in the Italian community, where you may have thought it would, but it didn't.
Story_ID: 3914
Speaker 1: If a black wants to be elected to the United States Senate, he's got to get name recognition.  He's got to be able to raise money.  It would be better had he run for some other elective office, so he could get that name recognition, but, you know, you can't, and, you can't just appeal to people on civil rights alone.  You've got to appeal on people on all issues effecting their lives, foreign and domestic policies.  And you've got to know something about both in order to appeal to them.  And to have programs that you want to foster in order to better their lives.  You've got to be interested in job, unemployment in the country.  You've got to be interested in housing, whether it's public housing or assisted living housing, whatever.  You've got to know about appropriations, where their dollars are going to be spent, and how much money that's going to be spent and where; what programs should be, should be authorized and appropriated for.  There's so many, many issues that confront you.  But you've got to be able to be concerned about those as well.  You've got to be concerned about peace and mainly, I think you've got to be concerned about for us, is equal opportunity and equal justice.  That's--those are the two keys I think to both.
Story_ID: 3915
Speaker 1: What was your relationship to [President] Richard Nixon?  How did you get along with Richard Nixon?
Speaker 2: I had a very strange relationship with Richard Nixon.  I did not support him in the convention when he ran for the Republican nomination.  When he was our nominee, I did support him.  I talked to him and assured myself that, that he wanted to do the right thing, that he would support important legislation involving civil rights, that he would work toward a, the recognition of, of China which I had campaigned on very strongly because I just didn't believe you could ignore the existence of, at that time, about 850 million people on earth.  And I thought we ought to start somewhere in bringing about and understanding communication with, between the, the Peoples Republic of China and the United States.  And so we began to be very friendly.  I traveled on his jet with him and his family around the country and spoke out for him whenever I had the opportunity to leave the Senate.  I was on a truth squad for him.  And so we were, we were I would say friends.  Nixon on the other hand never could understand how I got elected.  He, he looked at me as though I was something strange.  He was a student of politics.  He was not an ideological person.  I don't think he was a conservative, liberal or, or a moderate.  I think he was a pragmatic politician.  And one session I had with him in the oval office, he riled on and on, as did, as did [President] Lyndon Baines Johnson, about --almost came out and said, they will elect you, but they won't elect me their president.  And I knew what he was saying.  He didn't want to say it out, but he was saying they'll elect a black man and, but they won't--then talking about the establishment, talking about the Eastern establishment and the Brahmins and all.  So they had this, I call it an inferiority complex.  It sounds strange for a President to have an inferiority complex, but I think they both had those complexes.
Speaker 1: Well, that's interesting.  And just to draw on that, they, they saw as someone that was selected by the East Coast, white, rich, wealthy establishment--
Speaker 2: Right, right, right.
Speaker 1: --of a constituency that they couldn't (unclear)
Speaker 2: They couldn't understand, they couldn't understand how I could get elected.  They thought about the Kennedy's up there.  They knew I didn't have any money.  They knew I didn't even come from Massachusetts.  They just could never quite understand what happened in Massachusetts and I got elected to Attorney General and then to the United States Senate, never could understand that, never accepted it.  But Nixon, I, Senator [Leverett] Saltonstall's son down on the ABM [anti-ballististic missile] treaty thing.  I was against the ABM Treaty and I advised young Saltonstall to be against.  We went in to see Nixon.  He asked me to set up an appointment, which I did.  And Nixon said to him, look, "I don't care how you vote.  I'm, I'm happy and pleased if you get elected to the Congress, son, to support our issues in the Congress," you know.  He said, "But you listen to Ed Brooke.  He runs up there.  You do what he advises you to do."  He didn't.  He came back.  He supported the ABM and he was defeated overwhelmingly on that issue, primarily, in Massachusetts.  Now, this was Saltonstall's son.
Story_ID: 3916
Speaker 1: But [President Richard M.] Nixon--you know, when you have federal judgeships to appoint, and he had sort of done it (unclear) by regionalization.  He started regional offices of all the agencies, like Housing and HEW [Health Education & Welfare] and, and the transportation and what not into the various regions of the country.  And there were a lot of appointments made as heads of--he gave me all the appointments to all of those regions up there, even though we had a Republican Senator and--we had two Republicans.  We had Maine.  We had Maggie Smith.  In New Hampshire and Vermont and Rhode Island, all of them were, had the Republicans, but he gave them to me.
Speaker 2: So you could make all those appointments?
Speaker 1: All those appointments, but even more so on the federal judgeships for that whole region, for that district for the--in our district court and our circuit courts of appeal.  I had a--he gave them all to me.  You see, when judges are appointed, they are usually recommended by a Senator.  In the old days, it didn't happen, but some--because the Senate has the power to confirm the appointments, it ultimately ended up that they made the appointments.  Now, the president actually makes the appointment.  He appoints the federal judges, but he does it upon recommendation from the United States Senator from that district.  I had all the appointments of the federal judges in the whole Northeast region because Nixon said, look, these are your appointments.  When they were threatening to close the Navy yard up there, I asked them to have a meeting with [US Congressman Thomas P.] Tip O'Neill and [US Senator John O.] Pastore and others.  We sat down, discussed it.  He said, "Ed has asked me to have this meeting, and I want to do something about it."  So, the man, it was, it was a funny relationship.  I, ultimately, ended up as being the first Republican to call for his resignation, the first Senator to call for his resignation after the Watergate incident.  But even before that time, I had split with him on Southern strategy, and I accused him publicly of using the Southern strategy when he promised me he was not gonna do it, but he turned around and did it.
Speaker 2: And what we're, what we're talking about is the luring of those disaffected Dixiecrats into the Republican party.
Speaker 1: That was part of it, but it was getting Southern voters to vote Republican, and it was successful.  And now you have a South which is primarily represented by Republicans in the Senate and in Congressional jurisdictions as well.  That is, they are all beneficiaries of that Southern strategy which Nixon started back in the early '70s [1970s], in the late '70s [1970s].
Story_ID: 3917
Speaker 1: It was abhorrent to me that you're appealing to the worst instinct in men to be elected.  If, if a person believes in the separation of races and I'm a, I'm one who believes in integration, full integration in every form and fashion.  I almost believe in one world.  I believe in a global economy and I strongly feel that we should have integration and not separation of the races.  And when you do something to bring that about or perpetuate that, and that's what they did with the Southern strategy.  It put us back a long way toward integration and it--you've developed-- now, where you had the Southern Democrats who in many cases were racists, and I had to live with these people in the Senate.  And I knew how they thought.  They didn't say it to me.  They didn't say it on the floor while I was there because I was there, but I knew by their votes and some of the comments that they had made, how they really felt.  In fact, I had a prayer breakfast I used to go to, but I got--when I went there I couldn't in good conscience, I said, what hypocrisy?  This is not the God I believe in, but they're making these pious statements at these prayer breakfasts and going on the floor voting against basic rights for human beings.  I can't, I can't take that.  So I resigned from it.  And I never did go back to the prayer breakfast.  [President Richard M.] Nixon, for political reasons, and I guess expediency, enveloped, if he didn't start it, he certainly embraced it, the Southern strategy which I think set the country back for generations in race relations.
Story_ID: 3918
Speaker 1: Yet he [President Richard M. Nixon] did some wonderful things.  He followed through on the China thing.  No one else could have gone to China.  He called me in, because I used to give, when I campaigned, I campaigned on, on the China issue, Massachusetts, when I came down here, I used to, every month at least, I'd take the floor and talk about China and how we were making a big mistake, letting all these people we knew nothing about and we didn't know what they were doing, you know, we had to do something about this.  And so he called me into his Oval Office with Henry Kissinger one day, and he said, "Henry and I have been hearing what you've been saying on the floor, and we just want you to know that we're doing something about it."  And I say, "Yes, Mr. President, what is that?"  He said,"We're sending a ping pong team to China."  I said, "A ping pong team, Mr. President?"  (laughter).  I said, that's not what I had in mind.  He said, "Oh, no, no, no, no.  Don't, don't discount us, he said, that's important.  It's, it's a--it's a step.  And it's gonna go on through but this is for your, for your ears only."  And I said, "Yes, Mr. President, I understand."  He followed through.  They did send a ping-pong team to China.  And he later, Kissinger went and then he went over to China and began the relationship which we have now with China from bad, but that's what (unclear) you know, what we had.
Speaker 2: And--
Speaker 1: And he did some wond--he was strong, and his strong suit was foreign relations.  He paid too little attention, in my opinion, to domestic affairs.  He could have paid more attention, but you can't do it all, and he had to rely on a lot of people, some good, some bad, as you always find.  But his stren, his strength was foreign relations.
Story_ID: 3919
Speaker 1: Did you have your offices here in this building when Watergate (unclear) (simultaneous)?
Speaker 2: No, no, I lived, I lived in Watergate.  I lived in Watergate.  He called a meeting of Republican Senators to the Yellow Room on the second floor of the White House and I went to the first meeting.  It was, I think he called them alphabetically. And I went to that meeting.  And most of, were conservatives and what not, Howard Baker, Curtis, and I can't remember, Buckley, from New York, Jim Buckley, the other Buckley's brother--Bill Buckley's brother.  And he asked us, went around the room and asked us what we thought, give him any advice, what we thought about this Watergate thing, which he tried to minimize.  And when he got to me I said, "Mr. President, I think you've lost the respect and the confidence of the American people.  And I think for your own good, your family's good and for the party, but mainly for the country, you should step down.  I said, "Because if you don't, I think you're going to be impeached.  And I think the movement is already started, and I don't think you want to put the country through impeachment."  And boy, there was a chorus, "Oh, no, Eddie's crazy!"  And he said, he turned to me.  I as on his left, and he said, "Ed," he said, "that would be taking the cowardly way out.  I couldn't do that."  And I came back in rebuttal.  I said, "But Mr. President, I know what you did to get here to the most office, political office in the world and for you to give that up, is certainly not taking the cowardly way out."
Speaker 1: Well, that--that was shortly before he resigned or--
Speaker 2: Very, yes, not long after that.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: Then I went on--
Speaker 1: This is after the hearing.
Speaker 2: Yeah, I didn't tell anybody.  After I came out, the reporters were asking me what went on, and I never did say that I, you know, I always that "I'm not at liberty to answer your questions.  That's the President's.  If he wants to talk to you about it," just so I, just as I did with [President Lyndon B.] Johnson and Vietnam.  And then I was on either 'Meet the Press' or 'Face the Nation', I think after that, then I said, I thought again that he would be serving the country best by resigning from office.
Story_ID: 3920
Speaker 1: When I came back from Vietnam I had made a statement that Ho Chi Minh should never, that I was distressed.  I tried to get in North Vietnam.  I went to Cambodia and no American had been over there at the time.  And I was in, I was in Vietnam, [Henry Cabot] Lodge and [William] Westmoreland were there at that time.  And I came back and I said that Ho Chi Minh, because he was taking advantage of the divisiveness in the, in the American populous and that he was getting strength from that and prolong the war.  And I said, "Don't over, underestimate the will of the American people.  When the going gets tough, they'll join together and they'll be there."  And the New York Times picked it up and said I had gone a dove and come back a hawk, and [President Lyndon B.] Johnson asked me to come to the White House and talk to him cause he wanted to act like I was converted by him.  And we had this big meeting, and it was that same meeting when he--those people up there would elect you, but they wouldn't elect me, same type of thing that [President Richard] Nixon said later same--they had both had those complexes that they, that they were never one of them, that they were never acceptable to them.  And I guess it's from their backgrounds as compared to, you know, highly educated people from, from the New England states and New York or--
Story_ID: 3921
Speaker 1: What would you see as your, I guess the highlights of your career in the Senate.  You served two terms.  The second time, you ran against--who ran against you the second time, I'm sorry.  I'm--
Speaker 2: I think it was a District--yes, it was the District Attorney of the largest county in, in Massachusetts, in Middlesex County.  I--it used to be called--
Speaker 1: This is--
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon?
Speaker 1: This is 1972, right?
Speaker 2: Yes, 1972.
Speaker 1: Okay.
Speaker 2: I'll come up with his name.
Speaker 1: Well, he lost.
Speaker 2: It was not a very difficult campaign.
Speaker 1: He lost so we can--
Speaker 2: Yeah, it wasn't a difficult campaign for me.  I didn't spend a lot of money.  When I see what they spend now, when I was elected Senator, I think my--we spent $400,000 to be elected to statewide office.  They spend millions of dollars to be elected mayors and things.  No, it wasn't.  I can picture him.  It was not a very hard-fought campaign.
Speaker 1: Okay, so what would you consider then your, the highlights of your Senate career?  You served until '78 [1978], I guess, right?
Speaker 2: (No audible response).
Speaker 1: You served through 1978, right?
Speaker 2: My term ended in '79 [1979].
Speaker 1: Seventy-nine.
Speaker 2: Yeah, '79 [1979].  Elected in '66 [1966], but took office in '67 [1967]; defeated in '60--'78, [1978] but I served until '79 [1979] when my predecessor, who was Paul Tsongas took office.
Speaker 1: Okay.  Well, I'll ask you about that one because it (unclear), but what are the highlights of your Senate career at this (unclear)?
Speaker 2: Well, I, it's hard for me to, to single out any real one of them.  I think my work against corruption in Massachusetts as Attorney General, my fight to uphold the constitutionality of the Voting Rights Act, my battle later on against [US Senator] John Stennis from Mississippi and others to, to win out for the extension of the Voting Rights Act.  That was a tough, tough battle on the floor of the Senate.  All this is in the Congressional Record if you ever want to do the research on this.
Speaker 1: John Stennis actually, actually--
Speaker 2: Beg your pardon.
Speaker 1: John Stennis actively fought against this--
Speaker 2: Oh, yes.
Speaker 1: One would imagine-- (simultaneous)
Speaker 2: And even [US Senator Abraham] Ribicoff joined him, even Ribicoff from Connecticut joined him on that.  It's very interesting, you ought to read that.  It was a strange battle on the floor, and it came battle, motion to table the, the amendment.  And it was a hard-fought battle.  They didn't want to extend the Voting Rights Act which I considered to be--though I was not in the Senate when the Voting Rights Act was passed, I was there for the extension, and of course, I was there, I was Attorney General trying to uphold the constitutionality.  The NOW accounts which I don't know if you ever paid much attention to, which is getting interest, on your checking accounts.  My father used to rile at the fact that people put their money in Christmas savings and those old days and in checking accounts, and the banks took your money and used your money, and made money off your money, but didn't give you a penny for it, and sometimes even charged you to keep the accounts.  And I came across one (unclear) trying first to get my region in it for study, what we call NOW accounts whereby the banks have to pay interest on that money.  Well, that affected not just us, it affected all the people in the country.  Few people know about that.  I also served as chairman of the American Revolutionary Bicentennial Commission, which I was very proud of and we did a lot of good work there, and I think we did it well and it was something I enjoyed and was privileged to, to do.  Housing, the Brooke Amendment which provided that people living in public housing would pay no more than 25 percent of their income for rent because I, my father had always told me, you know, if you pay more than 25 percent for your rent, then you can't afford to live there cause you've got--you need money for clothing and food and shelt, whatever else you need.  So I introduced what they call the Brooke Amendment which is in public housing.  And I fought for a fair house--opened up fair housing legislation, which outlawed discrimination in housing across the country.  We--you couldn't go into certain neighborhoods.  Banks would not give you mortgages.  They called it redlining at the time.  So it was a big battle for that, that I worked on.  I stayed on the Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee for the whole time I was in the Senate.  And subsequent became in, on the Appropriations Committee where a lot of power so I was able to get money for cancer research and for a myriad of other things, Negro colleges and all that came about, but I was the only one there.  And I actually had to serve not only as the senator from Massachusetts, but I had a constituency of blacks all over the country, of Puerto Ricans cause they had no representation.  So when they had a problem, Governor Louis Leray (unclear), all those would come to see me, and I'd have to do constituency work for them and legislative work for them as well.  So our office had a lot of that.  The mail was voluminous.  The invitations were, just speaking around the country.  And then I always had to battle against the fact that I was a Republican cause a lot of blacks just wrote me off.  Well, he's a Republican.  He's not black, he's a Republican, which is absolutely ridiculous.  If they only knew that you're in there fighting for them day in and day out, for, for those kinds of rights.  And then nuclear disarmaments, the nerve, nerve technology.  It gets a little bit technical here, but in the arms race, in the nuclear arms race, I introduced the resolution and [Henry] Kissinger fought me on this as he did on Nigeria, with [President Richard M.] Nixon and he got Nixon to support him, but I won the day in the Senate.  We passed the resolution on finding that the continuous or next step in the Arms race was destabilizing rather than stabilizing.  So you take that nerve technology which were missiles and targeted re-entry vehicles, that target, were so precise that if we did, then the Russians would come along and take the next step.  So it was a continuing approach to weaponry that would destroy the world.  So a lot of work was done in that field, which, is all on the record if anybody wants to look at it, and see what was done at that time.  But I can go on and on, but those are things that I feel.  I'm sure I probably haven't upon any--
Speaker 1: You fought some nominations of a couple of judges too that you found were opposed--Carswell,--
Speaker 2: Well, I had to fight on [G. Harold] Carswell and [Clement] Haynesworth who were two judges that I didn't think should sit on the [US] Supreme Court.  And when, some of the writers, they said, look, he walked up and down the aisle without a piece of paper and took on this battle on him and got his other colleagues to come in.  And Nixon was very angry about that.  When I was at the White House, he said, well, we're going to win this one.  And I said, "Mr. President, one thing I've learned since I've been here is how to count.  And I think we've got the votes.  And he laughed about it, and we did have the votes.  We defeated both Haynesworth and Carswell, two judges from sitting on the Supreme Court.  There are others that perhaps should have been defeated, but I won't get into that.  That's another story.
Story_ID: 3922
Speaker 1: What are some of your hopes and concerns for the black community today?
Speaker 2: Well, I still have a dream that as said much more eloquent than I could, but I have a dream that we're going to live in this country with equal justice and equal opportunity, that we're going to have an integrated society and that black and brown and yellow people, skin people, are going to be judged on the basis of what they do, rather than how they look.  I'm deeply concerned about black-on-black killings, criminal acts.  I'm concerned about any killings and criminal acts, but if you look at the statistics and they are alarming, that 94 percent of young black males are being killed by young black males.  Society has got to come to grips with it because it involves what we do about some of the real grave issues facing us, like drugs, like HIV/AIDS, like poverty, which persists, the highest unemployment among our own people.  I see progress and I'm an optimist, but it's slow.  We've still got a long ways to go.  The struggle is by no means won--over.  The battle has not been won.  And we've got to improve the minds, and the bodies of our young people, and that's got to be done through education primarily.  And to me, that means public schools across the country.  I, myself, am a little product of a public school education.  I'd hate to see any child denied an education in public school.  I've looked at the arguments about vouchers and, as what they would do to public school education and how and where the money would be spent.  And I've listened to it over and over again.  And both sides of that issue can make a pretty strong case, but basically, we need more put into public education.  That's where the masses of people are, and if we're going to have an improvement in their lives, it's got to come through education of the masses of people, the people who are left out.  I'm concerned about peace in the world.  I strongly believe in the United Nations.  I don't believe we should have gone into the war in Iraq without the approval of the United Nations and the cooperation of the United Nations and without having known what post-Iraq war was to be.  This country has got to recognize also that there are many black and brown people across the world, who don't look like us all the time, don't always think like us or act like us, but there's diversity in this world and there's got to be respect for that diversity. And for the differences in religion.  I believe in one God.  Now, you may get to that God by different prophets and different means, but we've got to respect all religions, Judaism, Hinduism, Muslim, all those religions have to be respected.  And I want to see our country, not necessarily loved by everyone in the world, but respected by other nations and other people, respected for our integrity, for our strength, yes, but for our humanity as well.  You can't live alone in this world.  We know that now.  The world is a small place.  The Pacific ocean and the Atlantic ocean don't give us any means of security that we once thought we had.  Man has developed the technology there also that missiles can reach the United States.  We also know that men fight for their lives and their beliefs with whatever they have to fight with.  And we have learned the horrible lesson of the suicidal bombings that are going on in the world today and the terrorism.  It's not gonna go away unless we're able to get people to live in peace with humanity and--I don't want to say it sounds a little corny, but with love.  I have great faith that that day will come, perhaps not in my lifetime, maybe not in yours, but I do know we can do everything we can ourselves to bring it about.  And I'm hopeful that the youth of today will accept this challenge and contribute to the expediency of bringing about this, this world which we all want for ourselves and for our children to come.
Story_ID: 3923
Speaker 1: What would you see at this juncture as your legacy?
Speaker 2: If I had to leave something to anybody, I would leave them my faith, my faith in God and my faith in my fellow man, and my faith in myself.  Believe in God, believe in yourself and believe in others and believe that you can do it, that there are no barriers that prohibit you from doing.  I fall back on the statement that I love to say to young people.  Your place in this world, your place, is anywhere you want it to be.  You've got to want it.  I know in my own political life, you've got to have that fire in the belly as they say.  You've got to have that drive, that desire to accomplish what your motives and what your purposes are.  I like to leave that to people, faith in God, faith in man and faith in yourself.
Speaker 1: And last question is similar to legacy, but how would you like to be remembered?
Speaker 2: When God calls on the telephone and you pick it up and you answer, then you do what you have to do.  All my life, I tried to do what I thought I had to do.
